

2 RECONSTRUCTING URBAN SOCIOLOGY
In the last chapter we assembled some basic ingredients of a sociology which is more sensitive to people's experience of locality and locale.
Four particular, and linked, themes emerged.
The first was an increased concern with human association: face-to-face relations between people, and changes to those relations stemming both from underlying instincts and from broader social or ‘cultural’ processes.
The second was locale: a physical setting which is socially defined for front and back activities.
The third was moral careers.
This refers to people's progress through life: a result both of their attempts to maintain personal esteem and, at the same time, social respect deriving from other people's evaluations.
A moral career, in Harré's terms, is:
[The]social history of a person with respect to the attitudes of respect and contempt that others have of him and of his understandings of these attitudes.
The attitudes are realised and represented in institutionalised and ritualised forms in which respect and contempt are tested and meted out in particular societies
Finally, I have argued that urban sociology's key concern is the division between everyday life being led in small-scale localities and the fact that social relations and processes are increasingly organised at a global level.
As a way of understanding these linked themes we have argued for an increased emphasis on ‘the expressive order’: the understandings, interpretations and theories which people have of their social world and the way it is changing.
This kind of understanding is quite distinct from that usually associated with contemporary urban sociology.
It is often argued, for example, that concepts of country and city give us decreasing analytical purchase on the way in which advanced capitalist societies are  developing.
Yet notions of country and city form a regular part of people's experience and understandings.
We have so far discussed these themes as though we were constructing a wholly new kind of urban sociology.
This, however, is not the case.
A central argument of this chapter is that we can gain much by rereading and reinterpreting old, now relatively unfashionable, forms of sociology.
Much of this work has indeed come under increasing criticism.
It will be argued here, however, that this criticism has resulted in overlooking a number of the older works' most important insights.
So if we retrace our steps through the history of urban sociology we will actually find much there that we can use to construct a sociology that reflects people's understandings and the ways in which localities and locales are incorporated into these feelings.
We start this chapter by discussing some of the early sociologists, especially those concerned with one of our main themes; the impacts of widescale social change on human association.
Secondly, we take a fresh look at the Chicago School of Urban Sociology.
The many criticisms that have been made of this body of work will be recognised, but again we will be arguing that it has much to teach us, especially as regards incorporating an understanding of instinctive behaviour into an understanding of social relations and moral careers.
But, since the days of the Chicago School, there has been a growing divergence between sociology (including urban sociology) on the one hand, and psychology and biology on the other.
This leads us to a brief discussion of the developments within these fields since the time when the early sociologists were working.
These developments are exciting and suggestive, but they are frequently overly deterministic.
They claim, that is, that their particular kinds of explanation offer a total explanation of human behaviour.
But if we do not take their most far-reaching claims too seriously, and if we attempt to combine their insights with those stemming from more conventional social science, we can develop a form of sociology which once more has the extensive scope of the early pioneering studies.
FROM AN ‘OLD’ TO A ‘NEW’SOCIETY: A CORE SOCIOLOGICAL THEME
A central theme in the nineteenth and early twentieth century legacy of sociological theory (and one closely linked to Giddens's argument that  social life is being stretched over time and space) was that society was changing from one based on a small-scale and close-knit community of primary relationships based on blood, kinship and close association.
It was becoming an industrialised society constituted by highly impersonal secondary relations.
This change, it was argued, threatened social cohesion.
It was also seen as inflicting profound effects on individuals' lives.
To adequately understand the beginnings of urban sociology we need to develop this theme a little further.
Durkheim is perhaps the key protagonist of this dominant theme of profound social change.
His main concern was to understand social order and its maintenance as the older institutions of control (for example, the family and religion) were undermined.
Underlying this analysis was a profound, and from our viewpoint salutary, concern with the relationships between, on the one hand, the psychological and biological bases of people's existence (what he called their ‘pre-social’ lives) and, on the other hand, their lives as part of human societies and collective groups.
He argued that a fundamental conflict was taking place during the period of social modernisation.
Durkheim saw the social order, and the moral obligations it placed on individuals, as a barrier to the realisation of their basic and instinctive drives.
At the same time, he envisaged these innate and largely egoistic tendencies as threatening to the social order.
The risk associated with societal modernisation was, therefore, that the individual passions would run riot.
Social cohesion was thereby at risk.
Nevertheless, Durkheim saw signs of hope.
The emergent divisions of labour in industrialised society were also a prime means by which modern societies were still sustaining themselves in a relatively conflict-free way.
The new divisions of labour necessitated by the industrial economy were in fact obliging specialised groups of people to co-operate and work together.
He nevertheless still saw a need for such divisions being accompanied by new collective and community-based institutions.
If this did not take place, he argued, the result would be increasing levels of crime and suicide as pre-social or instinctive, biologically-based, behaviour increasingly reasserted itself.
Durkheim saw relations within localities as having a function in these processes, albeit a mainly facilitating one.
They were a means by which ‘moral density’ could in fact be sustained.
Durkheim put this in the following way:
The division of labor develops as there are more individuals sufficiently in contact to be able to act and react upon one another…
But this moral relationship can  only produce its effect if the real distance between individuals has itself diminished in some way.
Moral density cannot grow unless material density grows at the same time, and the latter can be used to measure the former.’
As Nisbet points out in his review of the ‘sociological tradition’, the thesis of the eclipse of an older form of community recurs throughout much of the nineteenth and early twentieth century sociological tradition.
A central, underlying theme was that a new social order was being ushered in; one in which relations between people were being profoundly modified.
Again, these relations were widely envisaged by social scientists as becoming individualistic, self-seeking, competitive and anonymous.
Furthermore, such changes were being accompanied by a decline in mutualistic support between associates and kin.
Similarly, the idea that these changes in social and personal life were being partly supplanted by alternative forms of close-knit association was also shared by a wide range of authors.
We have seen this already in relation to Durkheim.
Tonnies (with his account of the transition from Gemeinschaft to Gesselschaft) also argued that the emergent forms of society also continued new kinds of close-knit association.
For him, trade unions were an example of attempts to create a substitute for Gemeinschaft; one appropriate for the new era of capitalist industrialisation.
Despite these common themes, however, such changes in the relationships between the individual and society were attributed to a diverse range of causes.
For Durkheim, as we have seen, the level of explanation was ‘community’ or broad association.
For Simmel (who was also influential on the Chicago School of Sociology) the individual or small group was itself the focus of explanation.
In ways rather similar to Freud he argued that individualism and group differentiation stemmed less from macro processes and largely from individuals and small groups themselves attempting to assert personal identities.
For Marx and Engels, by contrast, changing relationships between individuals and society had to be rooted in the class system of society itself.
Similarly, alienation, crime and upheaval had much less to do with individualistic action or even changes in community association.
Rather, the underlying mechanism was class relations, class struggle and the poverty generated by capital's exploitation of wage labour.
There is one final point regarding the changing forms of association which many of these early sociologists saw as characteristic of the new social order.
There are some widespread and questionable assumptions in nearly all this literature as to what societies used to be like before the  advent of industrialism and capitalism.
Somewhat surprisingly, for example, in the early 1890s Engels wrote of workers prior to industrial capitalism as follows:
[They]vegetated throughout a passably comfortable existence, leading a righteous and peaceful life in all piety and probity; and their material position was far better than that of their successors.
They did not need to overwork; they did no more than they chose to do, and yet earned what they needed.
Durkheim, by contrast, maintained a considerably less rosy picture of how social life used to be.
The close personal associations and relations based on respect and morality were, he argued, heavily based on a repressive social order.
With some of these sociological theories we are perhaps again witnessing the process we identified earlier with the aid of Raymond Williams.
One quite helpful way of understanding social change is to construct simplified, even idealised, pictures of a past community life.
We must nevertheless be cautious in assuming that the changing forms of association identified by these authors are simply products of their romanticising imaginations.
In the last chapter we discussed Giddens's notion of time-space distantiation; the idea that social life and social processes are becoming increasingly stretched over both time and space.
The decline of community and the rise of a society in which association was becoming in some sense secondary can also be seen as reflecting some of the profound social and spatial changes that were actually taking place in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
LOCALITY, LOCALE AND MORAL CAREERS: A REASSESSMENT OF URBAN SOCIOLOGY'S ORIGINS
Key elements of what Nisbet called the ‘sociological tradition’ were adopted by the Chicago School of Urban Sociology of the 1920s and 1930s.
Their combination of classical sociology with a number of other intellectual currents led to a range of concerns which are central to our theme; especially those of locality, locale and moral careers.
There have been many criticisms of the Chicago School but this body of work still has a great deal to teach us.
Firstly, let us look at the wider influence of the Chicago School.
The main theorist here is Park.
Of particular interest to him were those  writers who were ‘concerned in different ways with human nature, individual and collective consciousness and the conditions of social order’.
Many of the founding fathers, including Durkheim, are mentioned in his personal papers; and Durkheim's influence, especially his concern with human nature and its relation to social or ‘cultural’ forces, forms a central part both of Park's analysis and of the Chicago School more generally.
However, other rather separate streams of thinking also influenced the work of Park and his colleagues during the early years of this century.
Two of these came from the natural world.
Social Darwinism was the first.
Although Darwin himself fiercely resisted such thinking, it was clearly tempting to make close analogies between the natural and the social world.
Indeed, the nineteenth century English philosopher, Herbert Spencer, had already constructed theories of human society based on Darwin's evolutionary ideas and his writings were again part of Park's reading.
Park, however, was not attempting a direct and obvious analogy between the workings of nature and those of human societies.
Rather, he was arguing that there is indeed a ‘biotic’ level to human behaviour, one constituted by instincts of survival and competition.
As such, he saw Darwinian theory as having something to say to social scientists, even though he also emphasised that there is a ‘cultural’ level specifically associated with conceptualising human beings.
But, although Park and the Chicago School recognised these two levels of human behaviour, it should be said that they did still engage in some largely unhelpful metaphors between the social and the natural worlds.
A particular, and somewhat misleading, borrowing by the Chicago School from the natural world consisted of analogies with plant life.
Ecology envisages a complex sorting process taking place as different types of plant compete for space.
This competition takes the form of ‘invasion’ and ‘succession’; the stronger species eventually occupying the territory occupied by the weaker.
Eventually (and assuming some kind of drastic disruption does not take place) a given space tends to settle down into a state of balance.
The ‘beech tree climax’ is an oft-quoted example of how a particularly dominant species exercises long-term domination over the natural life of a particular area.
The Chicago ecologists compared these processes with those of the social world.
The prices that different social groups are able to afford for land can be seen as an equivalent to natural species competing for space.
Businesses, house buyers and so forth also compete for the same space, the  strongest (i.e. those who can offer the highest price) eventually gaining the most favourable positions.
So a ‘climax state’ for the modern industrial city is one in which the central areas are dominated by powerful business interests.
Meanwhile, the remaining parts of the city are occupied by those unable to offer effective competition.
The result is again a sifting out and segregation of the city into well defined and specialised areas.
As Park put it:
There are forces at work within the limits of the urban community — within the limits of any natural area of human habitation, in fact — which tend to bring about an orderly and typical grouping of its population and institutions.
Even within residential areas a segregation process takes place; the richest residents being those who displace the economically less powerful groups.
We will discuss shortly the social significance which the Chicago urban sociologists attached to the these zones.
But we must remember that, unlike social Darwinism, there was no question here of importing the theory directly into the human social world.
Rather, the idea was to see people as simultaneously subject both to natural and instinctive drives while at the same time caught up in the various forms of culture and social relations which human societies construct in a more conscious way.
Park's personal papers also show other influences on the Chicago School's thinking.
Sumner and Thomas were especially important.
Sumner was concerned with what he called ‘folkways’; people's customary acts and institutions which satisfied an individual's instinctive needs.
His work foreshadowed that of Maslow and Malinowski who we will review in Chapter 7.
Sumner saw hunger, love, vanity and fear as key forces underlying individual behaviour and people developed a number of social institutions to maintain these needs.
Out of sex and love, for example, grows the institutions of marriage and the family.
Out of fear of insecurity emerges the institution of marriage.
More generally, the instinctive drive for self-preservation led to the emergence of a range of public and governmental institutions.
Individuals and their relationship to the social world were also the prime concern of Thomas.
Like Sumner, he was interested in the intersection between individual behaviour and society, in particular with how social groups imposed a range of standards and mores as a result of the broad social circumstances in which they were located.
Thomas was trying to combine an understanding of the biological and instinctive drives underlying individual behaviour and the society of which these individuals formed part.
The starting point for him, however, was  individual behaviour; people's own understandings of the world and the broader social changes flowing from such understanding.
As Thomas put it: ‘if men define situations as real they are real in the consequences.’
Perhaps the key influence on the Chicago School was, however, G. H. Mead.
As discussed in the last chapter, it was this author particularly who stressed the significance of the expressive order in understanding social processes and social relations.
He was again interested in the construction of ‘self’ in the social world.
Indeed, he proposed a two-stage process in which individuals' identities were constructed.
At an early stage it is formed in relation to the child's experience, especially its relationships with other children in play.
But the full realisation of ‘self’ comes through participation in the larger society.
This latter is what Mead called the ‘generalized other’:
The organized community or social group which gives to the individual his unity of self may be called the ‘generalized other’.
The attitude of the generalized other is the attitude of the whole community.
Thus, for example, in the case of such a social group as a ball team, the team is the generalized other in so far as it enters as an organized process or social activity — into the experience of any one of the individual members of it.
The ‘generalised other’ Mead saw as a form of reference group; a means by which some individuals assessed their norms and values in relation to some external authority.
By implication, of course, those who chose not to become part of the ‘generalized other’ were less than fully developed.
An unspoken assumption is that those not adopting the attitudes of the early twentieth century American ‘other’ were personally underdeveloped and possibly even deviant.
Language, for Mead, was the key means by which this socialisation takes place.
He recognised that human society is characterised by extraordinarily complex and rich forms of communication, and it is through such communication that the individual's self is constructed and the larger group is constructed.
As Mead put it:
Language in its significant sense is that vocal gesture which tends to arouse in the individual the attitude which it arouses in others, and it is this perfecting of the self by the gesture which mediates the social activities that gives rise to the process of taking the role of the other.
As mentioned previously, Mead was one of the early originators of symbolic interactionism, a perspective on social life which emphasises the  significance to social change and social order of the understandings and interpretations which people hold both of themselves and of others.
It is this perspective which links us to the work of Goffman, Harre and Giddens.
Goffman was a graduate student at Chicago in the late 1940s and early 1950s, and his concern with how people present their selves (including their ‘front’ and ‘back’selves) in the process of conversation lies firmly within the symbolic interactionist tradition.
As we shall see shortly, many of these themes (especially the links between individual and social behaviour) formed a central part of the Chicago School's work in the field of urban sociology.
There is, however, one remaining important element of their work.
The Chicago School's work was overwhelmingly empirical.
Park and his colleagues were strongly influenced by ‘pragmatist’ social science.
This meant that concepts and ideas had continually to be tested against specific problems confronted in particular situations.
Conceptualising, therefore, is best understood as the mental effort that people make in understanding their circumstances and attempting to find solutions to the practical problems and frustrations they find on a day-to-day basis.
Furthermore, the meanings of concepts changed in the very process of everyday life and the search for solutions to problems.
The members of the Chicago School were, therefore, actively developing their theories in the process of trying to understand the problems and changes with which they were surrounded.
And the surrounding transformations and tensions were indeed challenging.
Between 1898 and 1930 the population of Chicago doubled, to become some three million people.
Most importantly, this was almost entirely the result of immigration, first from the European countries and, following the First World War, from southern USA.
The Chicago School's writings are full of facts and figures relating to what they called, using a plant ecology metaphor, the ‘invasion of newcomers and the social implications of these changes’.
Cressey, one of the Chicago sociologists, wrote in 1930:
In 1930 one quarter of the people were of foreign birth, and an additional 40 per cent were the children of foreign parents.
Only two cities in Poland have more Poles, and but two cities in Ireland have more Irish than are to be found in Chicago.
ln addition Chicago is the third largest Swedish city in the world, the third largest Bohemian, the third largest Jewish, and the second largest Negro.
There are seven immigrant groups in Chicago, each composed of over one hundred thousand people, in addition to which there are nearly a quarter of a million Negroes.
The social significance of this (and one linking it to the theorists we have discussed earlier) lay in the fact that large numbers of individuals, uprooted from their established communities and families were adapting to one another and to the existing Chicago population.
Such invasions were seen as bringing about conflict, sometimes of an extremely violent nature.
Figures 2.1 and 2.2 remind us that this was also an era of sporadic, but vicious, feuds between whites and what they saw as the invading blacks.
As Cressey put it:
Where the groups are of similar social and economic level with no particular dislike for each other, the supplanting of one group by another usually involves only a minimum of friction.
But where marked prejudices exist and there is a fear that the invading group will cause a serious loss in real estate values, violent opposition may develop.
This situation has arisen particularly in the expansion of the Negro population into white communities and has been the reason for numerous bombings and other types of violence.
To put all this another way, Chicago represented for its sociologists an ideal case study area in which to test the grand theories of sociology; the changing social relations resulting from a shift from a pre-industrial to an industrial society, the effects this had on the individual and what Goffman was later to call the ‘moral careers’ of people as they managed (or indeed failed to manage) with the circumstances and institutions in which they were caught up.
How did the Chicago School actually achieve these objectives?
MORAL CAREERS AND THE CITY: THE CHICAGO SCHOOL'S APPROACH
Note that we have not yet encountered a specifically ‘urban’ explanation of social change.
As Saunders has convincingly demonstrated, none of sociology's founding fathers relied on the idea that cities and city life were themselves causing social transformation.
It was, in fact, Weber who was clearest about this.
According to Weber the city's real social and political significance was limited to the particular historical circumstances of the mediaeval period.
It was then a forcing ground for the new classes establishing themselves and exerting their power against the existing feudal order.
As Saunders puts it:
Essentially, Weber's essay sets out to show how the mediaeval cities in Western   Europe sustained a fundamental challenge to the feudal system which surrounds them, and thus paved the way for the subsequent development of a rational-legal social order.
This challenge emanated partly from the erosion of traditional values and the development of new forms of individualism, and partly from the usurpation of traditional powerful landed interests and their replacement by new forms of individualism, and their replacement by new forms of domination on the part of wealthy merchants and the urban nobility (as in the ‘patrician cities’) or later (and especially in Italy), on the part of the entrepreneurs and artisans organised through urban guilds (as in the ‘plebeian cities’).
Yet the Chicago School of Urban Sociology was attempting a specifically ‘urban’ theory of social change; one applicable to the new times of a modernising, industrialising society.
They were equating (and as Saunders points out this was later to lead to confusion) Mead's concern   with the relations between self and society, with these relations as they were being constructed in specific geographical contexts such as Chicago or one of Chicago's zones.
Clearly, there are real problems in equating society' or ‘community’ wholly with the limited, if very important, interactions in which people involve themselves in particular localities.
So, although this perspective still has much to teach us, we shall subsequently be combining it with the broader explanations offered by later urban social theorists.
One of the most famous essays emerging from this attempt to give spatial significance to the Chicago School's broader theme of self and society was Burgess's ‘The growth of the city: an introduction to a research project’.
Here is its opening:
The outstanding fact of modern society is the growth of great cities.
Nowhere else have the enormous changes which the machine industry has made in our social life registered themselves with such obviousness as in the cities.
In other words, the Chicago School closely follows the classical sociological tradition in being centrally concerned with the transition from a pre-industrial to a post industrial society.
Park was perhaps the most influential early member of this group and it was he who, in tracing this transition, distinguished between what they called the ‘biotic’ and ‘cultural’levels of human behaviour.
Cities and community structure he saw as reflecting both the instinctive or natural forms of individual and group behaviour and the various forms of conscious social behaviour.
So the biotic and the cultural levels are both concerned with individual and collective behaviour.
However, it was the first of these, the competition and relationships forged in the struggle for survival (including the economic struggle), which Park argued was specific to human ecology.
This links to the Chicago School's borrowing from Darwin.
The Origin of Species had shown that competition between animals and between plants led to adaptations between different breeds and the eventual dominance of some breeds over others.
Similarly, these continuing contests in the natural world were leading to areas which were specialised in their functions.
In a similar way, Park and his colleagues argued, the growing city was developing as a set of specialised yet interacting physical communities as they adapted in relation to one another.
As Park wrote in Human Communities:
Competition operates in the human (as it does in the plant and animal) community to bring about and restore the communal equilibrium when, either by the advent of some intrusive factor from without or in the normal course of its life history, that equilibrium is disturbed.
So unconscious and spontaneous forms of behaviour were of special interest to these early members of the Chicago School.
It was this biotic aspect of human behaviour to which they gave special attention in trying to understand how populations and individuals adapted to one another and how this sorting process resulted in spatial distributions of social groups.
They thus gave specific attention to the instinctive bases of human behaviour, this being much more than an attempt to make an analogy between the human world and the struggles for survival identified by Darwin in the natural world.
It was a genuine attempt to explore the innate bases of behaviour and their social implications, even if something of the confused Darwinian metaphor remained.
Nevertheless, the Chicago School of course recognised the various forms of conscious and institutional forms of control which only conceptualising human beings could achieve.
Bearing in mind later  criticisms of this work (by, for example, Alihan) arguing that the Chicago sociologists never made clear which elements of social behaviour were cultural and which biotic, it is important to emphasise that, in line with Durkheim, Sumner and other earlier social theorists, Park and his colleagues continued to emphasise the close relationships between these two forms of explanation.
The idea was that the distinction should not be apparent when it came to examining human activities and social relationships in actual urban areas.
Park describes the particular significance of the biotic level of human behaviour to natural areas in the following way.
Note, however, his parallel insistence on the cultural level.
The urban community turns out, upon closer scrutiny, to be a mosaic of minor communities, many of them strikingly different from one another, but all more or less typical.
Every city has its central business district; the focal point of the whole urban complex.
Every city, every great city, has its more or less exclusive residential areas or suburbs; its areas of light and of heavy industry, satellite cities, and casual labor mart, where men are recruited for rough work…
These are the so-called natural areas of the city.
They are the product of forces that are constantly at work to effect an orderly distribution of populations and functions within the urban complex.
They are ‘natural’ because they are not planned and because the order they display is not the result of design…
In short, the structure of the city, as we find it, is clearly just as much the product of the struggle and efforts of its people to live and work together collectively as are its local customs, traditions, social ritual, laws, public opinion, and the prevailing moral order.
Generations of schoolchildren have learnt that the Chicago School's famous concentric rings diagram (Figure 2.3) was simply a physical picture of the way in which cities expand.
Yet this is of course only a very partial view of what these sociologists were attempting.
Essentially, they were trying to examine the progress, or indeed lack of progress, of the immigrant newcomers as they tried to settle into this physical and social landscape.
The city was envisaged, then, as a social cauldron; one in which the struggles between the old and new ways of life were being actively conducted.
The city centre, the ‘zone of transition’, was where the new immigrants often started their moral careers.
This was the area of slum, the zone of maximum social and personal deterioration.
Yet, and here Burgess partly reflects the early sociologists' emphasis on the new forms of collective organisation, this area of deterioration ‘is also one of regeneration, as   witness the mission, the settlement, the artists’ colony, radical centers all obsessed with the vision of a new and better world'.
For the middle class reformers at least, this ‘new and better world’ was represented by the rings further out of the city (Figure 2.4).
Beyond was the area of second generation immigrant settlement.
It is the region of escape from the slum, the Deutschland of the aspiring Ghetto family.
For Deutschland (literally ‘Germany’) is the name given, half in envy, half in derision, to that region beyond the Ghetto where successful neighbors appear to be imitating German Jewish standards of living.
But the inhabitant of this area in   turn looks to the ‘Promised Land’ beyond, to its residential hotels, its apartment-house region, its ‘satellite loops and its ‘bright light’areas.
In short, one way of understanding Burgess is that he is describing the moral careers of immigrants; some successfully adapting and eventually living in what they and respectable Chicago society saw as the ‘front regions’ of the desirable suburbs.
Others, however, never escape from the central, and deteriorating, areas; these perhaps envisaged as ‘front regions’ for their supposedly deviant occupants but ‘back regions’for the dominant orders of American society.
Social mobility, therefore, is again closely linked to spatial mobility.
We might note here the central role of locales in these processes.
The physical segregation of the city ‘offers the group, and thereby the individuals who compose the group, a place and a role in the total organisation of city life’.
The final key point about these analyses are their emphasis on broader social change.
Again, this closely parallels one of the grand themes of early sociology we discussed earlier, the changing relation of the individual to other members of society and the wider social implications of this relation.
Mobility, Burgess argued, has great impacts on both individual and social life.
As he put it:
The mobility of city life, with its increase in the number and intensity of stimulations, tends inevitably to confuse and demoralize the person.
For an essential element in the mores and in personal morality is consistency, consistency of the type that is natural in the social control of the primary group.
Where mobility is the greatest, and where in consequence primary controls break down completely, as in the zone of deterioration in the modern city, there develop areas of demoralization, of promiscuity and of vice.
In other words, the rapid shift of populations through the zone of transition meant that primary forms of community and social control were collapsing.
Face-to-face associations were becoming temporary, fragmented and instrumental.
For pleasure and stimulation in this zone of transition many people turned to a criminal way of life.
As we have seen, the Chicago sociologists had every reason to be concerned with gangs engaging in a criminal behaviour.
Chicago was, of course, the leading capital of organised North American crime, with rival ethnically-based groups repeatedly engaging in open warfare.
So the elements of a spatial sociology which we discussed in Chapter 1 are actually well represented in these older forms of urban sociology.
Here we encounter, for example, locales, localities, front and back regions and activities, moral careers, changing forms of face-to-face association and an abiding concern with physical space in the making of individual and collective identities.
Figure 2.5 shows one way of redefining the early Chicago School work.
It shows what they saw as the moral careers of ‘successful’ and ‘unsuccessful’immigrant and the spatial progress from back region to front regions which is bound up with these careers.
But, as this figure also suggests, this is in fact a view which accepts dominant (white, middle class) views as to what constitute a city's back or front  regions.
An alternative view is represented by Figure 2.6.
These same regions might well be viewed rather differently by gang members who (by choice or otherwise) stay in the transitional zone.
This zone may well be the front zone where they attempt to gain the respect of other gang members.
Similarly, a respectable suburban life may well be suppressed by an individual who wants to retain credibility amongst the gang.
Many of the early Chicago School's themes, albeit with different emphases, recur in its later work.
Take, for example, the well known 1938 essay by Louis Wirth, ‘Urbanism as a way of life’.
He again argued that cities were themselves the cauldron in which the transition from the old to the new societies was taking place; and, crucially, cities were themselves actively generating a new way of life.
Society, he said, was no longer based on small groups scattered over large territories.
Rather:
The distinctive feature of man's mode of living in the modern age is his concentration into gigantic aggregations around which cluster lower centres and from which radiate the ideas and practices that we call civilization.
So cities were again seen as having causal effects.
Like Park, however, Wirth was not arguing that the effects of city life could be considered separately from the rise of capitalist industry.
Rather, the argument was that industrialism was giving rise to new, and massive, urban concentrations and these latter were having distinct social effects.
Nevertheless, like the cities of the pre-industrial era, modern industry-based urban areas were mechanisms for sustaining human contact.
The rise of cities in the modern world is undoubtedly not independent of the emergence of modern power-driven machine technology, mass production, and capitalistic enterprise; but different as the cities of the earlier epochs may have been by virtue of their development in a pre-industrial and pre-capitalistic order from the great cities of today, they were also cities.
Then follows Wirth's famous definition of the city.
‘For sociological purposes a city may be defined as a relatively large, dense and permanent settlement of socially heterogeneous individuals.’
The point of this definition was, however, that it should be used.
The central objective was to establish the kinds of actions and organisations that people typically make for themselves in this kind of social and spatial environment.
He comes to a similar conclusion to that of the classical theorists of the nineteenth century: face-to-face contacts are many and multifarious, but they are again secondary, fractionalised and based on only a very partial knowledge of a particular individual.
The resulting effects, as people      attempt to create their own personal and insulating space (what Harré refers to as Umwelt) are profound:
The reserve, the indifference and the blasé outlook which urbanites manifest in their relationships may thus be regarded as devices for immunizing themselves against the personal claims and expectations of others.
So Wirth argues that a distinct kind of ‘urban personality’ emerges in the new city; one distinguished by competition, aggrandisement, mutual exploitation and separation from nature.
Furthermore, individuals are rendered ‘schizoid’ by the range of roles which they undertake and which they experience in others.
Similarly (and this is a point we develop in later chapters)‘there is little opportunity for the individual to obtain a conception of the whole or to survey his place in the total scheme’.
In the less well known studies of particular subcultures, the Chicago School develops the theme of moral careers and the effects of space.
An example is Cressey's 1932 study of the ‘taxi dance hall’, a commercial institution in which men purchased dances from young women.
For the young women, many of whom were ‘set adrift in a money-mad city life’, the taxi dance hall fulfilled a basic desire for social recognition.
This was, nevertheless, an increasingly commercialised society and ‘the impersonal attitudes of the marketplace very soon supersede the romantic impulses which normally might develop’.
The taxi dance hall was, therefore, a complex combination of the outright commercial exploitation of women and these women's search for some kind of identity.
For the women this involved a distinct moral career.
The ‘lowest’ level was the ‘overnight date’.
Here the taxi dance hall represented little more than clandestine prostitution.
Above this level, however, a young woman was ‘faithful’ to three or four men.
As one of the men put it, ‘two of us paid her rent, another paid her groceries and a fourth fellow bought some of her clothes’.
The highest status level was that of the ‘mistress’— a more permanent relationship.
Other studies, such as Whyte's ‘Social structure, the gang and the individual’ and Thrasher's The Gang, combined studies of moral careers (in particular those of the Italian immigrant community) with their use of locales.
American society, Whyte argued, placed great emphasis on upward social mobility.
The ‘Cornerville’ man is caught in a contradiction.
On the one hand, he is tempted to advance himself materially ‘through advancement in the world of rackets and politics’.
On the other hand, precisely by moving upwards and into his ‘front region’ he loses his original connections and identity.
For all the attempts to move upwards, however, there remain massive constraints and limitations.
The fact of living in the back region itself leaves a social stigma.
Hence he is more or less permanently associated by middle class opinion with a back region.
Thus
[It]is difficult for the Cornerville man to get onto the ladder, even on the bottom rung.
His district has become popularly known as a disordered and lawless community.
He is an Italian, and the Italians are looked upon by upper-class people as among the least desirable of immigrant peoples.
The gang, Whyte argued, had a distinct internal structure of seniority; though a structure which allows upward mobility within it.
The abiding informal rules are the meeting of obligations for the rest of the gang.
Those who do not meet their obligations (lending money, helping out in other ways) stand no chance of moving up the hierarchy.
The leader is one who does systematically meet obligations.
Furthermore, one of his main attributes is the capacity to link to other gangs and their leaders.
This internal seniority structure and pattern of mobility might seem to be the sole mechanism underlying the making and breaking of gangs.
But, as Whyte points out, the situation is in fact more complex than this.
The actual formation of gangs depends as much on the splits and alliances made by the gang leaders as on the gangs' internal dynamics.
Finally, we can again recognise the central role of locales.
Within a back region there are, of course, fronts and backs.
In this area, the ‘corner’ is a front region.
Cornerville man describes the gang member and his relationships in a very literal sense.
As one member put it to ‘Bill’ Whyte:
‘Fellows around here don't know what to do except with a radius of about three hundred yards.
That's the truth, Bill.
They come home from work, hang on the corner, go up to eat, back to the corner, up a show [sic], and they come back to hang on the corner.
If they're not on the corner, it-s likely the boys there will know where you can find them.
Most of them stick to one corner.
It's only rarely that a fellow will change his corner.
Several of these themes are present in Thrasher's remarkable study of 1,313 Chicago gangs.
The overall conceptual framework is again that of the biotic ‘struggle’ for existence, the key result being the creation of distinct, ‘natural’areas.
In this instance we are again studying a very real struggle, with gangs looting, scavenging and turning to organised crime as a means of scraping together a living.
Within this framework four particular themes stand out.
One is the familiar picture of gang life emerging from an area of high social and spatial mobility and hence of   isolation from dominant mores and habits.
‘Demoralisation’ here refers literally to the ‘development of attitudes and habits which are out of adjustment with the dominant social codes’.
The detached individual (see Figure 2.7) thereby joins a ‘criminal gang’.
This gang may well have:
[its]own mores, which govern the relations of its members to each other, and it may have a high degree of morale, developed in fighting other gangs or defying the law'.
A second theme is again locale; the settings in which the gangs hang out.
These form what he calls ‘the conditioning factors within which the gang lives, moves and has its being’.
These back regions are formed in what he calls the ‘interstitial regions’ abandoned as the city has grown out.
[Gangland is]isolated from the wider culture of the larger community by the processes of competition and conflict which have resulted in the selection of its population'.
But, even within Gangland, there are front and back regions.
The place  to be seen is again the street corner (see Figure 2.8).
It is here, in a communal context, that gang members (in this case the racist ‘Little Murderers’ and ‘Big Murderers’) put up a front to impress their own members, other gangs and respectable citizens.
Many of these same themes, including what Whyte called Cornerville man, recur in the postwar Chicago work.
A good example is Suttles's The Social Order of the Slum.
This was a further study of the social and spatial organisation of part of Chicago's ‘transitional zone’, its divisions and its relations to the outside world.
The district is called the ‘Addams area’ by Suttles; Jane Addams being the well known reformer who was operating Hull House in this area some fifty years earlier.
On the one hand, Suttles argues, slum areas are ‘culture building worlds’, with ethnicity, territoriality and (once more) spatial organisation being the key means by which social and personal identities are made.
On the other hand, these identities are constructed in relation (and partly in opposition) to the demands and views of respectable middle class opinion.
In some ways it is easiest to describe the neighborhood by how its residents deviate from the public standards of the wider community…
Seen from the inside, however, the Addams area is intricately organized according to its own standards and the residents are fairly insistent on their demands.
Suttles's view of urban areas as the settings of face-to-face relations and interactions reads very like the concerns of Harré and other authors discussed in Chapter 1.
Here, in line with Harré's model as represented by Figure 2.4, we find individual identity being formed in the process of collective association and interaction.
The means by which these identities are formed are, according to Suttles, the withdrawal of ethnic minorities to small territories and a limited range of personal associations.
Nevertheless, personal identity and worth (and hence ‘moral careers’) are constantly being assessed and judged in this immediate social context.
Addams area residents relate to one another primarily by personalistic morality in which individual precedent is the major standard of evaluation.
The most incongruous of people become associated and continue to remain safe companions.
Judgements of worth and social sanctions are individuated and tailored to past commitments.
Normative rulings, then, do not apply to a fixed role apart from the incumbent; they can be developed only as individuals have the time and occasion to become familiar with each others' past history and future intentions.
Many of the other themes identified earlier recur in this more recent    work.
As suggested above, this slum area may well be the context in which ‘fronts’ are being put up by individuals in the processes of day-today interaction.
But what Suttles calls the ‘public view’ in fact stereotypes this same area as a ‘back region’.
Like a prison community, it is seen by respectable opinion as an area incapable of acting in what he calls ‘an approved social manner’.
Moreover, the public view affects how people in the slum actually behave.
Like those in the closed prison community, the stereotype is often lived up to.
In so far as the residents depend upon the public definition of each other, there is very little basis for trust except through the exercise of brute force or economic sanctions.
Physical space again forms a key element in the social and personal processes of identity-formation.
On the one hand, large-scale capital movements, investments and political strategies create a physical landscape of shopping centres, streets and public buildings.
But at the same time these physical forms are the means by which each group (including Negroes, Italians, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans) actively monitors, and sometimes resists, the incursions of others.
TOWARDS A REFORMULATION OF THE EXPRESSIVE ORDER
Although the Chicago School over-used the Darwinian metaphor of the struggle for survival, and although it made the mistake of equating ‘society’ or ‘community’with the social systems of relatively small areas, the Chicago School still has much to offer in terms of the new kind of spatial sociology which we started to develop in Chapter 1.
It was engaging with much the same processes as those later explored by Goffman, Harré and those working from a symbolic interactionist position.
Of particular interest is the Chicago School's sensitivity to localities and locales as the context of human interaction, the formation (though moral careers) of personal and social identities and large-scale social transition forming and formed by small-scale interaction.
In short, the slum (and other parts of the city) had their own kinds of mutually agreed social order.
The question must arise, therefore, why this kind of urban sociology has become unfashionable.
The answer lies largely in the kind of critique that we developed earlier  in relation to Harré.
It certainly sees urban concentrations as resulting from industrialisation and capitalism: but it rapidly places these considerations to one side and looks to interactions between people as the prime explanation.
Park, adopting an analogy with plant and animal ecology, was interested in how individuals adapted to the larger, and rapidly changing, society of which they were part.
Wirth gave special emphasis to the social-cum-physical setting of cities as themselves giving rise to secondary and partial human association.
All this gave powerful ammunition to urban sociologists writing from the mid-1970s onwards.
Castells is particularly significant here.
He argued that neither of these perspectives had theoretical objects.
As regards adaptation, for example, he made the critique which we made above in relation to front and back regions.
Adaptation actually meant adaptation of immigrants to the norms and values of capitalist America.
As he wrote:
Not only does this branch of urban sociology have a non-special theoretical object (viz. everything which takes place within an urban setting) but it has a different and non-explicit: the process of acculturation to modern society, i.e. to American society.
As a Marxist (and, in his early days, structuralist Marxist attributing relatively minor significance to the actions and understandings of individuals and groups) Castells therefore found the Chicago School offering very partial understandings.
And such explanations only contributed to the existing capitalist social order.
Furthermore, even if acculturation to a dominant order was a feature of early Chicago society there was, according to Castells, no need to promote this as a universal process occurring in all cities.
The Chicago School work, Castells argued, at best offered good empirical studies of a very specific set of historical circumstances.
So, in sum, Castells's argument leads to the suggestion that people's moral careers, their use of back and front regions, and so on, cannot be considered separate from the workings of a capitalist economy or the exercising of political authority.
As he wrote in 1976:
As soon as the urban context is broken down even into such crude categories as social class, age or ‘interests’, processes which seemed to be peculiar to particular urban areas turn out to be determined by other factors.
The question, however, is whether Castells's wholesale and penetrating critique represents the end of the matter.
Our argument here is that it does not.
Social theory generally (and urban social theory especially) cannot afford to lose sight of people's own understandings of the social world.
To do so would seriously undermine our understanding of how people are not only constrained by, but also through their actions change, the deeper structures in which they are caught up.
The concerns of the Chicago School are still relevant, even if they require supplementing by reference to social relations and processes.
People's understandings, as we have earlier seen pointed out in Williams's The Country and the City, need placing in the wider social circumstances in which they are living.
Similarly, their moral careers need placing in the context of their class position in employment, as well as in the physical and social context in which they live.
Again Cornerville man or the taxi dancer are operating within capitalist, patriarchal and, frequently, racist societies.
The point here, however, is that the expressive order, moral careers and front and back regions are still constructed and lived, albeit within extraordinarily persistent social structures which constrain and enable people's lives.
The implication is that the critiques developed by Castells and others have partly missed their targets.
While the Chicago School certainly addressed the expressive order in problematic ways, their critics have thrown out the baby with the bathwater; misinterpreting or misunderstanding what these sociologists were attempting.
The task now is to reconstruct a new kind of urban sociology which combines both kinds of insight.
However, this has not taken place.
Much progress has been made since the days of the Chicago School in terms of understanding the biological and instinctive bases of individual and social behaviour.
Yet this progress has remained debilitated by a refusal to link such understandings with those concerning what the Chicago School would have called the ‘culture’ which human beings consciously make for themselves.
THE EMERGENCE OF A DIVIDED URBAN SOCIOLOGY
We have seen the Chicago School making the important distinction between the biotic and cultural levels of human behaviour, and we have seen them attempting to combine these understandings of individual and social behaviour in the study of the ‘natural area’.
The clinical distinction between the biotic and cultural levels is difficult to sustain and urgent attention (of the kind being developed by Harré et al.) needs to be given to the merging of these two lines of thought.
Nevertheless, the Chicago School at least tried to relate an understanding of the instinctive aspects  of human behaviour to conscious forms of individual and social behaviour, even if we remain unhappy with the precise way in which this combination was brought about.
Since the heyday of the Chicago School, though, there has developed in urban sociology (and, arguably, in sociology more generally) a major gulf between these two kinds of understanding.
Throughout this study we will be discussing the crucial contributions made by recent writers within the social (or what the Chicago School called ‘cultural’) level.
We will find, for example, Marxists giving primary emphasis to class relations, their uneven development and the shifting alliances between classes in particular localities.
We will also find feminist writing, giving special emphasis to patriarchal gender relations and their different forms in employment, the neighbourhood and the home.
Other authors, especially those influenced by Weber and Foucault, emphasise the role of bureaucracies, their power over subordinated populations and their control over different economic and social interests affecting domestic and community life.
We return to these in Chapter 5.
These perspectives are quite familiar.
So too are recent developments in what the Chicago School would have seen as the biotic level of instinctive behaviour affecting individuals and societies.
Biology and psychology have, of course, developed considerably since the 1920s and 1930s, and at this stage we must outline some of their basic theses.
As will rapidly become clear, however, these theories have remained largely detached from the Chicago School's cultural level.
So while some understanding of these perspectives must form an essential part of social theory, one giving greater credence to people's own actions, theories and understandings, we must insist that these instinctive (biotic) processes are mediated by social (cultural) processes and relationships.
Contemporary understandings of the biotic order: Ethology and sociobiology
The mediation of instinctive processes by social ones is largely absent from most of the recent work on the instinctive bases of individual and social behaviour.
The linked subjects of ethology and sociobiology are cases in point.
Ethology is the study of species with particular emphasis on their interactions with the surrounding natural environment.
Ethologists have  followed Darwin in their prime concern with the evolution of species and the various forms of physical and behavioural adaptation that they have developed in the process of competing for survival.
Species develop, it is argued, specific forms of innate behaviours and drives which are geared towards survival and reproduction and, while much of this work has been carried out on non-human species, it has indeed been applied directly to the human animal: Desmond Morris's ‘naked ape’.
There are differences between human ethologists.
One of the authors who addresses himself directly to our main concerns is Ardrey.
His book, The Territorial Imperative, argues that human beings share with animals an instinctive territoriality, his argument being that this instinct lies deep in human nature and originally stems from animals' need to establish their patch.
The need for a well defined area (one established through various forms of marker such as the song used by birds) is seen by Ardrey as having its basis in guaranteeing access to food and space for breeding for future generations.
Territorial instincts in people may well now be disconnected from the fact that, say, food is provided on an increasingly international basis.
But this does not stop people, as human animals, having evolved with deeply held and genetically transmitted territorial instincts.
Ardrey, however, spoils his case by making very extreme claims for instinctive territoriality amongst humans.
Wars between nations, he suggests, are wholly a product of people's territorial natures.
Ardrey may well have a point here, but there is no way we can afford to leave out the social and political (or ‘cultural’) relations and processes underlying such conflicts.
Not the least of these are imperialism and vested interests in the extraordinarily profitable armaments industry.
More subtle and sophisticated writers in the contemporary ethological mould are Tiger and Fox.
The fundamental argument is again that human beings are still very ‘basic’ beings; that is, they have evolved over millions of years and that what we call civilisation or culture represents only a fraction of human history.
As a result, we are still designed around extremely basic forms of behaviour; forms geared towards individual and social survival, despite the fact that people now live in societies where  such behaviour is largely redundant for simple survival.
As Tiger and Fox put it:
We have to make the imaginative and unsettling leap into understanding that agricultural and industrial civilizations have put nothing into the basic wiring of the human animal.
We are wired for hunting — for the emotions, the excitements, the curiosities, the regularities, the fears and the social relationships that were needed to survive in the hunting way of life.
[my emphasis]
Human beings are therefore seen as having a seventy million year old ‘wiring’.
Tiger and Fox argue, however (and here they part company with the early sociobiologists), that human beings' wiring is capped by a symbolising, conceptualising brain.
This brain itself, however, is a form of adaptation which has allowed human beings to become the dominant species.
Selection has favoured those organisms which have scientific, learning, rule-obeying capacities all of which contribute towards the development and maintenance of advanced societies.
Nevertheless, the ‘wiring’ is constructed in such a way as to ensure that certain kinds of social relationship and hierarchy processes remain reproduced.
Tiger and Fox argue, for example, that there is a special bond between mothers and children, essentially based on suckling.
The home thereby acquires a special significance; an institution protected by the males, if necessary by aggressive actions towards others.
On the other hand, institutions such as the family and marriage are not seen as innate or wired.
‘They are’ in Tiger and Fox's words ‘devices to protect the mother/child unit from the potential fragility of the mating bond’.
Another key set of wired bonds is that between adult males.
While females are reproducing and suckling, males remain programmed to hunt and to defend their patch against predators.
Linked to this is Tiger and Fox's third main bond, that between adolescent males.
Here, in the process of competition and play, juveniles are establishing the skills required in male adulthood.
These not only include the aggression originally necessary for survival.
Adolescents are also learning how to be loyal to the group and, if necessary, to sacrifice their own selfish ends to those of the group.
A special kind of morality, therefore, emerges amongst male adolescents, one again originally programmed to serve the overarching imperative for survival.
Sociobiology also envisages long-term evolution and adaptations of animals (including human beings) as essentially organised around the reproduction and expansion of animal and human life.
For sociobiology, however, the central mechanism involved in such reproduction and expansion is not the species or even the individual but what Dawkins calls the ‘selfish gene’.
Genes and their behaviour are the basic building blocks for this understanding of human social life.
The expansion, or attempted expansion, of genes is seen as the central causal mechanism underlying  both individual and social behaviour.
Genetic reproduction and expansion has, of course, been for millions of years the basis of animal life and its evolutionary change.
Needless to add, these processes (and, more arguably, the forms of behaviour to which they give rise) have a far longer history than any particular society or mode of production.
Sociobiology's central idea is that an organism such as an animal or human being acts and competes for resources in such a way as to maximise its reproductive success.
This basically refers to success in spreading genes to later populations; even if this means damage to an individual organism's success.
At its simplest, sociobiology is arguing, then, that the central drive affecting individual and social behaviour is not the preservation of the individual but the maximisation of the individual's genes into future generations.
This behaviour goes beyond simple biological reproduction.
It includes innate male aggression and, as recognised by some ethologists, an emphasis on instinctive territoriality.
Sociobiology therefore extends its field of analysis well beyond the individual organism.
It incorporates the concept of ‘inclusive fitness’; the sum of an individual's fitness plus that of other blood relatives.
This principle of inclusive fitness is perhaps summed up by the answer reportedly given by the distinguished biologist J. B. S. Haldane when asked in a bar whether he would lay down his life for his brother.
His reply, after an extended pause, was ‘not for one brother.
But I would for two brothers or eight cousins’.
So the emphasis in much contemporary biology is now shifting away from the earlier Darwinian concerns which, as we have seen, originally influenced the Chicago School.
If the earlier understandings were based on individuals, species and their ‘fitness’ for survival, the present concern is with behaviour stemming from shared genes.
Individual animals and people are seen as people or animals acting as ‘survival machines’, being largely programmed by their genes towards the expansion of inclusive fitness and the use of resources to that end.
And these resources include, of course, other organisms.
Thus organisms are seen primarily as means by which strands of DNA are reproduced through succeeding generations.
Sociobiology develops from this an understanding of instinctive social and individual behaviours which stem from these innate drives towards maximising reproductive success.
For any one such machine, the environment within which he or she is competing includes not only the natural environment in the form of air, light, water and food, but also other survival machines.
These, too, are seen as programmed to act in the reproductive interests of their genes.
These machines compete and evolve so that those which survive are those which have best adapted to their genes' demand for replication and expansion.
Competition for scarce resources is seen by sociobiology as involving various forms of behaviour.
Competition and struggle may be the watchwords but this does not necessarily imply outright hostility.
If competition generated raw aggression resulting in defeat or death this can hardly be seen as assisting fitness maximisation.
The picture painted by sociobiology is less one of outright and explicit aggression and more one in which individuals or species evolve what Maynard Smith calls ‘evolutionary stable strategies’.
These are learned and inherited forms of individual and social behaviour which, assuming no major upheaval in the environment takes place, tend to be best for reproductive success.
The maximisation of reproductive success is seen by this perspective, as socially based.
That is, an individual's selfish genes are envisaged by sociobiology as leading to a number of self-preserving strategies which are essentially collective in nature.
Inclusive fitness is the key concept here; with altruism, more than individual selfishness, being a form of behaviour most likely to guarantee reproductive success.
Altruism here refers to the various forms of self-sacrifice, or, more accurately, apparent self-sacrifice, in which animals and human beings engage.
However, as Haldane's comment suggests, altruism is seen as a function of the proportion of genes shared by individuals.
A person or animal inherits half its genes from each parent.
For two siblings there is a fifty-fifty chance that it will share one of its genes.
This means that if one sibling helps another to survive and reproduce then it is ensuring the further spread of its genes within future generations.
To a decreasing extent, the same principle can be seen as applying to other blood relations.
Kin altruism is therefore seen by sociobiologists as the most basic form of co-operative behaviour.
It refers in particular to the forms of sacrifice which parents make for their children to expand their genes into the ‘gene pool’ of the population as a whole.
Kin altruism is not, however, seen as the only form of altruistic behaviour in which sociobiology sees people and animals engaging.
‘Reciprocal altruism’ is envisaged as the second main form of social behaviour.
Essentially this refers to forms of altruism between unrelated individuals.
While altruism by one individual towards another clearly involves some self-sacrifice, the tacit (even unconscious) assumption by the donor is that such sacrifice will, in the long run, generate reciprocal support.
The underlying motive here (although the word ‘motive’ is misleading since it suggests that such strategies are not genetically driven  but are a product of conscious strategy) is again ‘the selfish gene’and its reproductive success.
The third main form of social behaviour introduced by sociobiology is ‘induced altruism’.
This is a process whereby altruistic behaviour by one individual remains uncompensated.
Meanwhile, the recipient of this altruism stands a better chance of survival and, more importantly, its genes stand improved possibilities for replication and expansion.
The classic form of induced altruism in the animal world is, of course, the bird raising the cuckoo's egg.
But as Badcock and others argue, the same principles can be applied to all forms of human and animal life.
Whenever one organism promotes the fitness of another at its own expense and without reciprocal benefit to itself or benefit to its own genes present in the recipient it has perforce performed an act of induced altruism.
There are, however, a number of difficulties with this perspective, and especially about the core issue with which we have been concerned.
How is an understanding of biological processes to be applied to the social world?
One involving, for example, relationships between classes or between men and women as they are socially constructed?
There is firstly, however, the question of whether the sociobiological arguments are correct even on their own terms.
There is now (as we have seen Tiger and Fox recognising) a wealth of anthropological data on the evolution of man as a conceptualising, language-using animal.
Recent research by Leakey and Lewin in Africa shows that the most characteristic feature of early human beings is their large brains.
This suggests, Leakey and Lewin argue, considerable conceptualising capacities: consciously relating to others through language and reflecting on the innate processes to which they are subject.
In short, the characteristic feature of human beings, as the early symbolic interactionists such as Mead emphasised long ago, is that they are self-aware in a sense in which other animals are not.
This means that there is a specifically human nature to the early homo erectus which Leakey and Lewin reckon was roaming around East Africa 1½ million years ago.
He and she had capacities for self-awareness, reflection and organisation through a well organised and complex language.
Self-awareness means that human beings are, in fact, capable of engaging pure altruism.
This does not imply that there are no innate drives, including inner biological drives, nor that human beings are always likely to act in a selfless way towards others.
It does mean, however, that we must consider human beings as conceptualising animals, reflecting on what is taking place to them and, furthermore, doing something about it.
It is precisely through the evolution of conceptualising capacities (and, in particular, of language  enabling complex social interactions) that human beings have come to dominate other species.
The second, and related, argument against sociobiology is that sociobiology is engaging in biological determinism; the central accusation being that it offers a wholly biological basis for social and individual behaviour.
Sahlins has pressed this argument particularly hard, criticising what he calls ‘vulgar sociology’ which suggests ‘a one-to-one parallel between the character of human biological propensities and the properties of human social systems’.
For a radical social theorist such as Sahlins (and for a number of feminists) sociobiology is no more than a means of justifying the status quo as inevitable and ‘natural’.
To quote Sahlins again:
What is inscribed in the theory of sociobiology is the entrenched ideology of Western society: the assurance of its naturalness, and the claim of its inevitability.
Since the seventeenth century we seem to have been caught up in this vicious cycle, alternatively applying the model of capitalist society to the animal kingdom, then reapplying this bourgeoisified animal kingdom to the interpretation of society.
Sahlins's criticism of sociobiology centres on his analysis of human kinship in contemporary pre-industrial societies.
He argues that each form of kinship has its distinctive form of arrangements.
In some societies, for example, distantly related individuals may be incorporated into the formally recognised family, while in other cultures even children may be excluded.
He argues, in short, that actual forms of kinship are socially constructed.
None of them actually obey the formal theory which suggests that altruism towards kin in human societies is directly in proportion to shared genes.
Sahlins's arguments have strength.
Indeed, they are much in line with the argument we have been developing.
On the other hand, he is in danger of slipping into a wholly cultural (and Marxist) determinism.
Furthermore, he is actually criticising an early, and distinctly primitive, form of sociobiology.
More recently, anthropologists and others sensitive to this kind of criticism and conducting empirical research from this perspective have become much less assertive and deterministic.
So while the expectation of altruism mathematically relating to kin relatedness is almost inevitably doomed to be disproved in human societies, there is now considerable evidence that sociobiology identifies some broad relationships and tendencies which are incontrovertible.
Kin relations are a particularly good example.
Betzig, on the basis of a survey of a wide range of surveys, writes that:
More has been written about whether or not people take kinship into account when they expend reproductive effort than about any other problem in the study of  human reproductive behaviour.
People have been shown (1) to prefer proximity to kin (presumably, the better to help them),(2) to actually help their kin (presumably in ways likely to enhance their reproductive success), and (3) to produce more children and grandchildren when they live close to and/or are helped by kin.
Despite such increasing subtlety, however, this new approach to what the Chicago School would have called the biotic level remains relatively asocial.
While there may well be an overall tendency for people to support kin, there are considerable class differences in the extent of this mutalism.
Dunbar, amongst current researchers operating from a broadly Darwinian perspective, offers salutary (and, for ardent sociobiologists, perhaps the most disheartening) advice:
In my view, those who concentrate on a search for species-wide universals in behaviour or morphological traits are likely to be disappointed.
The number of genuinely universal traits are, I suspect, likely to run to single figures at most and probably correspond to the handful of biological ‘needs’ like warmth, food and procreation.
Beyond that, everything else is essentially a context-specific attempt to put those few universal principles into practice.
Clearly, any attempt to understand the instinctive or biotic bases of human behaviour is fraught with immense complexities and difficulties.
Furthermore, any attempt to promote the biological and instinctive bases of human behaviour at the expense of social relations and processes is surely doomed to failure.
A large part of our difficulty stems from the dualism between man and nature which was established in Western philosophy well before the establishment of modern science and sociology.
One answer, and a point we will develop at the end of this book, is to recognise that ethology and biology may well have identified some of the most basic relationships and processes (preservation of self and kin, territoriality, different forms of bonding between parents and children, male aggression) underlying human behaviour.
As such, sociology (including urban sociology) may well have been premature in rejecting these kinds of understanding.
There is no logical reason to reject the idea that sociological concerns (with, for example, class, power and gender) are not based on biological and deep-rooted psychological foundations.
We return to some of these links in later chapters, but might note here, for example, the extent to which ethology comes round full circle to reach conclusions very similar to contemporary radical feminist analysis.
Ethology's assertion that male aggression has an instinctive basis to it has a close parallel with those radical feminists such as Dworkin who argue that males are inherently and innately violent.
Despite long-held  opposition by many feminists to sociobiology and ethology (the most common basis to the feminist argument being that male aggression is entirely culturally derived) their conclusions are very similar.
But the possibility of radical feminism recognising biological and instinctive bases of male violence is spoilt by the early ethologists and sociobiologists overstating their case.
A recognition of these instinctive processes and relations does not of course entail envisaging all social behaviour as an unmediated result of underlying primordial processes.
Rather, some combination of instincts and social processes is taking place.
What the sociobiologists have identified are some underlying relationships and latent forms of human behaviour.
But whether, how, where and when these underlying instincts are activated is a social (or what the biologists would call a ‘cultural’) matter.
Furthermore, these forms of behaviour are not simply direct responses to external stimuli.
People, of course, have the capacity to give their own meanings to their and other people's actions.
Freud and his discontents
The other main element of the biotic sphere of human and social life which would be built into our new kind of spatial social theory is social psychology.
Although the Chicago School made passing reference to Freud's work in discussing the biotic level, it did not explore it in detail, perhaps because it was not fully available in English during the 1920s and 1930s.
Social psychology is clearly another large and highly complex topic.
As with the discussion of ethology and sociobiology, however, we shall simply be considering some of the main themes in this area (especially those deriving from Freud) and their possible links to the biological work we have just discussed.
We can also make some preliminary connections to some of the issues with which ‘urban’ sociology is conventionally concerned.
Again, these links must not be rushed at; social psychology cannot be ‘read off’ into urban sociology in the way in which some authors have attempted.
Firstly, there are also (as with biology) some internal inconsistencies to social psychology which need making clear.
Secondly (and there are again close parallels with sociobiology), there is the outstanding problem of social psychology's apparent ‘asociality’.
How, in short, are we supposed to relate this kind of work to what the Chicago School called the ‘cultural’ sphere of consciously constructed relationships and structures?
As we discuss shortly, this particular problem has also been explored in depth by feminist writing.
There is clearly a strong argument for social theory (including ‘urban’ social theory) being thoroughly involved in these knotty problems.
On the other hand, this literature is not easily applicable to the ‘urban’ sphere or even to the ‘social’sphere more generally.
Arguably, Jung's psychology (one which appears to link better to collective experience and social relations) is in some respects a departure for a new sociology which is more sensitive to the relationship between the individual and society and to ‘moral careers’.
As shown in Chapter 1, it is indeed this type of psychology which Harré et al.select as most appropriate for the ‘new psychology’ which they are constructing.
Freud, however, is a more common starting point for social theory.
There are a number of connected themes here.
Initially, at least, two particular sets of ideas seem most directly relevant to conventional ‘urban’ concerns.
First, there is the difficult question of ownership.
Does the possession of such items as domestic property and land have an instinctive basis?
Freud's psychoanalytic theory argued that people are innately possessive.
This stems, he said, from a child's early toilet training.
Very young infants are loathe to give up their precious bodily products and this is largely because children gain pleasurable sensations from not doing so.
Later child psychologists have noted how older children find and hang on to a favoured object such as a rag.
This is the beginnings of property acquisition, stemming from the need to be secure in relation to the outside world.
We shall shortly assess the plausibility of this notion.
Secondly is Freud's understanding of the human personality's different levels.
For him the ‘id’ represents basic, primordial drives and sexual instincts.
The ‘superego’, however, is a censoring, evaluating, mechanism, one instilled into children at an early age.
It is thereby often based on a childhood authority figure such as the father or mother.
Such a figure tends to replicate itself in the relationships and practices in which children engage in later life.
The ‘ego’(itself linked and responsive to the id and the superego) is constantly searching for what Freud and later Freudians call ‘defence mechanisms’ to protect and enhance individual personality.
This links to our ‘urban’ concerns through considering Freud's ideas of how social groups come into being (including, for example, those formed on a neighbourhood or local political basis).
In his later works, Freud was  particularly interested in the psychology of social and political groups.
He argued that the leaders of such groups, and the altruistic ideals which they appeared to espouse, had a deep psychological significance for the other members of the group.
Children, having built up in the early stages of their lives an ‘ego ideal’ with whom they have had apparently satisfactory relationships, are for the rest of their lives attempting to transfer this ideal on to other people or organisations.
Classically, of course, this may well be a sexual partner.
But, beyond this, an individual's identification with this idealised figure (usually, but not always, a parent) is transferred to other individuals or organisations.
Meanwhile, of course, apparently satisfactory early relations with a mother or father may well, according to Freud, have been based on the repression of sexual urges.
Freud extended his analysis of close-knit sexual and blood relations to the formation of larger social and political groups.
He argued that many organisations (especially those that were relatively long-lasting and dependent on leaderships for their organisation and continuance) could be interpreted in terms of the transference of early childhood affections.
Individuals' 'ego ideals' are seen as being systematically transferred to charismatic leader figures, organisations and the values (including those of family, church and patriarchal authority) which are no less than a displaced version of the all-providing ‘father’ or ‘mother’figure of childhood.
As Freud wrote:
A primary group of this kind is a number of individuals who have put one and the same object in the place of their ego ideal and have consequently identified themselves with one another in their ego.
Freud had always supposed that the various forms of innate behaviour he explored had biological bases to them.
These connections continue to be explored by psychologists who have studied the relationships between evolutionary genetics and the subconscious.
If the id represents basic primordial drives, it can be argued that this is a psychological equivalent of the biological tendency towards fitness maximisation in human beings.
Similarly, as Badcock argues, the ego can be seen as a means by which tactics for maximum fitness are constructed by active, conscious, social human beings.
The ego's tactics towards fitness-maximisation can therefore be envisaged as conditioning primordial drives in line with external circumstances and a sense of self-identity or personal defence.
Finally, the superego again acts as regulator over the tendency towards maximum inclusive fitness.
The displaced or externalised mother or father figure (including, of course, the state) can be seen as a repository of  tradition and culture, again regulating people's innate drives towards survival and genetic representation in later generations.
Like sociobiology, these speculations and connections regarding what the Chicago School would have termed the ‘biotic sphere’ are exciting and provocative.
Moreover, it is tempting to translate them directly into human social and political affairs.
Smith is one author who makes such a translation.
He argues that Freud's later work is in fact directly applicable to ‘urban’ social theory.
‘When Freud spoke of civilization’, Smith writes, ‘he had in mind the process of ‘modernization’ and the characteristics of urban life in the industrial capitalist cities of his own time'.
So Smith is arguing that Freud's analyses were conducted at a time when society was still undergoing a fundamental shift towards not only an industrialised society but one characterised by the growth of large cities.
Freud, as Smith points out, saw the new kinds of collective social controls as suppressing basic natural desires, and, as a result, these instincts were being channelled into other more harmful forms such as aggression.
Smith summarises Freud in the following way:
On the one hand, the customary inhibitions and externally imposed social controls characterizing modern urban life dilute the intensity of individual pleasure derived from the gratification of deep-seated instinctual impulses.
Tamed instincts may protect the individual from vulnerability to external aggression or from emotional abandonment by one to whom he or she is fully committed in an act of love; but in the process they also render life experiences flat and stand in the way of necessary instinctual release.
There are, however, a number of difficulties with this.
First is the elision of newly industrialised with ‘urban’ societies.
Freud may have been writing at a time of increasing urbanisation resulting from rapid industrialisation, but it is not at all clear that his work has any specifically ‘urban’ connotations.
Unlike the Chicago School, for example, he was not attempting to construct an understanding of how distinct forms of ‘natural area’ were resulting from people's search for identity.
Perhaps more important, and there are close parallels here to our critique of ethology and sociobiology, Freud still skirts round the difficult question of how primordial instincts are socially constructed.
The ‘individual’ in the extract above is confronted by social controls.
But he or she still seems to be unencumbered by, for example, the class, gender or ethnic relations which are of course socially constructed.
As we shall see, this is a point which has been made most forcefully by recent feminist writing.
One way of approaching the non-cultural (or non-social) aspects of psychological theory is to start with what seems at first sight like a simple series of internal inconsistencies in Freud's work.
Giddens in particular has pointed to the very varying ways in which Freud used the words id, ego and superego.
Sometimes, for example, the id refers to a section of the mind, at other times it appears to be alluding to a whole person or agent.
As Giddens points out:
Freud writes, for example, of the ego's ‘wish to sleep’, although while asleep it stays on duty' to protect against the worst emanations of the unconscious, ‘guarding’ the sleep of the dreamer…
Whose sleep is it the ego desires?
The agent's?
Its own?’.
Giddens argues that these ‘terminological inconsistencies and transitions seem to indicate here some rather more significant conceptual troubles’.
This leads him to put forward an alternative, three-point scheme for understanding the individual's conscious and subconscious behaviour and its relation to the social world.
This scheme consists of the ‘basic security system’, ‘practical consciousness’ and ‘discursive consciousness’.
The first refers to the ‘ontological security’ which we discuss in Chapter 1: the attempts by people to gain some understanding and a sense of ‘self’and social identity in the natural and social worlds.
‘Practical consciousness’ refers to the knowledge of the social world incorporated into actors, but a knowledge which they cannot directly express through speech.
‘Discursive consciousness’, by contrast, refers to ‘what actors are able to say, or to give verbal expression to, about social conditions, including especially the conditions of their own action’.
As is clear from the above, Giddens's querying of Freud is more than a pedantic concentration on sloppy terminology.
Giddens is trying to incorporate an understanding of the individual and his or her search for ‘ontological security’ with an understanding of the social world.
As such, this perspective again links to the discussion of ontological security and ‘escape attempts’ in Chapter 1.
Giddens achieves this by locating an understanding of the human agent (and the drive for ontological security) in the context of social structures and social processes.
These latter, he insists, do not exist outside human action.
Social structures are simultaneously resources and constraints affecting people's actions.
At the same time, however, they are also are product of these actions.
Giddens again, therefore, approaches the question of locale in a more indirect but more convincing way than those who have attempted to apply psychology directly to ‘urban’ or ‘spatial’processes.
Modifying  Freud's understanding of the human agent means first that he is trying to understand the attempt of human beings to place some order on to the natural and social world under conditions of ‘time-space distantiation’.
Once this point is reached, we can then start gaining a more useful understanding of the social and personal significance of people's instinctive notions of the ‘urban’ and the ‘rural’.
As Williams argues, these are ciphers or lay theories representing ways of life and contexts for apparent self-determination.
Giddens is not the first, however, to suggest that Freudian ideas are insufficiently ‘social’.
The problem has, in fact, been extensively argued during recent years.
Take first the question of property.
The tendency amongst many contemporary psychologists is to give less significance than Freud to the purely psychosexual aspects of property.
The argument would now tend to be that a child refusing to be toilet trained is not simply enjoying the experience for its own sake.
He or she is actually trying to exercise power over nurse or mother.
Similarly, older children's possessive impulse would now not be seen as an instinct for ownership per se.
Rather, their attempts to maintain exclusive rights over an object are seen as attempts to create their ‘selves’ and their relationships to other groups of children.
In short, if there are indeed innate or instinctive psychological mechanisms which are passed on genetically, then these take distinct social forms.
Trasler summarises his survey of the recent literature on the psychology of property in the following way:
It is not possible to explain the vast structure of institutions to which we assign the name of property as the expression, the means of satisfaction, of man's desire for physical objects.
Even the earliest possessions, as we have seen, have meanings for the individual which are social, that have to do with his relationship with others and his standing among his fellows.
A parallel argument is put by contemporary feminist writers when they discuss Freud's ideas regarding relationships between parents and children.
Starkly put, did Freud establish some of the great universals of personal being and family relations?
Or was he simply placing a cloak of scientific respectability over the peculiarly oppressive relationships of turn-of-the-century Vienna?
The second argument is put forcefully by Firestone when she argues that the sexual repression Freud describes and the adoption of parent (especially father) figures by children which they carry through into later life can only be seen in the social context of oppressive patriarchal relations in the home.
Freud, though initially shocking to respectable middle class opinion, replaced an emergent  feminism.
As Firestone puts it: ‘Freudianism subsumed the place of feminism as the lesser of two evils’.
For Firestone the alternative is to supplant Freudianism (and, by extension, psychotherapy) with an explicit acknowledgement of socially constructed and reproduced power; especially power of men over women and power of parents over children.
This, however, is not the end of the argument.
Mitchell is amongst those who argue against Firestone and hold out for the continuing relevance of Freud's work.
She suggests that Freud was fully aware of the extent of patriarchal power.
‘What he was interested in was how this social reality was reflected in mental life’.
Furthermore, she argues that Freud would not have shared Firestone's confidence about an objective social reality to which mental life must adapt.
In short, she argues, radical feminism is accusing Freud of not doing something which he never set out to do.
In the process, it manages to ease out mental and biological life altogether, once more subsuming it as a wholly social construct.
Mitchell therefore insists on relations between men, women and children having an instinctive as well as a purely social basis.
She achieves this by attributing to Freud a relatively low level of transhistorical applicability.
It is therefore Mitchell's study which best fits the general argument being developed here.
COMBINING THE BIOTIC AND SOCIAL ORDERS
This chapter first reviewed older forms of sociology, including the Chicago School of Urban Sociology.
This work contained a number of problems, not the least of which was their equating society and locality, and their clinical and unproblematic distinction between the biotic and cultural orders.
On the other hand, they were far more sensitive than we now are to the instinctive or innate bases of human social behaviour.
This led us to identify a number of key themes in the contemporary literature concerning what the Chicago School called the biotic order.
Clearly, much of this literature from the natural sciences remains contentious; the counter-arguments largely stemming from ethological, biological and psychological theory's avoidance of the social world.
Nevertheless, this literature must bc taken much more seriously by social theory generally, as well as by urban social theory.
A number of important, and highly linked, themes emerged during our discussion of the contemporary literature on the biotic order.
These  included innate self-preservation and support for kin and future generations; aggressive tendencies from juvenile males; affiliation by individuals with groups and displaced parent figures; innate drives for ownership or exclusive access; the search for ontological security and, especially significant for us, instinctive territoriality.
If these are instincts which human beings have inherited over several million years, any understanding clearly entails demonstrating how they are combined with the social and cultural relations of contemporary society.
Few contemporary social scientists recognise this.
Timpanaro is an exception.
He chastises Marxists for asserting an economic and social determinism at the expense of considering that people actually are born, reproduce others and eventually die.
As he puts it:
To maintain that, since the ‘biological’ is always presented to us as mediated by the ‘social’, the ‘biological’is nothing and the ‘social’is everything, would once again be idealist sophistry.
Similarly, Hirst and Woolley have challenged not only biological and psychological reductionism, but the idea that conventional sociology also has a monopoly of wisdom:
Sociologists have, on the whole, energetically denied the importance of genetic, physical and individual psychological factors in human social life.
In doing so they have reinforced and theorised a traditional Western cultural opposition between nature and culture.
CONCLUSION: URBAN SOCIOLOGY, A CORE TENSION
The above critiques are easy enough to make but the more difficult question is what to do about them.
At this point we can usefully remind ourselves of the central problem with which urban sociology is engaged and the reasons why we are engaging in the problematic areas of theory discussed in this chapter and in Chapter 1.
In the Introduction and in Chapter 1 I rehearsed Giddens's argument concerning ‘time-space distantiation’ in contemporary societies and resulting ontological insecurity.
Social life is increasingly centralised and concentrated; national and multinational organisations and governments having increasingly dramatic impacts on people's lives.
At the same time, most people's daily lives and face-to-face contacts remain relatively limited to small-scale localities.
Indeed, the recent decline in spatial  mobility means that daily life is increasingly limited to relatively small regions.
This tension between locally-based life and nationally or internationally based markets and governments leads to what Giddens calls ‘ontological insecurity’, a condition in which people have a limited understanding and control over their circumstances and the processes affecting their daily lives.
Such insecurity leads to ‘escape attempts’ or local utopias in which a degree of autonomy and identity can be secured.
This tension explains why we are addressing the biotic and expressive orders.
The first, as discussed in Chapter 2, refers to the relatively unconscious struggle for survival and the establishment of personal identity.
The second, as we saw in Chapter 1, refers to people's understanding of the world; this understanding leading to social action and communication.
An understanding of the biotic and expressive orders supplies us with an improved appreciation of human agency; one which means we need no longer envisage people as automatic pilots swept along by the broad forces of capitalist processes and social relations.
The biotic and expressive orders help explain why people suffer from ontological insecurity, and why (and how) they attempt to create zones of relative autonomy.
In reviewing the literature in both these areas we have encountered a recurring theme.
This is that the work of such authors as Harré, Goffman, Freud and Ardrey remain insufficiently ‘social’.
The social order has gone largely missing.
This is ironical since it is in this sphere that urban sociology, and arguably sociology more generally, has made its greatest recent advances.
The following chapters have two main purposes.
Firstly they discuss how a consideration of the expressive and biotic orders can be linked to the social order and applied to the fields of study currently examined by more conventional urban sociology.
But secondly, and more assertively, they examine the extremely diverse ways in which ontological insecurity is both generated and overcome.
As discussed in the Introduction, the actual extent of such insecurity and the extent to which ‘escape attempts’ are successful varies according to the particular sphere of social life with which we are concerned.
As social life becomes increasingly organised at a global level, the sphere of employment perhaps offers least prospect for the assertion of autonomy and personal identity.
By contrast, the sphere of civil society offers greater prospects for self-determination.
The gains to be made in the political sphere are, as Chapter S will show, more ambiguous and contradictory.
CLASSES, LOCALITIES AND MORAL CAREERS
In the preceding two chapters we have been developing ways in which questions of locale and locality can be systematically introduced into social theory.
This work makes systematic the fact that localities and locales are the context in which human interactions and conversations take place.
As such they literally situate social change despite the fact that such change is increasingly the product of centralised authority and power.
We have advanced ‘moral careers’ as another useful concept, this giving us a special purchase on that elusive quality: human agency.
Moral careers, as we have seen, are lives organised around exemplary biographies.
They concern the rise and fall of people's reputations, whether in the eyes of others or of the individual concerned.
In Chapters 1 and 2 we argue, however, that while the sociologies of the Chicago School, Goffman and Harré are all highly suggestive, they also tend to overlook some of the deeper social structures and processes in which individuals and small groups of people are necessarily caught up.
Localities, locales and human interaction may help us to situate society and social change.
They also help us to rectify the neglect of processes and emotions internal to individual human beings.
But, as Giddens insists, human interactions and emotions are also constrained and constructed by social relations which are only partly related to the spatial contexts in which they take place.
The time has come to start using these concepts and arguments in relation to present-day urban sociology.
The currently dominant paradigm throughout urban and regional sociology gives prime emphasis to class relations and processes.
Now, while class-based relations and processes are clearly a necessary and crucial part of any understanding of the relationships between the ‘spatial’ and the ‘social’at the urban and  regional scales, these combine in a number of complex ways with other relations such as those of gender and ethnicity.
Furthermore, as we discuss in Chapter 2, there are processes innate to human beings (including sexual and emotional drives) which also combine in many complex ways with ‘social’ or ‘man-made’processes.
Let us first, however, review some of the main themes of established class-based relations in urban and regional studies and establish how they might be improved by our new perspective.
Our central argument here will be that existing work fails adequately to consider people as active human beings.
People are not mere units of labour.
They have the capacity to think and act for themselves and, within the constraints of employment opportunities, make themselves socially and spatially mobile.
Social and spatial mobility offers a crucial connecting link to our special focus on moral careers and ‘front’ and ‘back’regions.
LOCALITY AND THE RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION
The circuit of capital (Figure 3.1) is of central significance to this area of urban sociology.
Money (M) buys the commodities of labour power (LP) and the means of production (MP).
It then sets in train a labour process in the realm of production (P).
This creates further commodities (C') incorporating the additional value added in the production process.
These in turn are converted into money, some of which is profit (m'), some of which (M') is put back into the circuit of capital.
There are three closely interlocking themes in contemporary urban and regional analysis which takes these class relations, and processes stemming from these relations, as their fundamental starting point.
Firstly, the circuit above is used as the prime explanatory device.
But, beyond this, production or employment itself is frequently given special explanatory weight.
Figure 3.1 clearly shows production processes and relations as intimately linked with the circulation of capital and the consumption of commodities.
But it is the realm of production itself (of paid employment) which is seen by this perspective as lying at the heart of capitalism and uneven development.
As such it is this realm which is seen as eventually dominating forms of social and personal life and the progress (or otherwise) of localities.
Examples of such an approach to the sociology of urban and regional development are the work of Frobel et al.and Massey.’
Frobel et al.argue   that capital is now breaking up or ‘decomposing’ production processes.
The result is a polarising workforce of highly skilled and qualified jobs on the one hand and deskilled, comparatively low paid, production jobs on the other.
Importantly, speedier and more sophisticated forms of transport and electronic communications make it increasingly possible for these two forms of work to be in contact despite their physical separation or ‘stretching’ over time and space.
The attraction of so-called Third World labour is the fact that it can be cheap compared to that in the advanced capitalist countries.
Many of these workers may be farm workers released by mechanisation of agriculture.
Industrial capital removes them from the land and subsistence agriculture.
Massey, in her work on ‘spatial divisions of labour’ in the British case, offers a similar conceptual framework.
Again, new divisions within the labour process are seen as a crucial explanatory starting point.
Upper level managers need no longer be geographically close to production processes.
This means that in certain regions of advanced capitalist societies (such as, in the British case, parts of Scotland, the North East, South Wales) are becoming pools of cheap labour and lower level management, while other regions (London and the South East in Britain) have a disproportionately high number of senior managers or ‘service class’ personnel.
These new spatial divisions of labour have recently been further highlighted by the very rapid growth of ‘services’ employment.
Employment in industrial production has itself declined in Britain and many other advanced countries during the postwar years.
In its place has emerged a growing number of people in such work as banking, finance, insurance, property and advertising.
Much of this work may well, of course, be servicing industry — in the advanced countries as well as in the developing countries.
The point here is, however, that these represent further rapidly growing sectors which can quite easily be spatially separate from industrial production.
So Massey sees relations and changes in the realm of employment as key starting points for understanding uneven development.
Unlike many writers in this tradition, however, she is especially sensitive to the effects of these large-scale processes on local social systems and on the role of labour itself effecting social change.
Another version of the ‘dominance of production’ argument comes from Harvey.
He also starts his analysis of urban and regional development with the realm of production, although he emphasises crises in the realm of production as the most important generator of spatial change.
Essentially, he argues that capitalist societies are prone to periodic fluctuations in profitability.
From time to time, more goods are produced than can profitably be sold and, as a result, capital must look for other forms of investment.
One such is the realm of land development and property.
These are ‘secondary’ circuits in which capital invests as a means (albeit temporary) of restoring profitability when the primary circuit of industrial capital is in trouble.
The result is a series of social and physical landscapes where capital invests.
But no sooner have such landscapes been created than they are destroyed before they are abandoned and neglected as capital moves off to find greener, still more profitable, pastures.
The particular attraction is again cheap and disorganised labour.
The mobility of capital, not labour
Of crucial importance to these perspectives is the idea that labour is relatively passive and inactive.
Implicit in both Harvey's analysis and that of most urban sociology working from a political economy perspective is the insistence that capital is globally mobile while labour is inert.
In so far as people do move, they move wholly in response to capital's demand; in so far as they are active, they tend to be seen as part of a huge block of ‘labour’.
The central mechanism underlying spatial change is, nevertheless, capital.
Capital invests where prospects for accumulation seem relatively promising (where, for example, labour is relatively inexpensive) and disinvests from areas and regions where prospects for profitability are less promising.
For Frobel et al., for example , capital has been both ‘pulled’ and  ‘pushed’.
It is seen as pulled not only by the reserves of cheap ex-agricultural labour in Third World countries but by the ready availability of large amounts of unskilled, young, frequently female labour for unskilled tasks.
The ‘push’ took the form of organised, trade unionised, labour forces in the European countries.
Since Frobel et al.were writing, however, there has emerged an argument that capital is actually increasingly finding itself drawn back to the European countries.
High levels of unemployment during the 1980s, for example, mean that labour forces in the older industrialised societies are not necessarily so expensive relative to those of the Third World.
So, with the exception of some authors such as Massey, the dominant paradigm to employment-related urban and regional sociology gives precious little attention to labour as an active force.
Labour is typically characterised as simply waiting to be either exploited or abandoned by capital.
People are pawns or units to whom things happen.
The result is that little attention is given to people's own experience and understandings of these processes and the fact that such understandings in turn lead to ways in which they attempt to improve their circumstances within the constraints and opportunities with which they are faced.
No attention is given to the history of people themselves, to what we would call ‘moral careers.
People as ‘class fractions'
With people envisaged as mere ‘class fractions’, some quite wishful thinking ensues over the prospects for mass proletarian upheaval.
Industrial workers' best chance of improving their prospects is to act as a global working class.
The globally-based divisions of labour produced by capital offer the prospects of mass alliance by labour against capital.
For Frobel et al., for example , the new international division of labour represents an opportunity for new forms of working class organisation.
A working class, disciplined for industrial work, is in the process of formation at the new sites: the organisation of these workers inside the labour process, on the production line, also embraces the possibility of their developing forms of political and social self-organisation with which they can struggle for their own development.
The dominant paradigm within class-based urban and regional analysis  nevertheless usually recognises the difficulties involved in creating a well-organised international working class.
Perhaps the main problem for these Marxist writers is the aristocracy of labour in the advanced industrial countries.
It seems unlikely that they will jeopardise their superior circumstances by combining in an alliance with Third World workers against capital.
For all this, however, Frobel et al.remain optimistic.
The effects of the international division of labour should make it easier for workers in these countries to discard their role of real or supposed world labour aristocracy and recognise that their fate on the world labour market is inseparably linked with that of their fellow workers in the underdeveloped countries.
A similar analysis comes from Harvey, although the class alliances are here seen as being at national or regional levels.
Geographically and socially static populations combined with the mobility of capital result in which he sees as ‘factions’ of classes combining with each other in an attempt to attract capital to their locality.
So essentially antagonistic class interests sharing the same region find themselves allying with each other in their mutual self-interests.
Even so, such alliances are, in the long run, doomed to failure.
They are doomed by exploitative capital operating on a global scale.
Different factions of capital and labour have different stakes within a territory depending upon the nature of the assets they control and the privileges they command.
Some are more easily drawn into a regional class alliance than others.
Land and property owners, developers and builders, those who hold the mortgage debt, and state functionaries have most to gain.
Those sectors of production which cannot easily move (by virtue of the fixed capital they employ or other spatial constraints) will tend to support an alliance and be tempted or forced to buy local labour peace and skills through compromises over wages and work conditions.
Factions of labour that have through struggle or out of scarcity managed to create islands of privilege within a sea of exploitation will also just as surely rally to the cause of the alliance to preserve their gains.
If a local compromise between capital and labour is helpful to both accumulation and the standard of living of labour (which it can be for a time), then most factions of the bourgeoisie and the working classes may support it.
Exceptions to prove the rule
I have been suggesting here that contemporary class-based analyses of urban and regional development have a number of common themes.
People are largely seen as victims.
Their lives, actions and politics are dominated by the demands of capital.
Not all Marxists, of course, share precisely the same perspective.
Warren, for example, is something of an exception to those discussed above.
He places, for example, much less emphasis than most Marxists on the mobility of capital, arguing that Third World countries are actually characterised by highly dynamic economies internal to the societies in question.
The reality of this picture of vibrant, ‘grass roots’ capitalist development in the Third World is attested to by the abundant evidence of rapidly rising commercialisation and the resulting social differentiation (especially in the rural areas of Asia and Africa), coupled with the relative expansion of wage-labour at the expense of family and self-employment, including feudal-type tenurial relationships.
However, even this view of relatively autonomous, locally based development shares some of the same themes as those identified above.
Class-based production processes and forces are still seen as the principal key for a useful understanding.
His ‘fundamental starting point’ is that:
[The]development of Marxist and working-class strategy must be [founded upon]the recognition that in general a progressive position is one that advances the development of the productive forces.
Furthermore, the working class is envisaged as just that; units (albeit divided units) of labour power.
Their long-term destiny lies in united working class action and the rejection of other forms of understanding.
As Third World capitalism develops, the working class is destined to play its classic revolutionary role.
The sooner this is recognised, and all forms of nationalism and populism rejected, the more successful will be the struggle for socialism.
There are two closely connected points to make at this stage about these Marxist accounts.
Despite their differences, their implications for the sociology of urban and regional development are rather similar.
They are making the broadly accurate point that capital and capitalist social relations must form a central part of any understanding of any locality's progress.
Furthermore, most of these authors (with the exception of Warren and other authors emphasising the dynamics of internal economies) argue that localities are peculiarly vulnerable to globally based movements of capital.
The first, and rather obvious, point of criticism is that by concentrating on capital-labour relations and movements of capital these authors  have largely neglected other kinds of relations (such as those of gender and race) which have dynamics which are relatively separate from those of class but which nevertheless combine with those of class in highly complex ways.
No doubt these authors would argue that they are well aware of this problem.
They would probably say that they have chosen an aspect of social life which is clearly central to many people's lives and which dominates these other kinds of relationships.
The problem is whether such a simplifying assumption does in fact adequately recognise these connections.
We must insist that sociological analysis at all scales explores how these relations combine with one another.
And the central point about localities is that they provide the context in which these combinations of social processes take place and in which people act as a result of such combinations.
Locality studies cannot, therefore, afford to insist on simplifying and monocausal assumptions such as those often made by Marxist analysis.
They must remain alive; to combinations of causes and how these combinations affect people's consciousness and actions.
This brings us back to the expressive order.
Perhaps even more importantly, few of these authors in fact attempt to understand the implications of the expressive order; how the classes and class-based processes which they emphasise are appreciated or acted on by the people concerned.
People understand their own and other people's lives not just in terms of class fractions or units of labour power even if they can be categorised as such.
They may be such fractions and units but they are much more besides.
Underlying their actions and understandings are, as we suggested in Chapter 1, relations which are not adequately captured by most Marxist commentators.
Furthermore, since social change is constituted partly by active individuals, such understandings must have major implications in terms of understanding social change.
Very recently, however, there have emerged important signs of a change within those working within a political economy perspective.
These signs, it must be said, largely reflect the changing strategies and priorities of management itself in coming to recognise that people have their personal plans and needs.
Such changing managerial attitudes have been largely a result of declining profitability and the increasing challenge of Japanese firms.
Morgan and Sayer are an example of the new style of analysis within a broadly political economy perspective.
They point out, for example, that Japanese companies in particular have for some time been making strenuous efforts to recruit labour which is not so much cheap but flexible  and prepared to work hard for the company in question.
Such companies, and to a lesser extent their Western competitors, are now treating workers not as units of labour power but as people with distinct personal and social needs.
Thus pay is tailored to individual performance.
Recruitment procedures focus on individual skills and potential for flexible working.
Company sick pay, canteens shared with managers and regular company-provided medical check-ups are all part of an attempt to make workers identify with their company.
In short, people are being treated as individuals with priorities and resources.
These, the new style of management recognises, are all worth tending to.
Contented workers are more likely to be profitable.
The significance of all this as regards locality is that management has clear views about the regions in which these special kinds of worker are to be found.
In the South Wales case, for example, there is a zone called the ‘golden triangle’ which is widely perceived as especially attuned to the specifications of the new, ‘high tec’, mainly Japanese industries.
By contrast, community spirit in the valleys which were once associated with mining is seen as a threat to smooth, harmonious and profitable working conditions.
To add to such an image, the local development agency responsible for attracting industry does its best to erase the old ‘radical’ image of the area.
Mobility and moral careers: A means of linking human agency to social structures
So political economy approaches, in line with changing managerial strategies, are now recognising the personal needs and instincts of categories of individual workers.
However, the academic literature still has some way to go.
Perhaps the key way to establish a connection between the concerns of conventional Marxist urban and regional sociology and the concepts outlined in Chapters 1 and 2 is to concentrate on typical forms of social mobility; the ways in which they relate to spatial mobility and moral careers.
We should recall here how alive the Chicago School was to this link, even if they saw people's careers and mobility as largely products of their own actions rather than also the products of companies and other institutions.
At the core of the Chicago School's analysis were the moves of immigrants from European societies to American cities and, once established in a town such as Chicago, the  successful households progressing from the inner urban areas to the suburbs.
By contrast, the issue of social mobility has been almost entirely ignored by contemporary spatial analysis, even if the issue of social mobility has been one of sociology's concerns.
As far as urban sociology goes, however, spatial and social mobility is what Savage calls the ‘missing link’.
Three points need to be remembered when we start to incorporate questions of social and spatial mobility.
First is the considerable change in the class structures of advanced industrial countries.
Upward mobility has been a real possibility for a large number of people.
This refers mainly, of course, to the fairly well-off (and ill-defined)‘middle class’.
We can be more precise than this by referring to Goldthorpe et al.'s work.
They show in the British case, for example, that under a third of the male ‘service class’(people in senior management, professional and administrative positions) actually started their working lives in this class.
Rapid recruitment into this class is largely inevitable as a result of a growing demand for this type of worker by the rapidly growing service sectors of the economy.
But, once established, the service class is extremely effective in ensuring that its offspring also joins this elite.
The second point concerns the diverse ways in which workers, and middle class white collar workers in particular, now achieve social mobility.
Some of these ways entail high spatial mobility and others do not.
The older and best known way is as an ‘organisation man’.
‘His’ life (these people are still mainly male) and that of his family are largely dominated by the large company in which he spends most of his working life.
High levels of spatial mobility are involved as he is regularly posted to regions where the multinational is operating.
Often these regions may be in other nations.
The ‘organisation man’ picture is largely that referred to by the novelists we reviewed in Chapter 1.
In fact this picture may be overworked.
The second, and growing, way in which social mobility is achieved by the middle classes, and by senior white collar people in particular, is not as ‘organisation men’ but as workers moving quite rapidly between organisations.
For these people individualism is increasingly the order of the day.
This means that many of these people do not envisage spending the whole of their working life climbing the internal labour ladder of a single organisation.
Increasingly, the tendency is to work for a large number of companies in rapid succession.
Alternatively, they may well work on their own account, perhaps for a number of  organisations simultaneously.
The result is that their high social mobility does not entail high levels of long distance spatial mobility.
Rather, it involves moves within those regions (such as the South East) which, as described by Massey, have exceptionally high concentrations of senior white collar jobs.
This brings us to our third point, that of geographical mobility as it affects different social groups.
There has in fact been a recent tendency for this type of mobility to decrease in most of the advanced industrial societies.
However, there remain major differences in levels of spatial mobility for different social groups.
Spatial mobility tends to be highest amongst the most affluent groups on the one hand and the most poor on the other.
As regards the latter, some of the most mobile in the British case are workers in personal services; those, for example, seeking work in the catering trades.
A group which has received particular attention recently are the unskilled labourers moving from small-scale, mainly agricultural, work on the peripheries of the industrial economies to the economically successful regions.
For capital, an alternative to migrating to cheap labour areas is to attract cheap, relatively disposable, migrant labour.
Cohen has drawn attention to this phenomenon at an international level.
And, for the European case, Mandel was amongst the first to demonstrate the importance of the guest workers to European capital.
He argues that:
Without this exodus of labour from Southern Europe, which allowed it to reconstruct a reserve army at home, West German capitalism would have been unable to achieve its formidable expansion of outputs in the 1960s without a catastrophic decline in the rate of profit.
The same is true, mutatis mutandis, of France, Switzerland and the Benelux countries, which in the 1958–71 period together absorbed another 2,000,000 foreign workers into their proletariat.
Taking, firstly, class-based urban and regional sociology on its own terms, social and spatial mobility is a major deficiency.
But, assuming we do incorporate such considerations, the tendency is to interpret such mobility as again largely the result of capital's needs, with workers being uprooted simply to increase their monetary rewards, and capital benefiting as a result.
This is clearly part of the story, but there is another, perhaps more subtle, way of understanding such mobility.
And it is this that connects to our specific concerns with the instinctive bases of human behaviour.
People's life-courses are simultaneously the product of economic structures and of people's own attempts to improve their circumstances  and social standing.
To illustrate this theme, we can explore some existing literature on the experience of agricultural workers on the peripheries of successful economies.
Here we can see how the concepts discussed in Chapters 1 and 2 might be extended into contemporary urban and regional sociology.
We should note in passing, however, that there are a small number of studies focusing on the expressive order of the workplace which can again be interpreted with the concepts we have outlined earlier.
Moral careers, escape attempts and front and back regions.
These are not strictly part of our ‘urban’ concerns, but they do show how Harré's and Goffman's ideas, as well as Giddens's concept of ‘locale’are not limited to a particular scale.
Burawoy describes, for example, industrial workers' 'escape attempts'.
These are informal, shopfloor cultures, industrial ‘games’ organised under the pressures of increased productivity.
Within these cultures workers are assessing one another and their capacity to reach informally agreed levels of production.
Giddens uses another illustration drawn from the car industry.
One worker recalls the following episode.
I was working on one side of the car and the boot lid dropped.
It just grazed the head of the fella working opposite me.
I can see it now.
He stopped working, had a look round to see if anyone was watching — I was pretending not to look at him — and then he held his head.
He'd had enough like.
He staggered, and I could see him thinking ‘I'm getting out of this for a bit’.
He staggered, and I could see him looking around.
You know what it was like in there.
Paint everywhere.
He wasn't going to fall in the paint…
So he staggered about ten yards and fell down with a moan on some pallets.
It was bloody funny.
One of the lads saw him there and stopped the line.
The supervisor came chasing across.
‘Start the line, start the line…
’ He started the line and we had to work.
We were working one short as well.
Studies such as these show that the workplace, although it may present relatively few opportunities for ‘escape’ is also a context within which personal identity and social esteem are formed.
Note that the above car worker ensures that his ‘escape’ from surveillance is not observed by his co-workers.
Such observation would risk losing prestige.
Note too how he turns a ‘front’ region (one subject to scrutiny from authority) into a ‘back’region.
The more general implications of this are treated in the discussion of ‘panopticism’ in Chapter 5.
Returning now to the urban scale, we can illustrate our approach first with Davis's study of a small town in Southern Italy.
Secondly, we can  turn to Berger and Mohr's account of migrants' experience as they travel from an economically peripheral society to a thriving industrial economy in Western Europe.
Illustration 1: Social relations and moral careers in a ‘peripheral’ locality
Pisticci is a small town in Southern Italy still largely based on agricultural employment.
When studied by Davis in the mid-1960s it was undergoing a transition from a relatively self-contained peasant society to one forming part of a much wider market economy.
Davis is an anthropologist, and, accordingly, his analyses are based on living with people and understanding the locality through close observation and conversations with the indigenous population.
All the themes that we have been arguing should be part of our new form of urban sociology are present in this study.
The core social mechanism binding the locality together is ‘honour’, or what we have earlier termed ‘esteem’.
As Davis puts it, ‘the neighbourhood, the country territory and the political network are linked by honour’.
Honour is a means of classifying and understanding people.
It informs the whole of local social life including, in particular, people's performance in their family role.
Honour is, Davis argues, ‘the basis of association, of forming alliances for all purposes — mutual aid, politics, marriage, farming — from the day-to-day to the long-term.’
In short, people's face-to-face confrontations are primarily about ‘moral careers’.
Reputation, in individuals' eyes, and in those of the surrounding locality, is therefore the prime issue of everyday life and conversation.
But, as Davis is careful to point out, behind this issue are social and economic structures on the one hand and the support of kin or blood relations on the other.
As regards the former, land is the great resource in Pisticci.
Clearly, it is the basis of the local economy but at the same time it is the key component in marriage settlements.
Land has both an economic function and a function in terms of personal and social esteem:
It is still an important component of marriage settlements, and it is an element of prestige: it can give independence of employers and it is a security for a man attempting upward social mobility.
Transactions in land, particularly transactions  in the exceedingly small, economically useless plots of land, are transactions in prestige and social position.
Furthermore, understanding the acquisition of honour solely through a class analysis of Pisticci would miss the many subtleties engaged in by the residents.
In particular, it would divert attention from the central significance of other relations such as those of kin.
Using the word ‘politics’ in a broad sense to refer to power relations, Davis argues that:
A full understanding of the politics of Pisticci, and of communities like it, requires us to understand the idioms of kinship, friendship and clientship — as well as those of organisational rank and of class.
The ways in which honour is formed and assessed are numerous.
Reputation can be inherited.
It can also be achieved through managing behaviour towards blood and kin.
As regards a man, for example:
His behaviour towards his family is the guide to his probable behaviour in the less closely controlled and supervised political and economic spheres where, since competition is so acute, most actions appear conspiratorial, and all plans are schemes.
The simple fact that he has a family at all, is a married man with adult status, is a guarantee of some element of responsibility.
Marriage, therefore, brings economic and social success.
It also gives to women a special status.
It means that she is freed from the ‘tutelage’ of her father and brothers.
Marriage gives her domestic independence in the form of access to the other women of the neighbourhood.
And, since this network acts as the main means of managing and assessing social esteem, marriage is the main means by which women gain this form of local power.
Esteem is gained by both man and woman partly through home life, and especially through presenting ‘a front space used for display’, wholly distinct from a back room for sleeping and intimacy.
It is established too in the ‘front regions’ represented by the town's two small piazzas.
Here public life and ‘fronts’ are maintained, quite separate and distinct from the secluded ‘back’regions where the population lives.
How do these codes and values relate to our specific set of concerns with work and employment?
Work, paradoxically enough for many small landowners and peasants, is actually an ‘escape attempt’, a means of being independent from large-scale farms and other industrial enterprises.
But secondly, it is once more a means by which prestige and honour can be maintained.
Indeed, work is one of the key bases on which honour is established in the eyes of family, kin and locality.
As one Pisticci peasant  puts it: ‘if it were not for my family, I'd not be wearing myself out’.
As Davis points out, it is also a way in which wives can be saved from what is seen as dishonourable employment.
The ability of a husband to support his wife and children is as important a component of his honour as his control of his wife's sexuality.
It can, of course, be argued that the great emphasis on esteem and moral careers which might be observed in a relatively undeveloped town in Southern Italy are not especially relevant to modern industrialised societies.
As Davis points out, however, the increasing penetration of nationally and internationally-based market relations into this old form of society does not dispense with the overriding priority for the acquisition of personal and social esteem.
Rather, it means that honour is becoming assessed in different ways.
To an increasing extent, moral careers are formed on the basis of wealth and on ‘impersonal economic grounds’ rather than on ‘moral qualities’.
The old and new ways of assessing individuals exist, in fact, in parallel.
Illustration 2: Industrialisation, moral careers and the move from a peripheral to a central region
Many of the themes discussed in Chapters 1 and 2 recur in this illustration.
This is Berger and Mohr's study of migrants travelling from Turkey and other peripheral regions to the more affluent regions of Europe.
We will encounter here Williams's emphasis on the city as a ‘front’ region: a romantic place representing a better life over the horizon is common.
But we will encounter, too, the grim reality of the same city being an alien and sometimes hostile society with ‘back’ as well as‘front’regions.
To maintain their own self-esteem, long-distance migrants are nevertheless obliged to repeat the myth of urban success when they return to the society they have left.
In our terms, this book is an account of migrants' moral careers, albeit careers constrained by the demands of a thriving capitalist economy.
Indeed, one of the key points about Berger and Mohr's study is that such moral careers are being partly constructed by capital's requirements for a cheap workforce and one which can be dismissed in line with fluctuating demands for the products they make.
Conversations between agricultural workers on the edge of subsistence  constantly refer to the city: a city that exists nowhere but which continually transmits promises'.
Indeed, their everyday life constantly brings about reminders of the metropolitan life.
The machinery they use, their cars, their clothes, the tourists they encounter, the music they hear, all summon up the idea of a new, modern, ‘front’ region: one which can only be fully appreciated by actually moving and becoming part of it.
Even more important than encounters with the city's products, are conversations with the people who have encountered this better life.
Those who have left and succeeded in the city and come back are heroes.
He has talked with them.
They take him aside as though inviting him into their conspiracy.
They hint that there are secrets which can only be divulged and discussed with those who have also been there…
What is not a secret at all are the wages, the things to be bought, the amount that can be saved, the variety of cars, the ways women dress, what there is to eat and drink, the hours worked, the arguments won…
He recognises that they are boasting when they talk.
But he accords them the right to boast, for they have returned with money and presents which are proof of their achievement.
Some drive back in their own cars.
Humiliating medical and literacy tests are carried out in recruitment centres.
Four out of five applicants then leave their families for the supposedly better world, hoping that they will return remittances and that their kin may perhaps be able to join them later.
Inevitably, the actual experience is far removed from the dream.
They are accommodated in inhospitable and humiliating barracks, well hidden as ‘back’ regions within this supposedly front region of a thriving capitalist economy.
The work they do is itself carried out in dangerous and dingy back regions.
Their jobs are those that workers in the host country refuse to do, and trade unionism is denied to them.
Furthermore, the host society treats them as outcasts threatening the existing social order.
The language barrier means that real interaction with the indigenous population is largely out of the question.
The immigrants' behaviour is caricatured as inevitably outrageous and disrespectful.
The overall result is explicit racism.
All of them carry knives.
No woman is safe.
They live in those barracks like animals.
They certainly do business among themselves.
Migrants are widely termed Zigeuner (gypsy), Lumpenpack (rag-pack), Kameltreiber  (camel rider), Zitronen-schuttler (lemon squeezer), or Schlangenfresser (snake eater).
Outwardly he accepts this.
Inwardly he calls upon his pride to remind himself who he is and what he has already achieved.
The greatest of his achievements is that he is working here.
The result is that they are thrown back on their own individual and collective resources.
Their sexuality is largely denied.
Their native music and language is, however, a means of restoring some identity and self-respect.
These help them to recollect their homeland and the families they have left behind.
Like the immigrants to Chicago in the 1920s, they collect in certain areas such as the local railway station to share news and experience (Figure 3.2).
Despite all these humiliations and the failure of the dream, the migrants, once they return home, find they have acquired considerable prestige.
The villagers now respect him as a man of different experience.
(Given this prestige, it would he unseemly for him to take on a menial local job.)
He has seen and received and achieved things which they have not…
And to make the whole experience worthwhile to his own esteem, the returning migrant has to repeat the myth.
Is it very large, the city?
His younger cousin asks him.
It is very large and to reach it takes three days and nights.
Does everybody have a car?
The cars are so close together in the street that it's like a river.
A river of many colours.
The cars are the colours of all the fruits of the world.
SUMMARY: POLITICAL ECONOMY AND MORAL CAREERS
The objective has been to indicate the value of appreciating the expressive order: the understandings people have of their own lives, their attempts to maintain self-esteem and the respect of others in the context of processes and decisions far removed from their understanding or influence.
Political economy and class perspectives on urban sociology lend little credence to this type of analysis.
They tend to see people as unthinking dupes who arc simply pushed and pulled around by the needs of capital.
Clearly, the  perspectives offered by Marxists cannot be rejected.
People must find work in order to subsist.
On the other hand, capitalist economies are  based on the willing and active involvement of the very workers they are exploiting.
Something is taking place which is enabling capitalist economies in this way.
We suggest here that moral careers (the preservation of reputation) and the protection and preservation of kin offer as much if not more explanation of local social systems and the mobility of workers as those emphasising class and class struggle.
To put this another way, the biological and emotional mechanisms outlined in Chapter 1 are just as important as the circuit of capital in affecting social and spatial change.
The two are clearly combining with one another.
CIVIL SOCIETY, ESCAPE ATTEMPTS AND SELF-DETERMINATION
In Chapter 1 we argued that conscious awareness, the images and representations that people use to communicate with each other and the various forms of deliberate planning and foresight which they use are all partly a result of the myriad social relationships in which they are caught up, and partly a product of deep-rooted instincts and emotions.
As Figure 1.2 (p. 12) also shows, however, consciousness awareness is also a product of what Harré et al.call ‘behavioural routines’: the raising of a voice to be heard, for example, or spontaneous reaction to danger.
Harré et al.argue that for the social sciences a key research priority should also be an improved understanding of the deep-rooted social and instinctive relationships and processes to which the conscious aspects of the mind are subjected.
Their understanding of social action is a ‘realist’ one, in so far as they believe there to be general, deep-lying mechanisms affecting human conduct which are triggered in different ways by contingent social circumstances.
The realist approach to explanation is one that we discuss further and use in Chapter 6.
Harré et al.further suggest, as Figure 1.2 also implies, that the deep structures and instincts of the mind have evolved in relation to the social processes and relations in which human beings have developed.
Tantalisingly, Harré et al.argue that both of these processes at the ‘top’ level of the human mind (level 3 of Figure 1.2) have yet to be properly understood.
Furthermore, they argue that the crucial relationships between them have remained almost entirely unexplored.
On the one hand, we have social scientists offering their understanding of the social structures and processes affecting people's behaviour.
On the other, we have psychologists, ethologists and sociobiologists offering their understanding of individual and collective behaviour.
But how do these  interact to influence our thought and behaviour?
How do such interactions relate to our special interest in locality and space?
These questions demand great research effort.
At this stage we can make only tentative suggestions.
A key first step is to remember Harré et al.'s ‘realist’ starting point.
In Chapter 1 we found psychologists, biologists and ethologists making far-reaching claims for socially unmediated, innate drives affecting people's lives.
Territoriality, male (and juvenile) aggressiveness, the demand for property, the protection and preservation of kin, and an innate need for ontological security were all put forward as being at the core of individual and social behaviour and observable in unmediated form in people's behaviour.
All these biological and psychological imperatives will continue to be much argued over.
The point is, however, that they combine with, and are mediated by, the social world.
So it is misleading to suggest, as many psychologists and sociobiologists are prone to do, that these mechanisms are necessarily the prime mechanism affecting awareness and action.
As we discuss in Chapter 6, a better way to envisage such imperatives is as latent: waiting, as it were, to be activated by the social and political relations and contexts in which people are living.
What has this to do with our central theme of locality?
People, of course, live in a number of different kinds of social relations and contexts.
And, despite the fact that employment is a means by which personal and social respect can be gained, it offers relatively few prospects for the presentation of ‘self’ as a unique individual.
The mobility of capital, combined with the overriding demands for profit-making and profitability, severely limit the extent to which people's innate needs for self-realisation at the workplace and their control over capital investment in the locality where they live can be satisfied.
Arguably, however, this extends more to those in relatively menial and unskilled tasks and less to those high-flying executives who are able to combine the need for social identity, sexual fulfilment and the like with the profitability of their enterprises.
When we come to civil society, though, the possibilities for a much wider group of people are rather different.
Civil society is constituted by the social relationships and processes outside paid employment and not immediately affected by the state.
As used by Marxists, the concept refers to the circulation of capital, with people exchanging the money they have earned in employment for the goods and services they need and require.
It refers also to the reproduction of the labour force.
People must turn up at the proverbial factory gates fresh, fit and ready to toil.
A recovery process  must take place: in the home, the pub or elsewhere in the surrounding locality.
It is at this point that we can make our first connection with the emphases we have laid out at the beginning of this book.
Civil society is the prime context of biological reproduction, the raising of future generations and the support of kin.
For now what seem rather obscure reasons, much of ‘urban’ sociology has taken the form of the sociology of civil society or of consumption.
There is no self-evident reason for continuing to insist that urban sociology should be equated with consumption or civil society, interesting as these areas of study are.
But there are good reasons for examining how self-realisation and moral careers are developed within civil society.
As Marx himself argued, the sphere of social life outside employment is indeed where the individual labourer has the best chance of achieving some degree of identity, autonomy and control over his or her life.
And as Harré implies (citing Veblen in his support), there is growing evidence that, in more affluent societies, questions of display and possessions outside paid work are of growing significance to the formation of people's self-esteem and recognition by others.
Here, then, is the second way in which we can connect the Marxist or political economy perspectives on urban sociology to our particular interest in human nature.
Civil society provides, perhaps, the key means by which deeprooted emotional drives can be realised.
It is replete with prospects for ‘escape attempts’; zones of autonomy and self-expression separate from employment and not regulated by state authority.
So in turning to social processes outside employment, we are shifting to a sphere of study which has been well trodden by urban sociology.
Paradoxically, however, our enthusiasm in turning to these processes lies more in examining how questions of identity and moral careers come to be formed rather than in continuing to equate ‘urban’ with ‘consumption’or ‘social reproduction’.
This chapter is organised along the following lines.
Firstly it will briefly trace how urban sociology came to be equated with questions of consumption.
However, it will also show how recent developments within the definition of the ‘urban’, as it applies to consumption, are now indeed beginning to touch on our central concerns.
Civil society is a necessarily diverse sphere of social life.
It is, however, possible to thematise it around dominant and subordinate forms of social life.
Here we explore what appears to be an emergent way of life entitled ‘postmodern’; one associated particularly with the middle classes.
Secondly, we turn to the question of lifestyles led by subordinate social  groups and their relationship to the home.
The intention throughout is again to demonstrate how conventional urban sociology might be combined with the new approaches outlined at the beginning of this study.
URBAN SOCIOLOGY AS THE SOCIOLOGY OF CONSUMPTION: SOME THEMES AND DEBATES
The elision between urban sociology and the sociology of consumption started with Manuel Castells's early work.
Writing as a Marxist influenced by the philosopher Louis Althusser, Castells argued that urban sociology, especially that developed by the Chicago School, was ‘ideological’ By this he meant that urban sociologists had never stopped to ask what was actually theoretically significant about cities and city life.
What, Castells asked, does ‘urban’ or ‘city’life actually mean?
The Chicago School, as we have seen, argued that there actually was some characteristic feature of the ‘urban way of life’: one entailing separation and isolation of people from one another and thereby generating crime and social disorder.
Castells challenged this, arguing that there was, in fact, no such thing as an ‘urban’ sociology.
The ‘ideology’ of existing urban sociology stemmed, he argued, from the fact that analysis never stopped to examine the underlying factors affecting these supposedly ‘urban’effects; unemployment, for example, or bad housing.
For a Marxist, this of course meant that class relations and the processes underlying capital accumulation received no systematic attention.
‘Ideology’, for Castells, does not necessarily mean that the Chicago School is in an absolute sense ‘wrong’.
It means that this type of analysis lights upon a particular aspect of social life and social change (and an aspect of life with which Chicagoans were immediately concerned in the 1920s) without attending to what Castells or a structuralist Marxist would see as the principal underlying processes affecting people's lives, especially economic processes and those related to the social relations of production.
So Castells proposed a wholly new definition of what ‘urban’ sociology consists of.
Writing in the late 1960s and early 1970s, he argued that advanced capitalist societies were caught up in a major contradiction.
Capital, if it is to remain profitable, needed its workforce constantly reproduced.
That is to say, houses, hospitals, schools and so forth were  needed to reproduce a workforce which had the capacity and ability to engage in labour.
Yet the contradiction as seen by Castells was that capital, if it was to remain profitable, could not afford to provide such facilities itself.
This meant that ‘collective consumption’ had to be provided, mediated by the state.
The state according to Castells's perspective, had the central role of ensuring a healthy capitalist economy.
It is, therefore, obliged by capitalist firms to provide these facilities itself.
The costs of such facilities are, however, spread over the population as a whole.
So, henceforth, ‘urban’ sociology would concern itself with the provision of such collective facilities.
As such it was to become inextricably bound up with a number of conflicts surrounding such provision.
These tensions stemmed, Castells argued, from the fact that as states intervened, these items of collective consumption become highly politicised.
Through mounting intervention to sustain a profitable economy, capitalist states are haphazardly establishing a wholly new arena of political confrontation.
Castells, much of whose work was based on France in the late 1960s, argued that new kinds of social and political alliances were being organised around collective consumption.
Working class people, for example, were combining with public sector workers to ensure that such collective provision was in fact provided.
At the same time, however, these so-called urban social movements represented in Castells's eyes a threat to the state and its spending.
Governments were under constant pressure to provide such facilities and, in addition to politicising consumption, they constantly risked running into fiscal crises themselves or charging even higher taxes on the capitalist enterprises they were supposed to be supporting.
In short, capitalist states were becoming thoroughly entangled in a set of conflicts from which they could not easily extricate themselves.
Castells's new definition of the ‘urban’ was therefore dedicated to understanding this new, complex and highly visible form of social conflict.
Seen in retrospect, Castells's work seems as bound in time and place as the Chicago School itself.
As events since the early 1970s have shown, many advanced capitalist states have in fact had much less trouble than anticipated in extricating themselves from the provision of collective consumption.
In Britain, for example, successive governments have managed to almost wholly withdraw from the provision of public sector housing.
So the contradiction identified by Castells turned out much less problematic and insoluble than imagined.
This problem of theory being tied to particular historical and social  contexts relates closely to two other concerns linked with Castells's work.
First is the fact that his capitalist society seemed to consist of mechanisms and relationships with universal effects throughout capitalism.
French, British, Swedish and American capitalism, for example, were all seen as forced to adopt similar strategies as a result of similar underlying economic forces and contradictions.
Yet we can now see that Castells's all-embracing theory could never have been straightforwardly extended to the particular kinds of class and social relations constituting particular societies and localities.
Secondly, despite Castells's emphasis on imminent urban social movements, very little attention was given to the nature of human agency.
People, their understandings of their circumstances and their struggles to force collective facilities out of the state, were again under-conceptualised and, indeed, even seemed to have a small role to play.
One final point of criticism.
For many sociologists and geographers, the equation of the ‘urban’ with ‘consumption’seemed unnecessarily restrictive.
Why, as urban sociologists such as those we reviewed in the last chapter argued, should a spatial or urban sociology not also be concerned with the class relations of production?
Castells's pioneering work did much to question underlying assumptions and, for better or worse, break the mould of the old urban sociology.
The above criticisms of his work seemed quite comprehensive, and to Castells's credit, he largely agreed with them.
Indeed, by the early 1980s Castells had largely rejected the kind of grand theorising he had earlier been proposing.
The result was an urban sociology which came very close to that which we have been developing in this book.
Castells's rejection of his old view took place with his City and the Grassroots, published in 1983.
His emphasis on ‘urban social movements’ remained; indeed the reasons for the success or failure of such movements is the key theme of his book.
He also maintained his interest in collective consumption in so far as he argued that a successful urban social movement must articulate a demand for that kind of state-provided facility.
The City and the Grassroots argued, on the other hand, that successful urban social movements must confront state domination (the tendency being for such domination to be centralised and tied up with the interests of monopoly capital) and recognise the nature of local culture and experience.
This latter item was of special importance to the Castells of the early 1980s.
It represented his growing recognition that social change is created not just through the inevitable and impersonal workings of  capitalist societies, but by the experience, understanding (and hence the demands) gained by people in their everyday lives in the limited spatial context of their localities.
At the same time, he sees many urban social movements as defensive, insular and failing to challenge the deeper structures of society and state power.
Castells gives as an example the gay community in San Francisco.
On the one hand, their very colonisation of an inner urban area and their resistance to major urban renewal was a way in which their collective and personal identities were asserted.
The property and land markets were shaped towards their own ends.
On the other hand, this group's demands remain quite narrow.
It did not mount a sustained challenge against globally-organised capitalism, concentrated state power or even prevailing discrimination against homosexuals.
The result was what Castells called a ‘local utopia’; one constrained to a small locality and an alternative culture and not substantially challenging state power.
So Castells was the pioneer of what came to be seen as the ‘new urban sociology’ and, paradoxically, The City and the Grassroots seemed to recover some of the themes (especially that of the experience of the immediate spatial and social setting) which he had earlier rejected in the Chicago School.
Castells has now moved on to new areas of research, one of these being new forms of communications technology and the threats and opportunities represented by such developments.3 Meanwhile, however, his emphasis on consumption set the tone for a very thriving area of urban sociology by later writers in this tradition.
Despite the fact, then, that Castells has now moved to other concerns, consumption and civil society remain key themes in urban sociology.
Castells's interest in the politics of consumption and the political alliances surrounding consumption have, for example, been developed by Dunleavy.
In a number of influential papers he has argued that people's political alignments are closely connected to their relationships to the state.
And these relationships to the state are, he argues, largely supplanting their class in determining their politics.
He demonstrates, for example, that the British Labour Party was most likely to find support not simply from the working class but from that sector of the working class which still strongly relied on collective provision.
Furthermore, such a group was likely to find allies amongst public sector workers who depended on the state for their incomes.
Indeed, one of Dunleavy's key themes is the central role of state professionals and bureaucracies defending their own material positions, if necessary at the expense of the public services they are supposed to be  providing.
We, nevertheless, postpone consideration of the state until the next chapter.
EXPLAINING AN EMERGENT FORM OF DOMINANT CULTURE
Urban sociology has tended recently to turn its attention away from the politics of collective consumption and towards a wider debate regarding the changing nature of civil society.
It is now frequently argued that advanced capitalist societies arc moving into a wholly new form of ‘postmodern’ culture.
Futhermore, the spatial aspects of this culture are seen as having a special significance.
What is postmodern culture?
Why has it emerged?
What has it to do with the ‘urban’?
These are difficult questions to answer despite the great rush of recent material on this matter.
Indeed, much of the literature on postmodernism seems programatically aimed at avoiding an explanation of what ‘it’ actually is.
‘It’ seems to have a number of facets.
Indeed, one of its defining characteristics is its lack of a single ‘discourse’ or theory.
Nevertheless, let us, at least, start with what it is and how it might be explained.
All forms of culture entail communications through images, language and signs.
The idea of a postmodern culture refers, however, to a way of life in which signs and forms of communication have largely become separated from content and from the specific contexts in which they are being projected and received.
Jean Baudrillard, one of the leading commentators on postmodernist culture, sees America as the society where postmodernism has most fully developed.
Here is one instance of a sign or message being separated from emotion or content.
Baudrillard is describing what might be called a ‘have a nice day’ culture:
They certainly smile at you here, though neither from courtesy, nor from an effort to charm.
This smile signifies only the need.
It is a bit like the Cheshire Cat's grin: it continues to float on faces long after all emotion had disappeared.
A smile available at any moment, but half-scared to exist, to give itself away.
No ulterior motive lurks behind it, but it keeps you at a distance.
A central idea of postmodernism is, therefore, that appearances do not correspond to reality; reality in the above case being the actual emotions and feelings transmitted and interpreted.
The expressive order, it is argued, has become the message itself, with ‘back’ emotions exploding  out to the ‘front’.
The whole of social life, it is argued, has become ‘flat’.
In our terms, there are no backs and no fronts.
Postmodern culture therefore entails, according to Jameson, ‘a new depthlessness’ with feeling, emotion and subjectivity vanishing from human communication and parody, mannerism, and pastiche taking their place.
In these ways, superficiality and surface appearances have replaced authenticity, emotional depth and true feelings.
Postmodern sociology, as outlined by Baudrillard, Lyotard and other commentators such as Jameson and Davis, is said to possess a number of other related features.
Perhaps the most important is the abandonment of single ‘truths’, theories or discourses.
Similarly, postmodern culture is also seen as highly diverse and mass produced.
Indeed, postmodern culture is envisaged as entailing and celebrating ‘the death of the author’; the abandonment of products surrounded with the aura of creation and uniqueness and attributable to charismatic producers.
Pastiche and lack of originality in popular culture is therefore seen as the result.
Baudrillard goes even further than this by suggesting that the whole of contemporary life is dedicated to consumption and communication in a way which has become wholly disconnected from meaning and content.
Again, the argument is that social life, particularly in the advanced societies such as the USA, is led at the increasingly superficial level of appearances and utterances.
Why has this form of culture developed?
The explanations are various and, as I argue shortly, rather limited.
For Baudrillard and Lyotard postmodern culture is largely free-floating, with little contact with social relations and processes.
Jameson and Davis recognise, however, that it is somehow linked with developments in capitalism itself.
Capitalism is creating these superficial images.
Meaning is being marketed.
Emotions, feelings and aesthetics are all being increasingly commodified.
Theories of postmodernism, therefore, relate the emergence of this type of culture with changes in capitalist economy and the rapid penetration of market relations into all aspects of personal and social life.
This applies especially to the life of the more affluent, most of whom are concentrated in the advanced societies.
Jameson, Harvey, and Lash and Urry argue, albeit with rather different emphases, that the emergence of postmodernism corresponds to a new phase in capitalist development.
They suggest that ‘modern’ aesthetics and culture were associated with mass production, with state bureaucracies treating individuals as standard products, and with a form of capitalism not yet fully operating at a global scale.
By contrast, postmodern culture and aesthetics are associated with the globally-organised production of commodities and with ‘flexible’ forms of manufacturing rapidly adapting to ever-changing forms of market demands from the increasingly affluent societies of the advanced industrial world.
Similarly, the decline of the welfare state means that people are increasingly treated as private citizens or defined by gender, race, religion and ‘class fractions’ rather than as standard ‘people’with standard needs.
Lash and Urry argue that postmodern culture nevertheless particularly benefits the ‘service class’ of senior white collar workers: a group which is given special attention in Chapter 1.
This is because a socially and economically dominant group is best able to engage in and control all aspects of contemporary culture, setting norms and values for others.
These arguments have strong implications for our special interests in locality and locale.
They also link up well with our conceptual starting-points.
For the middle classes in particular, everyday life and human association is increasingly dedicated to Veblenesque display.
Commodities are purchased not for their use values but as signs and symbols to emphasise personal and social distinctiveness.
Part of such display takes place through the design of locales.
Contemporary architecture, for example, is increasingly abstracted from the social and spatial contexts in which it is constructed.
Postmodern towers, in Davis's words are ‘a package of standardised space gift wrapped for the client's taste’.
The external elevations of one skyscraper in London's docklands, for example, takes a ‘Neo Gothic’ form.
Meanwhile, a recently completed tower in New York is based on early nineteenth century designs for Chippendale furniture.
Postmodern design therefore, emphasises difference and distinction.
But the resulting variety is literally skin-deep.
This brings us back once more to the personal and social implications of such developments.
Despite all the apparent difference of contemporary design and culture, everyday experience is increasingly detached from local cultures and social relations.
The Marxist, class-based, explanations of this emergent postmodern culture are certainly valuable.
Yet despite their insistence on a new form of human experience (one which is curiously reminiscent of the early sociologists' insistence that late nineteenth and early twentieth societies were emerging into a new society which was leaving behind gemeinschaft relations of blood and community) it is somewhat surprising to find that contemporary postmodern theorists give only schematic attention to human consciousness and agency.
They also become unnecessarily entangled  in the issue of when the new form of culture actually became dominant.
Is it now?
Was it in the 1960s?
Is there not plenty of evidence of pastiche and parody in earlier, supposedly ‘modernist’, times?
This issue is, however, symptomatic of a deeper problem of explanation; one to which we can now turn.
As we have discussed, there is now available a conceptual framework for adequately understanding the changing nature of contemporary civil society.
Reference should again be made to Figures 1.1 and 1.2 (pages 11 and 12) and our elaborations of Harré et al.'s framework as a means of explaining postmodern culture.
Lash and Urry are amongst the few commentators we have reviewed who recognise that the middle classes are those best able to indulge in, and benefit by, this emergent form of culture.
But analysis has so far been largely entrapped by the particular form of Marxism with which cultural theory has adopted.
Armed with the suggestions of Harré, Veblen and others we can now see that postmodernism is not simply a product of capital movements or recent developments in the industrial economy such as consumer-led, ‘flexible’, forms of production.
It is simultaneously the products of increasingly affluent individuals and households attempting to establish identity, uniqueness and esteem in their own eyes and those of others.
People do this, as Veblen argued in relation to the American middle classes about a century ago, through various forms of conspicuous consumption and display.
And typically the forms used for such display are versions of the cultural forms adopted and displayed by the ruling classes.
In this sense they are usually ‘appropriating’ the form displayed in the public realm by the affluent, pace-setting reference groups.
The precise timing of this process is largely irrelevant.
Veblen saw it developing in late twentieth century America.
And in Chapter 2 we saw G. H. Mead and the Chicago School of Sociology recognising how people used reference groups as a means of establishing their personal identities.
Clearly, this process has developed considerably during the late twentieth century.
As we discuss shortly, Bourdieu's work shows these processes of emulation to be combined with the extraordinarily subtle means by which social groups also distinguish themselves from each other.
And to the extent that the form of the middle class varies between localities and societies, these dominant social groups presumably have quite different effects on local cultures.
Admittedly, however, such variations remain largely unresearched.
The cultural forms adopted by the rising middle classes (or, more  specifically, Lash and Urry's ‘service class’) cannot be the ‘real thing.’
Only so many people can actually live in a real farmhouse or Elizabethan manor.
Indeed, they would probably not wish to do so unless it was centrally heated.
Only so many can engage at leisure with Indian or Mexican society.
For the rest of us it is a commercially ‘packaged’ version of the real thing.
If we understand people as continually persisting in what we have earlier termed ‘identity projects’ it need come as no surprise to find increasingly affluent households necessarily consuming pastiche, the extraction of history out of context, and superficiality as a normal way of life.
All this, however, in the search for social esteem and personal uniqueness.
Theorists of postmodernism relying on political economy explanations still do not adequately explain why sections of the middle class are engaging in this new way of life.
Bourdieu's work on the new middle classes (what he calls the new petit bourgeoisie) and Goldthorpe et al.'s study of the service class's social mobility provide us with some clues.
These people work mainly in the new, rapidly growing, employment sectors such as personal services, advertising and the media.
They are socially mobile, many of them having risen from working class backgrounds to new heights in the class structure.
They have a socially diverse array of friends and colleagues, some of them ‘old’ working class friends but many of them in circumstances similar to those in which they now find themselves.
They have thereby developed few class allegiances and few commitments to large-scale theories about how society is, or should be, organised.
Their commitment is to a culture of individual success and a highly hedonistic view of life.
In one of Bourdieu's many memorable turns of phrase, they suffer from ‘fear of not getting enough pleasure’
Bourdieu and Goldthorpe give us some preliminary insights into why a  particularly dominant social group should engage in a postmodern way of life; one which stems from social mobility, high incomes and which largely sets the pace for the remainder of the population.
But there may well be even more subtle reasons why this group should find itself attracted to this particular form of civil society.
Class positions and economic power may again be only a limited part of the explanation.
Pfeil makes the acute and useful observation that many of these individuals were raised in households where the father failed to make a significant impact on their offspring's development; a product of increasing household dissolution amongst the middle classes.
The result, he argues, is that many middle class children have never progressed beyond the ‘pre-Oedipal phase’.
As we have seen earlier, this is a Freudian  term implying that they are still committed to the ‘pleasure principle’.
Oral and anal pleasure and satisfaction remain their primary instincts while the ‘normal’ identification with the authoritarian father-figure enforcing codes of discipline has never occurred.
Again, therefore, explanation entails a combination of the economic or social processes familiar to sociology (and urban sociology) with mechanisms which lie deep within people's biological and psychological makeup.
SUBORDINATE CULTURES: TOWARDS A MORE COMPLEX EXPLANATION
We now turn from dominant to subordinate cultures in civil society.
The latter are amongst the ‘back’ activities outlined earlier as characteristically taking place in ‘back regions’.
What Cohen calls the ‘new subcultural theory’ needs first putting in a wider context.
If class is to be the starting-point then we must recognise that there are a number of different subcultures, many organised around groups of young people, but with ethnicity forming another important dimension.
Here we give special attention to youth.
Ethnicity is given more extended treatment in the following chapters.
Firstly, the placing of the new subcultural theory relating to youth in a somewhat wider context.
As Yablonsky argues, subordinate gangs can be defined in three ways.
One type adopts and aspires to dominant middle class values and priorities.
A second ‘delinquent’ type is one in which the gang still broadly aspires to dominant ideas of success (including the equation of ‘success’with material rewards) but finds alternative means towards these ends.
Hence the reliance on what is socially defined as ‘crime’ and various forms of illegal profits.
Thirdly, there is the potentially violent gang.
This is self-aggrandising and largely relies on defining its own culture through outright conflicts with other subgroups and the dominant social order.
It is the third and possibly the second group to which ‘new subcultural theory’ applies.
A second assumption which needs challenging, however, is this work's continuing and immense emphasis on class theory.
Such an emphasis leaves the analysis constrained by its relatively narrow conceptual framework.
Class-based mechanisms are again, therefore, seen as the main mechanism explaining the emergence of subcultures, and what are called ‘hooliganism’ and ‘juvenile  delinquency ‘.
The young working class  in deindustrialising, inner urban areas are seen by the new subcultural theory as caught up in a bitter series of conflicts and contradictions.
Urban redevelopment has transformed the inner urban areas where working class adolescents have been raised.
Skilled manual labour has largely disappeared, jobs are temporary and badly paid, and unemployment has rapidly increased as capital has removed elsewhere.
Meanwhile, the upwardly mobile members of this generation (Yablonsky's first group) have dispersed to the front regions of respectable parts of the city.
According to Cohen (and, indeed, to related work such as that outlined by Hebdidge) subcultural or gang life should be envisaged as resistance to these changes and forms of social subordination.
They argue that working class adolescents are, in fact, creating a collective, close-knit, community life which is a re-establishment of traditional working class cultures and values.
Nevertheless, the material fact is, of course, that capital has largely abandoned these inner urban areas.
Resistance by working class youth, therefore, takes various ‘magical’ or ‘symbolic’forms: dress, style, alternative ways of life.
Territory has a particular kind of significance in all this in so far as these young people are reasserting their lost solidarity and independence through literally ‘winning space’: claiming particular territories to be ‘theirs’.
In the terms discussed in Chapter 2 during our reinterpretation of the Chicago School, these groups convert certain districts in what for them are front regions.
For other social groups, however, they may well be seen as back regions to be avoided.
The important point for the contemporary literature on subcultures is that this type of resistance through rituals is still ‘symbolic’.
The ways in which old working class identity is re-formed still relies on cultural forms.
‘Alternative’ forms of subculture are still very much adaptations of dominant cultural forms: language and other modes of expression being, for example, adaptations of those generally, publicly, or commercially available.
Similarly, patriarchal relations between men and women or racism are also a frequent feature of these supposedly alternative forms of gang life.
So the general point about this literature is that oppositional youth cultures amongst working class youth are still envisaged as closely linked not just to wider public values but to middle class public values.
Meanwhile, however, dominant forms of culture (the fragmented, superficial and commercialised postmodernism we discussed earlier) seem to take up and incorporate many of these forms of resistance relatively easy; albeit in sanitised, respectable, forms.
Again, however, if we recall the biological and psychological concepts discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, this overarching emphasis on class seems unnecessarily limiting.
More specifically, it gives little attention to processes other than those related to class (including ‘lost’ class) experience and the demands of capital accumulation.
At the same time it tends to overlook the accounts and understandings of the people actively engaged in ‘subcultural’ ways of life.
In trying to explain the territorial behaviour and sporadic violence of young working class people, for example, one approach would be to take much more seriously the currently unfashionable ethological and biological literature we reviewed in Chapter 1.
Lorenz and Ardrey suggest, respectively, that aggression and territoriality form a deep-lying part of people's biological and psychic constitution.
As outlined earlier, Tiger and Fox suggest that there is an innate ‘male bonding’ stemming from millions of years' history and ultimately linked to a time when men co-operated in order to hunt.
Young male groups in primitive societies are seen as early proof of the formation of co-operative groups in which individuals learn to work in the interests of the wider group.
Clearly, group formation and aggression by contemporary human beings has little to do with hunting and survival.
Lorenz, Ardrey and others nevertheless argue that collective instincts and forms of aggression amongst contemporary human beings (and especially amongst males) have now been canalised into ritual and symbolic forms: types of aggression which do not usually result in damage.
If we turn to the literature which attempts to combine sociobiology with social psychology, we find the formation of youth subcultures being given an explanation which is largely at odds with that proposed by Marxism.
Basing his analysis on a combination of Freud and genetics, Badcock argues that young people forming oppositional, ‘alternative’ cultures are, in fact, resisting the oppressive emotional investment of their parents.
Contemporary societies, he argues, are characterised by relatively small families.
As a result, biological and psychological investment by parents is being invested in a relatively small number of children.
The result is that young adults, themselves seeking a separate sexual and personal identity, are resisting the way of life lived and promoted by their parents.
State authorities attempting to regulate youth culture are seen as little more than parent substitutes.
The upshot of this work is, then, that the term ‘parent culture’ used by Marxists needs to be taken more seriously.
Yet the danger of both these kinds of literature is that they offer just  the kinds of all-explaining and deterministic theories as the form of Marxism we reviewed earlier.
Categories of behaviour such as‘territoriality’ and ‘aggression’are first lumped together in an unproblematic way.
Secondly, they are given simple, catch-all explanations.
Furthermore, territoriality, violence (including violence towards women and children) and all forms of resistance can be all too readily justified as simply ‘natural’ and ‘innate’.
In addressing this literature we are clearly involved in some extremely tricky judgements and issues.
But, as regards the formation of youth subcultures with an occasional tendency to violence, a way forward is offered by Marsh, Rosser and Harre in their study of a particular form of youth subculture: football ‘hooliganism’.
In line with their realist view of human behaviour, they suggest that there are indeed latent forms of behaviour within the biological makeup of human beings.
The crucial point is again, however, that they are only latent.
It takes specific cultural processes and relationships to, as it were, spark off these latent tendencies.
Marsh et al.are particularly interested in the aggression of ‘hooligans’ on the football terraces.
As they put it ‘the actual arousal of aggression would seem to be very much a cultural affair’.
We could make a similar point about the psychological literature explaining subculture as resistance to parental norms.
‘Difficult teenagers’ are, for parents and children alike, an almost universal problem.
But how ‘difficult’ they are, the form these difficulties take, perhaps even whether they are difficult at all, must again be a ‘cultural affair’.
Presumably the actual outcome depends on, for example, the social classes of the people involved, and the kinds of resistance they encounter from parents and other authorities.
This takes us back to Yablonsky's useful distinctions.
As he suggests, biological and psychological imperatives may well take different forms.
It may even be, if the young people involved broadly adopt the ‘parent’ culture, that they turn out not to be imperatives at all.
The implications are again that any analysis must attempt the difficult task of combining the kinds of analysis offered by sociology with those offered by psychology and biology.
The second main point about Marsh et al.'s approach is that it recognises the expressive order: the theories which young people and others have about their circumstances.
Theories, of course, lie behind their behaviour.
Underlying the behaviour of an apparently undifferentiated and chaotic mass of hooligans are distinct rules and moral careers.
The young football supporters talked to by these authors have their own, mutually understood, hierarchies and regulations.
Indeed, many of these tacit rules remind us of those examined by the Chicago School in their early studies of youth gangs.
At the ‘top’ are the Town Boys, a group of older boys and young men who, while not waving banners or making the most noise, are nevertheless treated in a deferential way by other subgroups.
Beneath them are The Rowdies, a group of boys aged between 12 and 17.
They make the most noise: singing, chanting and consistently insulting opposing supporters.
This second group is what the mass media usually refer to as ‘hooligans’.
Beneath them are a group of children with an average age of 10.
They are the Novices, sometimes dubbed ‘little kids’ by the older and superior supporters.
In fact, the hierarchy is even more complex than this, with individual Rowdies, for example, being Aggro Leaders.
But the general point is that this hierarchy represents a ladder up which ‘lower’ groups aspire to climb.
But this is a result of those at the top of the hierarchy maintaining their status amongst their subordinates.
As Marsh et al.put it:
‘Becoming somebody’ is a highly structured affair, and an understanding of this structure is the first step in rendering the apparently anomic behaviour at football matches intelligible.
Furthermore, these social differences have a spatial expression, each group occupying distinct if overlapping regions of the football terrace (Figure 4.1).
Marsh et al.'s study of football hooligans and their emphasis on the expressive order has some similarities with other studies of ‘counter-cultures’.
Especially well known is Willis's Learning to Labour, a study of cultures which working class children construct for themselves at school.
Some boys, ‘the lads’, represent outright opposition to school culture, its rules and hierarchies.
Their school life is largely dedicated to preventing themselves being educated.
This is done through innumerable forms of minor subversion, tricks and escape attempts within the school routine.
Willis is at pains to point out, however, that this breaking of rules not only relies on having the rules there to break but ensures that ‘the lads’ condemn themselves to the worst jobs once they have left school.
Meanwhile, ‘the earoles’ are the ‘respectable’students who obey the rules, get the better jobs but remain low down in the schoolchildren's own counter-culture.
Willis is, in effect, tracing the moral career of small groups of children; this time from the school into their place of employment.
His book again shows locales being used as a resource in this process, ‘the lads’ using   distinct rooms and spaces to literally separate themselves from school authorities, from the ‘earoles’and from the much-despised Pakistanis and West Indians.
Two summary points can be made about dominant and subordinate cultures.
One is to repeat the perhaps obvious point concerning the relationships between these spheres of social life.
‘Front’ cultures have a way of incorporating apparent resistances and incorporating them into forms compatible with the established social order.
Meanwhile ‘back’ cultures are often a distorted version of dominant forms.
The structures common to society as a whole (especially the structure of language) do not simply constrain alternative values and ways of life.
They also provide the resources around which alternatives are constructed.
Paradoxically, both dominant and subordinate seem to sustain each other in a reciprocal fashion.
Secondly, we have been trying to develop an understanding of locality in human agency; one responsive not only to social or cultural processes but also to instinctive demands and human interaction.
We can now develop both these points by turning to a particular important aspect of civil society: the home.
DOMINANT CULTURES, SUBORDINATE CULTURES, INSTINCTS AND THE HOME
A fascinating feature of Castells's legacy is that later authors have continued to examine the sphere of reproduction and consumption despite the facts that Castells's original theories have emerged as far less universally applicable than he suggested and that many of his followers are not Marxists.
The reasons for this are clear if we examine the work of two well known urban sociologists, Pahl and Saunders.
For them a central reason for concentrating on civil society lies in the social and emotional significance of the home.
Pahl, in his Divisions of Labour, argues strongly that a rapidly decreasing proportion of the population is in full-time, paid employment.
To an increasing extent, people's lives, interests and identity are focused on relations outside the workplace.
More specifically, they arc focused on the home, with self-provisioning (DIY, gardening and so forth) representing a sphere of autonomy where they can literally ‘be themselves’.
Nevertheless, on the basis of his detailed study of households on the Isle of Sheppey, Pahl argues strongly against any romantic vision of deindustrialising but autonomous and happily self-provisioning households.
One of his central points is that it is the already employed and relatively well-off households who are in fact engaging in such self-servicing.
The reason is that they are the people most able to afford the necessary tools and equipment.
Moreover, those who do not own their homes have much fewer incentives to become ‘do-it-yourselfers’.
A related argument comes from Saunders.
At the end of the second edition of Social Theory and the Urban Question he argues that to focus on consumption is to focus on an area of social life where individuals can gain maximum control over their lives.
In focusing on that sphere of life which provides the greatest potential for the expression of individual autonomy, urban sociology is uniquely equipped to chart a path out of the ‘iron cage’ which Weber believed was encompassing the whole of modern society.
In the problem of consumption, therefore, urban sociology has not only at long last discovered an object of analysis; it has helped identify one of the core questions of the modern age.
But it is again the home to which Saunders gives his prime attention.
In some respects his work echoes that of Dunleavy and Castells.
He argues on the basis of his recent survey of working class home owners that ownership does indeed influence political alignments, especially within  the middle classes.
Unlike Dunleavy, however, he is saying that any ‘conservatising’ effect of home ownership is a result of the real economic interests people have in the economic value of their properties.
Home ownership does not itself have an embourgoisement effect.
Of crucial interests to our concerns is a rather more general aspect of Saunders's work on the significance of the home.
He believes that the home has a central role in people's consciousness, and specifically in their sense of ‘ontological security’.
As we have seen, this refers to a sense of knowing who or where you are in a society which has increasingly ‘spread’ over time and space.
Saunders argues that the home has a key role in providing such ontological security, a sense of refuge to which people can retreat and be themselves.
And, as people get older, they tend to attach greater significance to the home in providing such security.
Furthermore, home ownership is a key way in which people obtain such security.
Those in public and privately rented housing do not obtain the same sense of personal identity.
Another way of putting this is that the home is an ‘escape attempt’: a sphere of autonomy to which people can retreat.
Such a process has been taking place for a long time.
The home can, therefore, be seen as a potentially significant source of ontological security, even if large numbers of people finding such security in the same place at the same time can itself lead to much anxiety.
There is, however, a major counter-argument here alluded to by Saunders.
Pahl, Saunders, and indeed Marx, all argued that the home and civil society is a sphere of relative freedom and autonomy compared to the sphere of employment.
The question is, however, whether or not this is a peculiarly male vision.
Many feminists, by contrast, see the home as predominantly a back region for a man returning home from work: one where he can be himself, and largely at the expense of women's autonomy and escape.
The argument goes that it is women who are in fact doing all the reproducing of labour power and servicing other people's escapes.
The home is, according to this perspective, therefore, one of the principal sources of gender domination and exploitation.
The home as an escape attempt
Saunders, however, challenges this argument.
Following his survey of relatively low-income home owners, he argues that the domestic division  of labour within homes is indeed ‘strongly patterned by gender, with child care (where relevant), laundry and house cleaning being strongly associated with women while gardening and looking after the car tend to be predominantly male activities’.
But he also argues that this should not be seen as automatically implying drudgery and oppression for women.
Women are more likely to exercise control over the household budget.
Furthermore, women are not tied to the kitchen sink in the way often caricatured by feminist writers.
Roughly the same proportion of women and men regularly go out of their homes on a social basis.
Perhaps even more significantly, ‘56 per cent of women and 57 per cent of men said they had no desire to go out any more than they already do’.
Women and men in this group carry out different tasks within the home and they pursue different leisure pursuits (men, for example, are more likely to be tinkering with the car or engaging in DIY).
But Saunders argues that it is wrong for feminists to draw from this the idea that home is a place of relaxation for men or a setting for the systematic exploitation of women.
For both genders the home is associated first and foremost with a range of deep-lying instincts; those of family, children, love and affection.
As a home-owning woman with a skilled manual job puts it:
To feel at home — you never call it your house, it's your home.
It's the way you build it up and the people who live in it…
It's the house you build together.
A house isn't just bricks and mortar, it's the love that's in it.
Similarly, a male manager said:
Your home is with your family.
And the things you put into it.
You put part of yourself into your housing, don't you?
The second most important association people have with the home is one of relaxation and comfort.
Again, this is a feeling shared equally by men and women.
A retired male semi-skilled home owner said:
I can dress how I like and do what I like.
The kids always brought home who they liked.
It's not like other people's places where you have to rake your shoes off when you go in.
And a female manager said that:
It's not having everything regimental.
Not feeling it's got to be like a furniture showroom to be comfortable…
It always annoys me on building sites when it says, ‘Wimpey Homes’.
They're not homes, they're houses.
Home is happiness and family, that sort of thing.
Women and men both, therefore, seem to have very positive feelings about their homes.
Saunders makes the important point that these feelings about the home increase as people get older.
The implications are that, in a way similar to the class analyses we discussed in the last chapter, there is a major discrepancy between the ways in which social scientists conceptualise what is taking place and how people feel and understand what is taking place.
Of course, it is always possible to say that people are suffering from false consciousness (women, for example , are continually suffering from the illusion that they are not being exploited in the home) but that is surely too patronising a view to be taken at all seriously.
The implications are, firstly, that civil society at whatever scale (the ‘community’ scale as represented by Castells's studies or the scale of the home as represented by Pahl and Saunders) is for many people a setting within which a degree of identity can indeed emerge, albeit in complex and highly diverse ways.
But, secondly, a sociology of civil society needs to take far more seriously people's own understandings and self-conceptions.
This brings us back to our central theme.
Such understandings and self-conceptions can only be properly appreciated by combining those aspects of social theory which incorporate concepts of class, state, gender or ethnicity with the understandings offered by biology and psychology.
An extreme sociobiologist or ethologist might well argue that the fact that women largely enjoy home life is a result of their genetic inheritance.
They would probably suggest that during millions of years' evolution, women's instincts have developed in such a way as to protect and nourish family and kin.
But this kind of determinism (one denying the mediating social role of culture) is just as misleading as the kind offered by feminists or Marxists.
The fact is (however complex and messy the eventual analysis may be) that the two kinds of process and relationship must have developed together and must surely be combined with one another in our understanding.
Saunders's work offers an example of how such a combination might be effected.
In the British case (and Saunders makes it clear that he is generalising about the home in British society) the best way in which the occupant of a house can acquire ontological security is through being its owner.
Owner-occupation, in other words, offers the greatest opportunities for the management of self.
This need not, however, suggest (as Saunders sometimes does indeed imply) that owner-occupation is at all times and in all places an optimum means of gaining control over one's own life.
Pahl's and Saunders's work begins, therefore, to explore the particular  emotional and expressive significance of the home.
They have broken the mould of the old structuralist and determinist urban sociology.
It remains, however, to place their work within a systematic and more general framework.
This can be achieved by once more turning to the conceptual framework we have borrowed from Harré et al.and again linking our concerns to the broader structures affecting people's lives and social-cum-spatial mobility.
While much existing work on the home concentrates on the social relations and processes affecting people and households, few studies have examined how these broad constraints and relationships shape people's lives, biographies or life courses.
There are, however, important exceptions, and they clearly suggest that a first stage must be to see people's housing experience in relation to the whole of their lives, in particular their lives in employment.
This comes through very clearly in, for example, Forrest and Murie's study of senior white collar executives and their families.
They suggest that these people are indeed highly mobile, largely as a result of the decisions made on their behalf by the large companies and bureaucracies for which they work.
A similar insistence on incorporating an understanding of the constraints and limitations of the labour market as well as those of the housing market comes from Barlow.
His work implies that there is a typical ‘housing history’; at least for relatively well-off people in contemporary Britain.
It is one in which young people often start life in improved or ‘gentrified’ housing in inner urban areas, thence progressing to large family homes in the outer suburbs and later retiring to a house purpose-made for well-off home owners.
All such changes are related not only to people's work lives but to the decisions of (often multinational) house building companies; the latter increasingly investing in ‘up-market’ houses and retirement homes for people who have seen the value of their home rapidly increase.
These studies nevertheless tend still to treat individuals and households as people ‘to whom things happen’.
To a large extent, of course, housing careers may indeed be enforced or constrained by market processes or government authorities.
But, at the same time, the town chosen or the house actually lived in are still selected by the households themselves.
The house, its form and its location, is a commodity providing real options as to how some people, at least, choose to live.
Such a choice is made on the basis of how individuals see themselves and wish to be seen by others, and it is possible to conceptualise a characteristic or typical ‘moral housing career’.
It is one, certainly, shaped by land markets, builders, financiers  and the like, but also one resulting from households and individuals seeking status, respect and security.
So the prevailing ‘political economy’ perspective again needs combining, this time with an emphasis on the expressive order of the home.
Clearly the two are closely related: the archetypal Tudorbethan mansion built by a multinational house construction company being, for example, packaged in such a way as to appeal to a middle class household.
As Zukin shows in her excellent study of the conversion of old New York factory buildings into up-market flats, deindustrialisation, the flow of capital into property and the rapid emergence of a status-seeking middle class all combine with each other in the New York version of gentrification.
But we can be rather more rigorous about the form of ‘moral housing careers’ for different social groups.
The following two case studies show how the expressive form of the home extends to different types of household.
Housing careers, moral careers and the expressive order of the home
Much of our discussion of the expressive order has concentrated on language and symbols in the form of conversation.
But the artefacts, furniture, decor and design also represent a kind of language people use both to express their ‘selves’ and to communicate with others.
A now quite old study by Laumann and House of middle class homes in Detroit shows how this kind of language is used in the making of personal and social identities.
They see the living room and its furnishings as a ‘front’, one way in which individuals and families could both express themselves as individuals and yet still present themselves as part of a social group.
Their study showed that the Anglo Saxon groups who were already well established in the area (and whose parents came from similar backgrounds) indulged in French and Traditional American furniture and ornate wall mirrors.
By contrast, the upwardly mobile middle class who had recently ‘made it’ celebrated their arrival through the conspicuous forms of chic modern decor, including abstract paintings, modern furniture and sculpture and the pared-down aesthetic of the modern movement.
In adopting this chic mode of expression, the nouveau riche was  effectively distinguishing itself from the traditional middle classes while at the same time flaunting the fact that it had connoisseurship and taste.
However, there was (at least in 1960s Detroit) a rub here for the nouveaux riches.
While they were emulating the design preferred by avant-garde design-professionals, other lower-status social groups were leaving them socially stranded by copying the styles and artefacts of the traditional elites.
Clearly, the homes and household objects that people adopt for purposes of personal and social identity frequently change their nature.
Once an elite has established itself, it may well find itself being emulated or used as a reference group by ‘lower’ social classes.
On the other hand, rapidly emerging elites often pride themselves as ahead-of-the-game, a kind of cultural avant-garde.
As Laumann and House suggest, they can usually be depended on to adopt design-languages distinguishing themselves from those who have not yet arrived.
Perhaps the upwardly mobile middle classes in 1990s Detroit are now surrounding themselves with postmodern houses and artefacts!
A similar set of ideas and themes can be taken from Rainwater's examination of lower class home life in the massive Pruitt-Igoe public housing projects of St Louis.
Analysing tenants' own accounts of their living conditions, he again argues that ‘home’ and what we have earlier called ‘ontological security’actually mean quite different things for different classes.
The connotations are also quite different according to gender and property relations.
The home's most basic function is the provision of shelter from the social and physical environment.
So, perhaps unsurprisingly, it is this aspect of the home and the security it provides which is of central importance to the poor.
As Rainwater put it: ‘because the house is a refuge from noxious elements in the outside world, it serves people as a locale where they can regroup their energies for interaction with that outside world’.
So, for the very poor the home is primarily a means by which those largely cut off from the rest of society can shelter from further threats and attacks.
According to Rainwater, this aspect of ‘home’ is of particular importance to women.
If ‘home’ means, though, the defence of self and close kin for what Rainwater calls the ‘lower class’, it means something quite different for those who have managed to escape from this class and who have achieved a degree of economic and emotional stability.
For what Rainwater calls the ‘traditional working class’ general improvements to the home still have a fairly low priority.
People are saving their resources for other basic  needs.
Questions of ‘taste’ hardly enter in.
On the other hand, this class does concentrate on possessing minimal amounts of equipment and having ‘respectable’ neighbours.
As Rainwater puts it:
This traditional working class is likely to want to economise on housing in order to have money available to pursue other interests and needs.
There will be efforts at the maintenance of the house or apartment, but not much interest in improvement of housing level.
Families in this group tend to acquire a good many of the major appliances, to centre their social life in the kitchen, to be relatively unconcerned with adding taste in furnishings to comfort.
With respect to the immediate outside world the main emphasis is on a concern with the availability of a satisfying peer group life, with having neighbours who are similar, and with maintaining an easy access back and forth among people who are very well known.
But, as the battle for emotional security and economic prosperity starts to be won, questions of self-expression, esteem and self-realisation begin to replace mere self-defence.
At this stage expression turns both to the outside or ‘front’ of the house as well as the internal setting.
In fact, both inside and outside are fronts, with individuals and their families as they become better off constructing what Rainwater calls the ‘all-American leisure style’.
To quote Rainwater again:
Along with the acquisition of a home and yard goes an elaboration of the inside of the house in such a way as not only to further develop the idea of a pleasant and cozy home, but also to add new elements, with emphasis on having a nicely decorated room or family room, a home which closely approximates a standard of all-American affluence.
At this stage the precise form of the household's relation to its property is of critical importance.
For, clearly, owner-occupation assists towards these personal and social ends.
People who own a property have more freedom to engage in the ‘all-American leisure style’ if their house belongs to them and not to a public or private landlord.
CONCLUSION: CIVIL SOCIETY AND THE EXPRESSIVE ORDER
This chapter pursues our general theme of exploring locales and localities as the context of interaction between people and the understandings people gain through such interaction.
Social and spatial relations both  constrain and enable these interactions and understandings.
Moral careers are being fought out; property and spatial relations being used as means to these ends.
Property and other social relations are both enabling and constraining people's instincts to be self-determined and to protect self and kin.
We addressed civil society in particular; an area of social life currently at the centre of urban sociology, but one which so far incorporates insufficient understanding of human agency.
The conceptual framework developed in Chapter 1 shows how such an understanding would allow us systematically to understand civil society as perceived and appreciated by persons engaged in it.
It emerges that civil society provides quite extensive opportunities for self-realisation and autonomy in the context of what Giddens calls the ‘time-space distantiation’ of social life.
These opportunities are much less apparent at the place of work.
Nevertheless, the prospects of escape vary considerably by class.
This chapter indicates, too, that it may be profitable to re-examine old and currently unfashionable case studies.
An example is the ‘community studies’ tradition of the 1960s.
Their special emphasis on family and kin (at the expense of class) is now frequently lampooned.
But one of this chapter's implications is that their preoccupations may not have been so misplaced after all.
SOCIETY, EMOTIONS AND THE NATION STATE
How should we understand the state, its relationships both to society and to individuals?
Why should the national level of the state continue to have such significance to people's politics despite its apparent remoteness from their everyday lives?
How do we explain the growth of nationalism, and ethnic claims for autonomy and self-determination, not least those currently taking place within the Soviet Union?
As Smith points out, ‘ethnic ties and national loyalties have become more deep rooted than ever’.
The postwar period has seen a great rise in ethnicity; starting in the 1950s with areas peripheral to France and Spain and continuing in the 1960s with Britain's ‘Celtic Fringe’.
The 1980s have seen ethnicity and nationalism escalating in scope; not only within the Soviet Union but in Eastern Europe and a wide range of Third World societies.
But we have little understanding of why this should be.
Our emphasis on human nature outlined at the beginning of this study provides a large part of the answer.
This chapter is organised as follows.
Firstly it discusses the Marxian and Weberian concepts which now provide the basis for urban and regional sociology examining the state and its relations to people.
These concepts emphasise class, crisis management and bureaucracy.
With some exceptions, however, they have disappointingly little to say about the detailed relationships between people and state, how these are implemented by governments and interpreted by individuals.
Nevertheless, we will extract from this work those elements that connect to our concern with the stretching of social systems and its impacts on individuals and social groups.
Basing our work on Giddens, Foucault and the theories of human  nature outlined in Chapters 1 and 2, we will be advancing a new perspective, one involving a fundamental contradiction.
On the one hand, national and supra-national states attempt to regulate social relations and the relations between individuals (and such regulation leads to tensions and conflicts as classes and individuals try to reassert their personal and collective identities through local state institutions).
On the other hand, the state and its leaders also form an important means by which people understand their own circumstances.
States' and governments' emphases on nationalism and blood ties has a deep-rooted emotional significance for individuals.
We conclude by illustrating these themes with reference to German politics in the 1930s and British politics in the 1980s.
EVERYDAY LIFE.
AND THE STATE: ESTABLISHED APPROACHES
State theory is, of , an exceptionally large topic and there have been a number of wide-ranging surveys of the field.Urban politics itself is also a substantial subject and it too has received wide-ranging and systematic attention.
Two particular approaches will be distinguished here.
Those stemming from Marxism which emphasise the social relations managed by states, and those stemming from Weber which emphasise the role of bureaucratic elites.
We will find that they both provide substantial insights into our central theme.
They also contain problems.
Some of these are simply internal inconsistencies.
But they are also extremely limited in terms of our particular interests.
They have an inadequate conceptualisation of the relations between states and people and of the emotional significance of nation states.
Marxism, uneven development and citizenship
We have discussed earlier Castells's redefinition of the ‘urban’ as a concern with collective consumption.
He envisaged modern states as becoming increasingly embroiled in the reproduction of a fit and healthy workforce; a service which capitalist enterprises needed but was itself unable or unwilling to undertake.
In some respects, Castells's ideas were a continuation of Marx's and Engels's early ideas.
They argued that one role of the state in capitalist  society is to save capital from itself.
Factory owners pursue their own interests, competing with one another.
One outcome was the intense exploitation of labour-forces, ultimately leading to the destruction of the resource on which they were dependent: labour power.
Early state intervention over factory hours, therefore, can be seen as public control necessitated by the blind self-destructiveness of capital itself.
Such intervention was needed to restore productivity and profitability.
To undertake such intervention, governments needed a degree of independence or autonomy from any particular branch or fraction of capital.
In a similar way, the state's provision of collective resources can be seen as ensuring a key commodity for competitive and anarchic capitalist societies; that of a refreshed and productive workforce.
Perhaps the main difference between Castells's approach and that of Marx and Engels (and a difference we can use in our new formulation) is that Castells placed much greater emphasis on the fact that state intervention to provide collective resources did not only operate in the interests of the capital.
It was also a product of people's actions.
Urban social movements in the 1960s and 1970s were being organised around demands for such provision, clearly implying that facilities such as decent housing and welfare resources benefit the working class as well as capital.
Contemporary Marxist urban sociology places much less emphasis on the supposed necessity for the state to be engaged in collective consumption.
This, of course, reflects recent social change.
‘Recommodification’ or privatisation in many fields of collective consumption (such as, for example , public sector housing provision) has clearly proved state intervention to be not ‘necessary’for successful capital accumulation.
Marxist urban politics is now much more coy about all-embracing grand, theoretical claims.
Its prime starting-point is that of uneven development of class relations.
It is this uneven development that links to our central interest in time-space distantiation and its effects on people's consciousness and actions.
Tensions between local and national (or national and supra-national) governments are the political expression of ontological insecurity and the attempt to gain a degree of self-determination.
Uneven development implies, of course, that class relations take quite distinct forms in, say, the USA, Britain, Sweden or Japan.
These differences are partly a result of how people have forced governments to introduce legislation.
In Sweden, for example, the trade unions have long been well represented in government decision-making and have negotiated  pay levels and labour practices much envied by their counterparts in other countries.
Furthermore, class relations take distinct forms within societies.
These can again be seen as a result of different social alliances forcing their own interests on to the local political agenda and using the state apparatus towards their own ends.
In some regions within a particular society the working class may be exceptionally well organised and trade unionised.
In Britain, for example, Merseyside, Sheffield and Glasgow have long been considered to be ‘red islands’ within British society: the labour movement having forced out of the state substantial levels of collective housing and welfare provision.
Meanwhile, red islands in other places such as South Wales have forced state intervention in the form of major industrial investments.
For all these variations, however, there persists in many localities a ‘neighbourhood effect’ whereby working class people appear consistently drawn towards the politics of the middle classes and employers of their area.
The reasons for this have been widely discussed yet remain relatively obscure.
One reason may well be that people living in the same locality share, whatever their class position, similar material positions.
A working class individual and a middle class individual may have similar political demands when it comes to, say, local educational and welfare facilities, local job opportunities and protection of house prices.
In other words, their alliances may be simply the produce of shared material circumstances.
We might at this stage, however, recall from Chapter 2 the processes outlined by the Chicago School and, in particular, by G. H. Mead.
The ‘neighbourhood effect’ could also be explained as the product of repeated association between the different classes in the same locality.
Mead, it will be recalled, emphasised the role of what he called the ‘generalised other’ in the making of individuals' values.
People, he argued, evaluate themselves by viewing themselves through the eyes of others.
The neighbourhood effect could also be understood as the middle classes acting as a ‘generalized other’ for the working classes of their locality; in effect a reference group, for subordinate social groups, influencing the extent to which they either resist or abide by dominant, and often centralising, political authority.
The neighbourhood effect apart, contemporary urban sociology (especially that deriving from Marxism) envisages local variations in politics and forms of state intervention as straightforwardly the product of the particular balance of class relations constituting a particular locality.
Understanding the actual forms and extents of state intervention  thereby becomes a largely empirical matter.
In the British case, forms and levels of national intervention are seen as closely allied to the particular class interests for which the state is responsible: ‘the City’ or financial capital (for example, industrial capital) or the trade unions.
Forms of government intervention in other societies are seen by Marxists as reflecting varying degrees of class forces.
In many societies, for example, manufacturing capital is more influential than it is in Britain.
Furthermore, within nations, local governments and their intervention are seen as largely reflecting the demands made by class interests at the local level.
These often tend to include small, ‘petit bourgeois’ interests.
Nevertheless, these reflections of local interests and relationships are, particularly in Britain, being increasingly overseen and overruled by central government.
The emphasis on locality and variable demands on national government is one which we need to retain for our alternative view of the state.
But, for all its growing sensitivity to spatial variation, historical change and human agency, Marxist state theory itself remains unevenly developed when it comes to appreciating the links between state and people and the emotional significance of the state.
Marx himself did, however, leave some basic clues as to how we might achieve this kind of understanding of the state.
Marx argued that the state and its forms of intervention not only reflect the balance of class relations in capitalist society but atomise, and therefore diffuse (and defuse), imminent class conflict.
This is the result of the particular kind of social relationship or ‘state form’ created by states.
‘State form’ refers to the fact that states themselves constitute a special form of social relation.
People are treated by government-controlled apparatuses as individualised and equal citizens (with distinct legal, electoral and civic rights) rather than members of a class or some other kind of collective group.
One of Marx's key points was, therefore, the individualism inculcated by the state.
This theme has gone largely unrecognised by contemporary social theory, including urban and regional sociology.
Yet it is a key link in our new emphasis.
It means that any individual, including the least powerful, is an equal citizen.
Her or his rights before the law are, for example, deemed to be equal to those of a company director.
Quite apart from whether this is true in practice, contemporary Marxists have tended to overlook this insight.
Or if it is recognised, such individual rights are quickly dismissed as ‘bourgeois’: freedoms within an otherwise oppressive system of exploitation.
Marx's emphasis on how the individual is treated  by the state remains, however, an important one and we will return to it shortly.
Leaving this central issue to one side for the moment, we should add here that there are major critiques which can be made of Marxist theories, critiques on the theories' own terms.
The first concerns the continuing insistence that class and class-based processes are necessarily the principal mechanisms underlying uneven development and social change.
The questions are, first: What about civil society?
As suggested in Chapter 4, this may be increasingly significant in terms of people's consciousness and politics.
Secondly: What about kinds of social relation (especially those of gender and race) and their combination with class?
Any attempt to appreciate the political significance of uneven development must surely undertake the study of the complex interactions between different kinds of social relations in different localities.
Again, an adequate appreciation of people's understandings and political alignments must surely be rooted in the whole of their experience and not just that of the workplace.
Still more important from our viewpoint is how the state apparatus relates to its citizens.
It is extremely rare for Marxian analysis to explore this matter, but Marx's original insight that the state treats people as separate persons rather than as parts of larger social collectives, has actually been used and developed by one branch of Marxist state theory.
This approach emphasises the ‘state form’ .9 Like most Marxist analyses, this approach still envisages the state as ‘capitalist’: an apparatus caught up in and managing the social relations of capitalism.
It recognises, however, that the way in which this is achieved and experienced is precisely in the individualised form which Marx recognised.
To this extent, then, a ‘state form’ analysis does indeed bring welcome attention to people's experience of the state, especially those people who are particularly dependent on the resources represented by the state.
Presented below, for example, is a woman interviewed by the London Edinburgh Weekend Return Group, a group of authors working within this perspective and insisting on seeing the state as consumers and producers themselves see it.
The woman talking has raised a large family and needs state resources as her basic income.
The key point about her is that although she obviously needs the state and its resources, she does not need these in the oppressive, bureaucratic and regulatory forms in which they come.
Here she is assessing the likely outcome of a confrontation with her local council.
It doesn't get you anywhere.
You don't win.
They have the majority every time.
You can go down to the council and rant and rave, you still won t get anything.
If you go down and ask in a polite way, then you might get what you want.
(p. 13)
So, unsurprisingly, she ensures that she does nothing to cross the ‘important’ people on which she is dependent.
They are important to me these people.
I do have to depend on them.
I can t afford to take risks.
(p. 14)
Indeed, she believes that she is caught up in a bureaucratic cage, the different branches of the council being in league with local and national branches of other sections of the state apparatus.
Paranoia creeps in.
If you get into trouble with one, the other is likely to know.
That is what I think, anyway.
(p. 15)
This woman's understanding of local government is, incidentally, a useful commentary on the idea that local governments and state organisations are somehow especially responsive to people's everyday lives.
She sees the state, in its local manifestation at least, as a faceless, alien and still distant bureaucracy.
Indeed, regular contact with the state only reinforces this view.
Bureaucracy, corporatism and the nation
The above extracts, although used by Marxist authors, in fact also reflect a Weberian perspective on the state.
A Weberian approach emphasises the effects on people's life-chances of bureaucracy.
The emphasis, therefore, shifts away from the uneven development of class relations and towards elites within the state apparatus, seeing them as the key, relatively autonomous decision-makers.
Weber's approach to the state was quite distinct from that of the Marxist tradition, although the thrust of our argument will be that it can be usefully combined with this tradition.
Marx's followers insist on politics and state intervention being largely a product and reflection of underlying class relations.
They give little attention not only to how it is understood and experienced but also to the relations between bureaucracies and elected politicians.
Weberians, by contrast, give much attention to the state itself, arguing that it should be seen as a set of social processes relatively independent of class relations.
More specifically, Weber envisaged state bureaucrats as of key importance in creating this autonomy.
They have their own values and priorities, not the least of which is their self-preservation and acquisition of social status.
Their status and rewards are, like those of many other social groups, achieved through acquiring special forms of expertise.
Training and qualifications are therefore needed.
The managers argue that these are required in order to guarantee a good service.
Weberians argue, however, that expertise is also used to achieve ‘social closure’; the insistence on examined skills being means by which scarcity, and hence material rewards, are maintained.
Crucially, from Weber's perspective, the values and actions of state bureaucrats tend to override the policies of elected politicians.
Yet the claim of the bureaucrats is that they are working in a dispassionate general, even national, interest; working for the good of all society.
British television has mounted a highly successful comedy series called Yes Minister, the main theme of which has been an elected cabinet minister being constantly deflected from his preferred politics by senior permanent officials primarily concerned to protect their own positions.
Political strategies likely to affect the positions of the bureaucrats themselves are, therefore, systematically obfuscated and dismantled.
Yes Minister is, therefore, a popular version of one of Weber's main themes: state strategies, and variations in such strategies, being primarily the product of unelected officials working for faceless bureaucracies.
There are a number of ways in which we can link Weberian theory to our particular interests.
The first concerns the controllers, or managers, to which Weberians give such emphasis.
The 1970s saw some highly productive ‘urban’ work using a Weberian perspective, Pahl providing the main stimulus for this approach.
Detailed empirical work by, for example, Davies and Kramer and Young, focused on the ways in which planners and other public officials managed not only to frustrate the intentions of elected officials but, often in a highly paternalistic way, created strategies which simultaneously operated in their own interests while still deemed to be in the interests of the general public.
The work was paralleled by a similar focus on private sector ‘gatekeepers’: senior managers such as estate agents and landlords again being seen of critical importance in who gets what at the ‘urban’ level.
However, Pahl later changed his argument to suggest that a myopic focus on bureaucrats themselves was unjustified.
Public and private sector managers alike were caught up in wider social systems.
As such, they could not be considered as autonomous agents.
Rather than simply  imposing their own preferences on policies and resource levels, they have critical effects in terms of mediating wider social relations and processes.
To put this another way, managers work within larger societies.
This reconsideration of the original managerial thesis was eventually linked to an alternative and wider conceptualisation of the state, state officials and their relation to society.
It is at this point that this perspective relates to another of our central themes: that of nationalism and the national interest.
The alternative to managerialism was ‘corporatism’, a concept which had earlier found application in the study of fascism but which was now dusted off for use in what seemed like a new social era.
There are a number of different versions of this concept but essentially it argues that capitalist societies are tending towards a set of relationships between social groups and between these groups and the state.
Society is envisaged as composed of a series of ‘corporations’ such as trade unions and businesses; and, as regards politics and public strategy-making, these are represented by elites.
Mediating the differences between these groups and guiding them towards mutually agreed goals is the overriding notion of the national interest.
The central purpose is to hammer out long-term strategies for the nation as a whole.
Crucially, however, incorporation into the upper reaches of strategy-making is offered only to representatives of the respectable citizenry.
It entails responsibilities as well as privileges.
Trade union leaders, for example, are expected to regulate their members' demands and to desist from strategies which are not agreed with representatives of business.
Similarly, business has to enter into agreements.
These might include, for example, a commitment to certain levels of investment, wage levels or even working conditions.
A national, unifying interest thereby prevails; even if this results in diminishing the importance of parallel political decision-making in elected parliamentary assemblies.
So Weberian theory has slowly shifted its concerns away from bureaucrats to a related interest in the tendency for state officials to be operating in a corporatist manner: mediating between warring groups in the ‘national interest’.
As should have become clear, however, the main explanations within this shifting strand of thinking about politics and elites have been conducted primarily in the broad social and economic spheres: little attention has been given to the relations between states and people.
This is somewhat surprising given that Weberian sociology gives particular significance to the values, intentions and interpretations which people have of their lives and social relations.
The dominant theme in this perspective, one which we can pick up and develop with our particular perspective, is that of the state as a great power container, operating in a general or national interest but at the same time regulating people's everyday lives.
DAILY LIFE AND THE NATION STATE
We have so far discussed a number of themes in conventional political theory.
From Weber and early Marx comes the idea of the state's relationship to individuals.
From Weber comes the emphasis on a national or general interest, one represented by state managers and officials.
From later Marxists comes the idea that individuals' daily lives are caught up in quite distinct local forms of social relation.
We will now develop these themes and combine them in a systematic way to construct an improved understanding of the relationship between daily life and the nation state.
This will reflect the themes illustrated in Chapters 1 and 2 and will be illustrated with two studies of working class politics.
A good starting-point for developing an improved understanding of the state are Foucault's and Giddens's recent works.
Giddens's approach is indeed partly based on Foucault, but it also draws on Goffman whose studies of ‘total institutions’ we touched on in Chapter 1.
In Discipline and Punish Foucault argues that state power and administrative control took a new and distinctive form from the late eighteenth century onwards.
His book starts with highly explicit descriptions of horrific torture and physical violence, these being the principal means by which social order was maintained in the earlier era.
The new form of administrative control is, for Foucault, represented by the panopticon, a device designed in the late eighteenth century by the philosopher Jeremy Bentham.
Figure 5.1 shows a section through this device.
It is a circular building with a large central hall marked E and the prisoners or those under surveillance and regulation in the positions marked H. At the centre is an inspection lantern, a cylinder in which the inspector sits (Figure 5.2).
This is made of paper-thin material pierced by a number of small lenses.
The result is that the inspector (in Weberian terms, the manager) has total surveillance of the whole institution but without being seen.
Meanwhile the separated and isolated prisoners, having no ‘back regions’ in which to hide, reflect on their sins and eventually emerge as reformed characters.
Bentham suggested that the   device had a range of applications.
Besides factories it could be used as a device in which managers could survey workers, or teachers keep a close but invisible eye on their pupils.
Foucault makes a number of general points about the panopticon.
It involves the centralisation of power and its concentration in the hands of experts (such as prison governors, teachers, factory managers) with special knowledge.
This enabled them, for example, to classify ‘deviance’ and to separate different types of deviant into distinct forms of institutions or into different sections within institutions.
Such knowledge and classification represents subjugation of the rest of the population, and the regularisation and standardisation of moral careers.
Spectacular physical violence gives way to silent coercion.
Secondly, Foucault argues that the panopticon is much more than a building.
It symbolises the emergent way in which social relations are managed; the individualisation, classification and invisible control being the characteristic means by which power is established and maintained in contemporary societies.
This view of the state is developed by Giddens.
He sees surveillance as the ‘mobilising of administrative power’ with the storage and control of information the key way in which such mobilisation takes place.
He therefore gives extended treatment to the new forms of communications, transport and technology which have enabled ‘panopticism’ to be extended throughout nation states.
He also develops Foucault in suggesting that the classification of space (what he calls its ‘regionalisation’ and ‘sequestration’) is intimately bound up with these forms of surveillance and control.
Like Weber, Giddens argues that in older ‘class-divided’ societies (such as those of the Middle Ages), state power largely corresponded with cities themselves.
Now, he suggests, it is nation states, not cities, which are ‘the most prominent new power-containers’.
The sequestration of activities into distinct regions and zones is a key means by which control can be maintained and resources allocated.
Locales such as inner cities, suburbs or even regions can be monitored by the authorities as front or back regions.
But Giddens goes beyond Foucault in arguing that this sequestration, as well as enabling the administration of state power, is associated with profound forms of individual and social malaise.
These may in turn pose problems as regards the maintenance of social order.
At this point Giddens is touching on the deep-lying emotional instincts outlined in Chapters 1 and 2.
He argues that in contemporary society ‘routinisation of day-to-day social life is precarious, resting upon a relatively shallow psychological base’.
The separation and spatial spread of social life means that people do not regularly encounter the significant experiences of life: birth, sexuality, madness, illness, death and so on.
Clearly, being separated from these troubling experiences may well be a benefit, but Giddens is arguing that it also leaves the routines of everyday life relatively empty.
It means that individual and social life is lived at a superficial level, leading to ‘ontological insecurity’— the separation of the individual from her or his biological and psychological being.
It is at this point that the nation state begins to acquire a psychological as well as a purely administrative significance.
Giddens argues that:
The emptiness of the routines followed in large segments of modern social life engender a psychological basis for affiliation to symbols that can both promote solidarity and cause schism.
Among these symbols are those associated with nationalism.
As well as being, then, a means of administration and management of social relations, the state, and its symbols of home, land, family, nationhood and communal experience, are also seen as offering a sense of identity and security: especially to people who have little understanding and control over the processes affecting their everyday lives.
Meanwhile Giddens's work requires some comment.
He gives, perhaps as a result of a Weberian starting-point to much of his analysis, great attention to bureaucracy and the extent to which populations are very directly monitored and controlled by those with power.
This leads him to offer a somewhat partial view of Foucault's important work.
One of Foucault's most significant insights is that the controller at the centre of the panopticon does not actually need to be in the lantern for pacification of the surrounding inmates to take place.
Foucault is actually arguing that ‘control’ need not take place through the direct and constant surveillance of individuals by authorities.
Clearly, outright control does indeed take place, but on a day-to-day level social stability is secured largely through people feeling that they might be under scrutiny.
Foucault is therefore making the subtle and perceptive point that  contemporary societies are largely characterised by self-policing and introspective control of feelings rather than the explicit display and use of force and authority.
This implies that Giddens may be wrong to give such enormous emphasis to the state's directly coercive role.
An example of the application of Foucault to the ‘urban’ sphere is Dear and Wolch's research on what Giddens would no doubt call the ‘sequestrated region’of North American inner cities.
They trace the movement of dependents on the state from special enclosed institutions to the ‘community’ of the inner city.
The recipients of welfare concentrated in this highly segregated zone are no doubt subject to the direct surveillance of state officialdom.
Inner cities are, after all, back regions for middle class opinion.
But Dear and Wolch's main point is that the daily lives of those dependent on welfare are suffused in largely intangible and invisible ways by the institutions on which they are dependent.
Their lives, or more precisely their ‘moral careers’, are certainly regulated by bureaucracy and officialdom, and, eventually, by dominant social interests; but again, the word ‘surveillance’ overemphasises the degree of detailed, continuing and direct control which any state would find difficult to sustain.
TOWARDS A REVISED UNDERSTANDING: THE STATE AND THE INDIVIDUAL
We have argued for a revised theory of the relations between state and people: one reflecting the role of states in managing social relations and moral careers but one which recognises too that states, in representing a general or ‘national’ interest, have an important emotional significance.
In other words, we are linking the state to the biological and instinctive bases of individual and social life which we insisted earlier should form a part of contemporary urban sociology.
It would be easy to dismiss this significance were it not for the fact that general or national interests continue to be important and highly effective rallying cries for much of contemporary politics.
How can we develop this perspective?
A first stage is to re-emphasise the individualising and atomising role of states, these representing an important part of Weberian theory and Marx's early speculations on the state.
Recent years have seen a developing concern with individualism and the resulting difficulties surrounding working class political organisation.
Olson's early work laid particular emphasis on individual behaviour and motivation.
He suggested that people's interests are best served by pursuing personal gains.
A member of the working class is more likely to benefit through securing the benefits of collective organisation while doing the least possible to actually create such collectives.
In short, instrumentalism (the use of organisation to personal ends or the ends of close kin) is the best tactic for self-advancement.
Such an argument finds support in Goldthorpe et al.'s empirical study of affluent workers.
Their examination of Luton again found that the contemporary working class politics is essentially organised around the support and benefit of self and family.
Collective organisations (trade unions, local political parties and so forth) were basically used as means to this end.
Olson's original arguments have been further developed by Offe and Wisenthal.
They argue that an important distinction is to be made between the capacities of capital and labour in recognising and acting on their best interests.
While it is true that working class politics is highly individualistic and subject to the so-called free rider problem, there are many fewer problems for capital.
Whereas working class collective action always faces the difficulty of individualism, self-interest and fragmentation, the collective interests of capital are less ambiguous — simply to make profits.
As Savage puts it, ‘a hundred shares can be organised and directed more easily than a hundred workers’.
The individualism identified by Olson and others is, however, two-edged.
On the one hand, individuals (and working class individuals in particular) may have great difficulty in identifying and pursuing their collective self-interest.
This leaves them open to the very ‘panopticism’ identified by Foucault and Giddens.
On the other hand, as also identified by Giddens (and, before him, Freud) there are innate processes leading to a recognition by individuals of the common or national interests represented by the state.
Unfortunately for the Left, however, these are not necessarily collective working class organisations.
Rather, they are forms of politics and working class organisations which seem best to represent the interests of individuals and close kin.
To explore this alternative dimension to politics we must return to Freud who, with LeBon, developed his distinctive theory of politics and the state.
Freud, as suggested in Chapter 2, argued that the state and politics are transferred father figures: organisations and people on whom those with little power and authority can depend for safeguards while at the same time suffering imposed personal restrictions.
Similarly, nationalism with  its symbols of family, common blood and origins has profound overtones for the individual psyche.
‘Homeland’ again provides a strong sense of solidarity, collective enterprise, community, kinship and religious ties.
And, as Giddens and many earlier social theorists have suggested, time-space distantiation means that these senses of personal and collective identity are a decreasing feature of contemporary social life.
This further implies that nationalism and appeals to common blood and homeland are far from being ‘old fashioned’.
Rather, as people's lives become increasingly disconnected from emotional lives, and from the structures affecting them, they will find increased solace in institutions, individuals and themes associated with apparent, but displaced, notions of kin, blood relations and general or collective experience.
Such explanations of allegiance to the state and to charismatic patriarchal figures are in themselves too vague in this generalised form.
They are important in understanding the instincts lying behind people's relations to ethnic, racial and nationalist politics but we need to become much more specific about the social and historical circumstances in which these latent feelings are actually felt and expressed.
They need, in short, combining with the social or ‘political economy’ explanations as represented by the Marxian and Weberian traditions.
Instincts, the individual and the state: The case of the Third Reich
The best way, then, to deal with the complaint that psychological-cum-biological theories of the state are too vague is to attempt a combination between these theories and those we reviewed at the beginning of this chapter.
We must again try to understand not only the instinctive bases of people's understanding of politics and the state, but the way in which this is constructed by social relations, including the class relations to which Marxists give such prominence and the relations between governments and people emphasised by Weberians.
These connections can only really be understood by looking at concrete historical instances.
There are only a few studies with which we can illustrate this approach.
A small amount of work attempting to explain German fascism is an important example.
This includes Fromm's study of the industrial working class and the factors determining its support of fascism.
Most of his respondents were radically opposed to national socialism, but he established that a generally left-wing outlook amongst  his samples was being dissipated by underlying personality traits, in particular their susceptibility to follow father-like authoritarian leaders.
A better-known study from the same period is Reich's The Mass Psychology of Fascism, written in the early 1930s.
Essentially, Reich was attempting an amalgam of Freudian psychology and Marxism to explain the appeal of Hitler and the rise of fascism.
The deepest layer of human nature, he argued, was one in which ‘man is essentially an honest, industrious, co-operative, loving and, if motivated, a rationally hating animal’.
Reich argued, however, that over thousands of years these essentially good characteristics of humanity had been repressed.
Cultures, especially the patriarchal cultures instilled into children in the first four or five years of their lives, had now distorted an essentially benign human nature.
Art is one of the few means left of making contact with an essentially ‘good’ nature.
By contrast, fascism, Reich argued, appeals to a thoroughly perverted human nature.
[It is]the basic emotional attitude of the suppressed man of our authoritarian machine civilisation and its mechanistic-mystical conception of life.
It is the mechanistic-mystical character of modern man that produces fascist parties, and not vice-versa.
Fascism, he argued, made populist appeals to all sections of the community, including large numbers of workers.
Indeed, Reich's book was partly a response to the 1932 elections in which the Nazis made large gains amongst the working class.
He was also attempting to persuade the Communist Party that they must better understand the primordial needs of the masses: the demand for personal security and sexuality.
The working classes' basic humanity had, Reich argued, been distorted by bourgeois values and priorities.
But, more specifically still, he saw fascist mentality as ‘the mentality of the little man who is enslaved and craves authority and is at the same time rebellious.’
It is at this point that his analysis starts to become much more specific about the particular kind of capitalism with which he was dealing and the especially important group supporting fascism.
Who, in class terms, was ‘the little man’?
Hitler's Germany saw the resurgence of ‘big’ or ‘monopoly’capital, much of which supported the Fuhrer's war machine.
Indeed, Hitler's rise to power was based on a promise to fight on behalf of the powerless against ‘big business’.
The ‘little man’ in this particular instance was the little businessman; under constant threat from hyperinflation and threatened with the abyss of unemployment and destitution.
The ‘little’ businessman was, however, one of the principal supporters of fascism.
This was because, Reich argued, it was especially this individual and the family around him which espoused the grand values of nationhood, home and patriarchal authority.
In competition with other small businesses, the archetypal ‘little man’ had clawed his way to success through clinging to such beliefs.
He was a boss, not of a firm, but of his own family.
He was using the middle classes as a reference group; aspiring to what he believed to be their values of ‘honour’ and ‘duty’.
There was, therefore, a special mentality about the small businessman, one quite distinct from that of either the working class or the manager of a large organisation, and one which corresponded with the ideology of a master race.
Furthermore, this ‘little’ businessman even identified with the Fuhrer himself.
As Reich puts it:
The reactionary middle-class man perceives himself in the Fuhrer, in the authoritarian state.
On the basis of this identification he feels himself to be a defender of the ‘national heritage’ of the nation'.
The family unit, and especially the unit as headed by the ‘small businessman’ was therefore seen by Reich as of critical significance to the rise of fascism.
Adding to this was the fact, as they saw it, that potentially revolutionary working class families and heads of household were actually developing petit bourgeois values.
Nor only was it the ‘little man’ who was particularly prone to sexual repression.
More important still for Reich was the fact that his wife and children also suffered from his patriarchal authority.
The family and home was a miniature version of the nation state.
If the husband is the fuhrer of his family then his wife is the small-scale motherland, the guarantor of future generations.
Of course, these generations had, at all costs, to be kept racially clean through the exclusion of non-Aryan blood.
For Reich, therefore, the petit bourgeois partriarchal family lay at the heart of fascism.
The explanation was simultaneously social, economic and psychological.
The solution lay in the abolition of the patriarchal family.
As he put it:
Sexually awakened women, affirmed and recognised as such, would mean the complete collapse of the authoritarian ideology.
The ‘little man’ did not, of course, support German fascism without active encouragement of the Fascist Party.
Hitler's politics were deliberately constructed around the fears of the ‘little man’, their ‘little lives’ in ‘little villages’and the appeal of the nation as giving some sense to this  struggle.
Indeed, Hitler represented his own life as a prototypical moral career of the little man.
Here is Hitler's own account of his model moral career, one to be emulated by his audience.
I have come from the people.
In the course of fifteen years I have slowly worked my way up from the people, together with this Movement.
No-one has set me above this people.
I have grown from the people, I have remained in the people, and to the people I shall return.
As regards the calculated appeal to the frightened little man trying to make sense of his everyday struggle for life in his market town or small village, Hitler continually stressed the nation:
Now that we meet here, we are filled with the wonder of this gathering.
Not every one of you can see me and I do not see each of you.
But I feel you, and you feel me!
It is faith in our nation that has made us little people great, that has made us poor people rich, that has made us wavering, fearful, timid people brave and confident, that has made us erring wanderers clear-sighted and has brought us together!
So you have come this day from your little villages, your market towns, your cities, from mines and factories, or leaving the plough, to this city.
You come out of the little world of your daily struggle for life, and of your struggle for Germany and for our nation, to experience this feeling for once.
Now we are together, we are with him and he is with us, and now we are Germany!
We have been arguing here for a view of the state in which governments are managing not only class and social relations but also individuals.
These individuals may be frightened by and greatly distanced from the power and authority of the state, but in an important sense they also need the state; its appeal to a higher authority as well as its power and resources.
The responses by these members of the Frankfurt School of Sociology to Hitler's rise represent the kind of perspective we are looking for.
Reich's analysis is in many respects highly persuasive, even if some of his concepts are difficult to accept.
He made the connections between the social and instinctive bases of behaviour we have been demanding.
He is also dealing with our insistence on historically specific analysis.
On the other hand, Reich is not above criticism.
As a dedicated Marxist, he almost certainly makes too many unwarranted assumptions about the supposed ‘purity’ of basic human nature and its distortion by culture and civilisation.
It is arguable, too, that he was over-anxious to dismiss people's attempts to preserve the family as ‘ideology’, one distracting attention from the class basis of fascism.
As we discussed earlier and argue later, this ‘ideology’ has deep biological and emotional  reverberations and cannot be easily dismissed as generated by propaganda or clever oratory.
For all these criticisms, however, Reich's study is perhaps the best empirical example of how politics, and nationally-based politics in particular, is simultaneously the result not only of daily life (and people's attempts to construct an understanding of their particular experience) but also of deep-lying social sexual and psychic structures.
It shows, too, how some of the more conventional concepts of urban sociology link to our additional emphasis on human nature.
Fascism was the high-point of corporatism.
Our argument is that this type of politics has a strong basis in instincts and emotion as well as in political economy.
It is perhaps easy to construct such an understanding in the highly exceptional and extreme circumstances of the rise of fascism.
But how can we generalise the argument and extend it to more ‘normal’ circumstances?
The individual and the state: Developing the argument
It can be argued that Reich's work has much to tell us about contemporary politics.
In some ways, however, it seems quite difficult to extend his approach to more ‘normal’ politics and yet the persistence, and even growth, of nationalism and ethnicity as a basis for politics and social upheaval need some kind of explanation.
Here we need to restate and elaborate on our general proposition, this time with the aid of Van den Berghe's work.
One half of our argument is that states (and national states in particular) are indeed conducting the functions outlined by Marxist and Weberian commentators: those of managing the social relations of capitalism and regulating and classifying individual citizens and their activities or moral careers.
These are the social functions of contemporary states, even if this perspective overemphasises the oppressive nature of state apparatuses.
But authors such as Fromm and Reich are a good reminder of the second half of the argument: that states and leaders are also powerfully attractive to the individuals they are supposedly subjugating.
Not only are their resources in demand, but they make powerful appeals to instinct and emotion.
This latter is the common theme associated with the contemporary nationalist and ethnic movements.
The central drives are those to which we gave considerable prominence at the start of this book, and are those  associated with survival and identity, as well as with the preservation and expansion of family, kin and blood relations.
Furthermore, nationalism in all its many forms, is the continuing, and largely unconscious, search for personal identity in societies where relations of blood and kin are being lost.
This loss is a result of what we have earlier seen Giddens calling ‘time-space distantiation’: the increasing spread of social life over space and time.
Ethnic groups have now spread well away from original kin relations.
But this does not stop people instinctively protecting themselves and kin substitutes.
A way of developing this view is with the work of Van den Berghe.
He argues that people in contemporary societies are increasingly obliged to depend on ‘markers of ethnicity’ as a means of identifying who they are and where they belong.
These markers are outward signs portraying whether or not individuals and collections of people belong to the same ethnic group.
In contemporary societies these are necessarily of a cultural or social nature; nationality and territory being crude and highly approximate signifiers of shared ancestry.
One such marker (and one to which Van den Berghe gives little attention) is religion.
Contemporary political struggles organised on religious lines clearly need social and economic explanations.
On the other hand, the enormous power of charismatic patriarchal leaders combined with the assertion of common ancestry or blood are quite explicit parts of such politics.
Again, an understanding of biologically and psychologically based emotions helps us understand such social movements, many of which seem irrational and beyond explanation.
‘Ethnic markers’ are, then, a basic mechanism underlying the politics of nationalism, ethnicity and religion.
Yet crucial to Van den Berghe's work, and indeed central to our argument, is that these instinctive drives involved in establishing personal and social identity are only latent.
They will take many different forms and indeed they may not be self-evident in the ‘real’ concrete world at all.
They are, in effect, triggered off by very specific and local forms of social relationship and the threats they pose to everyday life.
As we have seen, in the Third Reich it was the specific circumstances of the rise of monopoly capital, the corporatist state organised as protecting national purity, hyperinflation, the rapid rise in unemployment and perceived threats to the ‘little man’.
In the various USSR states seeking autonomy, in Northern Ireland or in Palestine the contingent circumstances are again wholly unique.
This despite the fact  that the eventual outcomes, nationalism and defence of territory, are quite similar.
Reich's identification of the family with the German fatherland is, therefore, a special case of a more general phenomenon.
A particular set of social alliances and historical circumstances led to this specific version of nationalism.
The mechanisms underlying nationalism here and elsewhere are therefore those identified by the geneticists and ethologists reviewed earlier: the instincts for expansion and protection of kin.
The particular form of nationalism identified by Reich is also quite general: one led by a charismatic leader figure, the figure identified by Freud as the lost father or mother.
Given this conceptual framework, it is surely misleading to dub nationalism as simply ‘ideological’.
Still less is it a set of con-tricks to which deluded individuals and households continually fall prey.
Nationalism is linked to deep-rooted human instincts and cannot be easily ascribed to clever politicians.
The causal powers involved are real enough.
They are just as real as the class relations to which Marxists give such prominence or to the state bureaucracies which Weberians emphasise.
The point can now be clarified by turning to another illustration, one based on a contemporary debate concerning the changing nature of British politics.
Instincts, the individual and the state: The case of contemporary British politics.
The debate began with the Marxist commentator, Stuart Hall, attempting to explain the emergence and success of Thatcherism.
The difficult problem for him is why those people (especially the working class) who seem to be suffering most from a particular political regime actually support it.
Hall used the concept of ‘authoritarian populism’ as a means of explaining this apparent masochism.
Authoritarian populism refers to the ways in which successive Thatcher governments managed to harness and actively use a wide range of popular discontents to form a regime which relied considerably on heavy-handed, Victorian morality and even increased coercion.
Hall uses the work of the 1920s' Italian Marxist, Gramsci, to suggest that while new forms of politics are related to economic change and crisis, they cannot simply be ‘read off’ from such  developments.
Political strategy is considered to have a dynamism of its own, one not determined by economic change.
‘Authoritarian populism’ is seen by Hall as the latest stage in a long historical development of postwar British politics.
Corporatism as a means of intervention has, at the time of writing, largely broken down.
The alliances are primarily between central government and big capital.
In any event, the working class feels thoroughly uninvolved in this type of ‘national interest’ strategy.
The breakdown of corporatism, however, left a space for the introduction of New Right strategies.
This entailed dropping direct and centrist management and harnessing negative feelings for the state: anti-bureaucracy, anti-collectivism and anti-'creeping socialism'.
New Right philosophies, as applied in Britain, also exploited rising popular anxieties about crime and delinquency.
This has led, Hall argues, to an increasing ‘moral authoritarianism’, one involving, for example, the strengthening of the police force, a re-emphasis on family life as a means of controlling juvenile delinquency, increased calls for capital punishment, and a general return to old or ‘Victorian’ values.
The explanation is, therefore, partly economic: successive governments having consistently failed to create a national consensus around the restoration of a productive national economy.
Hall gives special significance, though, to ‘popular morality’ and the ways in which ‘new kinds of commonsense’have been established and imposed in the recent period.
Hall uses the Marxist philosopher Althusser and the social psychology of Laclau to argue that politics is not just about individuals and social groups pursuing their immediate material interests; it is also about how they imagine and identify themselves in relation to the wider social world.
Similarly, governments address people in these imagined' capacities.
They are addressed as individuals and families and, furthermore, as frightened individuals and families, afraid of being crushed by, say, a socialist bureaucracy or large masses of immigrants.
According to Hall, therefore, authoritarian populism respecifies people's material interests.
Thatcherism's long-term aim was the establishment of the ‘correct’ basic values.
These are the values of a supposedly ‘lost’ British culture; one in slumber but waiting to be awakened.
Mrs Thatcher herself is seen as the guardian of these traditional wisdoms.
She encapsulates the new commonsense: the housewife managing the nation in a way familiar to the ordinary household (not spending more than it is earning) and bringing home to her striking trade unionised husband the ‘harsh realities and consequences of living without a weekly wage’.
Hall's ideas led, however, to a substantial critique by Jessop et al.
They argued against what they termed Hall's ‘ideologism’, suggesting that it is too elastic, descriptive and lacking in explanatory content.
In his attempt to establish that there is a form of discourse associated with politics which is relatively separate from economic change, Hall is seen as neglecting the ‘structural underpinnings of Thatcherism’.
These are not just the shifting form of the economy and the rise of financial capital at the expense of productive capital.
They are also the continuing decline of parliamentary politics and political control increasingly orchestrated by a small clique within the Cabinet.
Britain, according to Jessop et al., is moving towards a presidential system of government.
The concept of authoritarian population implies, for Jessop et al., a monolithic, relatively stable and widely supported form of government.
They argue, however, that none of these assumptions is justified.
Nevertheless, the government is ‘populist’ and does indeed rely on the idea of a common national project.
It is, however, a project endorsed by good citizens' and ‘hard workers’ and one threatened by a subordinated Second Nation.
The latter includes, for example, trade unionists who go on strike or local authorities (such as the abolished Greater London Council) who do not aspire to this kind of populism.
So ‘ideology’ is important for Jessop et al., but it is of a different form from that suggested by Hall.
Their central point, though, is that the authoritarianism which Hall identifies stems almost wholly from attempts to manage a political and economic system in crisis.
It seems at first difficult to proceed with this debate.
On the one hand, Jessop et al.are clearly right to emphasise that new forms of politics and people's support of these politics must be in some way connected to changing social structures and crises within capitalist society.
It is precisely such crises which lead to ‘escape attempts’ in the form of the ‘national interest’or placing of faith in charismatic, father or mother figure leaders.
On the other hand, this still leaves us searching for explanations as to why authoritarian and highly nationalist strategies should receive such widespread and systematic support.
Hall does, indeed, seem to he touching on some very important issues with his insistence on a relatively separate sphere of discourse and communication.
The problem is, however, that his Marxist conceptual framework leaves him describing this sphere as ‘ideology’ or ‘hegemony’.
It is left unexplained and, furthermore, Jessop et al.cannot help him out because they too are caught in the same conceptual framework.
For them, too, it is simply ideology and false consciousness.
The clearest way forward is to break out of the restrictive conceptual framework within which both Hall and Jessop et al.are trapped while still using their insights regarding the economic or social bases of Thatcherism.
The ‘authoritarian populism’ of the 1980s, the corporatism of the 1960s and 1970s or presumably of some other form of nationalism in the 1990s are simultaneously a product of both capitalist social relations and the instinctive support which people, especially those least certain of their and their family's future, give to parliaments and their leaders.
Again, therefore, we are looking for explanations which combine Marx with the insights of writers such as LeBon and Freud.
As regards the latter, Rose has recently adopted a Freudian interpretation of the repeated re-election of Margaret Thatcher, one which seems in line with the framework we are adopting.
Rhetorically, she asks:
What if Thatcher was re-elected not despite the repugnance that many feel of her image, but also in some sense because of it?
What if that forceful identity for which she is so severely castigated somewhere also operates as a kind of pull?
CONCLUSION: LEARNING FROM THE NEW RIGHT
This chapter, like those before, attempts a fusion of conventional sociological approaches to urban and regional studies with approaches emphasising the emotional and biological bases of social life.
We apply such a combination here to an issue which has been of central interest to urban sociology: the state, its concentration of power, and its relation to people's daily lives.
The chapter is another lesson in the value of exploring perspectivcs which may at first seem wholly incompatible.
The psychological theories of political leaders and the state reviewed here have strong echoes in New Right thinking.
The latter also emphasise the dependency relations which state intervention forces on people.
The alternative, they argue, is to let the great mass of people engage in market processes, freeing themselves from such dependency.
State welfare would be used towards this end, providing people with additional disposable income.
When interpreted by political leaders and government officials in actual societies, however, the philosophies of the New Right become used as excuses for decreasing levels of welfare altogether.
In this way the original insights of New Right thinking have acquired for themselves a bad name.
But if our account of the role of contemporary states is correct, it suggests that the original New Right philosophies on the importance of the state to individuals and families may still have much to offer.
Perhaps they are at least‘Half Right’.