

Link June 1993
WE'RE WINNING!
Now we must keep on course
I should first like to congratulate all those who work in  and  on achieving second Queen's Awards for Export.
These awards are won not just by those responsible for export sales — although their contribution is very important — but by every employee in the business.
It is equally important that the products should be consistently up to top standard, correctly packed and delivered on time.
Every member of the team has a vital role to play in ensuring that this happens.
Well done everyone!
Secondly, I should like to thank you all for helping to deliver a most welcome profits increase in 1992.
This helped us to maintain the  dividend at 9p per share, rather than having to reduce it.
Had we reduced the dividend, our share price would have fallen sharply but, as I write a few days after the  Annual General Meeting, the share price is a robust 180p — 26 times our earnings per share.
It is very important that we should raise our earnings per share in the current year to a level above our total dividend of 9p.
Although trading throughout the Group is improving, we are paying a lot more bank interest this year as we borrowed £67 million to buy .
We shall have to go pretty hard for the rest of the year to cover this interest and generate greater earnings per share.
We also need to reduce our borrowings so that in the future we shall have the financial flexibility to make further acquisitions or fund major capital projects.
To this end we have just agreed to sell the Great Tower Street office to an overseas investor for £18.4 million and we shall remain in place as the head tenant.
We shall also be receiving £11 million from  as their contribution towards putting their organic chemicals business into a joint venture with .
These are two steps in the right direction, but with total borrowings of about £300 million there is more to be done.
We must therefore keep tight control on stocks of both raw materials and finished products and ensure that our customers pay us on time.
The  Board has just made a visit to the North West Region of .
We were shown round the mills at Newcastle-under-Lyme and Preston, both of which I had seen before.
The mills were in very good order and showed every sign of being run by teams of people intent upon maintaining high standards of quality, cleanliness and service.
The floral display at Newcastle provided a delightful finishing touch.
We were also given presentations outlining progress to date since the merger and plans for the future.
I was greatly impressed by the high level of commitment to the achievement of success by everyone that I met.
It is clear that over the past year everyone in  has worked extremely hard and for long hours.
They have had to overcome many difficulties; not least in trying to marry-up disparate computer systems.
Sadly, mills have been closed and people have lost their jobs, but I believe that these necessary changes have been handled with sympathy and understanding.
I am sure that levels of commitment and determination are just as high in the other three Regions of .
This makes me confident that we are going to be the winners in the animal feed market.
has made an excellent start to the year and I shall have more to say about them next time as I plan to visit Faverolles in August to see the additional breakfast cereal production capacity which will be coming on stream this autumn.
Going Down!
ABSEILING 130ft from  maltings at Bury St Edmunds is not everyone's ideal Saturday afternoon pastime but it suited our daring duo  from the maltings, and  from  Export.
The pair joined 18 other members of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force Regiment from RAF Honington in Suffolk, to achieve a total descent of 14,400ft — the approximate equivalent in height to the Matterhorn mountain in the Alps.
Money raised from the venture will go towards a summer holiday for under-privileged children from the town.
On the road to total quality
BY the time you read this article we shall have completed the first training workshop on T.Q.M. designed for directors and a number of senior managers.
We will continue with this training throughout the whole of the Company until every employee has a basic understanding of what we are trying to achieve and their individual roles.
This is, therefore, the start.
What follows thereafter is building up the knowledge and experience of all those things that will enable us to identify, plan and implement improvements to our business.
A recent survey of major North American companies who have practised T.Q.M. for more than 10 years, listed the following as the most important support features in the implementation of T.Q.M. — Training, Management behaviour, Communication, Measurement and information.
I have often heard it said that T.Q.M. is common sense.
Certainly, the principles are, but the application is far from easy, largely because leadership and cultural issues play such a vital role in the T.Q.M. implementation process.
The key challenges are:
Behavioural not technical
Changing leadership style
Changing the culture and values of the organisation
Sticking with it for the long haul, typically 5–7 years.
The time it takes to fully implement T.Q.M. and the amount of work involved may be something that most of us have yet to come to terms with.
How can we possibly sustain the change process for seven years?
It's very tempting to say ‘Let's do it in easy stages.
Let's not run before we can walk’.
It is not quite as easy as that.
How do you change culture, behaviour and leadership style in easy stages?
Clearly you cannot.
It has to be done all at once even if some need a little encouragement!
What can be adopted at a slower pace is the implementation of T.Q.M. practices, and the tools and techniques, but the experience of those in the USA is that the dire need for change brought about the most successful results.
One thing is absolutely certain and that is nearly all the US companies that set out down the T.Q.M. route 10 years ago are still convinced they took the right decision.
They list their corporate successes in order of importance as:
1.
Factors leading to customers' satisfaction — better products and services.
2.
Customers' satisfaction — fewer customer complaints and loss of business.
3.
Process improvements.
4.
Employee satisfaction.
5.
Improved financial performance.
All the 90 companies reporting listed a very high success rate (75%–90%) in all five areas.
Teamwork boosts profits
has seen impressive growth over the last two years — turnover up 40 per cent, gross margin up 50 per cent , profit up 30 per cent .
These increases continue with gross margin expected to be up by 14 per cent by the end of this year and profit increased by a further 23 per cent.
Simple numbers, however, do not tell the whole story.
has changed dramatically over the last two years.
The innovative flair and strong relationship with our customers is still there, but it is now supported by improved professionalism in Production, Purchasing, Logistics and Distribution.
A concerted effort by all departments has seen a considerable reduction in wastage, dramatic improvement in production efficiency and better logistics and distribution.
These things have been achieved by teams of people from different departments working closely together day in, day our.
The improvements have come not in a dramatic way but week by week over a number of months.
The impact for Telford is seen not only in profit growth but also greater job enrichment for its employees.
It is timely that we have concentrated on improving our performance because our market place is becoming more competitive.
As the major retailers adjust their strategies to the growth of discounters like  their emphasis is very much on cost control.
Suppliers margins have therefore come under pressure but  has positioned itself to face up to this ongoing challenge.
new puffed wheat plant
We are not only looking to cost control to help us.
Recent investment in new equipment like the Puffing Plant and development of our  /brands will play a big part in  's future.
So will our improved I.T.
systems.
These are already helping us to give a better service to our customers and as the systems develop they will allow us to have a more pro-active role in service.
In an earlier article for Link I said that  is a fun place to work.
Although I am questioned on this in moments of crisis, I firmly believe it to be true.
The people and the challenging environment makes  a fun place to work.
Waiting for the upturn in scotch whisky sales
MALT for distilling whisky will be about 20 per cent of  's total sales in 1993.
This is some way short of percentages in recent years like 1990 for example, when the amount totalled 30 per cent of sales.
To find the reason for the decline we have to look at two areas — sales/consumption and production.
Scotch whisky is sold worldwide and is the UK's largest export earner.
In 1992 total exports were valued at £1,991 million.
Major markets are the USA (15%), France (10%), Spain and Japan (7%) and Germany and Italy (3%).
The UK is the second largest market where we consume 14 per cent of total production — 38.26 million litres of pure alcohol.
But our home market along with the USA are both in decline.
The reasons are numerous — the recession, people's awareness of drink/driving and perhaps a perception that in some way white spirits are healthier!
It is often said that as one market slows down another opens up and all is not doom and gloom.
India could well be a future saviour.
At present its imports are extremely limited, diplomats and tourists consuming some 150,000 cases a year, but this is changing and the market potential is for 35,000,000 cases, similar to the UK.
Long term there is also considerable potential in China and the Far East.
The problem facing  and other maltsters is that whisky production is cyclical and we have to forecast and adjust for trends in consumption many years ahead.
The delay between the actual distilling and the sale of the whisky makes stock control a nightmare.
How do you forecast the volume and quantity of whisky to be produced now compared to the quantity needed in three to 25 years time?
Inevitably, forecasters err on the side of optimism because it is always possible to keep whisky which remains unsold, but impossible to sell stock which was not produced in the first place.
However, this optimism can lead to stock build up or whisky lochs.
Warning bells of our recent downturn began to ring quietly in 1989, louder in 1990, and in our case, resulted in the closure of Kirkcaldy Maltings in 1992.
As maltsters we must not only be aware of our sales but of the customers themselves — here in Scotland we are waiting for the upturn.
You can help —drink more whisky !
Exports show exceptional growth
THE export business at  has seen dramatic development over the last 15 years.
In 1978 the company was mainly an animal foodstuffs business — 84 per cent pig, fish and poultry, and 16 per cent pet foods for UK and export markets.
A strategic decision was taken in the early 80s that the best way forward for the company was to concentrate on dry and semi-moist pet food markets.
To this end the fish food business, which was mainly trout food was sold to the Swedish Company  in 1982 and the farm feed business to  's of Burston in 1984.
No manufacturing assets were sold within the farm feed business as they were to provide the storage, grinding and blending capacity for the manufacture of pet foods.
In 1985, the first full year solely producing pet foods, company turnover was almost £6 million, of which £1,400,000 was exports, ie about 25 per cent of the total.
It is interesting to note that a substantial part of the export sales in 1985 were to companies with whom we no longer deal as they have since merged and changed.
's pet foods selling Euro-wide
The company grew very quickly and in 1987 exports reached £7.8 million, more than 50 per cent of the total turnover and this was the year we won our first Queen's Award for Export Achievement.
The main reason for this exceptional growth was the supply of Rufus Dog Food to  in Germany achieving sales of over £3.5 million in its first year.
Since 1989 we have continued to gain major private label customers, eg  , in France.
Apart from private label products we continue to develop branded sales, mainly Omega in foreign markets.
We have always been successful with branded sales in Norway and success is now being achieved in Spain and Belgium.
Small markets are being opened up — Omega branded products can be bought in 24 countries including Iceland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
We have just received our first order from the Ukraine as a result of a contact made at the Expozoo exhibition in Paris.
With predicted export sales of more than £21 million in 1993 it is 15 years of exceptional growth and an export success of which we can all be proud.
Mill closures
has announced that its animal feed mills at Beverley and Aylsham are to close.
Beverley will be closed in October this year and Aylsham by the end of January 1994.
The news comes three months after the announcement that Roche mill in Cornwall is to close by the end of June.
The decision follows a review of production and distribution of products in all three regions.
Production will be transferred to Selby, Wymondham and Exeter respectively.
I.O.B. visit to Wallingford
NEARLY 50 members of the London section of the Institute of Brewing visited Wallingford maltings in March and praised the very high standards at the site.
Guests saw how the plant has been upgraded over recent years and capacity increased from 45,000 to 70,000 tonnes.
The comprehensive tour included barley purchase, intake, laboratory, steeping, germination, kilns and malt dispatch.
Retirements
Changing faces
Location in bloom
REMEMBER to take pictures of the flower displays at your location this summer for a change of winning  1993 Location in Bloom competition.
You can send them to the Link editor as soon as you like, but the final date of entry is October 30 .
A prize is also on offer for the best pensioner's garden — so get snapping!
Mango to teddy bears — new innovations — from 
has launched two new muesli products under the  's banner.
Yoghurt Muesli is a unique product with a crisp bite aimed at the many consumers who eat yoghurt with muesli.
The second variety, Caribbean Muesli offers an unusual mix which includes papaya and mango.
's sales and marketing director  said, ‘The new mueslis have been greeted with enthusiasm in initial trials with trade customers.
‘They are innovative products at the forefront of market trends, not replicas of brand leading lines.
We are planning to launch other exciting new products later in the year’.
Children's favourite
The company is also targeting the growing market for children's cereals with a series of activities for  's Golden Bites, a sugar puff style product.
These include the development of Harry the Bear, a cartoon character, in stories on the back of the pack.
A proof of purchase promotion planned later in the year will offer a teddy bear toy.
‘Children's products now account for around 22 per cent of total volume in this market’, said .
‘We are intending to expand our share both under the Harrison's brand and through developing our own label business’.
New calf range with strawberry sweetener
A NEW Earlycare calf feed range was launched on June 1 to provide farmers with a choice of feeds for calves up to 12 weeks of age.
The new range includes three calf milk replacers — Gold Top, Super Cream and Hi-Fat, plus three dry feeds — Calf Quicklettes, Calf Starter Pellets and Coarse Calf Starter.
, ‘Other Cattle’ market manager, has just completed a national roadshow around all the  sales teams to brief them on the new range.
Objectives
When putting together the range and support materials  said, ‘Our objective was to produce a range which is simple and exciting to sell, attractive for the merchant to stock and easy for the farmer to use.
I believe the Earlycare range achieves all of this.’
The products and recommended feeding systems are based on experience over many years in calf rearing at  development farm at Barhill, Cheshire and on customer farms.
There are several new initiatives to promote including: a new flavour/sweetener complex which is added to the milk powders and dry pelleted feeds to encourage early acceptance, giving the milk powders a strawberry aroma; a novel milk shaker for on-farm mixing demonstrations; a half-kilogram weaning scoop; and a unique ‘Earlycare 6 Pack’ containing all the farmer needs to wean six calves from four days of age to weaning in a convenient one tonne pack.
HELPING BARN OWLS BREED IN THE SW
Conservation officer for the Hawk and Owl Trust,, left, helps Somerset farmer  site one of  barn owl boxes.
at Wells, Somerset, has won praise from conservationists for a special promotion which is helping barn owls re-establish a foothold across the south west.
Two years ago the company launched a special offer giving away barn owl breeding boxes with orders to farmers who could offer a suitable site.
They expected a few dozen requests, but boxes were eventually sited at 100 farms and two years on experts are thrilled with the results.
During last summer a pair of barn owls bred at a farm in Avon, using a  box, and produced eight young, the highest ever recorded in the wild.
Although the Somerset levels is one of the strongholds of the country's 3,000 barn owls, the pair were believed to be the first to breed in Avon for six years.
The success of the promotion has led to requests for information flooding in from all over Europe and the US.
ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS
The Grain Terminal celebrates its 10 year anniversary
CAN it really be 10 years ago that the first ship —M.V. Arriaga — was loaded with 2,600 tonnes of barley by .
Yes.
It's a fact.
And one which was recorded by Link editor,, in July 1983, just after the shiploader and dockside intake had been commissioned.
Since that time the Grain Terminal has grown beyond all expectations and is now the largest cargo handler of cereals and malt in East Anglia.
During the decade its combined imports and exports have totally five million tonnes, involving the loading and discharging of some 2,000 ships from the Cliff Quay site at Ipswich.
Beginnings
and the rest of the team commissioned the terminal, and export operations began in March 19483, followed by a bulk import facility during 19485.
The bulk import business has grown from 45,000 tonnes in 1989 to 243,000 tonnes in 1992 with animal feed, milling wheat and malting barley being the main commodities.
To mark the 10-year anniversary, staff and associates were invited to a buffet lunch aboard  's historic sailing barge Ena , where , chief executive of the Ipswich Port Authority, presented Grain Terminal chairman, with a watercolour painting to commemorate the occasion.
Expressing thanks for the gift  said, ‘Our success is due to the close co-operation between so many people — shipping agents, hauliers, the Port Authority, to name just a few, with whom we have formed great friendships and partnerships over the years.
‘Nobody can predict what will happen over the next decade, particularly with all the agricultural changes brought about by the EC, but East Anglia can grow some of the best and cheapest grain in Europe and we are well placed to benefit from that’.
general manager, added, ‘I would like to thank every member of staff at the Grain Terminal for their support and co-operation over the years.
Thanks to their efforts we can look forward to achieving at least another five million tonnes over the next decade’.
Staff take time to relax on deck after their celebration lunch
The Grain Terminal Board of Directors with chairman  at the helm.
Retired GM , right, left, and  join in the dockside celebrations.
Office manager  chats about old times with .
FOCUS ON  SE REGIONAL CENTRE AT BURSTON
Making the most of the high ground
AT THE turn of the last century there was no more than an old windmill on the Burston site.
was its third owner — purchasing the mill and mill house for £200.
In those days a mill was sold on the basis of good wind and being near the top of a hill.
The Burston mill had just that.
WHEN  bought Burston windmill he could never have envisaged all the changes which would take place — but he always chuckled when he looked at the map — geographically he had bought the high ground.
Now, as Britain's No 1 feed company — it's up to us to maximise our geographical and premier status in the years ahead.
Sadly, the mill and house were destroyed by fire in 1933, but from these ashes and the insurance money a modern mill was built incorporating the first Californian press imported into the country.
The mill progressed well and became one of the largest in Britain before the war.
But fire struck again and the mill was not re-built until 1946.
It was actually  who helped us get off the ground again by giving us credit on Kositos (flaked maize).
This continued until Bob Prentice tactfully suggested that we had been given enough help!
1950
and  took over the mill and rationalised the business during the 50s and from then on we only sold  branded products and compound feeds.
The business grew steadily and by the time I joined in 1962 we were manufacturing and selling about 20,000 tonnes yearly.
Both raw materials and finished products were all in bags — we unloaded the raw materials up until midnight then re-loaded the lorries from midnight onwards for the drivers to deliver the next day.
The mill purchased by  from  was built during 1973 and at the time of the take-over was producing around 70,000 tonnes a year.
With the addition of our new process area we now have a plant which will see us well into the next decade.
Not many industrial sites can say that they have serviced the same industry for over 100 years.
Long may it continue to prosper and be recognised as a successful, hard working and happy mill — and one with which our customers enjoy dealing.
To the next 100 years…
Looking forward to a bright future in the Norfolk countryside
THE name of Burston has only recently become associated with the Company, but is now a major centre for the South East Region.
The mill entered the  in February 1991, upon the acquisition of , following which, plans to substantially extend the site and relocate the office from Ipswich were developed.
Before any work commenced however, the region's administrations were transferred to Burston in January, 1992, which culminated in a new office being completed in July that year.
The commissioning of the new mill began in September, 1992.
From this history, it can therefore be seen that the scope, size and shape of the Burston site has altered considerably in that time as a result of the £4 million that has been spent over that period.
SE Regional centre at Burston
Burston's village sign — taking the form of a maypole surmounted by a wheatsheaf — a symbol of the village's association with the land and milling.
We have created a considerable number of new jobs in south Norfolk; regrettably, some of these were at the expense of people affected by the closure of the Ipswich site, but nevertheless, such opportunities in a rural environment have been viewed very positively by the local community.
The working conditions at Burston are almost luxurious!
With air conditioned offices and a very pleasant aspect across open fields.
In addition, we have our own Pavilion and sports field which is used by several local clubs for hockey and cricket matches.
It is hoped that we will shortly be starting our own Social Club which will no doubt make full use of them too.
To summarise therefore, a big change, but a happy one, and a bright future in the Norfolk countryside.
Regional director  right, and regional operations manager  in Burston's luxurious new offices.
came from  and has 31 years experience of quality and operations from various posts in the company.
Improving quality and service
In line with commitment to quality, Burston is in the early stages of BS5750 registration which has also involved looking closely at the way we operate and how services to customers throughout the region can be improved.
The major redevelopment of the site is nearing completion and will benefit customers and employees alike in terms of product quality, service and working environment.
We are currently reviewing distribution and from the summer onwards cattle feed for the whole of East Anglia will be supplied from Bury St Edmunds.
This will permit Burston to concentrate on production of feed for monogastric livestock, pig and poultry.
Improved quality and service is expected from the switch round.
Quality, however, begins with every individual employee.
Our attitudes reflect the way the company operates as a whole and those who have regular and request contact with customers, lorry drivers for example, are special ambassadors for the company.
It has been a traumatic time for everyone at Burston during the past year or so and a great deal has been achieved over a very short time.
There is still much to be done but the more we ‘get it right first time’ the more confidence our customers will have to remain with us for the long term future.
The new look at Burston
THERE hasn't been a dull moment at Burston during the last eight months.
The mill has been completely redesigned; new offices have been built to accommodate regional staff, and almost every corner of the site has been affected in some way or another.
A large chunk of the £4 million investment went on improvements in the mill to increase production capacity — operations manager  gives us the details.
The mill has been re-designed to increase production to 48 tonnes per hour with an overall blending capacity of four tonnes every five minutes.
We have installed new grinders, two mixing lines (one, four tonne and one, two tonne) and four new production lines — two double pelleting, a single pelleting, and a single expander press line, to achieve the higher temperatures needed for broiler feed.
Bulk outloading has also been extended to include 32, 12 tonne outloading bins complete with four new driver operated weighbridges.
The heart of the system is a highly sophisticated computer system which, when fully commissioned, will virtually run the milling operation.
Intake, grinding, mixing, blending, cubing and routing functions will all operate automatically to pre-programmed formulations.
Later this year a third intake will be built and linked in to the system which will automatically transfer raw materials to the mill.
This facility, coupled with a new one way system for traffic around the site, will improve our service to customers who regularly come to the mill with raw materials and to collect animal feed.
The project has run to schedule throughout and we have maintained volumes, thanks to the co-operation of everyone in the mill who have accepted enormous changes in working practices and got to grips with the new system quickly and competently — its ultimate success will be a tribute to them all.
Special thanks
Special thanks from Link to office services manager, for her considerable help with this Focus.
Although she is not pictured, will be known to many throughout the Group from her previous job at Ipswich working for  and subsequent move to the region centre.
Burston's luxurious offices, referred to in  article, are a tribute to  who arranged all the internal services, furnishings and communication systems.
ESSENTIAL VITAMINS…
Shift operator  adds just the right amount of vitamins to the mix.
MEET THE NIGHT OWLS…
Introducing Burston's permanent nightshift operators,(l to r), back, and (front).
SOMETHING PRESSING…
Maintenance engineers  right and  check over some of the process plant on the press floor.
WRAPPING AGAIN…
When  joined  in 1975 all products were packed and loaded manually.
Today 90% is dispatched by bulk and the remainder is bagged automatically on a fully automated packing line complete with pelletiser which  is pictured operating.
TOP QUALITY…
Only the highest quality product wins the approval of quality controller  pictured with assistant  (soon to become  on her marriage to  fiancé ).
THE FRONT LINE
Just some of Burston's 24 drivers who represent the company across the region.
Left to right, and 
From left, standing,(33 years at Burston makes  the longest serving driver);(newest recruit); ex Eagle Mill;(not actually a driver at all).
After 30 years in the mill, retired four years ago but still works part-time at the mill; and last in line is  who began his career with , completed 28 years at Eagle Mill and is now at Burston.
That's it except  top left, and  top right.
KEEP IT ROLLING…
Burston produces over 1000 tonnes of sow rolls every month and stacking bins of the finished product is just one of the jobs  has handled during more than 20 years at the site.
IN THE BAG…left, and  pause for their photo to be taken in the Warehouse.
MONITORING…
Maintenance supervisor  checks the dust monitoring equipment in the mill.
REGIONAL FINANCE TEAM…
Finance manager  and his accounts/administration staff make sure the numbers tally at Burston and across the region.
seated, with (l to r)
There can't be many Link readers who do not recognise operations manager  right, and mill manager  centre, who have completed over 50 years service between them!
Both men were last at Eagle Mill although they have worked in many areas of the company over the years.
The new mill is their baby and they're looking forward to seeing it grow.
The third member of the team is  production supervisor, who previously worked at  for 34 years.
CLIMBING…
East Anglia is one of the biggest pig producing areas in the country, particularly for outdoor pigs, and more than 50 per cent are growing lean and strong thanks to compound feed from Burston.
Regional pig business manager  left, heads up the regional team which includes pig sales manager (East), right; pig sales manager (West); pig technical manager  and 12 regional sales specialists.
Burston's new mill incorporates a new bulk outloading area with four driver operated weighbridges.
WELCOME…
Over the telephone or person to person  always gives a cheery welcome.
She is pictured in Burston's impressive reception area with cattle sales manager for East Anglia,.
INS & OUTS…
Intake and despatch is controlled by the operations team who make sure customers orders are scheduled on time.
From left, ops scheduler; raw materials scheduler, weighbridge operator, and  assistant scheduler.
A special message goes to the key member of the team who missed photo day — transport manager  We hope you return to good health  soon (They told you I was visiting then!
Ed).
INTERNATIONAL FLAVOUR…
In 1991 the export business of  and  was combined into one operation based at Burston.
The main focus is selling specialist early weaning pig diets with back-up and service.
Business has been built up steadily over the last 12 years in Germany, Denmark, Spain, France, Eire and Greece, and more recently in Eastern Europe, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
In 1992 the business grew 16 per cent on the previous year and similar growth is expected during 1993.
The export team (l to r) export secretary; technical sales executive;, export manager and , export sales executive.
RARELY SEEN — BUT OFTEN HEARD!…
The customer services team are rarely seen by customers but maintain close contact with every one of them over the telephone.
From left, supervisor  with ,, and .
POULTRY BUSINESS TEAM…
The company has a major share of the broiler feed market in the SE region thanks to the commitment of the regional poultry team who ensure their customers needs are met as economically as possible.
From left, standing, business manager ; sales specialist ; senior sales specialist ; district poultry manager .
Seated, district poultry manager ; senior sales specialist ; game feed manager  and poultry district manager .
 INDISPENSABLE …
The secretarial team satisfy all the typing and secretarial needs of regional managers at Burston, while , right, keeps 'em fed and watered!
From left,;;; and .
(seated, has completed 22 years service — could she be our longest serving secretary?)
IN COMPLETE COMMAND…
Operators change shifts in the new control room at the heart of the mill.
From left (back),,,, and centre stage  and .
BRINGING HOME THE BACON…
Featured recently in Link the SE regional livestock team.
Manager  and the Admin team are based at Burston in a bungalow just across the road from the mill.
They are pictured with the regional field salesmen who just happened to come in on photo day!
From left:;;;;;;;; and .
PICK & MIX…
Regional raw materials manager , makes certain only the best ingredients, at the best prices, are picked for  feeds across the region and are mixed to the exact formulations.
Pictured left (standing),,, and , seated.
On right,,, and assistant raw materials manager .
Obituaries


IT WAS with great shock that we heard the sad news that  had died in hospital on Friday, May 21, only a few weeks before he was due to retire.
joined  from , as chief engineer on May 1, 1974.
After National Service in the RAF, he worked for  for eight years and it was during this time that he came in contact with, whilst the Belfast mill was being refurbished.
His milling design skills were soon recognised by , then responsible for engineering, who recruited  to strengthen his team.
The appointment could not have proved to be more successful.
He progressed to become director of engineering in  and then, after the merger last year, head of engineering for .
There is no doubt that  was first and foremost a first class milling engineer, probably without equal in his time.
The Preston and Shepshed mills pay tribute to his skills and the latter, although now almost seven years old, remains ‘state of the art’ for the industry.
For those who would listen, his advice was always sound, sincere and full of common sense.
We have much to be grateful for and to remember him by.
To his wife , son , daughter , and all their family we offer our sincerest sympathy.
chairman 


WE are sad to report the death of  on March 25. , 58, worked at  Burstwick Mill for the past 20 years on raw materials intake.
He will be sadly missed by all his colleagues.
Link correspondent


IT WAS with great sadness that we heard of the death of , at the age of 67, on April 24.
worked at Hull Mill for 40 years until his retirement at the end of November 1989.
He spent most of his working life on cooker and roller floors in the Flake Mill, but also worked on grain intake in the silo.
One of his sons still works in the packing department at the mill — now owned by .
was very popular and will be sadly missed by all his friends and workmates, and we offer our sincere condolences to his widow  and family.
pensioner contact Hull Flake Mill


IT IS with deep regret that the death is announced of .
joined  in 1921 and retired on 30 September 1960.
Although in her 94th year it was always a pleasure to visit .
She was still very active and made me feel so welcome, especially when she opened the sherry bottle.
Her 92nd birthday was featured in Link and she was so pleased that the company still remembered her.
My last visit was in the early part of this year when she said she was beginning to feel a little‘frail’ and was admitted to hospital.
In the company of  and  from the Key Street Office, I attended the funeral and an address given by a friend and neighbour paid a glowing tribute to  recalling how much she enjoyed life and that she would be missed by her many friends.
pensioner contact Ipswich


died on April 22, 1993, peacefully at home after a long illness.
He had been retired from the Wallingford Maltings since 1987.
His career in the malt industry began in 1938.
was born in Suffolk but his family soon moved to Horncastle, Lincolnshire, where his father ran the local maltings under .
started work there at 14 years of age.
With a break for war services from 1942 to 1947, continued in the industry for 44 years.
Between 1956 and 1958 he worked in Retford as foreman maltster for .
His weekly wages at this time were £11.54!
Three generations of  outside Horncastle Maltings around 1959.
In 1958 he took over the running of the Horncastle Maltings, which, after a series of ownerships was acquired by .
In March 1966 the Horncastle Maltings closed down.
, his wife  and their two children moved to Wallingford.
In 1970  received a long service award and a gold watch from .
Two workmates, and the late  were similarly honoured.
When  won the Queen's Award for Export Achievement in 1982, represented the Company at a ceremony held at Buckingham Palace.
by  on behalf of and family.
IT IS with deep regret that we have to report the deaths of the following:
and  ready for their anniversary trip in  's 1936 Armstrong Siddeley.
(Photograph courtesy of the Ipswich Evening Star).
A classic restoration
I WONDER how many Ipswich pensioners remember seeing this gleaming limousine gliding through the streets of Ipswich?
They say that 30 years ago everyone recognised it instantly as belonging to the late  of Orwell Lodge ('s step great-grandmother).
A local man bought the car from  's estate when he died in 1965 for £50 and intended to restore her, but until recently it had been rusting away in his garage.
Thanks to retired employee ,Link has discovered the car's present whereabouts and brings you the story behind its restoration.
Retired businessman  had been trying to but the 1936 Armstrong Siddeley for years, but was told the car was not for sale.
Then out of the blue he got a phone call asking if he was still interested in the car as it had to be sold to make space for the family.
He was there like a shot.
After 30 years the ‘grand old lady’ looked a sorry sight.
‘When I first saw the grand old lady she was a sorry sight’, said .
‘She was partly dismantled with flat tyres and covered in dust and junk, but she fascinated me and even in this state she looked elegant’.
began the restoration in January 1989.
First on the agenda was to get the engine going, which had seized solid, but with a little persuasion and plenty of penetrating oil it became free.
He then completely stripped down the engine replacing worn parts and reassembled them.
‘At last the old lady's heart was beating again,’ he said ‘And she didn't sound too bad for a 53-year-old.’
It was then time for all other mechanical parts to be cleaned, checked for wear, remade where needed and reassembled, which turned out to be a long job as some parts like the track rod ends, king pins and bushes had to be made anew.
After all the mechanics were finished it was down to the chassis, bodywork and interior.
The chassis and car body were stripped to bare metal, mudguards re-made, and woodwork repaired.
It took 19 litres of paint and cellulose for the coachwork, which matched the original perfectly.
Most of the chrome work had to be repaired and rechromed but all original fittings were refurbished, which makes the car so unique.
, seated, with her daughter  and granddaughter.
The interior was removed, cleaned and the leather treated and re-coloured.
The solid American walnut repolished and the original deep pile carpets and sheepskin over-rugs cleaned.
‘The whole car is a wonderful example of British workmanship’ said .
April 1992 saw the car completed and it passed its MOT with flying colours.
Since then the grand old lady has graced the streets of Ipswich once again, but this time with  at the wheel, for use on special occasions and for weddings.
, 's chauffeur from 1945 to 1965.
still has all the original documentation for the car and believes the 51,000 miles on the speedo to be true, but he is fascinated by its history and would like to find our more.
‘Various people have given me the names of its chauffeurs over the years —, and , but I would be glad of any further information anyone may have of this wonderful carriage’ he said.
(Link would be pleased to pass any details on to— send to the editor at the address shown on the back page).
Remembering a lifetime in malting
, centre, celebrates with friends (l to r),, and .
LOUTH pensioner and long serving employee , known to his friends as , celebrated his 80th birthday with a surprise party thrown for him by his family and friends.
began his malting career in 1927 working at the maltings in Barton-on-Humber, owned by .
He began by doing seasonal work which involved working at the maltings during the winter and working in a brickyard during the summer.
By working at the maltings  was carrying on a tradition started by his grandfather, who had been a leading maltster at the same maltings.
His father also worked there as a maintenance man, retiring after 51 years service.
After completing an apprenticeship under his father in maintenance, moved to Newark for two years before returning to Barton-on-Humber.
Wartime
He moved to Louth in 1938 and was based at the maltings on Leakes Row.
Because of his job,, along with the maltings manager, was deferred from joining the army.
However, many men weren't as lucky and women had to be employed at the maltings during the war, mainly in Malt Despatch and Barley Intake.
In 1949 work began on rebuilding the Newbridge Hill maltings which had been bombed during the war.
The silos were the first to be rebuilt with completion in 1950 ready for the harvest of that year.
The rest of the maltings wasn't finished until 1952, then owned by .
The construction of such a large building was welcomed by the people of Louth, especially as it would create jobs for many men who were returning from the war.
It was also the first pneumatic malting to be built in Europe, incorporating machinery from America.
Despite the introduction of more advanced machinery at the Newbridge Hill maltings, stayed at Leakes Row, going to the new maltings only when required by plant engineer .
In 1976  won the Queen's Award to Industry and in recognition of this achievement a reception was held at Buckingham Palace.
Three employees were chosen to represent the company and , being the company's longest-serving employee (50 years) was one of them.
He was accompanied by , assistant managing director and , traffic and shipping manager.
On meeting the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duke of Kent, remembers that he felt nervous and thrilled.
‘Everything was quite past my expectations’, he said.
met his wife  when she worked at the maltings during the war and they were married in 1948.
They moved into No 2 Newbridge Hill the same year, where they still live today.
Back to the future
STAFF from  pictured on a day trip to Ipswich in September, 1950.
Seeing the  silo in the background makes you wonder if they knew something!
Sadly, many of those pictured have since died, but  (second from left, back row) still works at the flour mill!
, mill manager at that time, is pictured third from left, front row, immediately in front of(wearing glasses) of  which owned  at that time.
Link plans to include a series of ‘Back in Time’ type photographs in forthcoming issues — if you have any real gems, please send them in.
Quartet notch up 25 years service apiece
, left, is presented with his long service award by  NW regional operations manager,.
, cuber operator at Preston, started work at the Gregson Lane corn mill in September 1967, then part of .
During his time with the company  started the first CPM 7000 interswitch press in the country and Preston workmates were not sure whether it was a splash of fat or a tear on  's cheek when it had to be replaced by the new Palladin 1600.
He is married with three children and likes woodworking and listening to organ music.
from Radstock, right, receives his 25 year service tie from Group MD .
began his career with the  company  at Belfast, working in the laboratory.
Over the years he has worked in a number of formulation and raw materials management roles.
His most recent move took him from Alton in Hampshire to  SW regional office at Radstock.
, centre, receives a crystal decanter to mark his 25 years service.
He is pictured with unit manager,, and his wife .
has seen many changes in the pig industry over the years at the NAC Pig Unit at Stoneleigh.
He was one of the first to have hands on practical experience of three week weaning of piglets and has been actively involved in the development of the Unit from its original 100 sows to the current size of 330 sows.
He has recently been involved in the developments in sow housing and feeding which are of great interest to pig producers.
from , right, is congratulated on his 25 years service by production co-ordinator .
has tackled most jobs over the years, both at , Kirkcaldy and before.
During his time at the flour mill (which is actually 30 years if you include an earlier spell) he has been mixerman, cuber operator, machine man, bran packer and even cleaner — when there were seven employees per shift!
But  's career has also included being a miner, linoleum worker, laundryman, not to mention a spell in the Black Watch!
Quiz
WELL we've certainly established one thing — you're not crossword fanatics!
There wasn't one correct entry for  's crossword published in the last issue — so how about this new quiz which arrived on the editor's desk via pensioner .
All you have to do is match up the inventor to the invention.
No  trouble !
Send your answers to Link editor,,.
No later than July 12 .
The usual £25 prize applies.
News from the Locations


domestic assistant  and husband  celebrated their ruby wedding recently and held a party for family and friends.
is well known for her charity work, raising much needed money for the local children's hospice — Hope House.
We wish  and  many more happy years together.
Correspondent becomes bride
Link correspondent  has reported many employees' weddings in the past, but now she has become a bride herself.
Her spring wedding to fiance  took place on May 8 in Wellington, Shropshire.
is pictured at work receiving a surprise gift from editor .
What a pull!
Two  employees have just completed their biggest pull yet!, supervisor, and , leading hand, hauled a 7.5 tonne lorry cab the length of the car park in aid of local charities.
They completed their task barely out of breath and with smiles on their faces, raised over 600 for charity!
In Memory of 
In memory of warehouseman , who died last August, employees at  decided to plant a tree outside the Shropshire factory.
A ceremony was held to mark the occasion and  's widow  is pictured planting the tree with managing director .
Carmarthen
CONGRATULATIONS to sales specialist  and his wife , on the birth of their son,.
Two members of our sales team have recently retired —, with 18 years service, and , with 20 years service.
We wish them both well in their retirement.
We would also like to announce the engagement of  from Customer Services, to  (no, not the ex Welsh rugby player — but a local farmer — should be good for business!).
Stoneleigh
The ESF Unit (Electronic Sow Feeding Unit) at the NAC Pig Unit, put up using around £250,000 of company money eight years ago, has achieved 25 pigs reared per sow per year.
This puts the Unit in the top 10% of herds recorded in the country.
Much of the credit for this must go to the staff at the Unit.
In particular, who in the nine months has been in charge of this section and shown great dedication and commitment.


WE welcomed another French student to  last month, who is studying a two-year course on International Trade at the Hugues Capet College in Senlis, France.
will spend seven weeks at  to learn about imports and exports, marketing, and generally improve her English.
Her application came via , general manager at ’ breakfast cereal company  in northern France.
We hope that our expert tuition here at  will help her to pass her exams next year.
Congratulations to , machine operator, and  on their wedding on April 3.
Also to , computer programmer, and wife , on the birth of their child  who weighed in at 7lb 1½ oz on May 8.
Radstock
CONGRATULATIONS to senior buyer  and  on the birth of their daughter  on Match 19 at St Peter's Hospital, Shepton Mallet.
weighed 7lb 15oz at birth and has two brothers  (4) and  (3); pig specialist  and  on the birth of their third son , born March 9 at the Royal United Hospital, Bath; and pig specialist  and  on the birth of their first child, a daughter named , born at Royal United Hospital, Bath on May 10, weighing 7 lb.
Welcome
We welcome the following who have joined us at Radstock during the last three months:, sales ledger clerk;, management accounts assistant;, accounts assistant;, raw materials clerk;, trainee formulator;, secretary.
and  tie the knot.
Wedding Bells
, Accounts and , from the Mill, tied the knot on Saturday April 3, followed by a romantic honeymoon in Tunisia.
They spent two days on safari while they were there, ending with a camel ride in the Sahara desert where they rode off into the sunset!
Good Luck to you both from everyone at Radstock.
Obituary
With deep regret we have to report that  who worked at Trowbridge Mill for nearly eight years as a press operator, died on March 30, 1993.
retires in style
and his wife at the farewell party.
's many friends, customers, colleagues and family helped him to celebrate his early retirement at a party at The Cotswold Water Park, near Cirencester on the evening of Friday, April 2.
It was nearly 21 years to the day since  joined  (as it was then) as a salesman in Dorset.
He stayed there only a short time before moving to Gloucestershire where he has been ever since.
It was my privilege to present  with a satellite dish as a retirement gift from his colleagues, customers and the company.
We know he will enjoy watching the sports programmes despite the fact that Bristol Rovers football team have not quite made it on to Sky TV yet! is well know for being a keen supporter of Bristol Rovers, a fact which did not go unrecognised by  who presented him with a beautiful jugglers top hat in his favourite team's colours.
We all enjoyed a lovely, fun evening and wish  well in the future and continued success as a  Agent.


has added a further tri-axle tanker trailer to its fleet which will be used to carry bulk loads to the Manchester and Walsall areas.
Driver  is pictured with his unit and the re-sprayed tank which will carry a payload of about 24 tonnes.
Key Street, Ipswich
managing director,, left, presents  with his retirement gift.
AFTER 21 years service  has covered his drawing board for the last time to take up the more leisurely pursuits of photography and walking in his retirement.
joined  as a draughtsman in 1972, from the aircraft industry.
The quality of his work has always been of exceptional high standard and featured in every major project in the company.
We wish him and his wife  good health and happiness for the future and hope that he will keep in touch.
Crediton
Sales specialists during their visit to the  — nice uniforms!
OUR sales specialists have completed a series of intensive training courses recently on the nutrition of dairy cows.
A visit was made to the  where they saw rumens at close quarters.
For some this proved too much and it was said that a few members of the group started to resemble the colour of our logo!
After a recent holiday to Cyprus , assistant straights and grain trader, returned to work, not only looking extremely sun-tanned but sporting a sapphire and diamond engagement ring given to her by driver , while they were away.
Congratulations to you both.
Now that summer is almost here (we hope!) a keep fit mania has hit some of the girls at Crediton and they are frantically dusting the cobwebs off their bicycles in readiness for the ride to work.
I have been assured however, this will only happen if it doesn't rain!
Coming up in the next issue — details of our latest recruit — Watch this space!
Wallingford
GENERAL manager  volunteered our services to organise a commercial vehicle convoy to mark the opening of the Wallingford bypass on Sunday March 14.
Some 50 vehicles drove the 4-mile circuit including a vintage coach, horse drawn brewery dray, solar powered car, various commercial vehicles including our own, and a few classic cars for good measure.
A wonderful old charabanc — a 1935 Guy Wolf — was chosen to lead the way and have the honour of being the first official vehicle to use the road.
It was driven by owner  accompanied by his wife .
The couple, who live locally, acquired and restored the 20-seater coach as a family keepsake, it was actually  's father who founded the Guy Motor Company which eventually became part of Leyland.
I am sure many of our transport pensioners will remember Guy vehicles (any stories, photos you may have would be appreciated.
Pupils from our friendly neighbourhood school,St John's,were invited along as passengers and they too became the first to use the bypass.
Wallingford Hockey Club, Sponsored by , has just ended a most successful season.
The first XI have gained promotion to the 1st Division of the four Counties League.
The second XI have maintained their position after two successive years of promotion and the third XI have gained promotion without dropping a single point.
The forths, Crofters and Youth team also continue to perform well.
We look forward to their continued success.
Brewery trip
Having been on the receiving end of a whole host of visits over the past couple of years, we decided it was our turn to get out and about and took advantage of a kind offer by local brewers, of Abingdon, for a guided tour of the brewery.
We all found it interesting and enlightening and are grateful to  — head brewer and  — brewing manager.
and  are pictured happily trying the brew with a not so happy  who was unfortunately not old enough to drink.
Penrith
COMPETITORS enjoyed glorious sunshine for the  golf tournament held by Penrith on Friday, May 7.
The day was held for customers and staff who in groups of three, set off for an 18-hole Stableford competition (I'm told this will mean something to golfers!)
Staff competitors included cattle sales manager , driver,,, and  from the Cumbrian sales team; from Preston and national training manager .
Winners were , 1st;(sales), 2nd; and , 3rd, who received various items of crystalware as prizes.
Full credit goes to secretary  for organising the event which was deemed a great success.
Farmer visits
Mill supervisor  with visitors at Penrith Mill.
FOUR groups of farmers and their wives came to Penrith mill recently as part of a continuing programme of visits for existing and potential customers scheduled throughout the summer.
The visits are intended to give those customers, previously supplied by Preston mill, an insight of the mill process and to see what happens once an order is placed.
Visitors were taken round the mill by transport manager , mill supervisor  and operations manager .
They also met customer services supervisor  and her two assistants — and  — who they will speak to often when placing orders over the telephone.
A buffer supper followed each visit thanks to  and her team who organised an excellent spread on each occasion.


VERY best wishes to  who has retired from  packing department after 17 years.
is pictured at her farewell receiving gifts of a bracelet and ring from production manager .
She also received a rose arbour for her garden where she plans to spend more time in her retirement.
Louth
CONGRATULATIONS to plant operator , whose wife  gave birth to a baby boy,, on Thursday May 13.
Mother and baby are both doing well although dad was a bit tired!
Information Services, Ipswich
WE WELCOME nine new recruits to  Information Services team.
From left,, application specialist;, PC specialist;, trainee programmer;, senior programmer;, clerk/typist;, resource unit manager;, business analyst; analyst/programmer and , network specialist.
Retirement celebrations
and  cut into their retirement cake.
TWO very popular members of staff have retired from  at Wells, Somerset.
, is officially described as office cleaner, but  became much more than that to the people who knew her during her 33 years with the company.
Always ready to lend a helping hand and make a welcome cup of tea, her lively personality will be greatly missed.
, has worked for the company for 26 years as order clerk.
, whose voice is well known to customers will still be in touch with what is happening at the company through husband , a shift supervisor — who can beat her years of service by seven!
Again, she is a member of staff who will be greatly missed, both for her knowledge of and unfailing help to, the company's customers.
Welcoming a new member to the pension scheme?
IT seems like everyone wants to join the pension scheme — even cold blooded reptiles! group pensions manager  describes the benefits to her newly found friend during a holiday in Thailand.
A close shave in the post room
WHEN wood shavings were put down on the floor in the Key Street post room it all proved too much for , left, and .
They'd asked for more space, as part of the  head office refurbishment, but this was ridiculous!
You'll be pleased to hear that the shavings were only temporary and they now have extra space and a fully carpeted floor!
your letters
YOU are welcome to send letters on any subject.
Send to:
The Editor,
French holiday home
, development manager at Ipswich is offering employees and pensioners the opportunity to rent his parents holiday home near Bordeaux — here's an extract from his leaflet.
The 200 year old stone farmhouse is set in eight acres of unspoilt countryside near to the village of St. Ferme.
It has a kitchen, bathroom, sitting room and two bedrooms (one double, one twin), and sleeps 4/6.
There is a fully equipped kitchen, washing machine, and the garden, featuring a barbecue and splash pool looks over farmland and woods.
The location is excellent for walking, and well situated for touring the abbeys and chateaux of the Bordeaux and Bergerac regions.
St. Emilion is 30 minutes away, and the commercial and cultural centre, Bordeaux itself, can be reached in an hour.
Outdoor enthusiasts will enjoy the nearby recreational lake, with swimming, boating, wind-surfing, fishing and riding.
Prices range from £145 to £205 weekly.
Vacancies still available for this year.
For full details telephone or write to  's sister:,,.
My first solo flight
IT HAD long been my ambition to learn to fly, but I had discounted it as being too expensive and not very easy to start.
However when I discovered that the  was situated on an old second world war airfield only three miles from my home, I decided to find out more about it.
In October last year I had my first lesson in a Cessna 152 with , the school's senior instructor, and immediately caught the bug.
I have now had 20 lessons, and completed my first solo flight one evening at the beginning of March.
After a few reasonable take-offs and landings, said those dreaded words feared by all trainee pilots, ‘Do you think you can manage on your own for one circuit?’, and promptly got out of the plane, leaving me to do the usual pre take-off checks, taxi to the beginning of the runway and nervously accelerate down the runway to do a fair take-off.
I have done the circuit many times before, but always with  sitting in the co-pilots seat.
On my own the aircraft was a lot lighter and so I soon reached 1,000 feet, the circuit height.
I made the usual radio and pre-landing checks before coming round onto the final approach, much too high, but somehow I managed to do a reasonable landing.
I couldn't believe I had done it; I had reached the point in a trainee pilot's training when he feels that he can now really get some flying under his belt and his flying really starts.
Since that day I have done several more solo flights and I am now beginning to learn about navigation.
My aim is to get my Private Pilots Licence by the end of the year, but we shall see.
I still have a great deal to learn.
( asks if there are any other budding pilots out there — if so, why not send Link  your experiences — Ed ).
‘Gotcha’
THE following memo was posted on all  notice boards from general manager,!!
— T.V. Personality
The Albion, representing  is due to appear as part of a BBC Look East programme.
It will revolve around a discussion between  and a gentleman from the CBI,but it is also likely to include our own  levelling his empty (transferring barley to germination).
The filming took so long that  had to remake the heap a couple of times and start again.
Watching him shovelling the heap back up really needed  to appear with a Gotcha Oscar!
I have searched high and low to find an equivalent ‘Gotcha’ but without success, perhaps  will accept this article instead!
Link — The House Journal of the  April 1993
Board appointment
has been appointed to the Board of  as a non-executive director.
is a qualified chartered accountant and has had considerable experience in a number of companies.
Between 1970 and 1984 he was finance director of , the European subsidiary of the Chicago based food conglomerate.
Between 1984 and 1987 he was managing director of , a family owned business which was floated on the USM in 1985 and sold to  in 1986.
In July 1987 he joined  as finance director, and has worked with the top management team to restructure the company within its chosen markets — packaging, printing and industrial films.
Group MD , centre, talks to  's MD  and territory manager  on one of the company's stands at Crufts.
Record turnout at Crufts
CRUFTS is always one of  's busiest times and this year was no exception.
The show had one of the biggest entries of dogs ever (20,000) and some 80,000 visitors.
There is always interest in all aspects of the show — not just in the dogs but in the displays, the trade stands and special events.
We had two stands this year — a first for  — and it was great to be able to rely on the Essex Dog Display Team to man our second stand.
The smaller stand was dedicated to Bakers Complete and was situated near the Special Events ring where Essex were performing each day.
Another first this year was our extra sponsorship to Crufts and in return they asked Essex Dog Display to perform in the Main Ring — needless to say they brought the house down!
They were the stars of the show and this was reflected in the excellent coverage which the BBC gave both the Essex team and in turn  Complete, on the Crufts programmes.
An audience of more than 4 million watched the TV shows.
On the main  stand we were promoting our new premium range of Omega Elite dog foods.
In a very competitive area Elite is gaining significant ground and our contact with breeders and serious dog owners is critical.
Although Crufts is the first show of the year, the Championship shows continue throughout the summer.
See the back page for details of those we'll be attending.
by , public relations manager,
and  gain Queen's Awards for Export Achievement
DOUBLE HONOURS
by  group managing director
APRIL 21, 1993 will be remembered as a red letter day for the Food & Agriculture Division of .
Two Queen's Awards for Export Achievement — one for  and one for  — honours in which we can all feel tremendous pride.
The Awards announced on the Queen's birthday are to recognise and encourage outstanding achievement in the field of export of goods or services from the UK, and together with Awards for Technological Achievement, were instituted by Royal Warrant in 1976.
Unlike other royal honours which are personal awards to individuals, the Queen's Award is conferred upon the whole company, recognising the team effort that is necessary to achieve success in exporting.
In 1992, achieved exports of £55.7m, accounting for more than half of the UK's total malt exports.
The company's exports have grown steadily since the early 1950s and , as it was then, won a Queen's Award back in 1983.
Exports took a significant move forward when  was acquired in 1987; itself achieved Queen's Awards in 1976 and 1981.
Congratulations to MD , sales director , the back-up staff at Kentford and every individual who works in the various malting locations.
started manufacturing extruded products in 1964, with the current Omega brand being launched in 1976.  exports business grew rapidly through to 1988 when it won its first Queen's Award for Export.
More than half the output from our two factories at Cornard and Chilton is exported, mainly to continental Europe, but new and diverse markets as far apart as Hungary and Japan have been opened up.
To MD , commercial director , and all who work for , our warmest congratulations.
Full reports and details of the Award ceremonies will follow in future editions of Link .
EXPORT SUCCESS…sales director,, left, and  's commercial director , celebrate their mutual success.
Factory extension growing to plan
by  technical director  
factory at Faverolles in northern France.
£8 million investment programme is right on schedule according to technical director  who says that the new factor extension will double the size of their current manufacturing facilities.
Demand for the company's breakfast cereals and snack food products has increased rapidly across Europe during the past two years and it is a leading manufacturer of own-label breakfast cereals.
Building work at the Faverolles factory in northern France started last November and thanks to a relatively mild winter is running to schedule.
The roof should be on the main building by the end of March and installation of the main process equipment will begin immediately after Easter.
Start-up of production from the new facility is expected in October.
Initially, a second production line will be installed for our traditional crisp rice and flaked products and a new extruded product line will give extra capacity for the production of existing chocolate coated wheat and honey coated maize products, and a number of new products currently under development.
The storage area for raw materials, packaging and finished products is also being increased, by three times its present size, greatly reducing our reliance on external warehousing.
THERE couldn't have been any doubt of ’ innovative thinking after managing director  presented this packet of breakfast cereal at the Financial Times Food & Drink Conference in March.
had been invited to the conference to present a paper on the development of a Private Label strategy for Europe, with specific emphasis on breakfast cereals.
Addressing senior personnel from the industry as well as representatives from various financial institutions, described how the company had become a leading European Private Label supplier and secured a major share of the French breakfast cereal market.
appoints new UK sales director
FOLLOWING a number of organisational changes within ,, UK sales director, decided to leave the company at the end of February.
Export director,, has becomes sales director with overall responsibility for UK brewing and export sales.
retains responsibility for distilling sales in Scotland.
Farmers see benefits of new beef package
A VISIT to farms in Shrewsbury was arranged for fifteen prospective customers last month to see recent deliveries of 12-week old Continental Cross steers being reared under  Excel Beef Package .
The new package being offered to farmers includes the supply of quality calves reared under contract from ; financial assistance from the  Bank; animal feed; and marketing of the end product.
‘The package is available to all beef producers who want to be part of a well structured and disciplined production chain’, said , national livestock marketing manager.
‘The concept is, to produce consistently high quality beef from continental silage fed steers to the exact requirements of the country's leading supermarkets’.
Since its launch last November, says that there has been a good deal of interest in the scheme from all sectors of the industry and added, ‘Through controlled and managed expansion the benefits in terms of new business to the Company are tremendous’.
Kiln refurbishment complete
FOLLOWING a three-month total refurbishment project, No. 4 kiln at the Bury St Edmunds' maltings is back on line.
Kilns at the Maltings are used at the end of the malting process to dry the green malt gently with warm air which results in the high quality malted barley dispatched by  to breweries and distilleries world-wide.
During the refurbishment period, the kiln was stripped down to its basic frame, shot-blasted and painted.
The integral malt loader was removed for the same treatment and refitted.
The inside walls were lined with stainless steel and its exterior sprayed with foam insulation before the entire unit was covered with plastic coated padding.
At the same time, the old fibreglass ducting was replaced with insulated stainless steel ducting and a new control system was fitted to the loader.
Food and Agriculture Division
Environmental policy issued
A POLICY statement on the environment was issued by the Food and Agriculture Division in February stating recognition of its concern for the environment as a corporate priority and the company's aim to integrate environmental considerations into the mainstream of business decision taking.
Over the past few years, companies throughout the Group have implemented a range of equipment and procedures to improve environmental standards and comply with COSHH regulations.
These have included central vacuum cleaning systems in our mills, noise and dust abatement systems, and at , an air to water scrubber has been installed to reduce odour emissions.
The policy states that the company will seek to:
Develop and market quality products which are wholesome and environmentally healthy
Operate and maintain company facilities in line with best industry practice and statutory requirements
Take account of environmental considerations in investment decisions
Achieve improved energy efficiency and conservation in our manufacturing process
Select and utilise raw materials and packaging in such a way as to minimise waste, and ensure that waste materials are reprocessed or disposed of responsibly
Avoid pollution of and, where possible, eliminate releases to air, land or water
Minimise any adverse impact of our operations upon the local community
Secure a responsible commitment towards the environment by our employees and third parties involved in our business, including suppliers, customers and contractors
Positively assist employees, suppliers, customers, shareholders and regulatory bodies to understand the company's impact on the environment
Monitor environmental statutory regulations to ensure that required standards are met.
The areas of company activity mentioned are targeted by the company as being the most important in our efforts to progressively improve overall environmental performance.
Each of our businesses will develop management procedures for environmental assurance and will regularly audit results.
Environmental risks will be identified and emergency plans put in position wherever necessary.
's air scrubber at Cornard removes cooking odours and dust particles from product drying air.
The exhaust air from three driers pass up through the tower and is cleaned by liquid sprayed down through the tower.
INVESTING £1 MILLION IN A TV DOG'S DINNER
is currently investing £1 million in a novel television advertising and sampling campaign for  Complete.
The 30 second commercial is a variation on the successful launch advertising and is scheduled over a two month period in England and Wales.
A unique new ending to the original ‘Blizzard’ commercial includes an invitation for viewers to call an  freephone line for a free product sample.
Although well established with breeders, complete dry dog foods are still new to many pet owners.
The aim of the  Complete campaign is to change this and Edward Baker believes that letting people try a sample pack will be one of the most effective ways to attract new users.
‘Eating is believing’ says , marketing and sales director.
‘The advertising and sampling will let people find our for themselves how much their pets enjoy it, which will be one of the most effective ways to maintain our current strong sales growth.’
The pre-Christmas test of this direct response advertising in the TVS region was extremely successful — with 10 per cent of dog owners in the area receiving samples.
A similar level of response in the other regions should ensure that many thousands of new users throughout the country are brought into the brand.
A fond farewell to Basingstoke
THE notice said it all: ‘Will the last person to leave Basingstoke please turn the lights out.’
So in the late afternoon of February 26, the Hampshire office, 's headquarters for 22 years, was plunged into darkness, ending another illustrious chapter in the company's history that goes back almost 100 years.
The task of the great turn-off was undertaken by , supervisor of typing services since the company first moved to the four-storey building in March, 1971.
It was overseen by , the company's operations director, who had been keeping an eye on the Basingstoke premises during its six-month run-down.
As  prepared to leave the Basingstoke premises for the last time, she said: ‘While it is difficult to take in the reality of the situation after all this time, we are delighted that the initials  continue to have prominence under a new and synergetic banner.’
It is a sentiment shared by many — and especially those who worked at the once-thriving Basingstoke office, now destined for the annals of feed industry history.
Awards presented and cash raised at dinner dance
THREE employees from Breckland Farms were presented with training awards in March at the company's annual dinner dance held at the Duke's Head, King's Lynn.
Stockmen, and  from Methwold and Winch Farms respectively, were each presented with a Craft Certificate, and , supervisor at Spey Farm was presented with his ATB ‘S’ series Supervisory Development Certificate.
The evening was deemed a great success — in more ways than one — as, in addition to the excellent dinner and the dancing, it also happened to be Red Nose Day and by fair means and foul the 155 people who attended, plus contributions from the social club, and the company, a total of £270 was raised for Comic Relief.
Fish feed activities combined
AFTER a review of its fish feed activities, has announced its decision to combine  at Radstock with  at Renfrew.
From April 1, general manager at ,, also became responsible for .
The two businesses will continue to trade under their original names but from April the financial reporting will be through  at Renfrew.
, who was previously poultry and extruded product business manager, will relinquish his responsibilities for fish feed but maintain his position as SW Region poultry business manager.
appoints manager in France
WELCOME to  who joined  last November to develop the company's pet food trade in continental Europe.
has considerable experience of the French pet food industry, having previously worked for one of the country's major manufacturers.
He is married and lives with his family in Montpellier in the south of France.
Location in Bloom
DUE to popular demand we're pleased to announce the 1993 Location in Bloom competition.
Everyone can enter — locations and pensioners alike.
All you have to do is take up to four photo's of your grounds, window boxes or flower tubs and send to Link editor.
The only rule, for the locations, is that the photo's must include some recognizable part of the site, eg sign, wall, silo, etc.
You can send at any time over the next six months, but the final date of entry is  .
Good luck and get snapping!
‘Was that big, fat blimp really me?’
AFTER seeing herself in a video,, receptionist at  South East regional office at Burston, decided it was time to lose weight.
Her success story resulted in a three page feature in Slimming Magazine last February.
Here's an extract which should inspire us all!
'S TRIUMPH — The 13 ½ st woman who is now the 8st-4-oz ‘slinky sylph’ above.
I never used to worry about getting fat, I supposed that's one reason I did so much over-eating and got to be 13 ½ stone, which is massive when you're 5ft 2ins!
You see until I was 22 — that's six years ago — I was slim.
I grew up with my mum, dad, and three elder brothers in Dickleburgh, near Diss in Norfolk.
Mum always cooked traditional English food, but it didn't seem to make any of us fat.
So when I left school at 17 to become a hairdresser, I was lovely and slim.
I met , now my husband, and although we liked to go out to dinner together, I still didn't put on any weight.
I worked in Norwich for two years and got my City and Guilds in hairdressing, but when I saw an advertisement for a receptionist's job at a local company (now ) I jumped at the chance.
James and I continued to go out and have lovely times together, but after a couple of years it slowly began to dawn on me that I was expanding.
I guess I was eating too much, but I didn't think I was overdoing it.
I decided to join a slimming club when I was 20 and lost a stone, but I couldn't stand going to the club.
I've got a very stubborn streak and I discovered that I couldn't bear people telling me what I could and couldn't eat.
So I rebelled and left and immediately put back the stone in weight.
I went back to my old eating habits and slowly put on more weight.
When  and I got married I had to wear a size 16 wedding dress.
But I still didn't let my weight worry me.
Then came the day that  bought a video camera and filmed me ironing.
I was in the kitchen when he played it back on the TV — I remember that day so well — and he called me into the living room to take a look.
I stared at the screen.
Talk about seeing is believing!
There was this big, fat woman with at least four chins and a huge fat neck standing at the ironing board.
Was that me?
I was absolutely stunned.
After all those years of being told I was fat, I had the evidence in front of me and I suddenly realised what everyone had been going on about.
I started my diet at once.
It was May and I vowed that I'd be 8 ½ stone by Christmas.
Once I'd made that decision nothing was going to stop me.
I started my diet by eating fruit and low-fat yoghurt for breakfast.
I'd never eaten breakfast on weekdays before, and I used to be starving by lunch-time and pig out.
But lunch now consisted of cottage cheese, salad and two crispbreads.
And every evening I'd cook something like meat, baked potato and vegetables, whether  was there or not.
Once I'd eaten dinner that was it.
I refused to be tempted by anything else.
In the first week I lost 12lb.
I couldn't believe I'd done it, and I felt just great.
I'd been hungry, but filling up on fruit or hot drinks had stopped my tummy from grumbling.
It was all worth it, because my skirt felt loose.
The second week I lost 6lb, which was marvellous too.
but I realised that big weight losses often happen to very overweight people at the beginning of their diets, so I didn't expect to continue at anything like that pace.
I settled down to losing 2lb a week.
I also started a gentle exercise programme.
As the months went by, I became quite excited by the prospect of weighing myself every Monday.
I was getting closer and closer to my goal of 8 ½ st.
When on Monday before Christmas 1991 I stepped on the scales and found that I'd done it, I almost died of happiness.
I'd made it!
I'd reached my target.
I'd lost 5st — I was slim — at last!
Since then I've settled down to 8st 4.
My taste in food has changed and I love the feeling of lightness I have now.
Everyone says how well I've done and nobody teases me now.
But it was me who allowed myself to get fat, so it was me who had to make the effort to get slim.
Luckily, I had that stubborn streak to give me the determination to do it.
I believe anyone can slim if they set their mind to it.
Start today, don't put  it off.
The sooner you start, the sooner you'll have all the wonderful feelings, the sense of achievement and pride I have now.
©  elan February 1993
Reproduced with the kind permission of Slimming Magazine .
Seminars
manager  introduces the ‘Green Book’.
TWO health & safety seminars were held during February for  site managers and safety co-ordinators.
Held at  Clayton Centre, Ipswich, both events gave staff the opportunity to discuss new  initiatives and get to know the ‘Green Book’— Health and Safety Manual compiled by health and safety manager .
‘Tasty’ treat for 
FOR a prize in the 1991 Christmas draw held at Wallingford's local hostelry — the Red Lion, donated a trip around the maltings followed by lunch.
When we asked who had won, we were told it was a pet dog called , but her owner,, would love to come in her place.
However, Christmas 1992 came and went and  still hadn't claimed his proxy visit — so we decided to act on  's behalf.
We managed to  acquire a large bag of  Complete and made a surprise lunchtime presentation.
is pictured with maltings manager,(both kneeling — 's the grey one!)
Picture by landlady .
changes gear after 42 years
retired at the end of March.
She took the opportunity to retire before her normal retirement date but I am too much of a gentleman to divulge her age.
joined  after leaving school exactly 42 years ago.
41½ of those years were spent in the Key Street office prior to the transfer with  Malt to their new home at Kentford last October.
The Ipswich desk was where  was to spend her early years assisting in the business of animal feedstuffs.
After her first five years apprenticeship she became involved with transport and it was here that she was destined to make her mark and has continued to do so for 37 years.
It is by no means an exaggeration to say that for many years  worked conscientiously behind the scenes in the shadow of five successive transport managers who relied heavily on her efficient and accurate administration skills.
With the acquisition of  in 1987  inherited a fleet of 12 bulk malt delivery vehicles — we had transferred our own fleet to a contract hire operator two years earlier.
It was at this stage that  came into her own, having learnt the skills of her five previous bosses (and noted their shortcomings) to such a degree she was a competent transport manager in her own right.
The only thing which was missing was the recognised transport qualification, a Certificate of Professional Competence, so, determined not to let this official piece of paper prevent her from doing the job she undertook a study course and was soon legally qualified to run the fleet.
Historically the transport business has always been a male dominated area therefore it may have been expected that the  drivers would bite hard on their Yorkie bars and throw their hands up in horror at the prospect of not only having a lady boss, but one who hadn't even got a driving licence for a Mini let alone a 38-tonne artic.
But not so — 's reputation had gone before her and she has continued to be the professional lady who is respected by professional drivers and haulage contractors and is known as the lady who runs  transport.
Whilst the end of an era for , April 1, was the first day of the rest of  's life.
She is wished a long, healthy and happy retirement by everyone.
FAREWELL DINNER…relaxes at her farewell dinner with some of her colleagues from  Kentford, from left , and .
Employees Financial Report
’ profits up to £38.6m
PROFITS reached an all time high for the Food & Agriculture Division announced by  for the year ending December 31, 1992.
The Division increased profits by 34 per cent from £28.7m to £38.6m, thanks to the inclusion of  for the half year from June to December.
Group managing director  said that the overall Divisional result was good taking into account the difficult market conditions and added, ‘We have made a good start to 1993, although margins were under pressure in the animal feed business due to higher raw material prices’.
’ results, plus a strong performance from plantations, helped boost  's profits by 19 per cent for the 12 months to £85 million compared with £71.2 million the previous year.
After a higher tax charge, earnings per share are ahead by 9 per cent at 7.6p.
chief executive  said, ‘1992 was a difficult year, and the 19pc advance in pre-tax profits confirms the strength of  as a well diversified Group.
‘We have continued to invest during the recession and have taken vigorous action to reduce costs, increase productivity, and improve our competitive position.
‘The actions we have taken and the benefits of sterling devaluation should enable us to increase profits in 1993, but the prospects for a more substantial improvement are still clouded by the threat of recession in continental Europe and continuing uncertainty over the rate of recovery in the UK.’
Extracts from the chairman's preliminary review statement
Chemical & Industrial
Profit gains in some operations were balanced by reductions in others.
had a most successful year and increased profits, but  suffered from lack of demand in Europe.
achieved a much improved result due to greatly increased efficiency.
Iron oxide pigments sold well for paints, but continued to suffer low demand for building materials.
Our organic chemicals businesses have survived the recession very well by designing new products and identifying new applications.
Cost reductions and a new IT system led to improvements in our chemicals distribution in North America and performance in Australia also advanced.
Overall profits were affected by restructuring costs of 1.8m in the Industrial operation, Linatex, where a much more efficient base has now been established.
Timber & Building Supplies
Demand remained very weak in the UK, but showed faint signs of recovery in the USA and Australia.
The UK distribution business  made good progress in the implementation of ‘best demonstrated practices’ to improve service and efficiency in its branches.
We have continued to develop the sale of high quality timber into those branches which previously sold building materials only.
This ensures that we can supply the complete spectrum of materials to all our customers in the building trade.
Whilst profits in  were somewhat reduced,, the specialist timber business achieved much improved results.
Profits were better too in Australia, but  's in the USA failed to live up to the promise seen in the first six months.
in Ireland and the warehousing operation,, showed improved results despite difficult conditions.
Plantations
plantations had an excellent year with increased crop yields and improved prices for its produce.
New management in Papua New Guinea cut down administration, reduced operating costs and achieved a welcome rise in profits.
Food & Agriculture
This year was dominated by the purchase of  from , completed in mid-year.
Integration of  was quickly effected and rationalisation, including the closure of five mills, took place before the year end.
With the closure of a further five mills in the first half of the current year major cost savings will be realised.
The combined business held on well to market share but margins came under severe pressure following sterling's devaluation which pushed up raw material prices.
Malt deliveries were affected by reduced consumption of both beer and whisky in 1992, but a good UK malting barley crop and the devaluation of sterling have helped 1993 exports.
The food companies had a year of strong growth.
commissioned a new cereal plant and  embarked on a capital project which will double output of breakfast cereals in France.
launched its new brand, Bakers Complete, supported by TV advertising and the product is now listed in most leading supermarkets.
See the following pages for detailed reports of the Division's progress.
OUR YEAR IN FOCUS
COMPANY MDs REPORT ON 1992 AND CHALLENGES OF THE YEAR AHEAD


Healthy growth in all sectors
1992 proved to be a very challenging year for .
The company achieved significant growth during the year with both home trade and export up 12 per cent on the previous year.
Profits were slightly ahead after taking into account the costs of advertising and promoting the launch of  Complete.
Complete has now been listed by all the major supermarkets and sales have built steadily.
We are however facing stiff competition in this sector from  , and  who have all launched products following the initial success of  Complete.
Further TV support including ‘Direct Response’ advertising is scheduled to boost the growing sales.
Active
Sales growth of Omega products through the pet trade has slowed, due in part to the effect of the recession and to a small decline in the population of dogs.
However, we have been very active in product development and a specialist range of Omega Elite products has been launched, targeted at breeders and professionals who require a premium food.
We have also introduced a tripe flavour variety to our immensely popular Omega Tasty dog food.
Our private label business in the supermarkets continues to grow with our cat food products selling extremely well in the major multiples.
On the export side we have gained further new contracts during the year, as well as achieving growth in sales of our existing ranges.
There are still significant opportunities for growth in the private label sector although the market throughout Europe is becoming increasingly competitive.
Our export business for Omega is poised for growth and a new distributor appointed in Spain and new market gains in Norway where we are already a major brand.
We have also appointed an experienced manager in France who is responsible for business development with particular focus on developing brands in France.
The operations and production teams have also had a busy year with new warehousing and packing facilities being commissioned at Chilton.
This is part of a phased development of the site with further investment planned during 1993 which will enhance capacity and production flexibility.
At Cornard we have made major investment in our packing lines to improve the output of semi-moist production and productivity.
On the same site, the air to water scrubber is a successful first stage in the planned control of odour emissions and is making a noticeable impact.
Looking forward, we have made an encouraging start to the year with buoyant export sales.
The devaluation of the pound gives us export opportunities, but is a double edged sword because of the inflationary impact of higher raw material and other costs which need tight control.
We are, however, expecting healthy growth in home and export markets.
Excellent year for Food Group
‘Increased profits for all four companies’
FOOD GROUP produced an excellent result for 1992, with all four companies increasing profits over the previous year and an outstanding performance from .
Operating profit was well ahead of budget and on a like with like basis (after excluding the two food ingredients businesses sold in 1992) was 80 per cent higher than 1991.
These results were achieved in spite of very competitive trading conditions in all our markets.
They reflect the increased level of professionalism in all four companies where clear policies to improve performance were identified and successfully pursued.
 recorded a major improvement in results, particularly in the second half year.
Margins were increased through higher productivity, cost reduction and planned product range amendments.
The commissioning of the £2.3 million puffed wheat plant was completed in November and good progress was made with the new management information systems.
It was a successful year for new product introductions, including high quality desserts, new soup varieties and pasta products.
Our trading branded activities under the  and  labels were extended in both product range and customer base.
 enjoyed a year of exceptional growth — with an increase in European sales of more than 50 per cent.
The customer base was considerably strengthened and a variety of new products launched.
The Faverolles factory responded to this challenge and continued to break production records, while  played their part with large increases in muesli, crunchy and pillow tonnages for the continental market.
The major capital investment programme is progressing well as detailed by technical director  on page 2.
 and  recorded good performances in a difficult year for the flour milling industry.
The problems of a poor wheat crop were overcome and record volumes were produced at both mills in the fourth quarter.
New business gains at both companies were achieved and together with recent price increases, should lead to a further advance in profits in 1993.
KEY TO SUCCESS…
A handful of people representing employees from around the Group who each helped the company to achieve its 1992 record results.
Left to right,, Albion Maltings, Ipswich;,;, Alton Mill;, Burston Regional Centre;, Exeter Mill;,, Ipswich;, Burston Regional Centre;,, Kentford;, Alton Mill;, Renfrew Mill; and centre stage —,, Sudbury.


A MOMENTOUS YEAR
1992 was a momentous year for  and for the Animal Feed Industry.
Following several years of intense competition and excess capacity, the merger was the most significant change to date in the rationalisation of the industry.
The size of  's commitment to animal feed has increased very considerably with ’ turnover forecast to rise to over £500 million in 1993 compared to a previous  level of £200 million per annum.
The merger has also increased the size of our livestock pig activity, which accounts for approximately £100 million of the total turnover.
In addition, the business now has a sizeable involvement in seed crushing and raw material upgrading through  and is a major UK fish feed producer through its  business.
Dramatic
Both the scale and rate of change affecting the operation of the company have been dramatic over the last nine months.
The mill rationalisation plan has been progressed swiftly and to timetable.
By the half year, ten mills will have been closed — to put this into perspective, it is equivalent to the total number of mills operated by  prior to the merger.
Capital expenditure is underway to upgrade the mills being retained with £8 million scheduled to be spent in the 18 months to the end of 1993.
This process has placed enormous pressure upon our employees and it is tremendously encouraging to see the way in which staff have committed themselves to the new organisation.
Despite being faced with a highly competitive marketplace during the post merger period, the feed business achieved both its volume and profit targets during the second half of 1992.
The devaluation of sterling from September onwards and its significant effect on raw material costs put pressure on margins which has continued into the first quarter of 1993.
The animal feed market has seen slow volume growth in the first part of 1993 with a relatively mild winter and Dairy farmers' concern about their milk production going over quota combining to depress demand.
Against this background, it has been a difficult start to the year but some improvement is forecast for the second quarter when further price increases will recover the impact of higher raw material costs.
Good progress
The livestock business enjoyed record profits in 1992 with pig meat prices at relatively high levels until late in the year.
Lower prices have continued into early 1993 with current profitability further squeezed owing to higher feed costs.
Fulmar achieved a very good result in 1992, with profits ahead of expectation and benefited from the recovery in salmon prices which brought increased confidence to that industry.
Continuing buoyant fish feed demand should result in  being ahead of budget in the first half year.
Following a very creditable result in 1992, has made an encouraging start to the current year — the seed crushing business in particular continues to find attractive niche products capable of generating higher added values.
There is still a high integration workload and the business has to look further out into the future to enable it to respond to the changes and opportunities likely to occur in the industry.
Examples of this are the combined 1993 Dairy Range due for launch this summer and a strategic review of the business' I.T.
requirements.
1993 will continue to be a year of challenge and change as we consolidate our position as market leader aiming to generate the best financial performance in the industry.


Quality and efficiency: the key to prosperity
DESPITE increasingly difficult market conditions  continues its battle against the recession — improving efficiency and increasing productivity.
Throughout 1992 the brewing and distilling industries have suffered from a continuing slump in sales.
In the UK, beer production has fallen to its lowest level for 20 years and distilling production has been cut back dramatically.
Growth in export markets has slowed down and at the same time new malting capacity has come on stream leading to a very competitive market place.
Against this gloomy background, however, there have been some high points during the year.
Our malt quality was very good which helped when 1993 contracts were being negotiated.
And although our markets are declining we have increased our market share in all sectors.
We have also invested £2.5 million in improvements to the maltings, including a kiln refurbishment and dust extraction system at Bury St Edmunds, and a peat furnace at Buckie.
There was continued expenditure on health and safety items as part of our ongoing programme to keep the maltings up to modern high standards.
1993 has started well with deliveries ahead of the same period last year and ahead of budget.
We still have some malt to sell if we are to achieve 1992 volumes but we remain optimistic that this can be achieved.
It will certainly be a challenging year for , but with our strengths in quality and efficiency, we should fare better than our competitors and be in a strong position when better times return.
Figures show how much we've grown
1992 was a year of mixed fortunes for the Food and Agriculture Division.
The recession continued unabated in the UK and started to gather pace in many of our export markets, however, we successfully expanded our agriculture business and became the UKs Number One, through the purchase of  from .
During the year our turnover received a significant boost from the enlargement of the agriculture operation and finished with a massive £612 million for the year.
Within this divisional figure,(including the old ) was 60 per cent of total turnover.
This proportion will continue to grow in 1993 as the Company will be included for a full 12 months.
Apart from, turnover also increased in consumer products, helped particularly by the strong performance of  and gains at .
Malt's trading was particularly difficult.
It managed to either maintain or even extend market share within its trade sectors, but lower margins and volume declines led to a fall against 1991.
Last years saw our profit before interest reach £38.6 million.
This was nearly £10 million up on 1991, but was assisted by a profit hike of £7.4 million from the newly acquired .
You can see by these figures that the Food and Agriculture Division of  is becoming a very large company.
Will we achieve sales of £0.75 billion in 1993?
We could !
OUR ACHIEVEMENTS
Some of our achievements during 1992/93.
Health & Safety
SEVEN locations achieved a standard of health & safety and accident prevention to merit a Gold Award in 1992.
They were Preston, Buckie, the Grain Terminal, Knapton Ware, Earls Colne and , Ipswich.
Location in bloom
WALLINGFORD Maltings won  Location in Bloom trophy for their excellent display of spring flowers in the grounds of the maltings.
Pensioner  from Bury St Edmunds won the prize for the best pensioners garden.
5,000,000th tonne
EARLIER this month the Ipswich Grain Terminal passed the five million tonnes milestone.
Established in 1983 as a joint venture between  and  the terminal can handle vessels of up to 140m length and 7.45m draught with cargo capacities of 13,500 tonnes.
Training
MORE than 200 employees attended  internal Core Management training courses during 1992 and 243 people are already booked on these courses for 1993.
A further 150 employees attended external training courses during the year.
BS 5750
WYMONDHAM mill in Norfolk and  at Wells, Somerset, received the British Standards Institution's BS 5750 award for their quality of manufacturing animal feed, customer service and distribution.
Summer Fayre
North West region won the Clayton trophy at the ’ 1992 Summer Fayre held last July at Ipswich.
Radstock came second place and head office/Eagle mill third.
was placed fourth.
Retiring after 45 years at Greens
and his wife  pictured with just some of his sporting trophies.
ONE of  top all round sportsmen retires this summer after 45 years service with the company.
As a fledgling 20-year-old  started as a packer earning £5 a week, moving onto the wheat intake and warehouse.
For 15 years he served as warehouse foreman before stepping down from that position to take responsibility of the new pre-mix plant.
is a keen pigeon fancier, racing most weekends during the season and a top notch dart thrower at which he has won many trophies.
His main love now, probably to preserve his energies, is coarse fishing, you will find him every weekend during the season on the shore with his rods, or cruising the Norfolk Broads and fishing round the clock.
and his wife , who have a grown-up son and daughter, are looking forward to celebrating their Ruby wedding anniversary this year just a month prior to 's retirement.
has been quite ill recently so all at Greens wish her all good health and for her and  to enjoy a long and happy retirement.
Retirements
THE following have recently retired or have a pension which has matured.
We wish them a long, healthy and happy retirement.
The figures in brackets indicate the number of years service.
your letters
Thanks 
Ed,— I am writing to express, through Link , my thanks for the marvellous gesture by  general manager , who instigated a get-together lunch for the Kirkcaldy maltings' pensioners on .
Shortly after  left the maltings, that part of  closed down for ever, and I felt that the last link was finally broken with the major part of my working life.
Not so! always said that he had enjoyed his time at Kirkcaldy and at the lunch he underlined that sentiment.
— you were always a gentleman while you were at Kirkcaldy and that's how I'll always think of you, regardless of where you are in the future.
Thank you.
YOU are welcome to send letters on any subject.
Send to:
The Editor;
says farewell
said farewell to Key Street staff for the second time round in March, having retired previously from the engineering department.
67-year-old , took early retirement from  engineers seven years ago, but came back a year later to become the head office caretaker.
At his farewell, received various gifts from the company and workmates, and said that he plans to devote more time to his allotment and to his duties of vice-chairman and bar-chairman at the Ipswich Conservative Club.
We wish  and his wife  a long and happy retirement together.
Annual luncheon for Mendlesham maltsters
PENSIONERS and employees from the Mendlesham Maltings in Suffolk are pictured at their annual luncheon at the Bucks Head, Thwaite on March 4.
Twenty-four people attended including  and  from the Albion Maltings.
We were also delighted to see  and , both in their eighties, who worked at Stoneham maltings.
One or two pensioners were unable to come along and we wish them well.
Everyone enjoyed a good time together and an excellent meal.
, pensioner contact Norfolk
QUIZ
QUIZ WINNER
OUR quiz in the January Link seemed to appeal to the football fans amongst you.
It brought in a record number of entries from around the Group — but only four were correct!
Congratulations to winner  from Wallingford maltings whose name was drawn out from a hat, and the other worthy entrants:, Burston;, and ,.
For a change of theme here's a crossword compiled by ,, Gainsborough.
The same £25 prize applies.
Send to ,,.
No later than  .
If anyone has a quiz for a future issue — please send it in.
News from the Locations
Crediton
MY FIRST reaction on hearing Link was being published every other month was, I imagine fairly typical.
I just didn't think I would find enough to send in.
However, once again, I have been proved wrong!
At the beginning of February we saw the transfer of our bag production to Exeter.
As the Sowton Mill has an automatic packer and pelletizer it means bagging and lorry loading can be handled much faster than at Crediton.
We are, however, keeping our hand in as the coarse plant is running at full production giving us plenty of bagging to do!
Our next event was the  Dinner Dance held at Langstone Cliff Hotel on .
A joint venture between Crediton and Exeter, which gave many people an opportunity to put faces to the voices and the evening was thoroughly enjoyed by everyone.
There was unfortunately one sad note — and those of us who are rugby fans will know — especially regional director  who, attending his first International, saw England defeated by Wales —— perhaps it was a good job he left Cardiff early to join us!
Changing faces
Welcome to , our new weighbridge operator.
Originally from Stockport, Cheshire, worked as an Outward Bound instructor in Devon for a couple of years and liked the county so much he decided to stay.
This of course means that we have said farewell to  who operated the weighbridge for almost five years.
At his leaving presentation  received a briefcase, pen, and an alarm clock (complete with plug!).
Not only is  starting a new career in accounting, but he is also a lead singer in a group called ‘Cellardwellers’ and will be starting a tour of 30 dates this summer, including Hamburg and America.
We wish him the best of luck with this venture and he has promised that he won't forget us when he becomes famous!
Farewell also to , sales specialist, who, after spending almost three years with us, is moving on to pastures new.
, senior formulator, is transferring over to Exeter as customer service and planning manager.
We all wish both  and  every success.
New arrivals
We have two births to announce this month.
, sales specialist, and  on the arrival of their son  born on .
And , senior arable trader and , on the arrival of son , born .
has already been signed up for Crediton Rugby Club.
Congratulations!
All for charity
With so many people doing ‘their bit’ for Comic Relief, it is nice to report the achievements of , raw materials clerk, and his friend  (who works for Devon County Council).
Dressed as cowboys, they climbed aboard their trusty steeds ('s Datsun!) and set off in the direction of the County Hall in Exeter where they ambushed the staff and persuaded them to hand over their readies.
Then it was off to , Sowton Mill at Exeter, followed by  at Woodbury.
After a long gallop to Radstock our two heroes then made their weary way back to Crediton where they made their final assault.
A total of £176.85 was raised and  and  would like to thank all those who contributed.
Key Street, Ipswich
Red nose day at Key Street…from left,, health & safety manager;, market analyst;, formulations & specifications manager;, secretary;, administrative assistant, and , senior secretary.
AS everyone knows, was Comic Relief Day — one of those days when, if you dared to venture out of your bed, you would be forced to empty your pockets for charity.
Dress in ‘bad taste’ was the order of the day at Key Street and out came the psychedelic shirts, hideous trousers, flower power shorts, multi-coloured spotted nightshirts, loud ties and luminous tights, complete with resplendent ankle socks.
Finishing touches were silver handbags, flashing neon ear-rings, pale blue eyeshadow and tomatoes — everywhere!
This mottley crew, headed by Group MD  in his glorious waistcoat, went around the office in all their splendour receiving donations for Comic Relief.
Altogether £345.15 was collected by fair means or foul and the Company has very generously rounded this up to £500.
What a ‘relief’ when everything returned to normal!
Carnoustie
A WARM welcome to  who joined us on .
replaced  who left Carnoustie in January.
(We thought we had a budgie in the office one day — whistles constantly!).
Congratulations to  and .
Their Tibetan Spaniel, Ch.
Niord Ricochet (who appeared in a previous issue of Link ) won the Veteran Dog Class at Crufts recently.
Penrith
AROUND sixty employees from the NW Region had the chance to get to know each other recently when they were invited to Penrith's annual Christmas party held at a local hotel.
Operations director at Penrith,, welcomed everyone to the dinner and NW regional direction,, gave a short talk on the changes in the region since the merger.
The party continued well into the early hours and was heralded as a great success by all.
Xmas panto
‘Oh yes we do!
Oh no you don't’…could be heard in full force on the annual children's pantomine trip on  to see, among others, of ‘Hi-di-hi’ fame, in Dick Whittington at the Theatre Royal, Newcastle.
A coach of 36 people (employees and their children) set out for the matinee performance, stopping en route for lunch.
The children thoroughly enjoyed the panto which also starred the ; who are currently appearing on Children's BBC in Chucklevision.
When the performance finished, the party went for a meal before returning to Penrith tired but happy.
, Gainsborough
at Gainsborough welcomes  to the team, who they believe, could be the first female weighbridge/plant operator in the company.
joined the team on  and works alongside the men, clearing straw and driving the loader as well as checking in the deliveries.
‘She often has a shovel in one hand and a pen in the other’ said manager .


CONGRATULATIONS to our proud ‘mums and dads’ on their new arrivals.
(process operator) and  who's first sin,, was born on .
(packer) and  on the arrival of  on .
(distribution manager) and  on the birth of their first child,, on , and to  (engineering manager) and his wife  on the arrival of a son,, on .
Farewell
We have said goodbye to two cleaners from the Cornard site during the last few months — both of whom passed retirement age many moons ago!
For health reasons, 69-year-old  decided to call it a day on March 19 after working for five years in the semi-moist processing section.
At 75 years of age  also decided it was time to take things a little easier and retired on  after 13 years with the company.
now hopes to spend more time on his hobby of gardening and growing plants in his greenhouse, and left us with these final few words…
The Sweepers Farewell
D'ye ken  with his coat so white
His cheery smile and his coat so bright
He made me work with all his might
When he came round the Mill in the morning.
For the sound of his voice just filled me with dread
My old knees knocked and my face turned red
He'd caught me talking to  or 
When he came round the Mill in the morning.
Yes I ken  deny it who dare
Ever firm but always fair
And now I've retired I shan't be there
When he comes round the Mill in the morning.
So here's to  with heart and soul
Let's drink to his health and finish the bowl
I'll be unemployed and too old for the dole!
When he comes round the Mill in the morning.
(With apologies to )
We wish  and  long and happy retirements.
Knapton
KNAPTON maltings held its very own barley identification course in January, organised and run by our friend  (retired from the National Institute of Agricultural Botany).
The course was attended by employees from all areas of the maltings and will ensure that we are even more professional for this coming barley intake season!
ON COURSE…(l to r), weighbridge operator; and , maltpacker/cleaners;, course tutor; barley manager;, production manager;, roaster operator; and , laboratory assistants;, assistant to the barley manager;, roaster manager and , office manager.
Louth
completed 25 years service at Louth Maltings in January this year.
Like many other RAF servicemen he found himself stationed in Lincolnshire and after five years service his Lincolnshire bonds were established and he later moved to the areas into the more peaceful activity of a fitter in the malting industry.
took over as engineering manager at the beginning of 1992 from  and should be congratulated not only on 25 years service, but also on the success of his new job, particularly in regard to safety.
production director,, presented  with a collection of hand turned natural wood items prior to a celebration dinner.
, left, being congratulated on 25 years' service by .
, and , accompanied by 14 children, went for a fish and chip supper in January before attending the local theatre groups' production of ‘Sleeping Beauty’.
The children all agreed that the adults were well behaved, embarrassing them only once when they stood up to sing ‘I'm A Little Teapot’, with actions!
Prompted by a ‘Love Louth more’ campaign, Louth maltings decided to play its part last Christmas by placing a 20ft christmas tree on the roof of the maltings.
The tree was decorated with lights by  and his team of engineers, and was such a spectacle it resulted in a letter in the local paper from Santa Claus himself, thanking us for putting it up.
The only problem encountered was finding a volunteer to be the fairy!
, left, retires after 28 years' service.
He is pictured with production director .
, left, receives one of his retirement gifts from Louth GM .
WE have recently said farewell to two maltsters on their retirement from Louth:
had been employed for 28 years on barley intake.
Over the years  's job has gone from unloading individual bags to today's bulk deliveries of around 40,000 tonnes each year.
At his farewell lunch  was presented with retirement gifts on behalf of his colleagues by  and gifts from the company by  production director,.
These included a carpet cleaner, portable TV, microwave, and sandwich toaster.
After seven years service plant operator  has also retired from Louth.
presented  with a nest of tables from his workmates and an electric jigsaw on behalf of the company from Louth general manager .
Wallingford
FOR some time now Wallingford engineering staff have been creeping around like concerned parents not wanting to disturb a sleeping child.
The reason is now obvious, a pair of robins had nested in the electrical spares rack.
Pigeon holes?
Well the robins weren't to know!
They were fledged and flown by the second week in February, is this a record?
Let's hope they come back next year.
Thanks to and  who organised our Xmas dinner.
A good time was had by all.
Pictured (l to r) and , and .
You can also just see our guests, and , enjoying themselves.
After wiring up the Xmas tree lights and programming the computer, even managed the washing up!
When I first moved to Wallingford I was told by a local resident (in no uncertain terms) what would happen to me if  didn't continue with the  tradition of putting a Christmas Tree on the silo top.
So how could we refuse.
In 1989, up went one tree.
In 1990 up went two trees.
1991 we had two trees with flashing lights, and a local family, whose children had written in to us about the trees, were invited to switch them on.
So how did we better that in 1992?
Two trees, computer controlled sequenced lights, about 40 children and parents from our neighbouring school, a carol service, roast chestnuts, sausage rolls, mince pies, fizzy pop, gale force winds and a torrential downpour.
A great (albeit damp) time was had by all.
retires from Wallingford maltings, pictured, right,(standing) with maltings manager  and colleagues at his farewell.
retired at the end of December 1992 having completed some 20 years service with  and latterly .
’ cheery voice and shrill whistle will be sadly missed in Malt Dispatch by all the drivers he has guided back on to the doings!
At his farewell the Social Club lounge was packed with colleagues wishing to give  a good send-off, his three daughters also came along to lend moral support.
We wish  a long and happy retirement and hope he will continue to pop in on a weekly basis to keep the Pools Syndicate going.
Burstwick
Retiring from Burstwick,, left, with transport manager,, and , third from left, with colleague,.
EMPLOYEES at Burstwick got together recently to bid farewell to two of their long serving colleagues.
Driver, was presented with a carriage clock after 22 years with the firm and driver/yardman  was presented with a wrist watch after 24 years service.
The pair are pictured with two of their colleagues from the transport department.
Between all four of them they have almost 100 years service.
Link welcomes new Burstwick correspondent  who has agreed to take up the post from previous correspondent .
Portbury
, centre,, right, and .
CONGRATULATIONS to packer/technicians , centre, and , right, who have each completed 25 years service.
They are pictured receiving their long service awards from  chairman .


CONGRATULATIONS to two teams of employees from  who raised £370 for the Spastics Society in March.
The teams raised the cash by taking part in an army assault course held at Warminster, Wiltshire.


seems to be producing more than just cereals and soups at the moment…the baby business is booming and so far they are all boys.
Firstly, on ,, senior distribution clerk, produced twin boys, and .
, national accounts controller became the proud father of a son, on .
Next was , development assistant and , leading hand, process, whose son  arrived on .
, secretary to MD,, gave birth to her son  on .
We now eagerly await the arrival of  's baby which is due mid-April…the burning question — is it going to be another boy?
Congratulations to  who has raised £350 for the Hope House Children's Respite Hospice appeal by doing a sponsored silence earlier this year.
is pictured presenting the cheque to  (left) from the appeals office with two of her colleagues, and .
Hull pensioner , right, with Hull Flake mill pensioner contact .
Never too old
YOU'RE never too old to start new hobbies according to retired employee .
At 91 years of age, has just taken up painting water colours and choir singing at a local day centre in his home town of Hull.
Until recently  was more or less confined to his home having no close relatives or transport.
He was then befriended by a young mother of two,, who took him shopping every week and suggested that he should go along to the centre.
‘I've never done anything like it before’ said .
‘But it really does me good to get out and I enjoy it enormously.’
worked at  Hull Flake mill as a wages clerk for 14 years, retiring at 66 years of age.
‘I enjoyed my time at ’ he said.
‘We worked from 9.15am to 5.30pm and got a slice of toast and a cup of tea when we arrived.
The mill was quite close to home so in the lunch hour I was able to go home to see to my mother who was ill at the time.’
Nowadays, enjoys his outings with  and her children who he has more or less adopted as his own grandchildren.
‘They give me lots of pleasure’, he said.
‘I don't know what I'd do without them these days.’
Very best wishes to you  and we hope you keep painting for many years to come.
International flavour
A GROUP of Japanese customers were given the red carpet treatment when they visited  's Buckie maltings in March.
The visitors were engineers from the  in Japan and were making a fleeting tour of maltings around the UK.
The party are pictured enjoying a five-star lunch after their trip around the maltings with distilling director,(standing), Buckie's general manager,; from Kentford and  from Carnoustie.
Thornton Dale
The Final Curtain by , Driver
LINK correspondent  sends us this extract of a poem written to mark the closure of  Thornton Dale mill at the end of April.
Yes, folks it'll be a sad day, when it comes to the closure
Some of us have been in here that long, we could have to be treated for exposure
The day they told us we were to close gave us all a shock
Especially the ones with Burgess written through 'em like a stick of rock
Over the years, I know we've had our snags
Like when we delivered our bulk out of bags
Or like the proteins we brought back
Most of them all in hessian sack,
There was soya meal and groundnut flake
Linseed and even cotton cake
All these as I've said in hessian sack
All to be humped or carried on one's back
And still today there's most of us here by heck
That can remember the dust and grit of ‘em, that got down your neck
All these and then maybe some more
In great piles rising from the warehouse floor
All stacked in bag by bag and ton by ton,
Hard work, maybe, but by hell we had some fun
It didn't matter then how much work there was to do just give a yelp
There was always someone around to help
Not like now, there's this, or that, or the computers on the blink
This week we heard that April 30th is the date
When on this mill for the last time there will close the gate
It hardly seems right that we should get the chop
When they kept telling us profit wise, we were well to the top
And, look, how many more mills on us relied
If they had a problem, to keep them with feed supplied.
From now on with their problems they'll have to cope
They'll find out it takes more than just a little hope
When they have an extra heavy intake of sale
It'll be no good saying, ‘Oh, well send some to that lot at Thornton Dale’
We won't be there, the gates have all been shut
This old mill at Thornton Dale has churned out her very last nut
But my friends there's one thing I can say without fear
We can all walk away with conscience clear
Because when it came down to the work bit
I can't think of any of the workers that would shirk it
And now in reverence to the mill I think we should lower our head
After all, she's supplied a lot of us, a long time, with a lot of bread.
End of an era
SE regional director,, chats with Eagle Mill pensioners  & , right, and  & .
THE Eagle Mill closure at the end of last year marked the end of an era for Ipswich pensioners — many of whom had been associated with the mill for their entire lives.
In appreciation of their loyalty and service a special luncheon was held on , attended by more than 50 people, including  chairman , his mother , regional director  and former Eagle Mill GM , and his wife.
1993 Shows  will be attending


Will the  make their fortune?
We're all keeping our fingers crossed here at  — to hear if there's fame and fortune in store for the  — a family at  who have been shortlisted for the TV game show, Family Fortunes.
The family comprises of:(mum), her three sons —, and ; 's wife ; and their cousin .
It all began last November when  wrote off for an application form and shortly afterwards they were invited, along with 8,000 other families, to go to Birmingham for an audition.
At the end of March they were delighted when they received a letter saying they had been shortlisted to take part.
And are now waiting to hear the final outcome.
If successful, they will be notified in April and the programme will be shown in the autumn — watch this space for details!
Obituaries
IT is with deep regret that we have to report the deaths of the following:
IT IS with regret that I have to report the death of one of our Trowbridge pensioners on .
was the manager of  's maintenance department and the fleet of delivery vehicles.
joined the company in 1945 and served 28 years service before retiring in 1973 and 65 years of age.
, Trowbridge pensioner contact.
It is with deep regret that the death is announced of , wife of .
was maintenance foreman at Hull Mill for 37 years, until his retirement in March 1992.
On behalf of all who know , we offer our sincere condolences.
, pensioner contact Hull Flake Mill.
Link — The House Journal of the  JULY 1991
Growing to plan
THE first six months of the year have gone very much according to plan and most of the companies within the Food & Agriculture Division are close to their budgets.
We are exceedingly fortunate that many of our products and our customers are relatively recession resistant.
In the last edition of Link I reported that the economic outlook was against us, but this would also create opportunities for us to acquire and merge other businesses with our own.
We have steadily acquired businesses since then.
New businesses
In APRIL we acquired some of the assets and goodwill of  '.
animal feed business.
This is another addition to  's SW Region's operations.
In MAY we acquired some new breakfast cereal business from  — the hot oat cereal and high fibre bran products will further extend the range of  breakfast cereals.
In JUNE  announced the purchase of the Kentford Grain Store from , the Irish agricultural group.
This first rate storage facility will enable  to take greater advantage of the high quality East Anglian malting barley crop at harvest.
Fayre success
Once again, the Summer Fayre was a major success and although it was a miserably cold day, the rain held off and allowed the full programme of events to take place.
There really is an enormous amount of work and preparation for the Summer Fayre, and on behalf of those who enjoyed themselves, I would like to express our thanks to , the chairman of the day, and to his committee.
Spills & thrills of the Summer Fayre
pages 7 to 10
New finance director
has been appointed finance director of .
has a wide range of commercial experience and joins us from  (cheese manufacturers) where he had been finance director since 1988.
He was previously finance director of , a private group of companies involved in pharmaceutical, minerals and colour processing.
, 39, is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants and lives in Melton Mowbray.
He will be based at the Food Group's headquarters at Market Harborough.


BS 5750 Approval
at Maldon has been recommended for approval to BS 5750 Part 2 (ISO 9002).
This takes both flour mills in the  to BS 5750 standard, achieving the approval last year.
Many people find BS 5750 a mysterious concept but in fact it is very simple and logical.
All manufacturing processes require a consistent approach to achieve a uniform product.
BS 5750 is simply a method of formalizing the approach to manufacturing so that casual and ad hoc practices are outlawed.
This starts with documenting a workable procedure and providing suitable plant and properly calibrated measuring equipment followed up with full job training.
The packing department show  how to write a proper Quality Manual!(l to r),,, and .
Everyone at  was involved in setting up the procedures under the guidance of technical manager  assisted by .
To ensure standards are maintained an inspector from  Register of Quality Assurance will return every six months to check that actual working practices agree with the written procedures.
This continuous review gives customers great confidence in us and our product.
STOP PRESS
Eagle Mill to close
has announced the closure of Eagle Mill at Ipswich during the latter part of 1992.
The move is part of an overall restructuring of the SE region following the acquisition of  of Burston in February.
Feed manufacturing operations will be concentrated at mills at Burston and Wymondham in Norfolk and Earls Colne in Essex, with the new SE regional offices at Burston.
It is hoped that many of the employees at Eagle Mill will be absorbed into other sections of .
A new united sales team for East Anglia is in place reporting to regional director .
Full details of the charges in the next issue.
Group news…
MALT FOR THE WORLD
IN THE present economic climate  is in the enviable position of having a full order book for the 1990/91 season.
Export in particular has had a good year and during 1991 we are forecast to deliver an all time record tonnage of malt to 40 customers in 33 countries.
The domestic malt market is becoming far less predictable with increased import competition and continued concentration within the brewing industry following the far-reaching Monopolies and Mergers Commission ruling on tied estates last year.
UK beer sales have fallen some 7 per cent over the first three months of this year, due to a combination of poor weather and recession.
There are signs too, that the distilling industry is cutting back whisky production from recent high levels, all of which will reduce sales opportunities in the UK.
Growth market
There is no doubt that the world market will increase further in importance for the malt division.
Here, fortunately, beer sales are increasing by just over 2 per cent per annum, or in terms of malt an additional requirement of 250,000 tonnes each year.
Indeed, many countries have recorded more impressive rates of growth in recent years.
Japan for instance, our largest single and most important market, has consistently increased beer sales by 6–7 per cent over the past three years.
In fact the whole of SE Asia has been booming over this period.
New opportunities
As well as spending a great deal of time servicing existing customers we are constantly looking for new opportunities in developing markets around the world.
The changing face of Eastern Europe has already had a dramatic affect on the malt market and as the political and economic climate becomes more stable new opportunities will doubtless emerge.
Despite a growing world market, competition remains fierce and will only intensify in the short term as new malting capacity is commissioned in numerous countries.
One thing is certain, as the competition increases, worldwide reputation for quality and service will pay dividends.
Continued growth for Omega
OMEGA products have performed well in the first half of the year achieving significant growth in volume compared with last year.
We are one of the few companies in the pet food industry not to have seen a decline in sales during this period as wholesalers and retailers reduce stocks to compensate for the high interest rates.
According to a recently released market survey we have now emerged as the clear market leader in the pet retail trade for complete dry dog food and dry cat food.
We have just reached agreement with the Kennel Club that  will sponsor all the Kennel Club field trials for the 1991/92 season — more good publicity for Omega.
Best seller
is very pleased with our ‘Cat Crunchies’ which have become its best selling line of dry cat food.
In July  will be launching a new dry cat food made by us called ‘'s Selection’— a very attractive product for which we have high expectations.
Export
On the export side the picture is mixed, with some products selling particularly well and others moving slower than originally predicted.
Sales into Germany are good, while in France, although well up on last year, business is quieter than expected.
We have launched Omega products into Sweden where we hope to build on the tremendous success we have had in Norway.
Introductory sales have been made to Poland and Hungary which gives us our first opening into Eastern Europe.
The export team has recently promoted Omega products at exhibitions in France and Holland.
Omega Tasty dog food coming off the fully automated packing line at Chilton.
Closer to home
At Chilton we have commissioned the new warehouse which has eased our storage problems and the second extruder line is due to be fully operational in early July.
There have been several major improvements to the process at Gt.
Cornard which are nearing completion and we have a beautiful new bridge over the mill pool which will allow lorry movements around the perimeter of the site.
We are still optimistic about further growth during the year with a number of new product launches planned in the coming months.
DEVELOPMENTS AT 
FIVE hectic months have passed since I joined .
Highlights have included survival of a new soup season, commissioning of a new extruder, completion of a new warehouse and offices, the acquisition of two new businesses, gaining  approval for a £2.3m puffing plant, identifying new computer software and hardware, and commissioning our extended crunchy oven capacity.
The  business has changed dramatically since it joined  six years ago.
The product range is now much wider and falls into three categories —
Savoury
The savoury range includes all possible varieties of powdered soups, sauce and casserole mixes and since the acquisition of  — gravy powder.
Cereals
Cereal products sold in the UK are muesli, crunchy, extruded cereals, malties and following our recent acquisition from  now includes hot oat cereals and extruded bran products.
We also sell cornflakes, puffed and sugar coated puffed wheat and rice manufactured at  factory in France.
Sweetmix
The third segment which we call Sweetmix products includes  table creams, custard, cornflour, instant chocolate drinks, lemon meringue and creme caramel desserts.
The acquisition of the  business from  has extended our range in this sector.
's major customers have always been the well known supermarket chains, but we are now also selling to regional supermarkets under  's generic brands and to cash and carry's.
A combination of acquisitions and new development has taken  to a turnover of £40 million — a fivefold increase on that of six years ago.
Above all, is a fun place to work and I'm looking forward to the challenges of the future.
Quality assured
ON January 1 this year the Food Safety Act came into force.
This legislation makes it an offence to sell or keep for sale food which is unfit or injurious to health.
Although this Act does not apply directly to animal feedstuffs, as compounders, we consider ourselves part of the human food chain.
Certainly the larger supermarkets and retail chains are now exerting more controls over the quality of rations and the mills in which they are produced.
has always been a quality conscious company and over the years has implemented procedures to ensure high standards of nutritional value and safety.
Our first rule is that all raw materials must be from a known and identifiable source.
For example, on wheatfeed a by-product of flour milling, we hold information on over 20 different flour mills.
By this means we build up data on the quality of a raw material, its variability and the reliance of a supplier in the quality concept.
Extensive testing
The laboratory at New Cut West works very closely with regional buyers in implementing the sampling schedule, resulting in 10,000 raw material samples being analysed in detail each year.
It would be fair to say that these tests are as details, if not more so, than those for human food.
Over 100 different tests are applied over the whole raw material range.
Development of sophisticated analytical equipment now enables us to measure potential toxins, pesticide and drug residues at levels as low as two parts in 1000 million.
Salmonella poisoning has received considerable publicity in the recent past.
We have our own Ministry registered salmonella testing laboratory with around 8000 raw materials and animal rations assayed annually.
In addition, all regional buyers inspect and approve all raw material stores personally to ensure they achieve our laid down standards.
All this testing is on-going and if suppliers falter in any way they are quickly informed.
If remedial action is not forthcoming we would cease trading with them.
The standards of cleanliness and hygiene in our feed mills is now expected to be close to human food factories, and this is monitored by the Company's Quality and Service audits.
As a Company we are still striving to set our standards even higher, and although such an approach increases our costs of production we believe that this is the only way forward if we wish to be trading with the larger livestock producers in the future.
100 years at Suffolk Show
celebrated 100 years at the Suffolk Show in May and to top the occasion collected first prize for the most attractive non-machinery agricultural stand at the show.
The Company's first attendance was in 1892 at the Suffolk Agricultural Association's ‘Annual Exhibition’ at Bury St. Edmunds where  occupied stand number three.
It was showing a range of rations for cattle, calves and lambs.
The official catalogue entry for calf meal said ‘may be deliciously used as a condiment with other crushed cereals’.
In 1892 there were 64 trade stands, this year there were 650.
The 1991  stand took the form of a splendid marquee housing displays of memorabilia and photographs of times past.
A competition was also held and souvenirs were distributed to mark the centenary.
Regional credit controller , right, collecting the cup for the best stand at the Suffolk Show.
notches up 25 years
, left, receiving his 25 year service ties from group MD .
, production director of , completed 25 years service on .
He joined as an assistant malting manager at Ipswich, and was made head maltster in 1968 and a director of  in 1973.
At a dinner to celebrate his 25 years, said of  that he was an example to everybody in terms of hard work and leadership and recalled how in the snow of 1982 he had walked the five miles from his home and Playford to be at his desk at the normal time.
was able to confirm that  's promotion through the Company had nothing to do with the fact that he cut  's lawns at the weekends.
was presented with a teak garden seat — knowing  's restless energy we doubt he will have time to use it.
takes the reins
Following  's retirement  has been appointed director of buying for .
joined the Group with the acquisition of  of Trowbridge in May 1978 and has been regional buyer for the north west region since March 1985.
PR firm
has appointed public relations company  to work with all operating companies in the Food Group.
The London based firm specializes in the food and drinks sector and is headed by MD,, who says they are ‘delighted’ to be able to help with a broadly based communications programme.
Maltings engineer retires
PROJECT engineer  has retired from  after 41 years service.
began his career with  in June 1950 as a maintenance electrician and over the years he has worked for  at Wallingford, at Newark and from 1987 for  at Gainsborough.
is well known at maltings throughout the country and will be greatly missed, particularly for his jokes and story telling.
pictured at his retirement dinner with his farewell gift from the Company — a banjo barometer (there's no doubt that  could make a joke about this one!).
All our yesterdays
WHERE has thirty eight years, one month and nineteen days gone to? has it all really happened?
Yes it has, and as my mind races back over nearly four decades I cannot help but smile, how is it possible that everything has changed so much?
and I formed a partnership on  in Seething Lane, EC3 — it nearly didn't happen on a dispute in wage negotiation.
They offered at £6.15s.0d., I countered at £7.5s.0d., confident of settlement at £7.0s.0d., their counter was £6.15s.0d.  or forget it!
My first lesson on Day One; labour is a commodity like any other raw material.
My early days at  were not quite the era of the quill pen but at Ipswich and Rotherhithe, London SE16, we had chest high desks with stools to match.
How can I forget  all 4′ 11″ of him who would run across the office and at the last moment hop, skip and jump and land astride his stool.
In doing that every day for fifty one years he actually wore a trench in the solid concrete floor.
Post war
In 1953 it was post war time, the docks working seven days a week.
The rule of the day was ‘pay the docker’ rather than stop the ship.
There was temptation money when unloading whisky and embarrassment money when unloading lavatory pans (true).
We didn't make a move without approval of the Buying Room at Ipswich, this was the power base of the Company, the team was led by  (Mr Jim),(Pop) and .
This was a period of great advances in technology, particularly in communication.
concession to improve communication was to increase the number of times they rang City Office to enquire if ‘anything was going on:.
, left, at his farewell with  MD .
Somehow, everyone seemed to know their place, you were moulded into a  person with a very tight grip kept on all staff.
The amount of information you received was strictly on a need to know basis.
The philosophy was to ‘purchase for profit’, as few people as possible to be authorised to spend the company's money whether raw materials, machinery and stationery and never tell anyone how the Company performed.
After all it was the family money.
Tight rein
We were all addressed by surname,,, etc.
The amazing thing is they addressed customers exactly the same way.
A very tight rein was held on all staff, it was as if they were very nervous and suspicious that we might go made and accept a bid!
Anyone growing a beard was immediately condemned as a dangerous left wing revolutionary.
They also had a deep suspicion about anyone wearing a bandage and would go to great lengths to find out why one was really wearing it.
It was usually felt that the chap with his arm in a sling had an ulterior motive.
The wearing of a plaster cast was only allowed in extreme circumstances and brown suede shoes were definitely out.
Yes, they were very exciting times and the amazing fact is the harder and more unreasonable the senior management acted the more the ‘masses’ strived to please.
We changed to meet the demands of the '70s and '80s and now we are into the '90s with many more changes to come; I am confident that there is a very bright future for our Company which is blessed with a lot of very good professional people who we must be careful not to undervalue.
buying director
Farewell
retired at the end of June after 38 years with the Company.
will be missed for his keen sense of humour.
He could, through the use of a few phrases, ‘paint’ the absurdity of a situation in the listener's mind, while his sense of timing was immaculate.
This enabled him to tell old jokes as if they were new and made him one of the ‘all time great’ story tellers.
He was also the Company Bookmaker and would give odds on any event.
Any bets taken were meticulously recorded in his diary which enabled him to remind punters of their unpaid debts.
Invariably he was the winner!
We wish  and his wife,, a long and happy retirement.
MD  
OPEN COUNTRY TRADITIONAL FREE RANGE CHICKEN
's involvement in free range chicken production is proving a highly successful and profitable venture — poultry manager,, gives an update on recent developments.
OUR ‘Open Country Free Range Chicken’ project is one of a number of new  initiatives which have taken place over the last few years in response to the dramatic structural changes ongoing in the poultry industry.
We began detailed evaluation of the potential for free range chickens two years ago.
Housing options were considered, economic  feasibility studies were undertaken and potential processor partners were identified.
Following this, in early 1990, the SW region encouraged an ex-employee from Crediton,, to erect a poly-tunnel house on his farm in Devon which was used to demonstrate the  system.
This proved extremely successful and after several open days farmers began signing up in increasing numbers.
Package Deal
We offer farmers a package deal.
They invest in the preparation of the site and enter into a contractual agreement to grow free range chickens for .
We in turn have a deal with a packer who processes the birds for the relevant market.
supplies the feed, chicks, veterinary advice and transportation to the processor's plant.
The farmer provides the building, labour, gas, electricity, bedding, etc., for which he receives a management fee.
What is Free Range?
Free range chicken production has recently attracted a great deal of interest from our friends in Brussels and for months now a battle royal has been going on to tie up the system of rearing birds to a ‘given’ free range name.
Open Country Free Range Chicken in their natural environment.
This has now been resolved and there will be three new ‘labels’ or definitions of Free Range:
Traditional Free Range — This is the system  has adopted.
The birds are grown to 81 days and the breed used is a slow growing variety.
The birds are stocked at a rate of 5,000 per hectare in a fenced off pasture to protect them from foxes and other predators.
Free Range — The birds in this category are grown to 56 days and a standard breed is used.
Stocking density is higher under this system and the end product looks very similar to that of a conventional chicken.
are the major retailer of this category at the moment.
Free Range Total Freedom — The birds are grown to 81 days and the breed used is slow growing.
This is the French system favoured by , ably assisted by .
The birds are, it is said, permitted to roam about in forests.
They obviously don't have any foxes in SW France!
Future plans
The long term future for free range chicken looks set fair.
It rides on the back of the general move to increased white meat consumption and a greater public awareness of animal welfare issues.
Keep a look out when you're in your local supermarket in the future, there is a fair chance the Traditional Free Range bird you see there, will have been grown on the  Open Country system of management.
Customer visit
AS an alternative to  's (export sales manager) never-ending customer visits around Europe, we took the initiative of inviting a group of existing and potential customers to visit  in May, for a two-day Flavour Seminar.
The first day included a series of slide presentations and guided tours of the departments.
On the second day the guests worked with the R&D flavourists concocting flavours they themselves had suggested.
All were very impressed with both the flavours and the seminar itself.
Following the success of the event, which we believe was the first of its kind in our field, we intend to hold a number of similar seminars in the future, for export and home-based customers, to confirm  's place as the leading flavour supplier to the crisp and snack industry throughout Europe.
‘Major — wrecks’
WHEN  from Radstock took part in an all-male ‘major-wrecks’ troupe at a local carnival in 1989, he had no idea how things would escalate.
The troupe made the performance in aid of CAF (Contact-A-Family), a registered charity set up to support families with handicapped children.
After scooping the majority of prizes at the event the 24-man-troupe found themselves being booked for other carnivals which led to a whole summer's bookings in 1990.
From each performance they were given either a fixed sum or collected money from the crowd for charity.
So far 1991 looks to be as busy as last year with two or three performances booked for almost every weekend.
They have also auditioned for the BBC's ‘Generation Game’— so look out for them on ‘'s show’.
— all for charity.
Obituaries


—
IT is with great sadness that I have to report that  died on .
retired from , where he was export services manager, in May 1982 after completing 43½ years of loyal and valuable service to the Company.
The late  pictured with his wife  on his retirement in 1982.
He will be remembered for his wonderful attention to detail and his meticulous work.
His many friends within  and the Ipswich area will miss him.
's funeral was on , at St. Augustine's church in Ipswich and was attended by his local friends, pensioners and current employees.
To  and all the family our deepest sympathy.


IT is with great sadness that we have to announce the premature death, on , of , 's production planning manager.
, 37, had been with the Company since 1982 and was part of the team which moved from Bletchley to Northampton.
He leaves a widow,, and will be greatly missed by all who had the pleasure of knowing him.
It is with deep regret that we have to report the deaths of the following:
Re-development complete
A LUNCH for close to 90 people, mostly Estate Agents, was held on  by  on the third floor of ‘One’ Great Tower Street (the old headquarters of ) to mark the completion of the re-development started in January 1989.
Reaction from those who attended was, without exception, extremely favourable, and endorses the view that the building constitutes one of the finest available to the market in the City of London.
The re-development took place while retaining the original (1910) granite and Portland stone façade on Great Tower Street and this was replicated at the rear of the building and down the open side on Idol Lane.
Prestigious
Floor area totals a little under 50,000 sq ft and the specification and interior finishes are of a very high quality befitting use as a prestigious headquarters.
A marketing campaign is now in full swing with our agents —, having maximum flexibility to meet the requirements of potential customers in terms of purchase of the freehold or leasehold.
re-development co-ordinator  
The imposing entrance hall of ‘One’ Great Tower Street.
joins Pensions
has been appointed  deputy pensions manager based at Lower Brook Street, Ipswich.
, 30, is an Associate of the Pensions Management Institute and has a BA in Economics gained at Sussex University.
She was previously with  as a pensions consultant.
NO SEX IN THE PENSION SCHEME
ALL members of the Pension Scheme will have received an announcement recently detailing changes to the Scheme Rules.
The reasons for these changes began some years ago, when  made , aged 52, redundant.
took  to Court because he was not entitled to claim an early retirement pension, unlike a woman of 52 years.
He maintained that this was sexual discrimination.
It was fought all the way to the European Court of Justice, which decided in his favour.
was unable to savour his victory, however, as he had died during the course of the hearings (is there a moral here somewhere?)
This decision turned out to be very significant.
It means that male and female employees, in the same category, must now have equal benefits and the same Normal Retirement Age (NRA), even though State pensions remain payable at different ages.
The  Scheme had already taken steps in this direction for new employees but had no plans to equalize the NRAs of existing members.
However, some action had to be taken to bring the Scheme into line with the Court's decision.
We were in an impossible situation; whatever retirement age was chosen, someone would be upset.
We therefore looked for a solution which was fair and would meet most members expectations.
We decided to equalize the NRA at age 65, making Schedule II the single ongoing Schedule, with a new scale of benefits combining the best features of Schedule I and Schedule II.
The details of the changes were given in the announcements, but in summary this now means that for members of Schedule II —
pensions will be even more closely related to their actual final earnings.
the death in service benefit will be four times earnings.
ill-health retirement and spouses benefits on death in service will be based on potential service to age 65.
In addition, those members who retire after age 62, with Company consent, will not have their pension reduced for early payment.
Members of Schedule I have been given a choice of remaining in that Schedule with an NRA of 60, or of opting for the new, improved, Schedule II.
I wonder if  realised, when he began his argument with the , that the outcome would affect practically every Pension Scheme in the UK and many of those in the rest of the European Community?
I very much doubt it.
Discounts for all at 
ALL employees and pensioners are now entitled to a 10 per cent discount on accommodation bookings, and a 5 per cent discount on conference bookings at  world-wide, thanks to a Gold Crown Card agreement made by .
The accommodation agreement also gives extra benefits: automatic room upgrade, late check-out, and double/twin room at single rate when accompanied by your partner — all subject to availability.
To quality for the discount — accommodation must be booked through  's central reservation offices on:
Quoting the Gold Crown Number 
For the 5 per cent discount on conference facilities, bookings must be made through  's ‘First Place’ offices on:
REMEMBER —The discount only applies if bookings are made through the above offices .
Sales brochures on  in the UK, Europe and world-wide can be obtained by calling .
A resident alien's view
and  with their children in Hawaii, Xmas 1990.
from  's Group Information Services department at Ipswich took the opportunity to spend some time in the USA 18 months ago, when he went to  in Kansas to set up an Information Technology department.
Now about halfway through the project, sends us his impressions of life across the ‘pond’.
HAVING found a school for our three children and a house to rent, my wife  and I took up our new life on .
, my new work colleague, took us to our new home where he and his wife had organised the house and furniture for us — all we had to do was unpack the 20 crates of personal belongings!
We all settled in very quickly, especially the girls.
The people of Kansas and colleagues at  have been very supporting.
The American people are proud of their country and rightfully so.
It's vast (England would fit into the state of Kansas alone!) full of variety and beauty.
We have yet to visit it all!
Here are a few of the oddities we have found in our adopted country.
Where else but in the mid-west of USA could you:
Travel less than half-a-mile in a built up area without finding a fast food restaurant — yet travel west for 600 miles and not see anything but grass.
Have a National Anthem that only one person () can sing properly.
Confuse a  waitress by asking her for a Big Mac and chips?
Not be able to live without a car — yet not be allowed to drive faster than 55 mph on a three lane highway!
Wear shorts on Monday when the temperature is 65 degrees and be in winter clothes the next when it drops to 35 degrees.
Be assaulted by a newspaper being ‘delivered’ to someone's driveway!
We miss our friends and relations in the UK but thanks to our new friends, especially my work colleagues, life in Kansas City is both good and rewarding.
bows out
and his wife , centre, with colleagues from  (L to r) back,, secretary, chief draughtsman,, chief engineer,, electrical engineer,, contracts engineer.
Front, and , trainee draughtsman.
AFTER more than 31 years working for , electrical engineer  has packed away his drawing board for the last time and started his retirement.
Over the years  has been responsible for improving the mill control systems throughout the country; updating the simple push buttons on the walls to the present day fully computerised systems.
He joined the company in 1960 when  asked him to set up the Company's first electrical department.
Having accepted the job,, who lived in Chelmsford, commuted each day to Rotherhithe until the department moved to Ipswich in 1974.
He has lived and worked in the town ever since.
will not only be missed by his friends and colleagues in the Ipswich office but by all the mills where his work has been much appreciated.
Farewell to 
, secretary in  department, Ipswich, retired on , after 14 years service.
was presented with a sewing machine as her retirement gift from the company, by  MD .
Colleague  also presented her with various gifts on behalf of friends and colleagues.
Three days later  was on her way to Australia to visit her married daughter and to take a well earned holiday.
‘What did you say your inside leg measurement is ?’
Left to right:,, and  MD .
French study tour
EIGHTEEN cattle specialists from , set off to Brittany in March, for a three-day study tour of the French dairy industry.
The French have dramatically changed their approach to dairy farming since the introduction on quotas in 1984 and we were keen to find out more about their farming, feeding and management techniques, and see their research facilities.
Cattle specialists get togged-up for one of their visits.
The packed itinerary included visits to five farms; an animal feed manufacturer; INRA — a leading research institute for dairy production, and ULN — one of Europe's largest dairy co-operatives producing a wide range of dairy products for human and animal use.
As a result of the tour, our cattle specialists are well able to talk to both internal staff and customers about dairying in France — ensuring that our customers stay ahead of their European competitors and that our cattle specialists stay well ahead of theirs!
leaves to help children of Romania
FOLLOWING two weeks in Romania helping to renovate an orphanage, believes that she has found her true vocation in life and on  is leaving her job at the Ipswich Grain Terminal to return to the orphanage and continue the work.
was among a group of 40 tradespeople who visited the village of Goiesti in April to help renovate an orphanage for the forgotten children of Ceausescu.
‘We didn't know what to expect’ said .
‘We'd seen so many terrible pictures on TV and when we arrived in the country I wondered if it was all true.
The countryside was beautiful.
It smelt clean and fresh — but the reality hit us when we arrived at the orphanage.’
There were about 50 children aged between three and sixteen years-of-age.
The older ones were at Goiesti on a short stay while their own orphanage was being refurbished by a French team.
‘I will never forget the sight and smell of the place when we arrived,’ said .
‘The children were rocking backwards and forwards, some sitting on potties, screaming and crying.
Many looked very pale and ill.’
After helping to wash and re-clothe the children, spent most of her time helping to improve living conditions.
, left, with workmate  repainting the childrens' slides at the orphanage.
Water and sanitation were the main problems.
Holes in the floor outside, and inside, the orphanage served as toilets, and water had to be drawn from a single well in the grounds, so first they set about unblocking the drains and opening sewers.
Cleaning and re-decorating nine dormitories was next.
They scrubbed the walls, replastered where necessary and repainted them.
‘Then we started on the cots’ said .
‘We repainted them all and made new mattresses.’
‘By the end of the fortnight you could certainly see the difference in the children and the orphanage’ she said.
‘The children looked clean and happy — there was no rocking now.
They were pleased to have new clothes of their own and had enjoyed the company and the attention they'd received.’
plans to stay in Romania for about two years.
‘There's still a lot more to be done,’ she says.
‘I'll stay as long as it takes, first in Romania and then anywhere else in the world where children need my help.’
has since received sponsorship from the Ipswich Grain Terminal to help with her work.
Training awards
Left to right:, C&G enterprise management award.
,
craft certificate.
, GM and director.
, craft certificate,, chairman, and , GB trophy.
(part of the Fe III team was unable to attend).
, craft certificate.
,
ATB ‘S’ series development award.
SEVEN employees at  received training awards recently at the Company's annual dinner dance held at Centre Parc, Elvedon, Suffolk.
One hundred and fifty staff, directors and partners sat down for an excellent meal at the venue followed by an equally good disco.
chairman,, presented the awards and , former GM, was also in attendance to present the  trophy, awarded for excellent achievement.
Outing to the West-End
FOLLOWING last year's most enjoyable day trip to see ‘Me and My Girl’ at the Adelphi, pensioners from Ware returned to the West End this year for another theatrical treat.
We travelled by coach to London on , and after lunch at , went to a matinée performance of ‘42nd Street’ at the Dominion theatre.
The seventeen pensioners who were able to join us for the annual get-together enjoyed themselves immensely and are already looking forward to next year's trip!
Ware pensioners get ready for their outing.
A new life style
THE following have recently retired or have a pension that has matured.
We wish them a long, healthy and happy retirement.
Focus on the SUMMER FAYRE
What a way to spend your wedding anniversary!
Pictured in their boaters, and  spent their ‘special day’ dishing up burgers and hot dogs to hungry spectators, assisted by  (centre) and .
THE STONE Lodge Sports ground burst into life on  when clowns, tightrope walkers, acrobats, trapeze artists and human cannon-balls arrived to take part in  's big top spectacular.
They came by coach, car and on foot from all corners of the country, and from France with a team from Faverolles once again supporting the event.
The action-packed programme started just after midday when  chief executive  welcomed visitors to the show, followed by a resounding march played by .
Twenty-six teams
Twenty-six teams turned up for the sporting events which included bowls, mixed netball, darts, 5-a-side football and the ever popular It's-a-Knockout and Superstars events.
A record number of sideshows and stalls provided entertainment featuring ‘Drown the Clown’, ‘Mac the Magician’, ‘Win-a-Football’, and a wide variety of food and drinks were on sale — strawberries and cream, oriental food and ‘Clown's Cocktails’— with all the proceeds going to charity.
offered hungry spectators an excellent barbeque with succulent burgers, sausages and pork steaks.
It certainly wasn't the day to think of dieting!
Swinging
Competitors battled  valiantly throughout the afternoon with plenty of supporters to cheer them on.
Musical entertainment continued with a marching display by the  and the swinging beat of the  Jazz band.
At the end of the day 550 people sat down for a superb dinner in the marquee, prepared by  and his team, where the trophies and prizes from the Grand Draw were presented, followed by a disco.
Perhaps it's too soon to mention next year?
Make a note in your diary anyway, the provisional date is  — unlucky for some?
We'll have to wait and see.
CLOWNING AROUND: Clowns from the Head Office ‘Clown's Cocktail Bar’ picked up 1st prize in the Fancy Dress judged by , wife of group MD,.
Left to right:,,,, and .
Big Top Spectacular
ON THE MARCH: The  in full swing.
from Knapton becomes a first aid ‘victim’ for his father,, in the Fancy Dress.
SO NEAR AND YET SO FAR!
Competitors fight it out on the netball court.
A SUMMER Ball held in the Summer Fayre marquee on the Friday evening raised over £10,000 for the Children's Hospice for the eastern region at Milton, Cambs.
The ball was arranged by  and a fifteen-strong committee include , wife of group MD  and , wife of  who was responsible for the flowers.
sends her sincere thanks to  for giving them the opportunity to hold the ball.
Thanks also to  and the Sports & Social Club team for their help.
‘Saucy Nellie’ takes the prize! collects a bucket of toffees for  — winners of the best Litter Bin competition.
All the thrills and spills!
I WOULD like to thank everyone for their tremendous efforts in selling draw tickets this year.
We raised the record sum of £5,000 for charity.
Special thanks must go to our many suppliers and customers for their most generous gifts and donations which ranged from 3 Nights in Paris for two, to a bottle of whisky.
The charities to benefit have been nominated by the first three teams competing for the Clayton Trophy.
They are:
1
Riding for the Disabled;
2
Magic Million Appeal,
3
Head Office Renal Dialysis Unit, Ipswich Hospital.
Friends of Ipswich Samaritans.
Prize Winners
Congratulations to the first four prize winners —
Grand Draw Organiser  
ON THE GREEN: Competitors in the bowls anxiously await the verdict of the umpire.
How to avoid the flak — by an expert!
Group MD  ducks a low ball at  's ‘Drown a Clown’ stall…
…after giving  their chance, reckoned it was his turn!
It was a push-over for lab assistant  from Wallingford, who mustered all her horsepower to win with ease in the car push.
Looking for inspiration for a new dessert flavouring?
Food Group MD,, enjoys a bowl of strawberries and cream from  's stall before taking part in the tennis competition.
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY!
Not quite, but  (wife of packing foreman  at ) did her level best to notch up points in the Darts.
CRACKING THE WHIP!
So this is how  keeps them in check at the special analysis section of the Ipswich Maltings.
GOOD LOSERS: congratulates  on winning the Mens Tug-of-War.
Chief executive   tries his luck at  's ‘Win-a-Football’ sideshow.
‘Legs, are you ready?’
Competitors battled it out against the clock in the squat thrusts.
A BIRDS EYE VIEW: Visitors make the most of the sideshows while waiting for the start of It's a Knockout and Superstars.
DETERMINATION: Is it any wonder that the NW Region won the Ladies Tug-of-War with  on their side.
pulls herself out of the water tank in It's a Knockout.
from Louth showed his expertise in the Yard of Ale — alas he didn't take the trophy this year (will it have to be a metre in 1992?)
Dare-devil human cannon-balls prepare to be fired into the deep!
Once in, they had to dive for a golf ball, put it in a bucket and return to the trapeze to do it all again — fun eh!
‘Keep it rolling ’.
Supporters cheered on  from  in the Superstars event.
RIGHT ON CUE: Snooker champion  from , left, with finalist  from .
Enthusiastic Telford supporters spur on their team.
UP-UP-AND-AWAY: NW cattle specialist  flys through the air with the greatest of ease.
GAME, SET and MATCH: meets  in the Tennis.
and  (wife of GM  at Bury St. Edmunds), left, and  and his wife  playing for .
CHAMPIONS: Head office took the cup in the mixed netball, pictured with the umpires, left to right,(back),,,,,.
(Front),, and .
Dig in they might…but after a worthy battle, the ground finally slipped away beneath them and  had to settle for second place.
FAST MOVERS:, left, and , right, from , battled it out with  from  in the 5-a-side football final, eventually winning on penalties.
Having filled their buckets with bright red liquid (thanks for the colouring ) contestants in Blind-man's buff had to rely on shouts from supporters to get back to their corner with a few drops left in the buckets — no thanks to members of the Summer Fayre committee who kept moving the obstacles — just in case it good too easy you understand!
‘Take the Strain…
…
Pull’ And pull they did, winning this year's Ladies Tug-of-War trophy.
Congratulations North-West!
Front to back:,,,, and .
PUZZLED: Competitors winch in giant jigsaw puzzle pieces in It's a Knockout.
‘’ remarked  from Faverolles as he prepared for the Blind-man's buff competition.
Let's hear it for the Committee
FOR US, was a good day out, but planning for the Summer Fayre started about eight months ago for the Summer Fayre committee who held their first meeting last October!
The committee met every three or four weeks from April onwards and weekly from then on.
They have to arrange every detail for the big day from hotel bookings to portaloos; ordering the marquee; finding referees, umpires and stewards and more!
organizes the games to be built and with a team of three — and  — is responsible for the amazing new constructions which appear each year.
The huge marquee arrives on Monday before the big day and groundsman  is the man who battles against the odds to get all the services connected.
On the day, it's  who handles any emergencies that crop up like blown fuses and late deliveries.
In the week leading up to the Fayre the committee spends most days at the Sports ground doing the million and one last minute jobs and testing the games.
With next year's Fayre only 11 months away they've already held their first meeting — now that's planning.
Spot the volunteer!
Poor  had just returned from a week in bed with flu when she was picked to test the trapeze.
(With friends like  who needs enemies!)
‘We've painted everything else  — now it's your turn!’ threatens  while  's son  watches anxiously from behind.
The Summer Fayre Committee — left to right (back),,,(chairman),,,,,.
(Front),,, and .
Proving that the games are tested, prepares to be launched into the deep, with a little help from .
's brother  chose to ‘walk the plank’ while  decide's he'll use the ladder!
All under the watchful eye of .
‘Let's vote on it.
Do they go in forwards or backwards!!’
You have to make such tough decisions on the committee.
Polishing up his act!
Summer Fayre committee chairman  buffs-up the trophies.
Mac conjures up funds for charity
Magician,, conjured up £46 on his stall at the Summer Fayre.  is pictured handing over the cheque to , chairperson of the Carnoustie Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund, with , operations manager, at .
Thanks
THE Summer Fayre Committee express grateful thanks to the following for their generous donations and prizes for the Grand Draw.
Double celebrations
There were double celebrations at Key Street in April, when  and  completed 40 years service apiece, having started work for  on the same day —.
began her career with  working on the London Desk for the princely sum of £7.2s.6d a week,(you can see why she stayed!)
After de-centralization of the Animal Foods Division in 1966, and the disbanding of the Desk, began the job of paying the expenses and purchase ledger work for  head office — which she still does today.
Ann says that she has seen many changes over the years.
‘When I started we used ink pens and sat on high stools — and the only way to add up was in your head,’ she said.
started as an office junior on the Ipswich desk.
Part of her role was to pass on instructions to driver for malt deliveries and the collection of raw materials for animal and feed production at  (return loads).
Dealing with drivers at this tender age obviously sparked an interest in transport which has developed over the years.
She is not an established lady in what was very much a man's industry and is highly respected by both drivers and haulage operators over a wide area.
your letters


Ed,— Thank you very much for sending the LINK magazine to my husband for the past few years.
He had such pleasure reading them and was delighted when you mentioned his love of Quoits (LINK September ‘90 Issue).
But I am sorry to tell you that he passed away on  after a massive stroke.
He kept in touch with one or two of his friends that he worked with at  as a maltster.
Thank you once again.
worked for the company for the malting season of 1936/37 and then again following demob from the RAF from 1947–1951.
Memories
POSTCARD to the LINK editor from a general manager on his annual holiday.
It appears that he was rather worried about his forthcoming ‘O’ level in barley identification.
Ed,— Having a lovely time here in Spain, the trip over was dandy.
At Malta, we saw the Ark Royal.
The crew were inspected by the Queen whose corgie unfortunately chased Magie's gerbils and atem.
After a plaisent meal aboard the Britannia, we went on to a casino where we met Sonja, a gypsy from Montana.
We arrived back at my cabin to watch a private video called Sierra Nevada starring a vixen called Kym.
The next day we hired a Panda auto and nipped off for a game of golf, it had been rather warm and on returning Sonya suggested I remove my cerise tweeds and let my cornet Kascade down.
Later that evening Sonja brought a friend along to our cabin.
He was a nice chap called Roland who entertained us with such finesse on his flute and oboe.
I remember the tune now it was Joline, a difficult number to practise the flamenco to, and I was puffin a bit afterwards.
Much later that night a Russian waitress called Marinka served me with a corniche patty.
I payed with my Vista card and although she was a hockey player, when she invited me to the opera I igried to go.
As I escorted Marinka to the Oasis Arena in the torrential rain, the scene of mimose reminded me of my halcyon days at .
After a wonderful evening I said goodbye but she refused when I tried to tipper.
A Klaxon sounded from the Regatta and we were soon triumphantly on our way home again.
I am hoping to return through Malta via Bali and we should arrive back at Ayr on Tuesday.
See you soon.
REW (RAISA ERMO WAVENY)
How many barley varieties mentioned in the postcard?
Answers should be sent directly to ,.
(The editor takes no responsibility for this one!)
YOU are welcome to send letters on any subject.
Send to:
The Editor,
fit and well
Ed,— In March, I went to New Zealand for a once in a life-time holiday with my family.
My father,, who retired from  two years ago, asked if I would visit a fellow pensioner —.
worked back in the days of  with my father at the Elephant & Castle, then moved with the firm to Bletchley.
He retired in the early 70s and emigrated to Auckland, N.Z. in 1977.
We found  living comfortably in really nice accommodation provided by the Salvation Army.
Although not quite running the place now, was in good spirits and still looking very smart in a collar and tie.
We stayed for a while to chat and told him how great we thought New Zealand was.
He seemed happy to be there and didn't miss the cold of England at all.
We said our goodbye's and wished him well.
Quiz
Ed,— I am writing regarding  's Xmas Quiz.
Having now seen the answers, I find that my wife and I had just one word wrong.
On Q.29 we answered ‘means absolute zero’ whereas it was ‘minus absolute zero’, which is practically the same meaning.
My wife and I are both pensioners.
is 67-years-of-age and I'm 72-years-of-age.
We were both delighted that we got every question correct except one little word.
It gave us both lots of pleasure trying to work out the various clues, so we shall give ourselves a pat on the back for doing so well — hope you will have some more mind-boggling competitions in the future.
I have since received a further letter from  on his return from hospital, following his fourth heart attack.
He says that it is good to be home again.
Style
‘LET'S do some fashion photography for LINK ’ they said, ‘With some Ipswich employees modelling summer outfits’.
Why not, I thought — but is LINK ready for it?— We'll see.
We set off for the ‘shoot’ on what turned out to be a dull, damp and extremely grey day, to Ickworth House and gardens — a National Trust property — near Bury St. Edmunds.
The group consisted of pensions administrator ,(previously featured in LINK for her photographic wizardry), four brave young ladies from the Key Street and Lower Brook Street offices and an editor in tow — to jot down the details.
This is the result.
, stands mischievously on the terrace walk, which looks over Ickworth park.
is risk management assistant at Lower Brook Street, and will soon become  on her marriage to systems analyst , on .
and  share girlish secrets behind the trees and shrubs which completely screen the terrace from the house.
, 39, joined  last November as pensions payroll administrator.
She is the contact for all pensioners when they have queries about the ‘payment’ of their pensions.
Time for reflection?— Maybe, but it's certainly a far cry from the hectic personnel department at Key Street.
pauses elegantly in the conservatory of the large west wing where floor-length windows lead on to a terrace facing south over the garden.
, 20, contemplates the trauma of the afternoon in one of the many quiet corners in the grounds.
started with  last October and assists with the pension administration for the NW region of , head office and .
The master at work — shows the girls how to pose for the next photograph.
, 29, is senior pensions administrator at Lower Brook Street.
Full credit goes to  for her excellent photography and organization of a cold but extremely fun afternoon.
A bit cheeky!
At the very end of the afternoon, and  try on a swimsuit and sarong — much to the amazement of a few spectators, who, on such a cold day, shivered and pulled their coats firmly around them.
Special thanks to Laura Ashley at Ipswich for providing the outfits pictured which were from their summer collection.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF 
export foreman at The Ipswich Grain Terminal
talks to  about a day in his life at the Ipswich Grain Terminal
‘MY first job of the day is making the tea.
I don't usually bother with breakfast.
Our children , 9, and , 10, are still asleep, but I take a cup to my wife  before leaving home in time to arrive at the Grain Terminal before 7.00 am.
We're loading only one ship today, the Linde II , with 4,800 tonnes of malt.
The ship is under charter to .
representative , and , an independent superintendent, have just inspected the ship and tell me that loading cannot start until the crew have dried out the holds — that will delay us a while.
is in the weigh-bridge at present, checking in the grain deliveries, and  will take over in an hour or so.
We try to rotate all the jobs on site between the eight of us — it makes life more interesting and gives us more flexibility.
Computer controls
The weighbridge also houses the computer controls for loading.
The system is linked to a 900 tph bulk scale in the silo block allowing us to weigh out exact quantities from any of the 15 silos at the touch of a button.
An indicator panel shows us when the grain is being elevated, conveyed and loaded.
checks intake details with  in the weigh-bridge.
May is one of the quietest months here which gives us the chance to catch up with maintenance and work days only for a whole.
It's quite the exception though.
During peak periods I've known 200 lorries waiting to tip, backing-up out of the port and along the surrounding roads.
And if the elevator gets blocked or the gearing on the conveyor breaks down — it's all go until we correct the fault.
The company can pick up penalties is the ships are not loaded on time.
Foreman to foreman: takes 5 minutes to chat with , intake foreman for imported cereals.
and  with their children  and  and their pet labrador .
The terminal is divided into two main areas.
At this end we handle the grain and malt intake for export.
Further along the dock there is a separate intake for imported cereals and animal feedstuffs which are stored before dispatch to compounders and flour mills.
and  in the cereal intake weighbridge.
It's 8.30 am and I must find that discharge connector for the breathing gear — we'll need it on the ship when loading begins.
Dust is one of our main problems here especially if we're loading malt!
When you're on the ship you need a mask, goggles and even full breathing gear if you're on board long, particularly if you're down wind of the loading spout.
I set off in the van to ask  on imported cereal intake if he's seen it.
Back with the connector.
They say loading should start around 9.00 am.
Meanwhile , production planning manager, has arrived from Key Street.
Whenever a malt ship is being loaded  comes down to inspect the site and oversee the loading.
We tour the silo block and sheds.
Great mounds of Soya awaiting dispatch to animal feed mills.
9.30 am.
We're given the go-ahead to load.
The malt is send directly to the ship by overhead conveyor from the silo block.
We can convey cereals at up to 700 tph but malt is loaded more slowly to ensure minimum damage.
We start off at about 85 per cent maximum speed.
During the day, and  will take samples from the ship's hold to check for damage and also check the quantity of dust and husk in the load.
Assistant manager, arrives for his daily inspection.
encouraged me to join the company almost three years ago.
I'd worked at  for 18 years and often came to the Terminal to check the weigh-bridge.
I needed a change, so when he said there might be a job coming up, I decided to go for it.
I'm pleased I made the move.
Overtime
says there's a good chance they'll want to finish loading today and asks me to find out who wants overtime.
There also has to be a supervisor on site until the end.
He says he'll stay until finish, if I work until 6.30 pm.
I'm happy with the arrangement.
That means I can get to my Darts Match at 7.30 pm.
I play for the Stone Lodge Lane team a couple of nights a week.
We won the league last year but I think it's going to be a tough one tonight.
(left) and  in Shed No 16
gives the silos a new coat of paint.
10.55 am.
Go to No. 16 shed, our big flat store, and ask  and  if they want overtime.
They're not interested.
‘Carrot’ and ‘Smudge’(and ), agree to work.
I suggest that they take an extended lunch and return mid-afternoon.
On board ‘Jack’(), is on board ship controlling the overhead conveyor.
The hold is filling up.
says the ship will travel directly to Durban, taking about 25 days.
The Linde II under charter to .
11.30 am up to the office to see .
Office manager  is on holiday this week.
, and assistant manager  are in good form.
General manager  is showing , the  buyer around the Terminal.
We all get along well, but when the pressure's on the air can turn pretty red in here.
(seated) and  in the office.
1.00 pm — lunchtime.
I often go to the canteen at  but as I'm working late I'll see what my wife  can rustle up in the microwave at home.
Two jacket potatoes later — back to it.
Two thousand tonnes have been loaded now and thankfully no breakdowns.
If all goes well I reckon they'll get through by midnight.
Operations manager , with  (before they found the shovels!).
In No. 16 shed, they still can't get the grain blower working to move the 10 tonnes of wheat piled up against the board.
So, while  the electrician is making a new connection, we (including the managers from the office!) decided to find the shovels and do it the hard way.
Two hours later I wonder if I'm 38 or 68-years-old!, who had lost 3–2 at squash lunchtime to , wishes he hadn't come back, and  can hardly crawl upstairs to his office!
The Ipswich Grain Terminal
THE Ipswich Grain Terminal Ltd is owned jointly by  and  of Antwerp — a major grain trading company.
The site at Cliff Quay, Ipswich, was commissioned in 1983 and is the only deep water berth inland port in East Anglia.
Vessels can be accepted of 140m length and 7.4m draught.
And cargos of up to 13,500 tonnes can be handled.
Ships are loaded either direct from lorries via mobile elevators or through the terminal silos.
This season the company has exported 640,000 tonnes of cereals and malt, while imports for the year are expected to exceed 200,000 tonnes.
Although it is at a disadvantage to the very deep water berths at Tilbury, Hull and Southampton, which can berth vessels of 25–30,000 tonnes, it still handles similar tonnages!
(standing) and GM  discuss loading.
5.00 pm and we're coming to the finish on hold No. 1.
We slow down to about 14 per cent at this stage.
We call it the ‘trim’.
The conveyor is moved from one end to the other keeping the load as level as possible while we top up the hold.
The captain has asked us to load to maximum capacity, so the better the ‘trim’, the more we can load, perhaps 5,000 tonnes or more.
Happiness is chip-shaped!— enjoys his fish and chip supper.
suggests fish & chips all round.
I take the van in search of a chippy.
Back to the weigh-bridge.
It's amazing how everyone appears when there's food about!
At 6.30 pm I leave for home and a quick shower before going to the darts match and a few beers.
Not a good end to the day — we lost 8–1.
Ah well, all in a day's work I suppose.’
‘A Day in the Life’ is an occasional series suggested by ,.
If you would like to nominate someone for a future issue, send the details to  at .
End of an era
marked the end of an era for five senior managers at  who retired after a life-time in the maltings industry.
started his career in the malting industry in 1945 with  of Newark, later joining the  — another part of the old .
After two years national service he returned to Newark for a short period before moving to Peterborough in 1952.
Louth was the next move, where  stayed for 17 years before going to Wallingford where, with a stay of seven-and-a-half years, he holds the record as longest serving manager!
He joined  at Newark central office, and finally ended up at Bury St. Edmunds in 1985 as manager.
joined  in 1983 as research and development manager.
He is one of those wonderful personalities who is quiet, knowledgeable, effective and efficient who is held in high regard by colleagues and customers alike.
During his eight years with us, has travelled extensively, visiting customers and promoting the name of  as the technical leader in the malting industry.
The good news is that we are still going to see something of  as he has agreed to act as a consultant for us.
started in malting in 1953 at Grimsby, as a trainee floor maltster for .
After three years he moved to a supervisory grade, and in 1960 to barley drying in the ‘new maltings’, known as No. 1 Maltings.
has stayed at Grimsby throughout, becoming assistant manager, and in 1968, after the closure of the old floor maltings, took over as manager.
After completing 35 years service as a chemist, retired from Louth.
had been responsible for running the ‘Popp: maltings in Louth before it was de-commissioned in the mid 80s, and if this was not enough, he has been the mentor of many newcomers to the industry, providing induction training to all levels of new recruits from director level down.
's scientific knowledge, and uncompromising standards and principles have earned him the respect and admiration of any who worked with, or even against him.
Going with a song!,(centre) and  (right) use old malt implements to play their way to retirement.
Cheers!(left) and  say farewell to their friends and workmates at the Bury St. Edmunds maltings.
, malt dispatch manager at Bury St. Edmunds retired after 38 years service.
joined the company in 1953 as a trainee for .
During the years  has been involved in all aspects of malt production, holding management posts at Bath, Salisbury, Abingdon and Gloucester.
He joined the team at Bury in 1982 as administration manager.
Success for apprentices
ENGINEERING apprentices  and  at  have become fully skilled craftsmen following their success in gaining 1st year engineering certificates — equivalent to NVQ level 3.
The pair are the first in Shropshire to attain the certification.
Works engineer, presents , centre, and  with their certificates.
They started training in 1986 and initially spent 36 weeks on block-release at college learning basic engineering skills, fabrication, machining, fitting and basic electrical work.
In 1987 they joined  under the EITB (Engineering Industry Training Board) module segment scheme.
They have had to log all their work at the factory, detailing each job with diagrams, while continuing their City & Guilds further educational studies at college.
Every six weeks an EITB officer has called in to monitor their progress and on  they successfully completed their training.
to represent UK at YFC rally
, administrator/secretary at Creditor, has been chosen by the National Federation of Young Farmers to represent the UK at the YFC (Young Farmers Club) European rally in Austria.
has been a member of the YFC for nine years and is currently secretary of her local club Newton St. Cyres.
Last year she was elected the Best under 21 Young Farmer and now at 22, enjoys her involvement with the club, her work at  and recreation of playing hockey and country pursuits.
received sponsorship from  and  and is looking forward to the week in Austria where she will be studying safety and protection of the environment and a wide range of other activities.
Bid to save flavoured crisps
‘THE end of flavoured crisps!’— This was one of the headlines to a story appearing in most tabloid newspapers in May.
What it really meant was that when draft EEC legislation was being drawn up last year, for the permitted use of intense sweeteners, including saccharin, nobody remembered to include crisps and snacks.
As saccharin is used by  in the manufacture of prawn cocktail and similar sweet/savoury flavours, it meant that if this draft legislation should pass into law, from April 1993, there would be no more prawn cocktail flavour!
Ministry
So, on  this year, I accompanied the senior management from ,, and others, to the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food to lobby the Food Minister,(yes, I spoke to the minister!) on the issue.
A ‘News at Ten’ film crew was there to witness the events.
‘Look outraged!’, they told us as we walked into the building.
Since then, events have moved on and despite the media losing interest in the proceedings, progress has been made towards the draft legislation being amended to include snack foods in the list of permitted categories.
Also, people have been saying to me, ‘My brother's girlfriend's aunt says that she spoke to someone who saw you on ‘News at Ten’ the other day!’
Ah well — they say everyone's famous for 15 minutes!
's own TV star!
25 Years at Kirkcaldy Malt
CONGRATULATIONS to electrician  who completed 25 years service on .
is pictured (left) receiving his 25 year service award from GM,.
News from the locations
Louth
celebrated 25 years service at the Louth maltings in February.
He joined the Company as a malt packer in 1966, which in those days involved loading malt in bags onto lorries and railway carries at the nearby station.
Over the years  has tackled most jobs around the site — from silo operator on shift relief — to his present position of malt dressing foreman.
received a gold watch as his long service gift from the Company presented to him by GM,.
and his wife,, and colleagues at his anniversary lunch.
Laboratory manager  retired on , after 35 years service.
The staff at Louth wish  and his wife  all the very best for the future.
On  , former secretary at the maltings, gave birth to a 7lb 8oz baby boy named .
Mother and baby are doing well.
Safety Award
sales director , presented the Louth maltings with a gold safety award on , for its excellent safety record to date.
It is our aim, with constant reminders from  (our safety officer and leading light of the safety committee) to be vigilant at all times and constantly put safety and accident prevention in the forefront of employees minds.
joined us on , as general manager of the Louth and Grimsby maltings, following  's retirement from Grimsby and  's departure to Bury St. Edmunds.
We hope  and  will be happy at their new locations.
, right, hands over the reins to , on the roof of the Louth maltings.
Cross Hands
MAGALUF, Spain will never be the same again…
Two of our ‘boys’ have just returned from a week there on a rugby tour.
(will remember  from last year's Summer Fayre!) plays wing forward and  (known to us as ‘little ’— all 6ft 2in of him!) plays second row.
Both are members of the Penygroes RFC and I'm pleased to report that out of the two games played, Penygroes won both, with  scoring 6 tries, making the results 28–17 and 26–15.
Wedding bells will toll in June.
Twice!
Pressman  will tie the knot with  on , quickly followed by sales manager,, who marries  on .
We would like to wish both couples the very best of love, luck and most importantly, happiness for their future lives together.
Cash and Carry manager  is back behind the counter after a short stay in hospital — nice to have him back all in one piece!
Unfortunately, mill manager  has left the company.
We shall all miss him and want to wish him, his wife  and their children  and , the very best of luck for the future.
Soutra
WE welcome two new faces at :
joined us in March as technical and quality control manager.
has a wealth of experience in the food ingredients industry both in the UK and abroad and was most recently working for an Australian ingredients company.
, who joined us in May as national account manager, has also gained extensive experience in the food industry having spent a number of years working in technical and commercial roles with leading UK food and flavour manufacturers — being one of them.
Knapton
We've been to the Dogs!
A PARTY from Knapton accompanied by their wives and plenty of money, met up with colleagues from  Louth and Grimsby recently for a night at the dogs.
The venue was Craven Park at Hull for the twice weekly greyhound racing.
, an avid fan and greyhound owner arranged for us to have the Board Room with the luxury of our own bar, video screens and boxes for viewing each of the 12 races.
An excellent meal was enjoyed by all and some of us actually won!
We hope to go again after harvest — anyone else interested?
, management trainee at Knapton for the last 18 months, moved to Grimsby during April to become the assistant production manager.
A farewell party was arranged with the usual outcome of everyone remembering a good evening (we have to tell  ++).
presented him with a huge pepper mill and thanked him for his hard work.
I think I speak for everyone when I say we'll all miss him.
pictured with a cake replica of a jug of beer made by .
The New Inn at Cropton, home of Cropton Brewery, was the venue for a social evening in April.
A mixed-pairs darts match was won by  and  and a quiz with two teams (men vs ladies) was won by — guess who — the men!


has been appointed production manager for  at Faverolles, France.
, 30, has a diploma in Food and Nutrition and considerable experience in the food industry from his previous positions as shift manager for the  company and production manager for  — a manufacturer of chocolate based breakfast products.
is married and has a young son.
He enjoys skiing, cycling, tennis, computing and is a ‘’— hunter of water game — a popular sport in the Picardie region.
Wallingford
Wallingford entered the world of hockey this year, with a £500 sponsorship of the town's hockey club.
The club has around 70 members and runs a 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and veterans (‘The Crofters’) XI, plus a mixed XI and the now thriving Colts section.
The season's finale was the annual festival ending with the presentation of the ‘Fair Play Award’ by GM  to the team who, in the opinion of the Umpire, approached the day in the true spirit of the game.
Surprisingly, Wallingford didn't win!
The association continues next year — P.S. Does anyone know a good hockey coach — we  definitely need one!
GM , left, presenting the ‘Fair Play Award’.


Memories
at  is looking for memories — your memories — of ‘Life on the Home Front’ during the Second World War.
Two years ago  completed a manuscript about his family's life during this period which he hopes will someday be published.
He is now writing a follow-up and wants to include others reminiscences of the time on topics such as rationing, the black-out, evacuation, all forms of civilian war service, the Home Guard, and more!
asks that you send any details to him personally:, and says that all letters will be acknowledged.
Charity
, and  from packing, raised £60 for the Sudbury town football club's ‘Floodlight Appeal’ on , by enduring a sponsored silence during a four hour shift.
This was in addition to £250 raised the month before, by packing plant foreman , for the same cause by ‘Being nice for a day’!
with production manager  during her 4-hour sponsored silence.
Congratulations to , processing, on his marriage to  in Fort Jesus, Mombasa on .
Also to , packing, who married  on .
Baby boom
Congratulations to:
, QC, and  on the birth of  on .
, packing, and  on the birth of their daughter  on .
, engineer, and  on the birth of  on .
, engineer and  on the birth of  on .
, engineering manager, and  on the birth of their 7lb 2oz daughter on .


Our congratulations and best wishes go to maltman  who retired on .
has done a number of ‘stints’ with the company, his last spanning 17 years.
He is pictured (between the girls) with many of his colleagues in Kirkcaldy maltings favourite watering hole, the Harbour Bar.
We wish him and his wife,, every happiness in their retirement.
Telford
WE welcome the following new recruits at :
, sales;, development;, administration;, QC;, production; and  in the logistics customer services department and  in stock control.
Comic Relief
saw Comic Relief day and thanks to organiser  from packaging, joined in the fun.
The first victim was packaging buyer,, who agreed, after a little gentle persuasion, to be covered with foam.
For a small fee everyone was invited to spray him with the foam wherever they wanted — and they most certainly did!
Next, 's friends and colleagues dressed up as cat burglars and prowled around Telford town centre collecting money for Comic Relief.
The local police kindly agreed to come in on the act and a few off-duty policemen pretended to stalk the burglars and locked them up for the night at a disused police station at Ironbridge!
estimates that they collected close to £1,000 towards the appeal.
Hello, hello, hello — what's going on ‘ere then?
Crediton
THE end of April saw the retirement of  from Crediton, after working for 14 years as a packer.
Before joining   had worked for  for 33 years, where he had been a champion buttermaker.
When the plant closed, and after trying his hand at a few other jobs, he finally settled at .
Mill manager, informs us that if all the bags that  has packed were laid end to end they would reach to Moscow!
MD,, presented  with a colour television from the company, while his colleagues gave him a garden bench.
This caused a bit of a chuckle from  and his wife , as they apparently did most of their courting on a similar looking bench.
We wish  all the best and hope he feels free to op in and check up on us whenever he's near the mill.
with some of his workmates at his farewell presentation.
Good luck to , operations trainee, who has joined  as operations assistant.
He will be getting married to his fiance  in August — congratulations to them both.
The local  store is rumoured to be considering Sunday closing after the loss of its most loyal customer!
Radstock
CONGRATULATIONS to:
and  who tied the knot on .
is our SW regional buyer and  is a school teacher.
Our best wishes for the future.
and  for passing their forklift truck tests.
and his team on winning the Radstock Skittles competition.
(I can't quite remember by how many pins they won!?
Also, congratulations to  and his team on winning the Milkline Skittles competition this year.
and  on the birth of their first child —, who was born on , weighing 7lbs 15oz.
Comings and Goings
Welcome to , assistant arable trader;, part-time buying clerk;, poultry livestock plan assistant;, technical manager Aquaculture and  Aquaculture salesman.
Farewell to , who has left us to have her second baby;(pig scheme) and  (accounts), who have retired.
Head Office
Farewell to: Secretary  who has left to await the arrival of her baby.
Receptionist  who has moved back to Newcastle following her husband  's transfer from the computer centre to  in Durham.
And personnel secretary  who has moved to Warwick.
We welcome  who has joined  as secretary to  and .
was previously a software trainer for a local computer company.
On the move: has transferred from  to the personnel department.
is now in reception, and  has become secretary to Agriculture finance director .
Congratulations to  on her promotion to export sales executive for .
Shepshed
WE welcome the following new personnel:
, sales trainee,, QC assistant,, poolman,, domestic assistant,, driver (welcome back),, operations assistant,, clerical assistant and , temporary clerical assistant.


retired from  on , after twenty years service.
The company  joined back then was a lot smaller than people know today.
The office was a 2-bedroomed bungalow with a coal fire in the grate!
There was electricity but no computers or other office aids.
has been our sales ledger and wages clerk throughout her time with us and will be best remembered by the workforce for her help in answering their questions such as‘Why am I paying so much tax ?’ and ‘Has my code number come through yet?’
In the office we shall remember our  as the hard working, level headed lady who always made a good job of the task in hand.
We will miss her friendly smile, sense of humour, wit, and conversation.
At her farewell, GM  gave a vote of thanks and presented  with a nest of mahogany tables on behalf of the company.
And friends  and  added various gifts on behalf of all her friends and colleagues.
We all wish , her husband  and family a very happy future.
, centre, with workmate , right, and  (retired) who worked together for most of  's 20 years at .
Carnoustie
SURPRISE, surprise!! some news from Carnoustie.
We welcome the following:
joined us on  to assist in the office.
(She likes to be called  — don't ask me why).
joined us on  to assist in the laboratory,(she likes to be called !).
joined our maintenance department on  as an electrician.
And last, but by no means least,, previously at , Louth, was promoted to maltings manager in January.
Now that he's settled in and understanding the language a bit better, I thought it was an appropriate time to congratulate and welcome him to Carnoustie.
Farewell
Regional customer services manager  is pictured (left) receiving his retirement gift from MD  in April.
, who is a keen walker, was extremely pleased to be given a  waterproof suit.
No doubt he will be reminded of us when he re-visits the Lake District (one of his favourite haunts) and it rains!


SINCE we last appeared in LINK , has gone international, formally changing the company name to .
This change is part of a concerted effort to raise our profile with our international customers.
We will also have a presence at two major European trade fairs this year — ECSA (European Chip & snack Association) at Maastricht, Holland, in September, and FIE (Food Ingredients Exhibition) in Paris in October — raising our international image considerably.
Over the past few months we have welcomed several new staff:
,(back again) and , in production.
and , reception.
, customer services.
, QC.
and , R&D.
Congratulations
, our R&D secretary married  on .
from the micro department and , from production, have become engaged (to each other!).
Congratulations also to LINK correspondent and accountant , and his wife , on the birth of their daughter , on .
Eagle Mill
WE welcome  who has joined our accounts department.
studied chartered accountancy at the Oxford Polytechnic and for the last 18 months has worked for a local chartered accountant.
25 Years Service
Our drivers  and  recently notched up 25 years service apiece.
They celebrated the occasion at the Shepherd & Dog carvery with colleagues from the transport department and SE regional transport manager  presented  with a camera and  with a watch.
, right, receiving his 25 year service gift from .
Farewell to:
, SE region poultry adviser who has retired after 22 years service and more than 750,000 miles!
At his farewell  was presented with a silver chicken donated by his many customers.
, intake chargehand, who has retired after 36 years service.
chose a greenhouse for his farewell gift from the Company and his friends and colleagues contributed towards garden vouchers.
with his wife,, at his retirement dinner.
TOUR DU MONT BLANC
‘You must need your head tested’, was one of the more polite reactions when I said that I was going to spend two weeks holiday walking some 120 miles up-and-down mountains rather than lying in the sun.
The fact that I had failed to find any companions didn't help my cause very much.
But despite the comments I flew off to Geneva last summer (with a very ‘full pack’) and then on by train to Houches — the start and finish of the ‘Tour Du Mont Blanc’(TMB).
As my usual walking activities are limited to a little fell walking in the Lakes or North Wales, with friends who usually do the navigating, the TMB was certainly ambitious.
Still, I was rewarded with a holiday to remember with spectacular views of mountain scenery, a sun tan and no blisters!
Day 1
Arrived at Houches during the evening.
Rucksack feels like a ton weight already (and still 120 miles to go!)
Proceeded to get lost in village — not a good start — but eventually found accommodation, despite my lack of French.
Day 2
Houches to Les Contamines (11.4 miles — 5,086 ft up, 4,472 ft down)
Set off early, which was fortunate as I had trouble finding the right path.
Found assorted English, Irish, American, German and French walkers having the same problem so didn't feel so bad.
Once on route, the path was very well signposted.
Arrived at Les Contamines weary but without mishap.
Day 3
Les Contamines to Les Chapieux (12.3 miles — 4,442 ft up, 3,173 ft down)
Used my travel alarm for the first time having been appointed ‘waker up’ for breakfast — not a success as I had forgotten to resent for French time (one hour ahead)— many comments about my parentage.
Eventually set off.
The route went through ‘Sound of Music’ type meadows.
Passed Bonhomme which has stunning views then on to Chapieux.
Found very good accommodation — good dinner and several beers consumed.
Day 4
Les Chapieux to Refuge Elisabetta (9.7 miles — 3,327 ft up, 879 ft down)
Set off along the road in cloud but the sun soon broke through.
Lovely path, climbed to the Col des Seigne, the French/Italian border — nothing to declare but nobody to declare it to anyway — Arrived at refuge at lunchtime — tried local speciality of Polenta, a bright orange ‘bangers and mash’.
The scenery was very spectacular — outside the Veni valley, inside of the French girls in my dormitory undressing for bed!
Day 5
Elisabetta to Courmayeur (13.5 miles — 1,614 ft up, 5,158 ft down)
Woke up with a hangover but it was a lovely day outside.
The views across the valley to Mont Blanc were the best so far — amazing.
Tried to find famous lake of Chécrout to take ‘classic’ photo of Mont Blanc reflected in its waters.
However the lake had dried up — took photo anyway!
Arrived Courmayeur mid-afternoon.
Day 6
Courmayeur to La Vachey (11.2 miles — 4,429 ft up, 3,045 ft down)
Most of the ‘up’ occurred soon after leaving Courmayeur, hence I passed several exhausted bodies littered by the wayside.
Arrived at La Vachey to find worse accommodation so far.
The hostel had fewer ‘mod cons’ than Dartmoor prison.
Guardian (manager) is a character the size and shape of the wrestler ‘Giant Haystacks’— but not so good looking.
Day 7
La Vachey to La Fouly (11.4 miles — 2,963 ft up, 3,117 ft down)
Awoke to find I had been sharing a room with a group of nuns.
Good views of the Pre de Bar glacier on the climb up to the Italian/Swiss border at the Col du Grand Ferret.
Many cows on this side of the mountain — signs say, ‘Do not bathe in the water troughs’(directed at hot walkers, not the cows).
Accommodation at Fouly is wonderful!
Day 8
La Fouly to Champex (11 miles — flat!— well, almost)
After previous days' lovely weather, disappointed that visibility was poor and it rained most of the time.
Views non-existent but at least the walking easier.
Acquired a companion who didn't stop talking for 5 or 6 miles — wasn't even female!
Fortunately he had a bus to catch.
Day 9+10
My feet decided they needed a day off.
Fortunately my fellow walkers' feet came out in sympathy.
Spent day boating on lake in Champex annoying local fishermen with our attempts at the world speed record for pedal boats.
Champex to La Forchaz (10.6 miles — 3,898 ft up, 3,737 ft down)
Route not so difficult as expected, although more ‘scrambling’ needed than before.
Emerged out of the clouds at the Fenêtre to find it more crowded than Blackpool beach.
Bodies draped everywhere in the sun — decided to join them.
Views from Fenêtre were excellent.
Eventually descended to Forclaz for well earned beers.
Day 11
La Forclaz to Trélèchamp (12.1 miles — 2,956 ft up, 3,370 ft down)
The path was one of the best on the tour so far — except for a stone ‘staircase’ clinging to a sheer rockface.
Needless to say I clung equally hard to the metal cable acting as a handrail.
Beautiful views of the Chamonix valley from Col de Balme and path to Trélèchamp.
Day 12
Trélèchamp to La Flégère (10 miles — 3,350 ft up, 1,588 ft down)
Decided to divert to Lac Blanc so had extra climb to make.
After initial steep path, walk became level balcony with extensive views across valley.
Lac Blanc is disappointing as it looks like a building site while a new refuge is being built.
Stayed at La Flégère — cable car station.
Day 13
La Flégère to Les Houches (11.3 miles — 2,530 ft up, 5,473 ft down)
The last day and the one with the best views.
After several miles saw Mont Blanc directly opposite and the town of Chamonix 4,000 ft below.
Down to Les Houches and the end of the tour.
Due to poor financial planning I was almost out of money.
Two American girls offered to help costs by letting me share their hotel room — an offer no ‘gentleman’ could possibly accept.
But as I'm no gentleman…
Day 14
Relaxing in Chamonix.
Most strenuous part of the day was a round of ‘Crazy Golf’(did not win).
Evening spent in a bar at a pre-arranged ‘reunion’ of everybody who'd met on route.
Finally run out of money and had to borrow train fare from Chamonix to Geneva.
Pigs to the Falklands
FOUR young pigs set sail for the Falklands last month and to make sure they didn't get hungry on the way they took their own feed with them.
of Gillhouse Farm, Zeal Monachorum, is a rare breed enthusiast who bred this year's champion Berkshire pig at the Devon County Show, she is exporting three large Blacks,(two gilts and a boar) and one Chester boar to a pig breeder in Port Stanley.
The pigs will be at sea for about a month and Cobbledicks of Torrington has supplied enough of their Supersow feed to last them until they reach their new home.
Field sales manager  said, ‘It was important to reduce any stress on the pigs and essential that there were no changes in diet while they were travelling’.
According to the large Blacks should adapt well to their life in the Falkland Islands.
‘They are hardy animals and good outdoors,’ she said.
‘They can also withstand extremes of temperature which may be very useful in the South Atlantic.’
Ethnic appeal
were invited to demonstrate their top grade Chapatti flour recently at the largest ethnic centre in the country at Ealing Road, Wembley.
This was the first time a company had been invited to give a product demonstration at the centre and  were keen to present the merits of their product.
Sales representative  organized the promotion and personally demonstrated the production of chapattis to thousands of visitors over a five-day period.
He generated a lot of enthusiasm and was supported each day by his colleagues from the company who agreed that it was great fun and a huge success.
New arrivals
EMPLOYEES at  were delighted to welcome seven new arrivals to the Great Cornard site in May, when a swan nesting beside the factory produced seven cygnets.
The swans started to build their nest several weeks ago and everyone at the factory had been eagerly awaiting the big day.
The swans are one of three breeding pairs to have nested within 400 yards of each other on the river bank.
‘It's extremely rare,’ said production director , ‘Normally the ‘cob’(male swan) is very territorial and won't let other swans near his nesting site’.
is pleased to report that mother and cygnets are doing well and thanks to tasty titbits of Omega petfood are growing stronger every day.
joins FID
THE Food Ingredients Department (FID) department increased its staff by 50 per cent on April when  joined on , swelling the departmental population to three.
is a graduate food scientist and previously worked for .
She will be working on a wide range of projects for our expanding activities in savoury food ingredients.
Away from the laboratory  has a wide variety of interests from aerobics to performing with a number of local theatrical groups.
Link — The House Journal of the  December 1990
Aiming high for 1991
First half improvement
IN THE first half of 1990 the Food & Agriculture Division continued to make progress and earned profits of £14.9m, an increase of nearly 20% on our 1989 half.
All of the companies in the Division turned in good half yearly figures with a particularly strong performance from  thanks to record prices for pigs.
had a more difficult first half with margins under pressure, but the quality of this year's barley harvest and strong export demand should help in the second half.
The companies within the Food Product Division made progress and  in particular have secured a number of new customers.
continues to make rapid progress in both the UK and continental markets and its new state of the art factory at Chilton was opened on  — fully reported on pages 4 and 5.
Current half year
The Division has continued to make progress in the second half in spite of very serious deterioration in the UK economic situation.
We should be grateful that most of our Group products directly or indirectly end up on plates or in glasses.
1991 and beyond
The budgets which have just been prepared show that we are aiming to do even better in 1991 and the managing director's reports on page 2 endorse this optimistic approach.
We have several capital projects which will take us into new and exciting areas and if we ride out this recession better than others we will have the opportunity to make further acquisitions to expand our core activities.
Thank you all for the support that you have given during 1990.
May I wish you and your families all the very best for Christmas and the new New Year.
's new Chilton factory is declared open.
Pictured from left:, MD ;, group managing director;, Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk and , chief executive,.
State-of-the-art loader/leveller installed at , Wallingford.
new LINK editor
SINCE I joined the Company at the beginning of October I've visited several locations and met most people at the Key Street office.
Thank you all for your generous welcome.
My home town is Cambridge but I'm moving closer to the east coast all the time and presently live just off the A45 between Bury St. Edmunds and Stowmarket.
My background is in publicity and public relations having spent the last ten years producing a variety of literature, press releases and editing several in-house magazines for two engineering companies —, a road machinery manufacturer and most recently  which manufactures valves, pump and pipe systems for the H&V industry.
Completely new to the Company, I know that I have a lot to learn and I'd particularly like to thank  for her help during the changeover.
I know that she will be a tough act to follow.
LINK is your magazine and it's your contributions that make it successful.
Please pass on your ideas — whether they're articles, photographs, or cartoons — to your local correspondent or send them to me directly at Key Street, and do not hesitate to telephone on  with any suggestions you may have.
Meanwhile, may I wish you all a very Happy Christmas and best wishes for the coming year.
Group news…
Group news…
Group news…
Significant Progress
THE fourth quarter of the year is our busiest and most profitable in the pre-Christmas trading period.
However, in the current economic climate the food industry is not anticipating consumer expenditure this year to reach quite the normal ‘Christmas Bonanza’ levels.
Food products are more resistant to down turn than many other goods.
We are fortunate in producing directly or supplying ingredients for products which provide good value for the consumer.
This point is well demonstrated by the strong performance of  and the recently acquired  business.
Sales of soup are particularly encouraging and additional capacity for specials production has been created.
Capital approval has also been given for the building of a new warehouse at Telford which will link together the soup and cereals factories and is due for completion next spring.
has made significant progress in recent months, improving both sales and production performance.
We have been able to consolidate our position as the major private label breakfast cereal supplier to the French market and enjoy further growth in other European markets.
There are many exciting new product launches planned for the next few months and the prospects for 1991 look very good.
Our flour milling businesses — and  — have continued to make progress in spite of a very competitive trading environment particularly in England.
has achieved the benefits of a cost reduction programme completed in June but the cost of the 1990 maize crop has created recent trading problems.
has found sales targets outside the UK snack market difficult to achieve but it is hoping to obtain new sales from recent new initiatives.
continues to enjoy a high level of sales and the new plant will come on stream early next year — not a moment too soon.
I should like to thank everyone in the Division for all the hard work which has gone into making 1990 a year of significant progress.
CHILTON FACTORY DECLARED ‘OPEN’
, Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk, officially opened the new Chilton factory on .
In declaring the factory open, paid tribute to the teamwork which went into the design and construction of the plant.
He also said how pleased he was to return to  after his visit two years before when he presented the Company with the Queen's Award for Export Achievement.
The guests included customers, former  shareholders, local dignitaries and many of the people directly involved with the project, all agreed that the factory is a great achievement of which the Company can be really proud.
We were also delighted that so many employees and their families were able to join us in the evening after the opening ceremony to look around the plant for the first time.
The visitors to Chilton saw production in full swing with the extruder packing plant and pelletiser working smoothly.
The second extruder line is already under construction and footings for the new 20,000 sq ft warehouse are being prepared.
Completion of these projects, planned for Spring 1991, won't come a moment too soon as we are already desperately short of warehousing space and will soon need the additional production capacity.
, whose organisation distributes many of our export products, highlighted opportunities facing the Company when he presented us with a commemorative certificate to mark the Chilton opening and to celebrate over 15 years of close co-operation.
Home trade and export sales continue to forge ahead and a number of new export products have recently been introduced.
We are looking to strengthen and support the Omega brand name and increase our investment in new product development.
We have a very busy programme to take us through to the end of the year.
Agriculture — ready to meet new Challenges
IN MOST respects 1990 has been very successful for , despite the gloomy predictions for much of the agricultural industry and the dismal annual reports from a number of competitors in the feed industry.
The first six months produced strong growth in compound feed sales, led by a recovery in pig tonnage and our continued success in the dairy sector.
The demand for pigs has remained buoyant with prices reaching an all time high in the middle of June.
A number of factors combined to give rise to these market conditions.
Firstly, it was the result of a reduced number of pigs coming forward from a smaller sow herd and secondly, there was a drop in demand for beef resulting from the media coverage of the BSE scare.
June also saw the beginning of the second successive hot, dry summer, with consumers recognising the versatility of pork products for the barbeque and to serve with salads.
It seemed improbable that the fine hot weather should continue right through the summer, but so it did for most of us.
The fields became parched and brown and the cattle required additional concentrate feed much as they had done the previous year.
All seemed set fair for an excellent autumn, but change comes when you least expect it.
We began to tire of eating charred meat outside in the garden and, instead of the normal seasonal rise in pig prices, they moved sharply into reverse.
The abundant supply of other meats and new sources of pigs from Eastern block countries, flowing into the EEC through the newly opened border between East and West Germany, meant that quite suddenly the honeymoon period was over.
Coupled with this, the rains eventually did come.
A gradual change in the countryside from brown to green meant that farmers could at last take advantage of buying less feed and the buoyant demand dwindled.
In the last two months, our budgeted sales of cattle feed have been much harder to achieve but these are conditions under which we are used to operating.
Despite the difficulties, I am confident that we can finish the year on a successful note.
1991 will bring a whole new range of challenges which we will meet with new vigour, refreshed by the Christmas break.
Looking forward with Confidence
WE ARE fortunate that malt is not suffering to the extent of many industries in the current recession.
Historically, brewing has justified its recession-proof rating, perhaps because in good times or bad, people still keep on drinking.
Our other major domestic market, the distilling industry has come back strongly from the low levels of production of the early 1980s and appears full of optimism, if the huge rise in the share prices of quoted distilling companies is a fair yardstick.
Some correction in volumes of spirit currently being distilled is almost inevitable, but strong management and marketing should prevent a repeat of 1979/80.
Beer production in the UK may be on the decline but, as previously stated in LINK , beer continues to be drunk in ever increasing quantities worldwide.
Malt export sales for delivery over the next twelve months have gone exceptionally well.
Japan and other smaller but developing markets in the Far East are showing exciting growth.
Parts of Africa and South America have been keen buyers of our malt.
It would be foolish to ignore the obvious signs of recession at home and not take the necessary defensive precautions.
Fortunately we have almost finished a major capital programme at Wallingford and are well ahead at Knapton.
The large sums of money spent on the maltings have enabled manufacturing cost increases to be held well below inflation.
We have, to many experts' surprise, had an excellent harvest, especially in Scotland.
All in all, we will be able to look back on 1990 as a year of solid achievement and forward to 1991 with confidence.
Thanks
I HAVE been completely bowled over by everyone's generosity and good wishes.
I had hoped that like the proverbial old soldier I could just quietly fade away but it didn't quite pan out like that.
And, of course, in my heart I'm glad it didn't!
I settled for a beautiful Waterford Crystal clock as my leaving present from friends and colleagues throughout the Group.
It sits in pride of place in my sitting room at home and is a timeless reminder of your support and friendship whilst I was editor.
May LINK and everyone at  long, long continue to flourish.
Thank you.
New appointment
has been appointed marketing services manager for , responsible for advertising, public relations, promotional and research activities.
, 43, is a member of the Chartered Institute of Marketing and has had an extensive career in sales and marketing in the wholesale and retail food industry; wholesale hardware trade and the computer industry.
He is married with three children and is a member of the Felixstowe Ferry golf club.
's farewell
Left to right: and , finance director  and group pensions manager .
, deputy pensions manager, retired at the end of August.
At his farewell, the Company presented  with an electronic typewriter, fitted with all the latest software.
His friends and colleagues gave him a cut glass sherry decanter and group pensions manager,, complemented this gift with matching sherry glasses.
's wife  was presented with a flowering houseplant.
began his 15-year career with the Company in the pensions department, working for ex-company secretary .
Over the years  took great pleasure in visiting the various locations frequently, to meet people and discuss their questions.
On leaving, he said that his only regret, was that he hadn't been able to get round to everyone and say goodbye.
We wish him a long and happy retirement.
Left to right: and his wife  with .
End of an era
retired from  at the end of June marking the end of an era for many employees at the Essex mill.
was former chairman and MD of  and former chairman of .
He has been ‘governor’ since 1947 and during this time has taken on most of us as recruits, acting not only as the boss but as adviser of finance, law, education and various other problems.
For this we thank him, and wish him and his wife,, a very happy retirement.
A buffet meal was laid on for his send-off and most of the workforce managed to return early to join in a very enjoyable get together.
General manager,, presented  with a silver tray from the Company and directors, and  followed this with a bouquet of flowers for .
and  then presented a cut glass decanter and a camera from the workforce.
We were also very pleased to welcome back retired employees,, and , who returned for the farewell.
INTERIM RESULTS
The unaudited interim statement for six months ended , was announced on .
RESULTS
Group profit before tax for the first half of 1990 was £57.5 million, an increase of 2%.
Earnings rose by 6.9% to £40.4 million, giving earnings per share of 6.8p, the same as last year after adjusting for the bonus element of the Rights Issue of 114 million shares in May.
Turnover was down by 7% at £878 million, reflecting the sale of the General Trading Division.
DIVIDEND
The directors have declared an interim dividend of 3.6p per share (1989 — 3.3p).
Notwithstanding the deterioration in the world economic situation, coupled with the Gulf Crisis, the directors intend, in the absence of unforeseen circumstances, to recommend a final dividend of 5.4p per share making a total of 9.0p (8.3p) for the year as forecast at the time of the Rights Issue.
celebrates Chilton opening
Europe's most modern, dry pet food factory
's new £4.5 million Chilton factory was officially opened on  by , Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk, at the Chilton Industrial Estate, Sudbury, Suffolk before 110 invited guests.
unveiled a plaque at the new premises at 11.00 a.m. and was attended by , Sudbury's deputy mayor; chief executive ; group managing director ; and  's managing director .
Left to right:,, and .
Welcome
welcomed the guests on behalf of,, and .
He said that he was delighted to be at the opening of the new factory; built entirely under the planning and control of production and engineering director .
He added that he was particularly pleased to say that funds for the 40,000 sq ft facility had been generated totally by the Company and that none was borrowed money.
said he was particularly pleased to perform the opening of the Chilton factory.
He recalled his last visit to the Company's Great Cornard factory two years ago when he presented  with the Queen's Award for Export.
He added that in today's difficult economic climate it was so encouraging to see a local company expanding its facilities and particularly for production of the newest type of dried pet food which has made life so much easier for all cat and dog owners.
Left to right:,,,,.
Tour guide  (left) 's technical manager, shows guests the computer control room where operator  explains the sophisticated production process.
expressed great confidence in the Company's products and its future and welcomed the new factory in the area, saying: ‘is good for exports, good for Sudbury and good for Suffolk.’
Following the ceremony, thanked the guests for coming and briefly explained what they would be seeing on their tour of the working factory, which is expected to boost the Company's production to over 50,000 tonnes during 1990.
Celebrations continue
's managing director  (left) receiving a ‘Certificate of Appreciation’ from ,, one of  's major customers from Holland.
After a tour of the facilities, the guests convened in a splendid gold and cream marquee constructed inside the factory, for a buffet and refreshments.
Part of the impressive interior of the new 40,000 sq.
ft.
Chilton factory.
A group of visitors look at the fully automated packing line in operation.
Growing business
Sales of  's OMEGA pet food products have continued to rise dramatically during recent years and plans for additional production facilities were well underway by the spring of 1988.
Building work began towards the end of the same year with the first product produced in July 1990.
Guests in the new warehouse facility.
At present the factory has one production line running with a yearly capacity of 25,000 tonnes.
Further major capital expenditure has now been approved and work is already underway with the installation of a second line and additional warehousing.
It's work as usual for  (left) and , warehousemen at the new factory.
(left) receiving A silver salver from .
Tribute
The day's celebrations came to a close with a touching tribute to , founder of the Company, by .
said: ‘I would like to thank all the people responsible for the Company and for the very good way that the business was handed over.
Many thanks to ,, and .
But particularly to , who drove the business forward.’
He then presented  with a silver salver in recognition of all his achievements over the years.
Production manager  explains the automated production process.
Visitors making their way to the upper levels.
Three smiling members of the maintenance team: Left to right,, and apprentice .
Special evening
To round off the event an informal party was held in the evening for employees and spouses who toured the factory and enjoyed a buffet and refreshments.
Omega Pet Foods What are they?
MOST people associate pet food with the canned meat products that they see on the TV and in local supermarkets.
This predominance of cans is a correct impression of the country's cat food market.
Ninety-five per cent of our cats are fed a canned cat food, the others eating scraps or whatever they can catch!
However, about a quarter are also fed a brand of dried cat foods, like ,, etc., and  (under the umbrella name of OMEGA) is the market leader of this type of food.
Indeed if you include our exports, we are the largest manufacturer of dried cat food in the country.
The dog food market is less ‘one product’ than that for cat food.
Again cans predominate, but with only about 55 per cent of the market, along with mixers such as or .
Surprisingly, about a quarter of the country's dogs are still fed on raw meat or scraps.
The majority of the remaining 20 per cent are fed a complete and balanced dry dog food, such as Omega dog food.
This is sold, alongside Omega cat food, through specialist outlets such as pet shops, garden centres and agricultural merchants.
What does Complete and Balanced mean?
Dogs, of all breeds, have the same basic nutrient requirements.
Only the amount of food they need varies and this is determined by the animal's age, activity, size, temperament and living conditions.
Complete dry dog foods are complete in that they contain all the nutrients essential for a dogs good health and are balanced in that these nutrients are in correct proportions to each other.
Does it make any difference?
Yes — one of the many reasons dogs often suffer from nutritional problems (resulting in too much weight, lack of vitality, a poor coat, and diarrhoea) is that a canned food diet is not adequate.
Often, dog owners do not realise the importance of feeding canned food and mixer in the right proportions.
A particularly common problem is that owners economise on expensive canned food and over feed with mixer and biscuits.
For a complete and balanced meal they must be fed with an equal volume of canned food and mixer.
The mixer is not just a bulking food, but an essential part of the dogs diet containing not only carbohydrates but important vitamins, proteins and minerals.
But I thought dogs only ate meat?
In the wild, a dog (e.g. fox or wolf), needs many foodstuffs, including meat to satisfy its nutritional requirements.
The constituents of complete dry dog foods mimic a dog's natural diet and includes not only meat, but cereals and vegetables.
Types
There are two types of complete dry dog food; Flake and Extruded.
Flake food is simply a low cost muesli made up of all the different foodstuffs of a complete food.
Omega Pet Foods manufactures the extruded variety which is made from the same constituents, but cooked under pressure — extruded — to form a characteristic nugget.
Not only does this result in a more palatable food but the extrusion process makes the food more digestable and therefore more nutritious.
Omega range
There are three types of dog food in the Omega range: Omega Tasty — a ring shaped general purpose food for the majority of home owned dogs; Omega Extra — a cross shaped concentrated food for working and sporting dogs, breeding and lactating bitches; and Omega Puppy, a high nutrient food for weaning puppies from their mother and for their early months.
If you would like a free sample from the Omega range and more information, complete and return the FREEPOST coupon below.
You too will soon be recommending Omega to your friends.
Send to:,.
Please send me a free sample from the Omega Pet Foods range and further information.
Name…
Address…
Postcode…
Remember — No stamp required  
and  unveiling their fathers picture watched by  (seated) and .
Memorial for former MD at University
A MEMORIAL lecture room at the Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, has been dedicated to the late , former managing director of .
The dedication took place in August at a ceremony where daughters  and  unveiled a framed picture of their father who was tragically killed in 1986.
Scholarships
As ex-  employees will recall , his wife and youngest daughter, were on their way to the Maldives when their aeroplane was bombed by terrorists at Colombo Airport.
All three, along with eighteen other innocent passengers, were tragically killed.
At the time, a trust fund was formed with the aims of establishing a permanent memorial to , and annual scholarships for young people connected with the industry.
The scholarships are now in their third year and a number of candidates have successfully completed a variety of courses.
Around forty contributors to the fund were present at the ceremony representing malting, brewing, distilling and grain merchanting companies.
International centre
, a close family friend gave an excellent address and , current chairman of the trustees presented a cheque from the fund for £25,000 to , director of the brewing school at Heriot Watt.
The late , former managing director of 
The lecture room is in the heart of the International Centre for brewing and distilling at the Heriot Watt, the only such facility in the UK.
It was my privilege and honour, as trustee of the fund, to welcome the guests and chair the proceedings.
Do you have a flair for illustration or graphic design?
The Summer Fayre Committee needs help with the production of posters, leaflets and other items for next year's Summer Fayre.
— Could you be the person they're looking for?
As an added incentive, two complimentary tickets for the evening's disco are being offered for the winning entry.
Send your ideas to:, Chairman of the Summer Fayre Committee,,.
Linda on her way to the top
, personnel secretary at Ipswich, has successfully completed the first stage of a three year course in personnel management at the Suffolk College.
was awarded her Professional Management Foundation Certificate on , for passing a series of four examinations during the year on: the corporate environment; management processes and functions; management information systems; and human resource management.
joined the personnel team two years ago having moved to the area from Chester.
She has a degree in history and religious studies and is now well on her way to becoming a graduate member of the Institute of Personnel Management.
Comment scheme award
WINSFORD MILL press operator,, has won £200 for his response to the company ‘Comment!’ scheme.
's idea was a pre-cooling bin for Winsford's main double pelleting line.
Before the new bin was installed, there was a problem with fat building up in the cooler and in the downspout between the press and cooler.
This led to fat wastage, inefficient cooling and blocked systems.
's new bin now provides an effective air seal and ‘buffer’ time for the fat to be fully absorbed.
Cash for Comments
COMMENT! is a  Quality and Service initiative launched in September last year to gather up all those ideas and suggestions which we have, and which if implemented, can help improve productivity, quality and working practice.
Your ideas and comments are received by , managing director of , personally, and are treated with the strictest confidence.
's north west regional director,(right) presenting  with the cheque.
A small committee assists in deciding the financial benefit of each suggestion and a cash bonus is given to the employee concerned based on this.
There's no upper limit — so put your ideas into action — pick up a leaflet today.
Double charity boost
Production director, is pictured presenting a cheque to , vice-chairwoman of the St. Nicholas Hospice.
donated cheques for £375 apiece to two Suffolk charities following their team's success as runners-up in the Clayton trophy at this year's Summer Fayre.
The St. Nicholas Hospice at Bury St. Edmunds will put its donation towards a £2.5 million appeal, to build new facilities in the grounds of the West Suffolk Hospital.
The second beneficiary, the Suffolk Accident Rescue Service, relies totally on charitable donations for its desperately-needed equipment.
Specialist treatment
Members of the Suffolk Accident Rescue Service, staff voluntarily by GPs, are usually the first doctors to arrive at the scene of car accidents where they can give specialist emergency treatment, additional to that provided by ambulance staff.
This is a service which affects everyone who lives in, or visits Suffolk.
The number of injured people helped by the service runs into many hundreds.
Focus on Wallingford
WALLINGFORD is the most southerly of all  maltings but not, surprisingly, the most westerly.
Its circle of influence on barley includes all southern and western England with our own maltings at Ware providing the nearest buying competition.
This geographical advantage is not restricted to the raw material, there are obvious transport advantages in delivering to many brewers in the Thames Valley and Wales.
clearly knew what they were doing when they decided to build the plant at Wallingford and it's no secret that when  bought  from , Wallingford was seen to fill a gap in  distribution of locations.
Capital
Historically, the town looked at one time as if would become the main centre of Thames Valley affairs.
Indeed for a few medieval days it was the effective capital of England.
Given its Charter in 1155, the town was the first such to be honoured and appeared to be ‘in a growth situation’.
And growth there was until the Civil War, when the prosperous Burghers chose the losing, if not the wrong side.
Oliver Cromwell, not renowned for his soft forgiving nature, decided to demolish Wallingford castle and in doing so, also destroyed the fabric of the town's commercial growth.
Recovery was slow.
It is tempting to claim that  's construction of the maltings in 1958 was the benchmark of modern investment.
Certainly until then no national company had invested a great deal in the area.
The river Thames
Now pressures are such that consent has finally been given for the southern by-pass, a scheme first proposed in 1916.
Unpaid extra
This part of the country, referred to as south Oxfordshire or north Berkshire,(boundaries have tended to move a lot), is a startlingly beautiful part of England.
Stop anywhere for a few minutes on a summer's day and you are likely to end up as an unpaid extra in next year's calendar or on a biscuit tin.
Those who know southern England might well expect Wallingford to be already a mere dormitory of London.
True enough there is the odd Porsche but surprisingly few patrons of the supermarkets carry mobile phones of filo-faxes.
In fact, Wallingford remains a cosy rural town, populated with friendly folk, who have time to show their friendliness, it is a delightful place to live.
St. Peters Church, Wallingford
Borough of Wallingford Coat of Arms
Wallingford — transformed
JANUARY ‘89 saw the beginning of transformation at the Wallingford maltings with the launch of a massive £4 million investment programme to modernise the existing plant and give a boost to production.
acquired the  maltings in July 1987.
Since its construction almost thirty years before there had been little capital investment.
Consequently, it was struggling with outdated equipment and facilities.
Today, with the first phase of the project complete, the original aim has been met and Wallingford has the highest production levels in the group.
Major developments
Wallingford's nine saladin boxes were the first to benefit from investment, each being fitted with new stripper turners.
Box height was also increased to boost the batch size from 80 to 100 tons apiece.
‘State-of-the-art’ loader/levellers have been installed in the three kilns reducing the cycle time to 11 hours and all the steep tanks have been re-fitted with full ventilation.
A new thermofluid indirect heating system, already in use at some other locations, has also been installed.
A great deal of the plant is now under computerised control although there is still a long way to go before it is as automated as other maltings in the group.
Outside, a new Intake office and canopy provide staff and drivers with added protection from the elements and new weighing equipment in the weigh-bridge gives improved data retrieval.
Second phase
With the essentials complete, the second phase of the project — to improve overall appearance, is well underway.
Walls and ceilings in the germination rooms and steeping areas have been clad with plastic panelling to facilitate cleaning.
And all the corridors, stairways, and walls in other areas, have either been re-painted or are about to be.
They say that there's still a long way to go before the transformation is complete, but there is no doubt that Wallingford is coming out — tops!
Key to success
As any maltster will tell you — hi-tech equipment is a necessity for efficient malt production, but the finest quality malt can only be produced with the addition of the combined knowledge and expertise of those involved in its production.
Their skills, coupled with an acute understanding of customer requirements, are the key to success.
Our colleagues at Wallingford definitely have these talents and many more besides.
is a true veteran of the malting industry.
He began his career as intake foreman at the maltings when it was built and is now barley buyer for the south of England.
is the best in the business and graces the office with a dignified professionalism.
Although not based at Wallingford, this FOCUS wouldn't be complete without mentioning , senior project engineer.
, who is coming up to retirement next year after more than forty years in malt, has known the Wallingford maltings since it was a green field site.
He still works very closely with them and is the only person who knows the exact location of every borehole; the size of every drain, and more.
Smiling , shift operator, makes his second appearance in LINK .
Previously, he was featured as our champion archer, who never misses the point.
is still progressing with the sport taking one championship title after the other.
On this occasion he is posing for us with the ‘stripper’ in one of the kilns.
All barley delivered to Wallingford is scrutinized by , barley manager.
is ex-  and like  started at Wallingford when it was built.
His experience of the industry began in 1958 when he worked at Immingham Docks, before transferring to Wallingford as assistant engineer.
Today, oversees the delivery of some 80,000 tonnes of barley each year.
When he is not looking over a sea of grain, is overlooking the sea!
As his main hobby is sailing.
and his friends have visited places as far afield as Cherbourg.
New Intake
, barley supervisor, joined  three years ago on a temporary basis.
‘I took a plumbers apprenticeship when I left school,’ he said, ‘But after I'd worked here for a while, I decided to stay on full time.’
, intake operator, is a larger than life character and is extremely popular around the maltings, which is just as well when you see his size! usually takes the barley samples and generally attends to the drivers.
, process manager, at the kiln control panel.
's career has spanned over 36 years in malting; working previously at Newark, Bath and Immingham.
Congratulations are in order for , as in October he became a proud grandfather for the second time.
Granddaughter  is doing well and , trained in all aspects of babycare such as nappy changing and bottle feeding, expects he'll be contacted soon for baby sitting duties.
, shift operator, taking a sample from one of the steep tanks.
asks us to forgive the ‘designer stubble’— he didn't know it was photo day!
In addition to his talents at the maltings, is a champion darts player and most recently was an individuals finalist in the area finals.
Although he didn't take the trophy this year, has done so on many previous occasions.
Pictured are a few of his 120 trophies.
This is the smiling face of , receptionist and switchboard operator.
has recently announced her engagement and the wedding is set for June ‘91.
Her proposal of marriage came as a complete surprise as her boyfriend popped the question while they were on holiday in Spain.
‘I thought he was joking!’ she said.
‘It wasn't until he produced the ring that I took him seriously.’
in control
Congratulations to electrician , who despite the chaos going on around him, managed to pose for this photo.
Poor  had been trying to remove this panel in the control room when we appeared and was surrounded by contractors trying to get in to start redecoration.
Well done !
There are few in  who won't recognise , Wallingford's maltings manager for the last two years.
joined the Company in 1970 as lab technician at Ipswich and has experience of many different departments at a variety of locations.
was one of the team involved in the  construction of the Grain Terminal at Ipswich — from its conception through to commissioning.
He also spent time at Grantham and Gainsborough for production training.
Whether it's petty cash, invoicing, or conference organising, 's your person! has been at the maltings for just over a year and takes care of all those time consuming, but essential, administration services, appreciated by us all.
Outside the office, takes every opportunity to fly off to warm exotic climates for her hobby of snorkelling.
On top of it all
, left, and  are certainly on top of it all in the steeping area.
is part of the maintenance team and knows every inch of the site having worked here since 1969. , is one of those outside ‘non-permanent’ additions to the staff, who will be recognised by many in the Company.
is the son of , who tragically died 18 months ago.
's mother , also works for , in the research and development centre at Ipswich.
(He sends his love mum!)
, assistant malting manager is pictured with .
is responsible for keeping the ‘vital’ malt board updated and writes the malt blends for stock control.
He also doubles as relief for  and is safety co-ordinator for the site.
is QC manager.
A relative newcomer to Wallingford, starting seven years ago.
However, 's career in malt began in 1966 when he joined  's brewing services division at Gloucester on the same day as  from R&D at Ipswich.
Three years later he transferred to Newark where he was a research chemist.
is pictured with  and  whose combined time at Wallingford exceeds 40 years.
(left) is a key member of the laboratory staff with knowledge which she has acquired through 28 years of barley and malt analysis.
is a shift chemist with 12 years experience at the site.
For the past year  has spent her spare moments studying for an Open University degree in science and technology.
She took her exam in October and is now waiting for the results.
and  work shifts in the lab with fellow chemists  and .
also burns the midnight oil studying for an HNC in chemistry.
If it doesn't move — paint it!
from the maintenance team is pictured in full swing — transforming yet another corner of the maltings.
Keep up the good work  — it looks great!
is outloading supervisor and captain of Wallingford's 6 & 9s skittles teams.
spends his day blending the malt and seeing that it is despatched correctly.
His authority is based on many years experience in the industry since he started in 1964.  is assisted with packing and loading by  and .
Special mention
Maltings engineer,(father of ), and the maintenance team deserve special mention in this feature for their combined skill in keeping essential plant operational and for their assistance with new installation.
has also had the added responsibility of overseeing the work of a multitude of outside contractors during the investment programme.
Part of the management team — left to right,,,, and .
Anyone for Skittles
THE maltings has recreational facilities on site through the  Sports & Social Club run autonomously by local residents.
The club acts as a convenient watering hole at lunch times and becomes the arena for some titanic battles with skittles or darts during the evenings.
Local leagues for both activities are well supported from the maltings.
Practically everyone gets roped into ‘bowling’ at one time or another but the  family, and , always seem to maintain the highest profile on the alley.
Left to right, back:,,,,,,.
Front: and .
Darts are also very popular.
Last month the club hosted the area finals in a most impressive manner.
and  reached the individuals finals whilst a team with , and  performed well in the fours.
is director of southern sales for .
He joined  in 1977 from the .
Since then he has operated from various locations and in 1979 was appointed barley buyer for the north of England, based at Knapton.
He took up his present position six years ago and is based at Wallingford.
QUIZ FOR CHRISTMAS!
START the New Year with an extra £25 in your pocket!
Try your hand at this quiz devised by .
All you have to do is work out the association between the number and the clue.
Here's one to start you off — 26 L of the A, answer, ‘26 letters of the Alphabet’.
Good Luck.
The prize will be given to the first correct entry (which should be sent to  by ) and we'll print the answers in the next issue.
What's 20ft long and weighs 10 tonnes?
HAVING the only large area of concrete within the town boundary, Wallingford's forecourt has become the ‘traditional’ assembly area for all the local activities from scouting to carnival parades and now it seems for a 1920s engine boiler!
Believe it or not, this is the boiler of the 1920s 42XX 280 Great Western tank engine, number 4247, currently under restoration by a group of local enthusiasts from the Cholsey and Wallingford Railway Preservation Society.
They needed somewhere to store the boiler while the rest of the loco is away for repair and the maltings was only too pleased to help.
: On Top Form
For those of you who remember  for his sporting club interests, this picture says it all!
Suffering, but determined, comes to the finish of the Oxford half-marathon held in September this year.
It was suggested that  should enter a team for the 13 mile run, however as the day approached, half of the team members were unexpectedly unable to join in, including  who unfortunately sprained his ankle two weeks before, climbing  in the Cairngorms!
However, the three that did enter finished in style.
Pictured: 579 ; 606 , maintenance fitter; and , general manager, Louth, modelling the latest Paris fashion — a Kirkcaldy bin liner!
WINSFORD VISIT
GROUP managing director,, visited the Winsford mill of  in October.
He took a keen interest in the new bulk outloading and intake system and is pictured in the new control room with north west regional director  (right) and intake operator  (left).
The tour also included a visit to the cubing control room where operatives had overlooked a recent suggestion that ‘Page 3’ type calendars should be removed.
This oversight resulted in this cartoon appearing on mill noticeboards.
I'm sure  and  don't like to see nude calendars on display?(, operations manager, far right, and , front, right)
, energy manager for , Gainsborough, is pictured (right) receiving his 25 year service award from engineering manager .
In the true spirit of energy conservation  chose a bicycle for his gift.
Christmas Delight
Here's the first of what could become a regular feature in LINK if you send in your suggestions.
But any recipes should be fairly straightforward (so the editor can try them!)
Our first recipe specially for Christmas is from , chef at .
He says you should serve it with whipped cream for a lighter Christmas dessert.
Ingredients 
3 oz sultanas
3 oz currants
3 oz chopped raisins
1½ oz glacé cherries
1½ oz mixed peel
2 ft oz brandy
½ tsp mixed spice
2 pt softened vanilla ice cream
4 oz double cream
3 oz toasted flaked almonds
Mix together the fruit, brandy and the spice and leave overnight.
Place the softened ice cream, fruit and nuts in a bowl and mix thoroughly.
Spoon into a 3½ pint pudding basin, cover, and store in the freezer until required.
To serve immerse the basin in hot — but not boiling water — for 20 seconds and turn onto a chilled serving dish.
Bon appetit !
Left to right:;(chairman of the angling club) and , treasurer.
Getting hooked!
and  again (after they'd been told they were on camera!
TWO years ago a group of keen anglers from  at Hull teamed up with employees from a local company,, for informal and friendly fishing matches.
As the numbers increased they decided to form their own angling club under the chairmanship of  operative,.
donated some trophies to be presented at the end of the club's first official fishing season.
The year went reasonably well but there were of course a few difficulties as you would expect from a new organisation.
Two brothers, and , both from  won the match weight trophy and the heaviest single fish award.
Caps and aprons
By the start of the 1990 season membership had increased to twenty and the club took on a more professional approach.
donated twenty caps and bait aprons in the club colours (yellow and black) bearing the Company name.
The season went well and the club recently held its presentation dinner dance where the trophies were awarded.
A new life style
THE following have recently retired or have a pension that has matured.
We wish them a long, healthy and happy retirement.
: Pride of Eagle Mill
, office manager for Livestock Contracts, is a keen bowler (flat green version) and is the pride of  's Eagle Mill at Ipswich, having won the County Cup for the four-wood singles competition earlier this year.
has developed her love of bowls since being introduced to the sport eight years ago by workmate .
She now plays for the Stone Lodge Bowls Club at the Sports and Social Club, Ipswich and for the Suffolk Police Bowls Club.
In addition to playing for the clubs in league competitions she also enjoys pairs and triples games with fellow bowlers.
‘It's a super sport,’ said .
‘You meet lots of different people and after the game there's always time for a drink and a good chat.’
In the run-up to the final, played a number of games on a knock-out basis, culminating in an area final followed by the County semi-final, before winning the County overall on  at the Otley Bowls Club near Ipswich.
Following her success, went on to represent Suffolk in the National Finals at Skegness, narrowly losing in the semi-finals, by one shot.
Although slightly wounded, says that she is ready to take up the challenge again next year.
, winner of the 1990 County Cup for the four-wood singles competition.
Obituary
OUR  joined  in February 1951 in the London Office, moving on to various training and sales jobs throughout Manchester, the Midlands and Essex.
He was senior representative in King's Lynn during 1957 and area sales manager at Ipswich during 1961–1965.
In 1965 the big step to London as area general manager (we were now ).
followed  at Faversham in 1971 as the ‘boss’ leaving in 1980 to return to East Anglia as director and general manager — East Anglia.
I worked closely with  for 30 years and that relationship became closer and friendlier as the years went by.
was that sort of person.
Without doubt a great deal of my enjoyable working life has been due in part to being lucky enough to work with .
Proper ‘gent’
A tongue that left people in no doubt of their responsibilities but delivered in impeccable style, seen by everyone as a proper ‘gent’.
No-one has enjoyed such popularity over such a wide range of colleagues from the very junior to the very senior.
We shall miss his humour, his smile, his sometimes quite brilliant prose and always remember that if the name  was mentioned it always brought a smile, and that is what we shall remember.
buying director,
Born  Died 
UNBELIEVABLE to hear of his death, only six weeks after the pensioners outing, when we all enjoyed the river cruise.
I had a long chat with  during the trip when, amongst other topics, we recalled the days of the agricultural show season and some of the hectic times we had, especially at the Norfolk and Suffolk shows.
In the early 70s the theme of most shows concentrated on ‘live displays’ which meant taking cattle, pigs and poultry around the country.
The one  remembered was the time when we had a display comparing ‘steers’ against ‘bulls’and their relevant daily liveweight gains.
Chase
Needless to say this led to several incidents because the cattle came direct from farms and were not accustomed to being in pens or being handled by the general public.
The result was that one of the bulls managed to escape.
What followed can only be described as a wild west show, with  representatives chasing it around the Norfolk showground, much tot he amusement of everyone in the vicinity.
— who said he was beginning to enjoy his retirement and looking forward to many more years to come.
Unfortunately this was not to be.
How tragic for his life to be taken so suddenly.
All our sympathy goes to his wife, and family.
pension contact
Pensioners' Outing
THE weather forecast was to say the least somewhat forbidding — gale force winds and blustery showers.
Undeterred by this, pensioners from Louth, Grimsby and Gainsborough maltings, along with their spouses, set forth on their annual outing.
Well chaperoned by  and , the first stop was Rufford Park, north of Nottingham.
A picturesque spot with well laid out gardens and leisure centre.
The weather, being much better than expected, allowed us to take a gentle stroll and some light refreshment.
The next port of call was the Royal Moat House International and Nottingham, for an excellent carvery lunch enjoyed in most pleasant surroundings.
Here we were joined by , general manager, Louth, and  who organised the outing.
Thank you .
After lunch, pensioners had the choice of venturing off on their own or visiting the Tales of Robin Hood Centre.
The majority opted for the visit and in my opinion made a good choice.
The conception of the centre is very similar to the Jorvick at York.
A realistic portrayal of the life and times of the legendary outlaw well worth the visit.
Afterwards, there was still time for a spot of shopping and sight-seeing before embarking for home after a very enjoyable day.
Pensioners from Louth, Grimsby and Gainsborough maltings
Back in time
I recently visited  and his wife , now both in their 80s, at their home in Ipswich.
Before retiring, had worked for 40 years at , mainly in the office and completing his time at Eagle Mill.
He is still keeping busy making model steam engines and indulging in his favourite hobby — photography — in which he has now progressed from ‘stills’ to ‘movies’.
Whilst remembering the old days I was surprised to hear that  ran in the family as his wife's father had worked for the Company at the turn of the century.
recollected some of her early memories of those long-ago-days.
pensioner contact
Memories of the S.S. Oarsman lost with all hands in 1932
‘My father,, started working at  in 1896 when he was 14 years old.
He told me that he used to run from Chevalier Street through the unlit town streets to the office on the docks.
When he arrived his first task was to light the one and only office fire.
In later years he rose to the position of shipping manager and had about four small steamers and a score of sailing barges to supervise.
Steam ship
I can remember my mother telling me that he used to look out of his bedroom window many times during stormy nights.
His worst time was when the S.S. Oarsman , sailing from Rotterdam to Great Yarmouth, was lost at see with all hands in 1932.
No trace of the ship was ever found.
He personally visited every family of the lost crew.
Just after the First World War, my father said to my oldest brother and me: ‘Would you like to see a large grain ship on the river?’
We were very exciting, of course.
And were taken by the Primrose (a small steam tender which conveyed the dockers down to Butterman's Bay to partially unload ships too large to enter the dock fully laden) to the ship.
Bananas
We arrived at the bottom of a rope ladder which seemed to rise to an enormous height up the ship's side.
Dad steadied the bottom of the ladder but it still swung about a bit which really frightened me.
However, the crew helped us aboard and I soon forgot my fright when we were given bananas to eat.
We hadn't seen one for years.
We played with the ship's monkey and had a wonderful time, while around us the dockers unloaded the cargo into barges that lay alongside.
All the rest of my family inherited a love for the river and its estuary and later on my husband,, and my eldest brother, bought a small sailing boat and we spent many happy and sometimes frightening times on the water.’
Obituaries
It is with deep regret that we have to report the deaths of the following:
Deaths in Service  
Outing to butterfly park
Grantham pensioners
WE met at our usual rendezvous, the King's Hotel, for coffee and a chat before a roast beef lunch.
Again we were fortunate with the weather.
The sun shone warmly for our trip to the Long Sutton Butterfly Park.
The park is set in 12 acres of a 156 acre farm and since its opening three seasons ago, it has proved to be one of the most popular tourist attractions in the country.
Over 500 butterflies fly freely among tropical plans, trees, flowers and shrubs, intermingled with pools, streams and waterfalls stocked with fish and terrapins.
Wander
We were also able to wander around the herbaceous gardens, Pets corner, wildflower meadows and museum of farm implements.
(I didn't see anyone sampling the adventure playground though!).
The ride home through the Fens had its own particular beauty, with the stark skyline against which trees and buildings were silhouetted in the sunshine.
We all agreed that it had been a most leisurely and pleasant day out.
It was also good to have our ‘old’ general manager  with us for the day giving everyone the chance to bring him up to date with their news.
also accompanied the group and special thanks are due to him for his organisation and for looking after the Grantham pensioners welfare.
Farmer of the Year Award
's salesman for the Cardigan area shares the delight of two of his customers, and  of Tynlofft Farm, Dyfed, who have won the Reed Farmers Publishing Group's Farmer of the Year Award .
On winning the accolade the  brothers were praised by the judges for their tremendous grassland and forage management on the 45 ha (111 acre) farm at , near Lampeter, Dyfed.
Congratulations to them both from  and all at .
and 
Sales team
THE recently expanded  sales force met each other for the first time in September at their autumn sales meeting.
The new team members have already made a great dent on the company's lunch budget, by wining and dining garden centre owners and agricultural merchants.
Before it was only pet shop owners who were entertained!
They have also been successful in encouraging many traditional pet shops to sell pre-packed pet foods, rather than loose from a sack.
This gives the retailer a more attractive product for a larger market and helps the Company to create a stronger brand image.
From left back,,,,.
Front:,,,,.
hits them for six
, 's export administrator, helped lead the Sudbury cricket team to victory earlier this year when they won the premier cricket competition in Suffolk and Essex.
has played for the Sudbury team for many years and was vice-captain when they took the Anglo Two Counties League Championship.
is pictured right, with fellow opening bat,(formerly of Essex and Worcester).
Supper Fayre romance
A CHANCE meeting at  's 1989 Summer Fayre has led to a lasting romance for  's stock controller  and  from  in France who has since moved to England to continue the relationship.
At first, communication was something of a problem for the couple, as neither of them could speak the others native tongue, but this was soon overcome by a friendly interpreter.
Addresses and telephone numbers were exchanged and the romance began.
After a series of telephone calls, letter writing and visits to France, asked for a transfer to .
Thanks to who granted his request, started work and a new life in  on .
The romance continues…
and 
wins trip to Paris
, from the computer centre at Ipswich, had the luck of the draw in October when she won two tickets for a weekend in Paris.
won the prize in a draw at a recent Business to Business Exhibition in Ipswich.
She is pictured with boyfriend , operations supervisor at the computer centre, who  invited to join her on the two-day trip.
News from the locations
Cross Hands
BY the time this is printed, it will be December and nearly Christmas, therefore, may I, on behalf of all at ,, wish everyone a very Merry Christmas, a Happy and Prosperous New Year and a very good Christmas staff dinner/dance!
Ours will be held at the White Hart Inn, Llandeilo, again this year, in early January, and we are looking forward to it — but before that, I think we should thank the Company once again for presenting all members of staff with their Christmas turkey.
Congratulations to first time gran,(accounts).
Granddaughter  was born on , and weighed in at 7lbs 13 oz.
Gran, daughter  and baby  are all doing well, and together with  's mum,, this makes a four generation family.
Wedding bells
September brought the news that two of our once very eligible batchelors are no longer available!
our sales manager, popped the question to  (whose father also happens to be a  customer) and their big day will be sometime in the summer.
Pressman  's wedding to fiancee , a local girl, will be  — at least won't miss the Summer Fayre next year!
Next I ask myself, does one congratulate oneself on getting married or not?— or is that left for everyone else to do?
Not one to be left out, and to bring 1990 to a good end, here goes — on , I will be marrying my fiancee, at Carmarthen Registry Office.
Our reception will be at the White Hart Hotel, Llandeilo, well known by most of the hierarchy of  (that's where I always arrange their accommodation, staff dinners, etc) and a few days in London will round off this long awaited event, quite nicely thank you!
On the move
On the move, in more ways than one,, one of our warehousemen, moved house earlier this month, best of luck to  and his family in their new home.
On the move in a different way goes  who leaves us in November to start a new job with the MMB as a AI inseminator — best of luck  from us all and may you be very, very successful in your new post.
To round things off, may we all at  say hello and welcome to the new editor of LINK ,— hope you enjoy working with us !
Albion Maltings
MORE than fifty pensioners from the Ipswich Albion maltings had a super lunch and afternoon tea-party on , at the Clayton Centre.
They arrived at midday and after a delicious lunch were entertained by a three piece band.
A few brave souls danced while others enjoyed a good sing-song.
An intermission was filled with several games of bingo and the day was rounded off with cream tea.
CONGRATULATIONS TO  from the SAS (Special Analysis Section), on her marriage to  on  — pictured above.
We're glad she did tie the knot, as on the day before her wedding, she received her pay cheque in her married name,!
Eagle Mill
WE welcome the following who have recently joined us at Eagle Mill:
, shift technician; and , mill production operatives.
THREE employees have retired from Eagle Mill in recent months:
retired at the end of October after a 26-year career with the Company which started in the accounts department at Key Street in the days when staff sat on stools at high, sloping desks.
After spending some time at  's at Mundford, transferred to Eagle Mill in the early '70s and has been with us ever since.
His friends and colleagues gave him a memorable send off and presented him with binoculars (for his bird watching), a leather writing case (so that he can drop us a line from far off places) and a couple of brandy glasses (empty — unfortunately).
John received a hi-fi system and a picture of an African scene from the Company.
We wish  a very long and happy retirement.
, above (left), father of mill manager , chose a display cabinet for his retirement gift and was also presented with a ‘ship in a bottle’ from his workmates.
(right) receiving his gifts from SE regional director .
retired after 30 years service, working most recently in the maintenance department.
is pictured above (left) receiving a video recorder from SE regional operations manager .
We are sorry to see  leave in October after ten years as our regional nutritionist for a well earned rest before her happy event.
A buffet lunch was organised to send her off in style at which  was presented with a variety of gifts for her new arrival.


Wedding congratulations to: machine operator, to .
Warehouse man  to .
(accounts) to  and  (sales) to .
has been appointed management accountant at .
Many of you will know  from his days with  working initially from Key Street and then at Bletchley.
is a qualified accountant (FCCA) and plans to move back to Suffolk with his family to live at Glemsford near Sudbury.
Welcome back .
50 years combined service
FITTER, and electrical supervisor , celebrated their combined 50 years service recently at the Belstead Brook Hotel, Ipswich.
was presented with a framed picture for his 25 year award and  a table lamp.
Left to right: and ; general manager ; and .


saw the union of one of  more unlikely matches!
The romance began at the end of last year when  our quiet and somewhat serious technical manager started dating  a lively, gregarious member of the personnel team.
Fellow colleagues were surprised, to say the least!
Only six weeks after their first date, proposed and they were married at nearby Bridgenorth in October followed by a honeymoon in Singapore and Penang.
We wish them well in the future.
Shepshed
WE welcome the following who have recently joined the north east region:
, customer services operator;, clerical assistant — buying;, cleaner operations;, driver; and , domestic assistants.
has been appointed sales development executive for sales development in the north east region.
took up this entirely new post at the beginning of October and will provide much-needed support for the sales team.
Crediton
JUST because we haven't been seen in LINK for a while — it doesn't mean its been quiet at Crediton!
Congratulations are due to four couples who were married this year:, quality controlled to .
, a blenderman to  (no, not the same one!),, owner-driver to , and , weighbridge operator to .
Best wishes all round!
Meanwhile , senior nutritionist and hubby , are now proud parents since the arrival of .
At six months old, she's already visited three mills — perhaps she will attend a formulation meeting by the time she's two?
New faces
We are joined by several new people: and  in customer services.
and , trainee salesmen.
, owner-driver. , secretary and , trainee arable trader.
We hope that they enjoy working at Crediton.
Sad departure of the last Crediton chicken
On a sadder note, I have to report the passing away of the last Crediton chicken.
Many of you know that free range chickens are a very important part of Crediton.
Originally six absconded from a local farm and successfully made it to the mill in a lorry chassis, however they had dwindled to a single cockerel.
He was part of the team, good at avoiding traffic, vocally active during regional meetings, but still exceptionally discreet during Q&S inspections!
On , a strange dog was seen running out through the main gate with aforementioned chicken in his mouth and a packet of Paxo around his neck!
We were all deeply saddened.
(I blame that Dudley Moore myself!).
Preston
WE welcome the following to the north west region:
joined us , as regional accountant.
Previously  spend 17 years as an accountant in the bakery industry.
He is a keen sportsman and enjoys marathon running for charity.
joined the purchase ledger department in August.
Her hobbies include caravaning, gardening and knitting.
Our most recent newcomer is , buying clerk, who joined us on .
is a member of the Operatic Society and Young Farmers Club.
CONGRATULATIONS to , accounts department, on her 21st birthday on .
from purchase ledger tied the knot to  on a beautiful summers day on .
Regional nutritionist, is pictured just after her marriage to husband .
was extremely busy before the wedding making her own bridal gown and the bridesmaids' dresses.
was also fully occupied, planning a surprise honeymoon to California, which  only found out about when they reached the airport.
WINSFORD'S shift supervisor  and Preston's production manager  have been presented with their mill safety awards by  MD .
Pictured is  (right) receiving the award for Preston.
Gainsborough
retired in October after completing 41 years service.
He started his career working as a maltster at the Paddock maltings at Gainsborough in 1949.
In 1969 he moved to the Carr Lane site where he joined the engineering fraternity .
‘Our ’ will be missed — we all wish him a very happy retirement.
Bury St. Edmunds
of , Bury St. Edmunds, is pictured receiving his 25 year service award from general manager,.
joined  at Bury St. Edmunds in August 1965 when the maltings was opened, working on barley intake.
He was subsequently moved to malt despatch when the maltings came into production and is now assistant chargehand.
The presentation of a pair of binoculars will help  in pursuit of his hobby of aeroplane spotting at numerous airfields in the locality.
Buckie in full swing
IT WAS all go at Buckie during the harvest.
When these photo's were taken there were 39 lorries on site trying to tip!
General manager,— dazed!
Distilling director,, obviously in complete command of the situation!
Summer Fayre beneficiary
The Cancer Research charity was one of the beneficiaries from this year's Summer Fayre ‘wild card’ draw.
The computer centre nominated the charity and presented a cheque for £500 to  from the Cancer Research shop in Ipswich at the end of August.
Pictured from left:(PA),(),(Cancer Research charity) and  ().
Destined for an Olympic medal?
helming No problem!
, daughter of , farm manager at  's farm at Akenham, has won the Royal Yachting Association ‘All England’ Ladies' Championship.
, 16, who has been sailing for about seven years, said winning the championship was ‘a surprise’.
She has spent the last year following her sailing pursuits but this year she gave priority to her GCSE exams and has done much less sailing.
, is also a keen hockey player and has just been selected to ply for Suffolk Under-18s.
‘I would like to represent the country in either sailing or hockey,’ says , who plans to train as a PE teacher when she leaves school.
Her ambition?
‘I would like to win an Olympic medal.’
she says.
also spends some of her time helping out at Akenham with farrowing, recording and weighing in the pig unit.
Best in show
new treat product  won the ‘Best New Packaging in Show award’ in September, at the Pet Trade and Industry exhibition, Wembley.
Pictured with the award is  (left), whose company designed the packaging, and  (right), 's marketing manager.
Only the malt culms can do this!
There is no limit to the uses of malt by-products!
Gainsborough has recently supplied ‘The Tackle Shop’ in town with malt culms, used to enhance a groundbait appropriately called ‘Mr Malt’.
Quality control testing is being carried out by YTS laboratory student —.
It's all ‘mod cons’ at Key Street!
ON the first bitterly cold day this year — the Key Street offices had a ‘temporary interruption’ of the water supply on , while Anglian Water proceeded to dig up the water mains.
This resulted in five Portaloo's and a 250 gallon water tank being brought on-site to cope with staffs in's and out's!
Company secretary   tries out the latest conveniences at head office — Portaloo's!