

GUINNESS TODAY
Guinness Today is the newspaper of Guinness Brewing Great Britain.
June 1993.
Issue number 5
Special effects roadshow brings ‘Taste Sensation’ to thousands
Taste show on the road
The best of Britain's latest and most complex performance technology has been packed into a unique travelling promotion, developed especially for Guinness.
GUINNESS HAS PULLED OUT ALL THE technological stops in its latest marketing drive — and employees were among the first to see the imaginative Taste Sensation before it went out on the road.
The inside of two large lorries had been converted into a special effects roadshow that allows visitors to get the sound, sight, taste, smell and feel of Guinness — and win prizes as they go.
Just under £400,000 has been spent on the equipment, which will visit Blackpool Pleasure Beach, county shows up and down the country and the Southampton Boat Show later this summer.
It will appear at venues around the country for at least three years.
It is the only marketing device of its kind for a drink brand, and is designed to increase sales of both Draught Guinness and canned Draught Guinness.
And it is linked to the themes of the latest Man with the Guinness ad campaign.
Both are aimed at drawing the consumer into the product ‘experience’.
Marketing's Senior Brand Manager  (above right) and Procurement Operations Manager  (left) managed the project jointly from initial concepts through to its finished form.
said: ‘I am delighted that it is now up and running and I am confident we have done justice to the concept.’
Positive Reaction
As for the first reactions from employees and visitors to the Taste Sensation launch preview, said: ‘Most people have been very positive about it.’
Park Royal employees  were among the first people to see the Taste Sensation.
‘I was quite impressed,’ said .
Other employees said they had favourite sections of the roadshow, and everyone was enthusiastic about the Crystal Maze game that makes up part of the roadshow.
Countless pieces of high tech electronic equipment have been used in the construction of the Taste Sensation sequence, which runs on a continuous programme and lets six new visitors in at two minute intervals.
The two trucks into which the Taste Sensation packs and is transported around the country were custom built for the job.
Two former dray tractors with the appropriate black and gold livery will move the roadshow around the country.
They were a year in the planning and a year in the building, and carry all generators, control systems, prizes and a generous helping of Guinness to slake visitors' thirsts after their visit.
One of the main creative forces behind the Taste Sensation has been actor Anthony Daniels, last seen in a gold metallic suit as the robot C3PO in the Star Wars film series.
Didn't we do well!
GUINNESS TODAY HAS WON THE ‘Best Overall Publication’ Award in the Guinness Group Publications Awards for 1992.
There were 40 entries from 17 publications around the international Guinness empire.
We won a bottle of bubbly and money to spend on production equipment.
Editor  said: ‘We are absolutely delighted at this award, and we would like to thank all the correspondents and everyone involved in the publication for their efforts.’
Computer cork pops at 400
More than 400 people at all Guinness Brewing GB sites have now been linked into the computer network that connects all the PC terminals together.
The original target for the link-up was 400, and the 400th person to be linked into the system,, was presented with a bottle of champagne.
But as soon as the presentation had been made to the laboratory manager, he offered the bottle to the Guinness Fundraisers as a raffle prize for one of their future fund raising events.
The whole system, which includes business and office applications and E-Mail, was put together by IS&T Technical Architect Manager  and Business Support Admin manager , who are pictured with  at the presentation.
The idea was to link all 400 PC users into all the different computer systems and networks across the whole of Guinness Brewing GB.
Since then, more PC users have come on stream and about 460 people have now been linked into the whole network.
Putting a stop to crime at Park Royal
SAFETY AND SECURITY ARE UNDER constant review at Park Royal in response to the ever changing risks.
The security project which is due to go live in October will introduce site and building access control systems and perimeter closed circuit TV monitoring.
To make this possible, a number of buildings will be refurbished.
Cumberland gatehouse will be overhauled and Coronation Gate rebuilt and resited.
But as an immediate response a security patrol has been introduced to James Way during weekday afternoons and evenings.
said: ‘There are over 1,000 pairs of eyes on this site.
Together we can considerably improve out workplace in terms of safety and security.
‘You may have joined Neighbourhood Watch at home; bring the same vigilance to work and help make Park Royal more secure.
‘However, to challenge strangers on site requires one basic change — commitment to ID display.
This is the only system that allows us to readily identify strangers and protect ourselves and our company.’
Focus on health and safety rules
THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF employees at Park Royal is coming under the spotlight.
Health and safety ‘monitors’ from each department complete with what is called a Housekeeping Audit Checklist in their respective departments between monthly meetings.
They check that the employees in that department know who is in charge and have kept it in good order.
They make sure fire instructions are clearly displayed and that fire fighting equipment is in its correct place.
First aid, exits, the condition of floors and walkways, waste bins, benches, tool cupboards, machines and lighting all come under the eye of the monitors.
They have to make sure that all the health and safety and related legislation is properly observed throughout Park Royal, and follow up any problems they find on site.
The monitors, who meet to discuss their audits on the first Friday of every month, are:.
Crown sell-off
CROWN BUCKLEY, THE SOUTH Wales brewer that Guinness, through The Harp Lager Company, helped save from bankruptcy in 1990, has been sold to its management team, lead by Managing Director , and their financial backers.
The new owners will continue to develop distribution in Wales for Harp, Kronenbourg 1664 and Satzenbrau Pils and they have signed a long term trading deal with Harp for the supply of Harp and Guinness products.
Four-stage plan for future business
OVER THE NEXT DECADE SIGNIFICANT CHANGES are likely to occur in the UK and Export beer markets which will pose particular challenges to Guinness Brewing GB.
The first stage of the Supply Chain Project which is due to be completed by the end of this month is aimed at developing a blueprint which redesigns the way the business should operate in response to these changes.
The supply chain project seeks to achieve this by focusing on future customer needs and driving them back through the activities of the business to make Guinness Brewing GB operate as effectively as possible for the company and its customers.
‘We have interviewed 25 of our key customers across the on, off and export markets and the message which is coming through is that we need to get much closer to our customers in order to respond to their changing needs,’ said L&QA CSSO On Trade Manager .
There are four stages to the project:
Vision of Guinness Brewing's future supply chain requirements.
Discovery of the present supply chain capabilities and the gap between where the company is today and the vision for the future.
Design of the key activities within the company which need to be changed.
Plan of how to implement the key parts of the plan during the next two to three years.
Because of its profile and impact across the whole of the business, the project team is chaired by Guinness Brewing Managing Director .
L&QA Project Manager, is a member of the team.
‘The breadth of knowledge and expertise which each person brings to the team is enormous and by working together we have been able in a short space of time to see the company woods from the departmental trees.’
The other team members are .
The team is being supported by  from outside consultants Andersen Consulting.
If you want more information on supply chains, contact your departmental representative on the project.
Tax changes complete
THE CIVIL WAR IS NOT OVER YET — at least as far as Britain's beer duty collectors are concerned.
Parliament imposed excise duties on beer in 1643 to raise money for its army — and the taxes were only supposed to last for the duration of that little upset.
Not only are beer taxes still with us, but they have just gone through their biggest shake-up for many years.
On June 1 End Product Duty — the system that assesses the tax on beer as it is about to leave the brewery — replaced the old system assessing it at the beginning of fermentation.
The change has been a major exercise, and while the civil war may not be over in the eyes of the excise collectors, the next issue of Guinness Today will carry the story of the people behind the massive change to End Product Duty.
Strategy News
Presentations on Guinness Brewing's strategic aim of being the best British brewer are being organised on all sites during the first two weeks of July.
The events, called Strategic Intent presentations, will be held at Cheltenham, Leeds, Park Royal and Runcorn.
‘These presentations will not just be a one way affair — you will have every chance to participate,’ said Strategic Intent Communications Project Manager .
‘This is our event.
It involves all of us and how we work together to make Guinness the outstanding performer in the British Beer market.
‘If you have not had an invite yet — chase your manager for one, he or she will have the dates.’
Take-home reports powerful performance
EMPLOYEES AT RUNCORN HAVE BEEN given the lowdown on Guinness' strong performance in the competitive take home trade with a day-long series of presentations.
It followed the highly successful Take Home Trade Sales Conference that took place at Park Royal in February.
Video clips of ad campaigns and of the latest customer service initiatives at Park Royal, along with sales and market share statistics and a mock ‘News at Ten’ performance to focus on the main events in the Guinness Take Home year, formed the core of the presentations.
Runcorn is the major supplier of Guinness' Take Home Trade products and the presentations were organised to bring Runcorn employees closer to the market place and its customers.
And the employees pronounced them a success and a valuable source of information about the take home trade.
The presentations, which included showings of the latest Man with the Guinness TV and cinema ad campaign, came as the ideas generated by employees at the Take Home Trade conference began to bear fruit.
The Take Home Trade Process Flow Team has been quick to investigate ideas generated by employees who attended the Park Royal event.
More than 250 ideas emerged from the presentation, and each one has been looked at for possibilities.
Many had already been tried, but had clearly not been communicated to employees.
Other suggestions made were already in train.
One strong theme was that of training people by using internal staff members rather than consultants.
‘David Francis from Customer Services has been trained up to run sessions on coaching,’ said Personnel Organisational Development and Training Manager .
‘Supported by Training Department he has already run a session on coaching for 20 people or so from across all sections of the brewery.
It was well received, and we plan to run some more and invite people who were on that session if they wanted to play a similar role.
‘A line manager delivering training is very powerful and saves the company money.’
Other ideas are being followed up by the Supply Chain Management Project which is investigating ideas on promotional planning, information availability and customer service system enhancements.
Process Flow Team chairman  said: ‘Following the success of this year's Take Home Trade Conference and follow up presentations at Runcorn, we will be looking at involving more employees at similar presentations next year.
If you want to take part in a future coaching session run by , as mentioned above, please drop a line to   .
Smoke change begins
THE FINAL POLICY RULES  GOVERNing at Park Royal, news of which was broken in the last issue of Guinness Today, have still to be finalised.
But the first inklings of the new policy have already emerged with the coffee room being segregated into smoking and non smoking areas.
There will eventually be no smoking there at all.
, a member of the Change Project Team and the Brewery Council working group that is formulating the new policy, said earlier this year: ‘All the conference and meeting rooms will have to be non smoking.
It will not be allowed in communal rest areas and work areas.’
Final details will be announced in the next issue of Guinness Today, but Bob reassured the smokers that although smoking will be banned in communal work and rest areas.
‘To say that people won't be able to smoke anywhere on site is wrong,’ Bob said.
Guinness in court
Brent magistrates have ruled that the case against Guinness Brewing Worldwide, its technical manager and a consultant working for the company following a fatal accident at Park Royal Brewery last year should be heard at the Crown Court.
The referral means a further court appearance on July 14 when officials will decide on a date for trial.
The company is being prosecuted by the Health & Safety Executive following the death of Anthony Flaherty on September 26 1992.
Mr Flaherty, an employee of R F Winder Electrical Limited, was installing an extension to high voltage switchgear in the main sub-station at Park Royal.
During the work, Mr Flaherty touched some live equipment carrying 11,000 volts and died from the injuries he received.
It is alleged that Guinness Brewing Worldwide failed to provide a safe procedure for work near high voltage electrical equipment so that non-employees were put at risk.
Perfect pint patrol
HAVE YOU EVER DRUNK A PINT OF Guinness in a pub or club and been disappointed by its quality?
Or have you (if you are very, very unfortunate) ever been into a pub that for some reason does not even stock the stuff?
It is up to everyone to keep checks on such things, and you may soon have even more chances to report back to Guinness Brewing GB and make sure the problem is solved.
One hundred selected employees have been given Perfect Pint cards containing a hotline number at the Cheltenham site on which such breaches can be reported.
And when comments from the 100 who are taking part in the trial run are reported back, it will be rolled out nationally to all Guinness Brewing GB employees.
The card is shaped like a small pint of Guinness.
Happy second anniversary
TWO YEARS AGO BECK AND Pollitzer won the contract for delivering Guinness Brewing GB products for the Take Home Trade.
And to celebrate the second anniversary, the Albany warehouse operation at the Stretton site delivered a suitably decorated cake to Park Royal.
Our picture shows National Distribution Manager  wielding the knife as (left to right) await their slices.
Operation of the contract has involved close partnership between Guinness and various sub divisions of Beck & Pollitzer's organisation specialising in transport, network logistics and warehousing.
During the past few months the change to End Product Duty has made Stretton a Customs & Excise Bond, and Albany's extensive experience in bonded warehouse operations came in useful.
Share queries answered
GUINNESS PLC HAS TOLD Guinness Today the reasons why it does not offer shareholders the chance to receive dividends in shares — called scrip dividends — rather than in cash.
The issue was raised during the recent presentations of the annual results for the company when GBW managing director  was asked whether Guinness would consider issuing such scrip dividends.
Now, Guinness PLC company secretary  explains: ‘We have looked carefully at this question recently.
There is no tax advantage to shareholders in receiving shares in place of the normal cash dividend.
The Inland Revenue treats a scrip dividend as if it was cash income.
Furthermore, for non taxpayers there is a disadvantage, as the tax reduction from a cash dividend can be reclaimed, but that from a scrip dividend cannot.
‘A scrip dividend alternative is very significantly more expensive to administer and would also involve a delay of at least a month in payment of the dividend.
In addition the Board believes that the best way to serve shareholders is to keep administration as simple as possible so that the Group can concentrate on its core business and maximise profit growth.’
Talking of shares, here is a reminder of the share helpline that has been set up to give you advice about your shares in Guinness.
The helpline service,, is provided by Stock Market member Wise Speke, which is a member of the Securities and Futures Authority.
A whole host of share questions can already be answered in your Guinness Share Opportunity folder and scheme documentation.
Park Royal memories and re-unions
A record number of Guinness pensioners turned out for the annual pensioners' party at Park Royal this month — almost 1,000 descended on the brewery grounds to  remenisce about their lives in the brewery.
They were welcomed by Guinness Brewing Worldwide Managing Director , who is chairman of the Guinness Group's Pension Trust, and who told them of the latest developments at their former workplace.
Among the 950 pensioners at the gathering were , who was attending his 24th reunion at Park Royal, and one pensioner who was proudly showing off his 40 year service tie.
‘As you may remember when Peter Lipscomb spoke to you last year, we have embarked on a £53 million investment programme.
Most of our brewing equipment has not aged nearly as well as many of you here tonight and so it is being replaced.
I am pleased to say that we are right on target,’ said Brendan as he brought the pensioners up to date with Park Royal developments.
He told them of the product launches during the year, Cruzcampo's success at the Expo event in Spain, and the development of the new staff restaurant to replace the old canteen.
As for the future he said: ‘We are constantly striving for ways in which to improve quality and efficiency and to eliminate waste and mediocrity.
‘But along with change is a commitment to the values that have kept us operating successfully as a group for over 200 years — service, quality, innovation — all these things and more.
That is what will ensure continuing success and prosperity for our employees, for our shareholders and of course for you, our retired staff.’
He led the pensioners in heaping praise on the social committee, catering staff and helpers who had organised the event.
It's sur-really sensational!
What the visitors will see when they enter the Taste Sensation's rooms.
Each separate darkened room in the Taste Sensation deals with a different sense.
The rooms are formed from the insides of the two lorries and from platforms that are hydraulically extended from the sides.
Hydraulics also play a part in the display as they are used to help give visitors the sensation of being inside a pint of Guinness.
Fibre optic cables and banks of screens also feature inside the rooms, and the whole show is controlled by a central computer.
The separate rooms, the doors of which open and close as part of the programme after they have given visitors the chance to move from room to room, begin with the sense of smell.
In a darkened room, with a flash of lightning and a crash of thunder, an Old Master oil painting comes alive as the host, a beautiful bald headed woman, appears with a giant glass of Guinness.
With lights and sounds, the aroma of malt, hops and barley is gently wafted over the audience.
The vision vanishes into another crash and the audience is guided into the sound room.
The room is deep black, and there is the sound of a racing heartbeat as the visitor is plunged into the impression of a sea of Guinness with the lights of bubbles twinkling underfoot.
Lights and sound tower up and race across the ceiling to crash down and disappear once more into blackness.
Tiny bubbles rise up through the darkness and a soothing voice calls the audience into the sight room.
The light fades to black, to be replaced suddenly by a crash and a burst of light from above as a giant ring pull seems to tear from the ceiling.
The walls come alive with foaming beer and music surrounds them as the audience journeys upward in a can of Guinness.
Bursting through the surface, visitors rest before the can tilts forward and pours them into a giant glass held by a giant hand.
They reach the surface, tipped by hydraulics beneath the room, to see the can still pouring, and they rest on top of the filled glass.
Visitors look around and find themselves at a party, surrounded by chatting people, but their journey takes on a new twist as they glass is tipped, a face looms over the rim and they are poured into the  drinkers throat.
They turn and enter the touch room.
Giant Guinness
Here, the audience stands outside a section of a giant pint of Guinness.
A voice tells them to put their hand into the half pint through the special openings.
Inside, prize tokens swirl in currents of air and each person tries to touch and keep one token within the given time.
The tokens are swapped for Guinness T shirts, key rings, vouchers and customised prizes.
Finally, there is the taste room.
A snaking black corridor takes the audience along to claim their prizes, and they reach the final chamber to claim a glass of Guinness.
After leaving the sensation, visitors can spend their time touching and smelling the samples of hops, malt and barley stacked nearby, while a static display shows them how the ingredients are used in the brewing process, and a second display shows them the secret of the widget in the cans of Draught Guinness.
Visitors will be charged £1.50 for admission and the Taste Sensation roadshow set off for its Blackpool location just days after being unveiled at Park Royal.
It is intended to be on holiday season tours for at least three years.
Profile
Occupational health at Park Royal is in the hands of dedicated specialists in their own fully equipped health centre on the ground floor of the main office building.
Health checkers
Good health at Guinness Brewing GB is not just a toast that precedes the downing of a jar of the product — it is also the concern of a dedicated team of medical experts.
The occupational health centre is in the central office block and provides an occupational health service aimed at the prevention of illness and injury at work — and can provide immediate treatment.
The idea is not just to be there for employees with minor complaints like headaches — the department is mainly concerned with much bigger issues like the general health of employees while on the Park Royal site.
‘We try to promote a healthy lifestyle and we give advice on good living practice,’ said occupational health nurse , one of two full time nurses at the centre who constantly monitor the health effects of the multitude of jobs on the site.
Most of the centre's work is concerned with checking the health effects of the work done by everyone at Park Royal, but the part time physiotherapist at the centre has her fair share of football and other sports injuries to contend with as well as other muscular and skeletal problems suffered by employees.
An example of the work related issues dealt with by the occupational health centre at the moment is the eye tests necessary under the latest legislation governing the use of VDUs and other screens.
On hand in the department are .
Outside the centre are the fully trained first aiders.
There is at least one in each department and all the security men are also fully trained.
There is also an ambulance, normally parked near the main entrance at Cumberland Gate, which can ferry employees to the Central Middlesex Hospital on the rare occasions when there is a serious accident or illness.
A typical day at the moment, explained , begins with audio tests on early shift workers whose job involves exposure to noise and lung function tests for those working with grain.
That may be followed by a health and fitness check on new employees.
There are then morning and afternoon sessions of voluntary medicals in which people in certain job and age categories can attend for a health check.
After that, until the centre closes at 4.30pm, the staff will see other employees for any other work related health matters — and if necessary refer them to their own GPs.
Carol said the centre and its staff could monitor if a particular department was producing repeated cases of a particular injury or illness, and make recommendations about how the problem could be solved.
General services offered by the centre include a health screen for people who have just joined the company, or who are about to join, health checks and advice on the lifestyles of individual employees, examinations for fork lift truck and HGV drivers, blood pressure and weight monitoring and health education.
But the occupational health centre is not just there for Guinness Brewing GB employees.
It also looks after United Distillers and Guinness Brewing Worldwide employees and makes sure that those who travel to the far flung parts of Guinness's empire have the right inoculations and advice for their trips.
IN Brief 
Comic relief
Employees at Runcorn raised almost £300 for Comic Relief Day and Guinness PLC will double that amount.
Of the total, £183 was raked in through collections by the canteen staff and £105 was collected at the gatehouse.
The money has now been sent to Portman Square for inclusion in Guinness PLC's ‘double your fundraising’ offer.
Enigma definitions
So you think you know about making beer — but do you know what the little bits of jargon mean?
Next month Guinness Today will give you a chance to find out, with a competition to guess what a whole host of strange and enigmatic terms mean.
Fun Day best
Plans are well advanced for the 1993 Fun Day on the sports ground at Park Royal, scheduled to take place on Saturday August 7, with a host of fun and entertainment for employees and their families.
It is being organised by the social committee.
A fairground, sumo wrestling, clowns, face painting, stalls and sideshows and a chance to sit in a helicopter top the list of attractions at the show which is open from 1.30pm–5pm.
Beer vouchers will be available to employees throughout the day.
There will also be a free prize draw with £100, £50 and £25 Guinness vouchers on offer.
On top of those attractions will be a five a side motaball contest, with players ‘driving’ small single seater vehicles to ‘kick’a giant ball.
Teams are wanted to take part in the contest, and anyone who is interested in entering should contact  on .
Don't fence me in
Users of the main car park at Park Royal will have noticed a new fence at the back of the site.
The aim of the fence is to improve security at Park Royal.
Josie's big day
Brewing office administrator  has married  at St Mary's Church in Hanwell.
Archives man has K-factor
PAUL SMITH, THE ASSISTANT Archivist at Park Royal, will soon have a Krypton Factor.
He has been selected to take part in the tough TV contest of that name and will appear on millions of screens around the country some time in the autumn.
By the time you read this, Paul will have landed a Jumbo Jet — with a flight simulator, of course— completed a rigorous army assault course and faced challenging questions and puzzles in the popular programme's studio in the first round of the contest.
So how do you get to try for a Krypton Factor?
At the end of the last series, presenter Gordon Burns invited anyone who was interested in taking part to write in and ask for a place — and Paul was among the 8,000 who applied.
He was sent an initial list of trial questions from which the producers of the show selected 500 to take part in a mock Krypton Factor show.
Paul ended up being selected as one of the 36 contestants for the autumn series — and immediately had to start a rigorous six week training programme to make sure he could tackle the assault course part of the programme.
The first round has already been filmed at the flight simulator in Leicester, the assault course in Bolton and the studio questions in Manchester, but Paul does not yet know the date of transmission.
If he managed to win through in the first round, there is now a second round of contests to be staged, followed by the final round later in the year.
It was forty years ago today…
Forty years ago, in the summer of 1953, the Guinness zoo animals and their keeper played their own part in celebrating the Queen's Coronation on June 2 of that year.
They appeared on a poster created especially to mark the event, with the zoo keeper, fortified by a Guinness, copying the girder carrier from an earlier poster.
And in common with Guinness' reputation for innovative ads, the poster marked a revolution — it was the first from any company that featured characters so famous and recognisable that it could dispense with a proper caption, or a reference to the product.
The poster was by John Gilroy, the creator of the Guinness menagerie, from an idea by Stanley Penn, for many years a copywriter for the Guinness ads.
He said of the Coronation poster: ‘I always thought the idea for that poster was the apogee of my career as a copywriter because, although I enjoyed thinking up ideas, I always founding writing copy very hard work.’
The Coronation poster also appeared as a centrepiece in off licence window displays at the time.
A similar poster, again without either caption or product, appeared in 1982 to mark the birth of Prince William — and featured a toucan instead of the stork.
Raleigh trip to Chile
HELEN THOMAS IS OFF ON A  GLObetrot next year — she has been selected to take part in an Operation Raleigh exercise and Guinness has agreed to contribute towards her expenses.
She is one of three Guinness people who are setting off on the Raleigh scheme next year — the other two work at Guinness Ireland and at head office in Portman Square.
Helen leaves for Chile at the end of September 1994 to help local projects in the country including an orphanage and other community projects and will not return to Britain until a few days before Christmas.
The total cost to Helen is about £3,000.
Guinness is stumping up £750 and Helen plans to raise the rest through events including a sponsored abseil.
‘I've read the programme of what will happen, and it sounds good.
I am looking forward to the trip,’ said Helen, who is a Sales System Secretary in the Sales Operations department.
Keep your eyes on Guinness Today for reports on how Helen gets on.
Office dangers?
SO HOW DID YOU GET ON  SPOTting the errors in the picture Guinness Today published in the last issue as part of the new PRoPS initiative at Park Royal?
There were 64 hazards in total in the factory area.
The closest was a list of 59, but in common with many other entries there was more than one duplication.
The person who spotted the most hazards was Guinness pensioner , who wins a £25 Guinness voucher.
Second was  from Packaging who wins a £10 voucher.
Now for the second of the two posters, which Guinness Today is producing with kind permission of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents.
This time the environment is an office.
There are fewer hazards in this picture, but still enough to get you thinking.
The prizes are the same, and the solution will be published in the next Guinness Today.
As a checklist, this is the full list of hazards in the factory picture.
1.
Paint kettle on pipe.
2.
Pipe hanger disconnected.
3.
Light flex tied to pipe.
4.
Pipe flange leaking.
5.
Man opening door without looking.
6.
Heater too close to coat rack.
7.
Man descending stairs without looking.
8.
Man descending stairs not holding rail.
9.
Rubbish left on stairs.
10.
Bad stacking under stairs.
11.
Flammable materials wrongly stored.
12.
Scrap wood left lying.
13.
Fire extinguisher inaccessible.
14.
Material projecting into entrance.
15.
Stair hand rail broken.
16.
Broken glass in yard.
17.
Hand truck overloaded, vision obscured.
18.
Obstruction in front of truck.
19.
Crane hook strained.
20.
Slinging incorrect.
21.
Slinger standing under load.
22.
Fork truck moving with load raised.
23.
Fork truck driver not looking where going.
24.
Fork truck rear tyre soft.
25.
Fork truck carrying unauthorised passenger.
26.
Man carrying shoulder load wrongly.
27.
Man carrying shoulder load not looking where he is going.
28.
Improper use of fire bucket.
29.
Man carrying load he cannot see over.
30.
Unfenced open manhole.
31.
Man lifting wrongly, case too big.
32.
Man smoking while pouring acid.
33.
Man not wearing protective clothing while pouring acid.
34.
Man not wearing eye protection while pouring acid.
35.
Man wearing unsuitable shoes while pouring acid.
36.
Man spilling acid.
37.
Boy larking with compressed air line.
38.
Operator not watching machine.
39.
Operator's sleeves not rolled up.
40.
Operator dripping oil on floor.
41.
Machine not guarded.
42.
Sawyer not using push stick.
43.
Sawyer smoking.
44.
Sawyer wearing rings.
45.
Saw not guarded.
46.
No riving knife on saw.
47.
Saw bench not clear.
48.
Wood stacked in gangway.
49.
Nails left in board ends.
50.
Pipe in gangway.
51.
Ladder foot chocked up.
52.
Stile of ladder damaged.
53.
Angle of ladder too steep.
54.
Ladder not footed or lashed.
55.
Ladder too short.
56.
Rung of ladder missing.
57.
Man on ladder wearing unsuitable boots.
58.
Fire extinguisher out of reach.
59.
Fire extinguisher not on bracket.
60.
First Aid cabinet broken.
61.
Portable drill on floor.
62.
Socket connector for portable drill wrong.
63.
Rubbish on floor.
64.
Leads fouling ladder.
Coast to coast for children's charity
ANOTHER OF WAINWRIGHT'S walks, Robin Hood's Bay to St Bees, a 200 mile walk from coast to coast across England, has fallen to the conquering boots of Kevin Treacher.
And the only blisters he suffered after his 11 day sponsored trek appeared after a frantic dash to licensed premises for a meal and a pint of Guinness part way through the walk.
Kevin is the Service Planning Officer at the Leeds regional office and his previous long distance walks have raised over £800 for children's charities.
And what next?
‘First, I need to collect the sponsor money, over £300 from this walk.
It's to go to the St John's School for deaf children in Leeds.
Then I think it's time I came south, maybe the Pembroke coastal path or following the Thames to the sea,’ he said.
Anyone who wants to make a donation can send it directly to Kevin at Leeds.
Staff News
Appointments
The Take Home Sales Division has announced two promotions within its ranks.
Both involve promotion from executive to manager in two sectors of the division.
Matthew Miles has moved up from being a National Account Executive in the Multiples Sector to become National Account Manager in the sector, reporting to Gary Lunt.
Andrew Young has been promoted to become National Account Manager in the Cash and Carry and Wholesale Sector from his former job as National Account Executive in the same sector.
He reports to Brian Murray.
Retirements
Martin Schofield retired at the end of May after 40 years service with the company.
He was educated at The City of London School and did his National Service in the RAF, mainly overseas in Burma.
He joined Guinness in 1952 as an Under Brewer and worked for a number of years on 24 hour shifts under the guidance of the late .
His training included a period in Malts and Hops with  and , before transferring to managerial appointments in Distribution and Corporate Planning.
In the early 1970s he became Manager Hops and continued in this role for the remainder of his career at Park Royal.
He has played a leading part in representing the brewing industry and is acknowledged internationally as a world expert on hops.
For his work in this field he was awarded the Order of the Hop medal at the International Hop Growers Congress in Tasmania in 1986.
Now Martin is looking forward to spending his retirement enjoying outside interests which will include travelling, walking and watching cricket.
Obituary
Tony Wilkinson, known in the industry as one of the pioneers of the lager revolution in Britain, has died after a 15 month battle against cancer.
After joining Harp Lager at Alton in Hampshire in 1962, Tony successfully launched the dispense of Draught Harp in the south, then transferred to Harp Lager in Manchester to continue development of the product in the north.
He returned to the south in 1979 where he stayed until his retirement last year.
Tony was the first Technical Adviser for the lager operation and ran the training programme for all the breweries that handled the brand in the 1960s at the beginning of the  later boom.
Guinness Today is sure that all Tony's lifelong friends and colleagues in the industry will join in sending their sympathies to his widow Jean.
LEISURE TIME
Beaters are beaten
IN A WARM UP TO THE EVENING Standard newspaper's five a side football competition, a team from Guinness Brewing GB called the Harp Beaters was entered into the preliminary competition on the day before the main tournament.
Manager  struggled against a rising roll call of injuries and non availability to put together a fine squad.
‘The round robin tournament saw us win two, lose two and draw one,’ said .
‘It was this final one all draw that knocked us out.
In fact, we were ahead in the last game until a tactical error by one of the players (he knows who he is!) caused the sad downfall.’
The picture below shows  delivering final instructions to the beaming team which consisted of (left to right).
Harp Managing Director  presented the Harp prize to the winning team from Watford football club which won the Evening Standard five-a-side tournament.
All London's football clubs, with the exception of Arsenal because of its training commitment leading up to its eventual FA Cup victory, took part.
The event, last sponsored by Harp in the mid 1980s, was staged at Wembley Arena and by the end of the televised evening tournament, Watford had scored the most goals to win the top award of the event.
Casting around for members
What have Robert Redford, fictitious author J R Hartley and Steve Innes of Guinness Brewing National Sales in common?
Here's a clue.
Redford made the film, Hartley ‘wrote’ the book and Innes has announced plans to launch the club for like minded GBGB employees.
The link is the gentle and reflective art of fly fishing.
‘Angling does not feature prominently within the sports and social activities within the brewery,’ said Steve.
‘I want to set up a club for keen fly fishermen, all those anglers who pursue game fish like trout and salmon.
He said a fly fishing club would be able to make bookings at the country's best lakes and reservoirs, and be an active forum to increase the skill and knowledge of members.
And if you have only just been inspired to take up the sport, maybe on the back of the Redford film A River Runs Through It, the club will allow a small number of beginners.
Instruction will be available to them from a top qualified instructor.
For more details contact  in National Sales.
Golfing prowess
THE GUINNESS GOLFING Society's season got off to a good start when 21 members took part in the Spring meeting at Burnham Beeches.
won the main competition in the morning.
In the afternoon the team of  chalked up a magnificent score in the Scramble event.
The next fixture was the Society Prize at West Middlesex Golf Club when 23 members took part.
The first prize was taken by , and  scored a hole in one at the seventh.
A golf team from Harp Lager managed second place in the Interdepartmental Golf Competition staged by the Society at the West Middlesex Club.
Winners were from GBW Technical.
More events are planned by the Society in July, August and September.
Darts players double top
GUINNESS ARROWSMITHS WON the team and men's pairs trophies in the London Breweries Association darts competition last month.
The winning team was .
and .
from engineering and planning respectively, landed the men's pairs trophy.
In the men's singles contest, managed to get through to the semi final while in the triples contest, and  from Draught Stout joined  from Brewing to win through as far as the semi finals.
continued his award winning streak by landing two other trophies; one for scoring the most 180 totals, four in all, and one for the highest check out score, which was 135.
Forthcoming events for the London Breweries Association are the athletics meeting at Enfield on July 21 and the tennis contest at Park Royal on August 15.
Marathon times
Three employees slogged around the streets of the capital in the London Marathon, and raised hundreds of pounds for charity.
Fastest on the 26 mile course was Kegging Process man , who finished in three hours 15 minutes in his third London marathon.
The time matched his 1992 result and was an improvement on his first time from 1991.
He raised £855 for three charities: £500 will go to a heart research organisation, £250 to a charity for terminally ill children and £105 to a cancer trust.
The amounts will be doubled by Guinness PLC.
Twenty five minutes behind Pat at the finishing line was Personnel Training Adviser  who came in with a time of three hours 40 minutes.
He raised £800 for a charity that helps children with  leukemia , a donation inspired by a former employee of the company on whose behalf Robert was running.
Half an hour after Robert crossed the line, Personnel Director  ended his marathon after four hours and 15 minutes.
He raised £500 for diabetic children.
Squash success
OF GBW topped the honours in the finals of the London Breweries Squash contest as he took top spot in the veterans event.
In the finals of the men's and the team events Guinness managed a well fought second place to players from Gale's Brewery.
was pipped at the post in the men's finals by  from Gale's.
After the final, said the men's tournament was the highest quality for many years.
In the men's team event the Guinness team of  were runners up to the Gale's team.
Other teams in the 1993 contest had come from breweries including Whitbread, Fuller's, Young's and Courage and the event was held at Park Royal.