

THIS DOCUMENT IS IMPORTANT AND REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
If you are in any doubt about its contents you should consult your stockbroker, bank manager, accountant or other professional adviser, authorised under the Financial Services Act 1986.
If you have sold all of your ordinary shares in Dawson International PLC, you should pass this document and the enclosed form of proxy to the purchaser, or to the agent through whom the sale was effected for transmission to the purchaser.
Dear Shareholder 
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The twentieth Annual General Meeting of the Company has been called for Wednesday 14th July 1993 at 12 noon in the Caledonian Hotel,.
This letter provides details of the resolutions to be proposed at the meeting along with the formal notice calling it and a proxy card to enable you to cast your vote at it.
Shareholders are requested to complete and return the proxy card, but this does not preclude them coming to the meeting and voting in person.
ORDINARY BUSINESS
Resolutions 1 to 4 comprise the ordinary business of the meeting, adopting the accounts for the financial year to 27th March 1993, declaring a dividend, re-electing directors, reappointing the auditors and authorising the directors to determine their remuneration.
Further details are given in the Directors Report on page 38 of the Report and Accounts.
SPECIAL BUSINESS
Resolution 5 — Scrip Dividends
The Company has offered shareholders the opportunity to elect to receive new ordinary shares of the Company in lieu of cash for the final dividend for each of the last three years and this opportunity will again be offered in respect of the final dividend for 1993.
The power to offer such an opportunity requires to be renewed from year to year; Resolution 5 extends this power for a further year.
An explanatory circular and form of election will be sent to shareholders following the AGM.
Resolution 6 — Purchase of Own Shares
Shareholders have previously given the Company authority to purchase and cancel its own shares.
Resolution 6 at the AGM renews this authority for a further year in respect of up to 15 million shares (9.63% of the present issued share capital) on the existing terms as set out in the resolution.
The directors confirm that the power would only be used if the board was satisfied it was in the best interests of shareholders and would result in an increase in expected earnings per share.
Resolutions 7 to 9 — Share Option Schemes
Your directors consider that employees at all levels should be encouraged to identify their interests with those of the Company's shareholders and that this objective can be furthered by providing means for employees to become shareholders themselves.
An executive share option scheme was first introduced in 1980 followed by an Inland Revenue approved executive scheme in 1984 and a savings related scheme for UK employees in 1990.
Your directors are proposing certain changes in respect of these schemes to enhance this objective.
The executive share option scheme is now nearing the end of its ten-year life and following successful introduction of the savings related share option scheme in the UK, the Directors would like to make similar arrangements available to employees in other countries.
They have therefore decided, subject to shareholders' approval, to introduce a new executive share option scheme and a series of savings related share option schemes for employees overseas as well as making a change to the UK SAYE scheme.
Resolution 7 — Amendments to UK SAYE Share Option Scheme
In accordance with legislation in force at the time of adoption of the Savings Related Share Option Scheme in 1990 the Rules provide that employees may exercise their options on reaching state pension age, even if they continue to work after that date.
As state pension age is different for men and women, the Rules of the Scheme could be seen to be discriminatory.
Since its establishment in 1990 some 1700 employees, representing about 30% of the workforce in the UK have participated in the Scheme.
Following changes in legislation the directors are proposing an amendment which will allow employees to exercise their options on reaching either age 60 or age 65, even if they continue in employment.
Adoption of Resolution 7 will authorise the directors to make the necessary changes which will also apply to options already granted and still outstanding.
A copy of the amended Rules of the Scheme is available for inspection at the Company's registered office.
Resolution 8 — Overseas Savings Related Share Option Scheme
A large proportion of the Company's employees work outside the United Kingdom and the directors believe that it is appropriate to establish share option schemes for those employees which broadly mirror the UK schemes but which take account of the laws, securities requirements and tax regimes in the countries where the employees live and work.
Adoption of Resolution 8 will authorise the directors to set up share option schemes for employees outside the UK.
The schemes will be generally similar to those for UK employees and the limits which already exist on the number of shares available to the Company's share schemes will not be changed.
Overseas employees will be invited to save regular amounts each month for five years with local savings institutions.
At the end of the five year period, the employees will be able to use their savings to subscribe for shares at a discount of up to 20% of the value of the shares when they started saving.
It is initially intended to launch these schemes in Germany and Switzerland but they may be extended to other countries later.
Resolution 9 — Executive Share Option Scheme
The Dawson International Executive Share Option Scheme 1993 (‘the Executive Scheme’) provides for share options to be granted to those senior employees who are most in a position to affect the fortunes of the Company.
The Executive Scheme is designed for approval under the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
Under such schemes employees are not normally liable to income tax on the difference between the option price and the market value of the shares at the time the option is exercised.
However, subject to the normal exemptions and depending upon the individual employee's particular circumstances, a liability to capital gains tax could arise on a subsequent disposal of the shares.
Options may also be granted under the scheme to senior employees overseas.
A summary of the Executive Scheme is set out in the Appendix to this letter.
The maximum number of new ordinary shares that may become issuable pursuant to options granted under the Executive Scheme during any ten year period is 5% of the Company's issued ordinary share capital for the time being subject to an overriding maximum of 11,677,500 shares which represents approximately 7 ½%; of the Company's issued ordinary share capital as it presently stands.
This overriding limit is subject to adjustment in the event of certain specified alterations to the Company's share capital.
Furthermore, the maximum number of new ordinary shares that may become issuable pursuant to options granted under all of the Company's share option schemes during any ten year period is 10% of the Company's issued ordinary share capital for the time being.
The Scheme will be administered by a committee consisting of non-executive directors.
Resolution 10 — Issue of Shares for Cash
The Company is prevented by Section 89 Companies Act 1985 from issuing shares for cash without first offering these to existing shareholders in proportion to their holdings.
Resolution 10 which will be proposed as a Special Resolution extends for a further year at a slightly higher level the authority previously given to disapply such pre-emption rights in the case of small issues and to deal with certain aspects of rights issues.
It also excludes shares issued in lieu of dividend from counting towards the limitations.
There are no present plans to take advantage of this authorisation, except in respect of investments into the Dawson International PLC Personal Equity Plans.
Copies of the draft Rules of the new Executive Share Option Scheme (which are subject to modification to satisfy Inland Revenue requirements) will be available for inspection during normal business houses on any weekday (Saturdays and Public Holidays excepted) up to the date of the Meeting at the offices of Hill Samuel Bank Ltd,, at the Registered Office of the Company and also at the meeting itself.
Your Directors unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of the aforementioned Resolutions, and intend themselves so to vote in respect of their own beneficial holdings totalling 117,180 ordinary shares representing 0.07% of the present issues ordinary share capital.
You will find enclosed a form of proxy for use at the Annual General Meeting.
You are asked to complete and return it to the Company's Registrars in accordance with the instructions printed thereon and, in any event, so that it is returned not later than 48 hours before the time for holding the meeting.
The return of the proxy form will not prevent you from attending the meeting and voting in person should you wish to do so.
APPENDIX
DAWSON INTERNATIONAL
EXECUTIVE SHARE OPTION SCHEME 1993
(‘the Executive Scheme’)
SUMMARY OF THE RULES
1.
Constitution
The Executive Scheme will be introduced under the provisions of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
It will be governed by Rules and administered under the direction of a committee of the Directors comprising only non-executive directors.
2.
Eligible Employees
All full-time employees (ie those having a normal working week of 20 hours or more, or 25 hours for directors) who are with the Company or any of its subsidiaries which the Directors have decided will participate, and who have at least two years' service to complete before retirement, may be eligible to participate at the discretion of the Directors.
3.
Option Price
The price at which a participant may acquire ordinary shares in the Company (‘shares’) on the exercise of an option shall be determined by the Directors but shall not be less than the middle market quotation of a share as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the last dealing day before eligible employees are invited to apply for options (or, if higher, the nominal value of a share), or, if certain specified conditions are satisfied, 85% of such figure (‘Discounted Options’).
4.
Grant of Options
Invitations to apply for options may be issued by the Directors during the six weeks following:
(i)
the date of approval of the Executive Scheme by the Commissioners of Inland Revenue; and
(ii)
subsequently, the announcement of the Company's final and interim results to the London Stock Exchange for any financial period
and at other times under exceptional circumstances.
Options will be granted for nil consideration and will not be transferable or assignable.
5.
Limits
(i)
The maximum number of shares which may be issued under the Executive Scheme shall be 11,677,500 representing 7 ½%; of the Company's issued ordinary share capital as it presently stands.
(ii)
The number of unissued shares over which options may be granted under the Executive Scheme on any date shall be limited so that:
(a)
the number of shares issued under any employee share scheme not involving the grant of options, when aggregated with the number of shares made issuable pursuant to options granted (excluding lapsed options) under the Executive Scheme and any other employee share option scheme shall not in any ten year period exceed 10% of the Company's issued ordinary share capital for the time being;
(b)
the number of shares made issuable pursuant to options granted (excluding lapsed options) under the Executive Scheme and any other employee share option scheme (other than a savings related scheme) shall not in any ten year period exceed 5% of the Company's issued ordinary share capital for the time being; and
(c)
the total number of shares issued or capable of being issued pursuant to options granted under the Executive Scheme during the four year period commencing on the date of adoption shall not exceed 2.5% of the issued ordinary share capital for the time being.
(iii)
The value of shares over which each participant may at any time be granted an option under the Executive Scheme when added to the aggregate of the values of shares (as at the date of grant of the options) comprised in outstanding options granted in the preceding ten years under the Executive Scheme and any other employee share option scheme operated by the Company (other than a savings related share options scheme) is limited to four times the participant's annual salary.
(iv)
Not more than one quarter of the shares which may be acquired on the exercise of options granted under the Executive Scheme may have an option price below the market value of a share on the dealing day preceding the relevant date of invitation.
(v)
No options may be granted after the tenth anniversary of shareholders' approval of the Executive Scheme.
6.
Exercise of Options
Options may usually only be exercised between three and ten years after their grant.
However, earlier exercise is permitted if the participant leaves the employment of the Group through death, redundancy, retirement, injury, disability, or the company or undertaking by which he is employed being transferred outside the Group; or in the event of a takeover, reconstruction or voluntary winding-up of the Company.
If a participant leaves in other circumstances (retirement excepted) the option will lapse unless the Directors exercise their discretion to keep it open for a longer period.
7.
Conditions
The Directors may impose conditions on the exercise of options and it is proposed that such conditions will be imposed on the exercise of Discounted Options as reflect the guidelines of institutional investors from time to time.
At present, such guidelines require that options may not be exercised until at least five years from their date of grant and then only if over a five year period following the date of grant the Company has achieved growth in earnings per share which exceeds the growth in the Retail Prices Index by at least ten percentage points.
8.
Issue of Shares
Shares allotted following the exercise of an option will rank pari passu with the then issued shares of the same class of the Company (except that they will not rank for any dividend or other right having a record date prior to the allottee's entry on the Company's register of members).
The Company will apply to the London Stock Exchange for such shares to be admitted to the Official List.
9.
Takeover or Reconstruction
In the event of another company acquiring control of the Company through a takeover or reconstruction, then (as an alternative to exercising his option as described in paragraph 6) a participant may, if the acquiring company so agrees, release his existing option in return for the grant of an option over shares in the acquiring company (or a parent thereof) having the same aggregate option prices and the same aggregate market value as the shares the subject of the options released, the new options being generally exercisable on the same terms as the old.
10.
Reorganisation of Capital
In the event of a capitalisation or rights issue or the sub-division, consolidation or reduction of the Company's ordinary share capital, then the numbers of shares referred to in paragraph 5(i) hereof, the option price of shares under option and the number and nominal value of such shares may be adjusted with the confirmation in writing of the Company's auditors (except in the case of a capitalisation issue) that such adjustment is fair and reasonable.
11.
Parallel Options
The Directors may grant Discounted Options which are subject to conditions as outlined in paragraph 7 above in parallel to options with an option price at full market value on the dealing day preceding the date of invitation.
On the exercise of the Discounted Option, the related option will lapse and vice versa.
12.
Amendments
The Rules of the Executive Scheme may be amended by the Directors in any respect provided that:
(i)
no amendment which would be to the advantage of participants may be made to the following without the prior consent of the Company in General Meeting:
(a)
the periods during and conditions under which options may be granted and exercised;
(b)
the basis of calculation of the option price;
(c)
the total number of shares available for the Executive Scheme;
(d)
the persons eligible to participate;
(e)
the maximum value of shares over which a person may be granted options under the Executive Scheme;
(f)
the rules governing reorganisation of capital, takeover, reconstruction or winding-up of the Company;
(g)
the rules governing amendment of the Executive Scheme;
(h)
the rights attaching to shares issued or transferred on the exercise of options;
(i)
the non-transferability and non-assignability of options;
(ii)
no amendment shall operate to affect to his disadvantage any rights already acquired by an employee under the Executive Scheme without his consent;
(iii)
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in (i) and (ii) of this paragraph the Directors may amend the Executive Scheme to secure or maintain its approval by the Inland Revenue or to comply with or take advantage of any changes to legislation provided that such amendments do not affect the basic structure of the Executive Scheme or the limits outlined in paragraph 5 above;
(iv)
no amendment shall have effect until it has been approved by the Inland Revenue.
NOTICE OF MEETING
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Twentieth Annual General Meeting of Dawson International PLC will be held in the Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh, on Wednesday 14th July 1993 at 12 noon for the following purposes:
1.
To receive and consider the Directors' Report and Accounts for the financial year ended 27th March 1993.
2.
To declare a dividend.
3.
To re-elect Messrs  and  as Directors of the Company.
4.
To re-appoint the auditors and authorise the Directors to fix their remuneration.
5.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following Resolution as an Ordinary Resolution of the Company:
‘That the Directors be and they are hereby authorised:
(a)
to exercise the power contained in Article 134 (B) of the Articles of Association of the Company so that, to the extend determined by the Directors, the holders of Ordinary Shares be permitted to elect to receive new Ordinary Shares of 25p each in the capital of the Company, credited as fully paid, instead of all or part of any dividend declared or proposed to be declared at any time prior to or at the next Annual General Meeting of the Company; and
(b)
to capitalise the appropriate nominal amount of additional Ordinary Shares falling to be allotted pursuant to elections made as aforesaid, out of the sums standing to the credit of the reserves of the Company (including any share premium account or capital redemption reserve fund) or otherwise available for distribution as the Directors may determine and to apply such sums in paying up such Ordinary Shares and to allot such Ordinary Shares to members of the Company validly making such elections in accordance with their respective entitlements’.
6.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution of the Company:
‘That the Company be and is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised in accordance with Section 166 of the Companies Act 1985 to make market purchases (within the meaning of Section 163 of the said Act) of Ordinary Shares of 25p each in the capital of the Company (‘shares’) provided that:
(a)
the maximum number of Shares hereby authorised to be purchased shall be 15,000,000;
(b)
the minimum price which may be paid for a Share shall be 25p;
(c)
the maximum price which may be paid for a Share shall be not more than 5% above the average of the middle market quotations derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the ten business days immediately preceding the date of purchase of the Share; and
(d)
unless renewed the authority hereby conferred shall expire fifteen months after the passing of this Resolution or at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company whichever is the earlier save that the Company may, prior to such expiry, enter into a contract to purchase Shares which will or may be executed wholly or partly after such expiry and purchase Shares pursuant to such contract;
and that all Shares so purchased in pursuance of this authority shall be cancelled immediately upon completion of the purchase and the amount of the Company's issued share capital (but not authorised share capital) shall be reduced by the nominal amount of the Shares so purchased’.
7.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution of the Company:
That subject to the approval of the Board of Inland Revenue, the Directors be and are hereby authorised to amend the Rules of the Dawson International Savings Related Share Option Scheme into the form presented to this meeting and for the purpose of identification initialled by the Chairman hereof.’
8.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution of the Company:
‘That the Directors be and are hereby authorised to establish and to permit the Company's subsidiaries to establish such employee share schemes as they consider appropriate for the participation therein of employees of the Company or any of its subsidiaries who are resident or working overseas, and from time to time to make to permit the making of such alterations thereto as they consider necessary or appropriate provided always that the terms of such schemes shall, as far as is appropriate having regard to local circumstances and local taxation consideration, be similar to those of the Dawson International Savings Related Share Option Scheme and that the overall limits on the number of Ordinary Shares in the Company which may be subscribed for under all the Company's employee share schemes shall not be increased thereby and that Ordinary Shares which may be subscribed for under such overseas schemes shall count towards such limits.’
9.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution of the Company:
‘That the Dawson International Executive Share Option Scheme 1993, the provisions of which are summarised in the Appendix to the letter to members of the Company dated 16th June 1993, to be constituted by the Rules produced in draft to this meeting and for the purposes of identification initialled by the Chairman hereof, be and is hereby approved and the Directors be and are hereby authorised to do all acts and things which they may consider necessary or expedient for implementing and giving effect to the same including making such amendments to the Rules as may be necessary to gain the approval of the Inland Revenue.’
10.
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as a Special Resolution of the Company:
‘That where they are generally authorised for the purpose of Section 80 of the Companies Act 1985 the Directors be and they are hereby empowered pursuant to Section 95 of the said Act to allot equity securities (within the meaning of Section 94 of the said Act) for cash, as if Section 89(1) of the said Act did not apply to any such allotment provided that this power shall:
(a)
be limited to the allotment of equity securities:
(i)
in connection with an offer of securities, open for acceptance for a period fixed by the Directors, by way of rights to holders of Ordinary Shares in proportion (as near as may be) to their holdings on a record date fixed by the Directors (subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors may deem necessary or expedient to deal with problems under the laws of any territory or the requirements of any regulatory body or any Stock Exchange in any territory or in connection with any fractional entitlements or otherwise howsoever);
(ii)
to holders of Ordinary Shares who shall have elected to receive an allotment of equity securities in lieu of any dividend pursuant to authority given to the Directors; and
(iii)
(otherwise than pursuant to sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) above) up to a maximum nominal amount of £1,945,000; and
(b)
unless renewed, expire fifteen months after the passing of this Resolution or at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company, whichever is the earlier, save that the Company may prior to such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.’