

The Company
Dawson International is one of the world's leading textile-based consumer products companies.
Employing 12,000 people at over 80 locations, we operate through an extensive range of businesses focused in five key areas — Cashmere, International Apparel Brands, Home Fashions, Mass Market Apparel and Yarns & Fabrics.
We have achieved world leadership in a number of product areas, including the processing and knitting of cashmere, thermalwear and shower curtains.
With more than three-quarters of our sales made overseas and our brands sold in over 50 countries, we are one of the U.K's top 100 exporters.
Our aims are to achieve market leadership in our chosen fields; to ensure the continued prosperity of our businesses and the people who work in them; and to enhance consistently our profits and earnings for shareholders.
Strategies for achieving those aims are based on the fundamental recognition that customer satisfaction is the key to success.
We also recognise that highly trained and motivated people are critical to the achievement of our objectives.
Thus we aim to recruit, appraise, train and challenge them in line with our ambitions — and reward them in line with our results.
Wherever possible we will conduct our affairs in ways which are environment and country/neighbourhood friendly.
We will maintain our reputation for integrity, trust and respect in all business activities.
Our continued success in exploiting brands and technology worldwide is, above all, founded on our commitment to maintaining the stated values of our business which are — innovation, quality and service.
Financial Calendar
The market price of the Company's shares at 31st March 1982, adjusted for the bonus issue in 1985, was 87.33p per share.
Chairman's Statement
I am pleased to report that we have achieved on increase in profit in the year.
Profit before tax at £32.1m was up 6% and earnings per share, boosted by a lower effective tax rate, at 13.3p per share were up 16%.
These results have been achieved despite our principal markets becoming even more difficult and complex.
The improvement in trading which I reported a year ago rapidly evaporated as recession regained its grip in the United Kingdom and gained momentum in the important Continental Europe and Japanese markets which themselves account for about one half of the sales of our United Kingdom businesses.
The withdrawal of sterling from the ERM last September and the subsequent establishment of more favourable exchange rates does, however, provide us with the opportunity of countering these pressures to some extent.
Such a change also has a benefit in our domestic market where sales to tourists, enjoying a more competitive pricing environment, have increased in recent months.
It is to be hoped that the current parities of the exchange rates will be maintained to enable consistent pricing policies to be applied.
In this context, in a more general sense, a return to a more convergent exchange rate policy within Europe, providing as it does a background of stability to encourage exporters, would be welcomed again at some stage in the future.
Recession in the U.S.A. has run its course and left an aftermath of uncertainty in its wake.
For our United States businesses the rate of sales growth slowed in the second half of the year and pressure on margins intensified as major retailers battled for increased shares of the limited upsurge in consumer expenditure.
We are, however, well prepared to benefit from a restoration of consumer confidence which is expected to follow resolution of the new administration's policies.
During the last few years our strategy has been clearly focused on those businesses where we have significant competitive advantage.
It is these in particular which have performed well during the year and we have gained market share through innovative product offerings and quick response to customers’ demands.
Coupled to this has been careful control over costs.
Operational problems were experienced at some of the less well positioned businesses which found it difficult to sustain market share in the current environment.
Although the issues have now been addressed, profitability was adversely affected as a result.
We also incurred costs in connection with the re-positioning of our United Kingdom international brands which involved the rationalisation of a limited number of our facilities.
We much regret that this involved a net loss of some jobs but if we are to remain competitive against increasing overseas competition, it is essential that we operate with the lowest possible cost base and the most efficient facilities.
With increased capital expenditure and a build  up of working capital, there was an outflow of cash in the year following two years of strong positive cash flow.
Harnessing our financial resources remains a major priority for us and despite another major capital expenditure programme, we expect to achieve a more balanced position from trading in the current year.
The results for the year are presented using the new accounting standard, FRS3, and to show how these relate to the results on the previous format, full details are presented in the financial review.
Your Board has welcomed the Cadbury Committee's Report on the financial aspects of Corporate Governance.
While the company has observed for a number of years the thrust of most of the recommendations put forward in the code of best practice, some of our procedures have been adjusted so that the form as well as the spirit of the code is met.
This is explained more fully in the Directors' report.
We have, in our company, many highly experienced people who have spent a lifetime in our industry.
They are joined by an increasing number of younger people throughout our businesses who bring with them new knowledge and skills so essential to maintain a lead against global competition and benefit from changes in technology.
It is this partnership of complementary skills and knowledge, which has made these results possible and on your behalf I extend our thanks to our employees throughout the company.
During the year we increased the momentum in the development of our ‘One Company’ strategy based on our key product sectors, cashmere, international apparel brands, home fashions, mass market apparel and yarns and fabrics.
As part of this strategy, we achieved further penetration of our brands and products internationally.
This will again be our aim in the current year along with the enhancement of profits from a greater pooling of resources between businesses.
The '90s will continue to be a period of even more rapid change.
The challenge is intense but the rewards from successful achievement are high.
The product sectors on which we have focused will, I believe, be proven to be increasingly beneficial to us as consumers look for fewer but better quality, better value products.
Although there is as yet no consistent pattern emerging across world or indeed within individual markets, this strategy and the resources at our disposal will enable us to make further progress this year.
Structure
The Board operates with two standing Committees.
These are:
The Remuneration Committee determines the remuneration of the executive directors of the Company and the basis of allocation of share options among directors and senior employees.
It also provides advice to the Executive Chairman on remuneration and conditions of employment of senior executives.
The Audit Committee reviews any published financial statements prior to adoption by the Board and oversees relationships between the Company and the external auditor and reviews the internal audit programme.
The Chairman's Committee comprising the Executive Directors deals with the overall operational management of the Company.
CHAIRMAN'S COMMITTEE
The businesses of the Company are structured into two groupings, Dawson Consumer Products and Dawson Premier Brands.
Each of these business groupings operates through its own Executive Committee and these are made up as follows:
STRATEGY GROUP
The members of the Chairman's Committee and the two Executive Committees form the Strategy Group which supports the Chairman's Committee in determining the future direction of the Company.
Review of Operations
The businesses with Dawson International are grouped by major product sectors into Cashmere, International Apparel Brands, Home Fashions, Mass Market Apparel and Yarns and Fabrics.
Including Duofold, the businesses with the Home Fashions and Mass Market Apparel groupings combine to form Dawson Consumer Products; the other businesses form Dawson Premier Brands.
DAWSON PREMIER BRANDS
Over the course of the year Dawson Premier Brands enjoyed considerable success, both financially and in terms of laying the groundwork for future development and growth.
Against a difficult economic backdrop with recession continuing throughout many of our principal export markets, growth does not come easily.
In many of our businesses much energy was devoted to implementing a wide range of initiatives in product and process innovation, management reorganisation, recruitment and training and an increasing emphasis on an ever more competitive cost base.
In overall terms the Cashmere related businesses had an outstanding year despite weaker raw material prices.
Within International Apparels Brands performance was severely affected by the manufacturing reconfiguration and related costs.
All brands have now been repositioned.
The Yarns and Fabrics business has undertaken substantial changes to respond to the needs of a difficult market, and now looks set to reap the rewards as demand picks up.
The Cashmere grouping of businesses generated excellent figures in total helped by a cashmere volume increase of around 30%.
Joseph Dawson sold aggressively in both the U.K. and Italy, recovering weaving market share and gaining ground with novel blends backed by new sources of supply.
Management was strengthened, operating costs were contained and production performed well in both cashmere processing and woolcombing.
Substantial investment programmes in information technology and new effluent treatment plant to meet the latest regulatory requirements were also initiated.
Todd & Duncan benefited from the increased demand for cashmere and, backed by the strongest stock service in the industry, quality driven investment and new impetus in product development, made substantial overseas progress which should be maintained in 1993/94.
Colour authority and stock service capability allied to tight cost control and good buying saw Laidlaw & Fairgrieve exceed last year's record figures.
Investment in winding capacity at Galashiels and Dalkeith will lead  to further quality enhancement and underpin performance in the future.
International Apparel Brands activity in the U.K. was dominated by brand repositioning, changes in marketing and distribution and the planned reconfiguration of knitwear production facilities.
In order to lower the cost base and consolidate manufacturing, factories in Dumfries and Arbroath were closed.
The costs were provided in the previous year with the exception of a £1.1 million write down in the value of the Dumfries building charged in 1992/93.
A solid platform for future development has now been established.
The increasing focus on Pringle of Scotland as ‘the natural name for sports and leisurewear’ gained pace during the year.
With further product ranges in clothing and accessories as well as knitwear, this wider branded collection is now available at an increasing number of company-owned retail stores, dedicated retail outlets and concessions established with business partners throughout the world.
Service to the customer was improved with better communication and the strengthening of the role of local operations in the U.S.A., Germany and Japan.
Production facilities have now been concentrated in six well-invested factories.
The Pringle brand's leading position in the growing international golf market was enhanced during the year with the spectacular performance of Nick Faldo, the world's No. 1 golfer.
The Pringle/Nick Faldo collection of clothing took a higher share of the U.K. market.
A more aggressive sales campaign for this capsule collection was also launched in the important U.S. and Japanese markets, creating opportunities for further growth.
Ballantyne Cashmere saw a satisfactory increase in sales, in both the cashmere and clothing sectors.
Allied to the reorganisation of the New Bond Street flagship store, the extension of the coordinated clothing range to cover the U.S.A. and Japan, and a successful ‘being the best’ internal efficiency review, this uplift in sales generated both improved results and an encouraging base for maintaining momentum.
United Brands was established in March 1992 to encompass the separate Barrie and Glenmac companies and the McGeorge and Braemar brands previously managed as part of Pringle.
The business has made substantial progress in terms of integrating production facilities, warehousing and administration.
Sales, independent for each of the four brands, operate out of new design studios, showrooms and offices.
The brands have been repositioned with relevant distribution  and marketing changes.
The team is now in place but the total reorganisation task has been expensive and operational efficiency has suffered during the process of change.
The novel element injected by Edina Ronay design, acquired during the year, and the unique retail concept of Cashmere Cashmere in the U.S.A., acquired in 1988, continue to open up opportunities to develop the fashion image of our apparel businesses.
Results within Yarns and Fabrics have been dominated by an invigorating performance by Blackwood Brothers.
In a very difficult year for the carpet yarn industry, considerable effort was invested in the areas of management, supervision and shift structures, reducing costs, meeting market requirements for faster response and tighter pricing, and increasing overseas sales.
These were all implemented in a determined and successful manner.
A broader product portfolio, new customers, higher market share and a substantial investment programme for the current year are the results.
Premier Fabrics, the marriage of the two specialist weaving activities of British Replin and Robert Noble into one integrated business, also faced troubled market conditions.
Transport and contract fabric demand remained low while apparel interest was affected by recessionary markets.
However, with reorganisation now substantially complete, the business has already begun to realise its ambitions in transport, contract and apparel fabrics.
Backed up by clear strategies for marketing, design, sourcing and production, a confident business is now in place.
At the time of this Report, knitters' order intake volumes for Autumn 1993 are down on the previous year, in part as retailers delay ordering and in part reflecting recessionary conditions in key export markets in Europe and Japan.
However, despite the adverse effects of these economic difficulties, the key cashmere knitwear volume is ahead.
In general, volume levels in most of the upstream businesses are holding up well, although increasingly subject to shorter pipeline requirements.
DAWSON CONSUMER PRODUCTS
Against a backdrop of rapidly changing retail dynamics and continuing economic uncertainty, trading conditions in the U.S.A. were extremely difficult affecting both Mass Market Apparel and Home Fashions.
There  was considerable pressure on both margins and stock levels.
Within the Mass Market Apparel businesses, following on the previous year's mild winter, sales volumes at J E Morgan Heavyweight remained constant, although sales dollars were higher as a result of new product introductions and a higher price mix.
This change in price mix reflects the increasing importance of products introduced to offset the anticipated reduction in basic thermal sales due to warmer winters.
Since the Winterlite product range was introduced — the warmest, lightest product of its day — sales of Winterlite and its derivatives now account for 5% of thermal volume.
Products designated as sportswear have also taken a more significant share, now representing almost 9% of volume.
On the upside, the move to concentrate thermal production in Pennsylvania helped margins through increased productivity.
The lightweight underwear and pocket T-shirt manufacturer, J E Morgan Lightweight, however, had a more difficult year, with a decline in both sales and profits.
This was due both to the general reduction in the level of retail sales growth and to fashion market reversal in demand for products made from jersey fabric.
Problems were also created as a result of its movement away from military contracts to a wider portfolio of private label customers looking better quality products.
The consequent retraining led to lower operating efficiencies on new products.
The cross-over period between customers also resulted in a significant build up of inventory levels.
West Knitting fleece had a disappointing year, aggravated by the unfortunate coincidence of late product specification by a major customer with the launch of new screenprint brand which caused severe production and delivery difficulties.
Lack of early information caused a reduction in momentum which could not be regained quickly enough once sales levels were known.
This resulted in disappointed customers, poor operating efficiencies and a loss.
For 1993, sales are being concentrated on developing the screen print brand using the cotton faced product launched in 1992 and on innovative differential dyeing techniques.
These initiatives are expected to produce a solid sales base for future development and an improving profit picture.
Dawson Fur Fabrics continued to grow its fleece fabric sales during the year, although there was a weakening in the European export business in the fourth quarter of the financial year.
Although the sliver business had a tough year, their market position was strengthened by the acquisition of Fur-Textiles Nederland BV, their Dutch based distributor of sliver products.
Sales developed strongly in Eastern Europe.
Raschel fabric sales volumes continued to decline, although the trend slowed in the latter half of the year.
Production efficiency was optimised by the growth in the fleece business already referred to.
A number of fabrics are being developed based on raschel knitting technologies.
The shower curtain business previously under the name Associated Products, was relaunched as Dawson Home Fashions to reflect the business' stronger drive into co-ordinated bathroom products.
A major merchandising statement was made with the successful introduction of the mass market brand ‘Collage’.
The shower curtain market is changing rapidly.
While margins were under severe pressure in commodity style products due to the import of low priced promotional products from the Orient, unit sales overall increased in both the mass and department store markets.
Duofold, one of the International Apparel Brands, had another strong year of sales growth.
The Duofold development into Eastern Europe also continued apace, with sales volume doubling from last year.
A high-performance clothing system, Vent-A-Layer, was successfully introduced to the market, and has led to a whole series of further product introductions during 1993.
In one of the highest-profile events for its products during the year, Duofold jackets and underwear were worn by Sir Ranulph Fiennes and Dr Michael Stroud during their four-month epic crossing of the Antarctic on foot.
FINANCIAL
These accounts have been prepared under the Accounting Standards Board Financial Reporting Standard No. 3, ‘Reporting Financial Performance’.
The presentation of comparative figures has been adjusted to reflect the new standard.
Sales were £431.7 million compared with £415.0 million in the previous year.
£6.3 million of the increase arises from movement in the US$ exchange rate.
Some 75% of sales were to customers outside the U.K. Direct exports from the U.K. totalled £98.0 million compared with £93.5 million in the previous year, an increase of 4.8%.
Operating profit was £37.2 million compared with £35.7 million in the previous year.
£0.4 million of the increase relates to a favourable movement in the US$ exchange rate.
After the reduction in profits in the first half of the year, profits in the second half improved.
It is anticipated that this shift in profits from the first to the second half of the financial year is likely to continue, reflecting retailers' ever shortening delivery cycles.
Profits continued to improve within the Premier Fabrics and Yarns businesses and J E Morgan Heavyweight and there was a significant profit recovery at Blackwood Brothers.
However, West Knitting, J E Morgan Lightweight, Dawson Home Fashions and United Brands all suffered a reduction in profits.
The net interest charge increased significantly in the second half of the year, reflecting the year's cash outflow.
Before provision for terminated operations, profit before tax showed an increase of 6.3% on the previous year, from £30.2 million to £32.1 million.
The tax charge was 28.6% compared with 32.1% in the previous year.
The lower rate arose as a result of the effects of sterling weakness during the financial year.
Earnings per share were 13.3p compared with 11.5p (before provision for operation to be terminated) in the previous year, an increase of 16%.
An interim dividend of 2.9p was paid on 20th January 1993.
A final dividend of 6.1p is recommended to be paid on 27th August 1993 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 2nd July 1993.
The total dividend for the year, excluding tax credits, will therefore amount to 9.0p, the same as in the previous year.
After two years of strong cash inflow, there was a cash outflow of £9.5 million.
This is accounted for in part by the considerably higher capital expenditure and tax payments, but also reflects the significant increase in stock levels.
The growth in demand for rapid response in the U.S.A. continues to have the effect of transferring stock out of the retailers' balance sheets and into those of the manufacturers, a situation aggravated this year by relatively weak fourth quarter sales.
The effect of this cash outflow and the stronger US$ on the translation of dollar denominated borrowings resulted in gearing increasing to 24.8%.
US$55 million of Guaranteed Senior Notes repayable between 1998 and 2007 were issued by the U.S.A. subsidiary holding company.
The proceeds were used primarily to repay a portion of a medium term loan falling due in 1993, prior to maturity, and to lengthen the debt profile.
Capital expenditure was £17.1 million.
This compares with depreciation on the Dumfries building where production ceased during the year.
Major projects during the year included further expenditure on hi-tech knitting machinery, winding equipment at the spinning companies in the U.K. and dyeing and knitting machinery in the U.S.A, as well as continuing expenditure on information technology worldwide.
Group shareholders' funds totalled £191.8 million compared with £178.2 million at the previous year end.
The pre-tax return on average Group shareholders' funds was 17.4%.
During the year £1,571,000 of 973/8; % Guaranteed Redeemable Convertible Preference Shares of Dawson Finance NV were converted into 727,312 ordinary shares of Dawson International PLC.
A further £495,000 has been converted since the year end.
Directors' Responsibility for the Accounts
The Directors are required by the Companies Act 1985 to prepare accounts in respect of each financial year that give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group as at the end of the financial year and of the results for that period.
The Directors are also required to maintain adequate accounting records.
In addition, the Directors are responsible for taking reasonable steps to safeguard the assets of the Group and to detect or prevent fraud.
Suitable accounting policies applied consistently and making use of reasonable and prudent estimates have been used in preparation of the accounts.
Applicable accounting standards have been followed.
Report of the Auditors
To the Members of Dawson International PLC
We have audited the accounts on pages 18 to 37.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors
As described above the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the accounts.
It is our responsibility to form an independent opinion, based on our audit of those accounts, and to report our opinion to you.
Basis of opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination, on a test basis, of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the accounts.
It also includes an assessment of the significant estimates and judgements made by the Directors in the preparation of the accounts, and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Group's circumstances, consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the accounts are free from material misstatement, whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the accounts.
Opinion
In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group at 27th March 1993 and of the profit of the Group for the financial year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Notes to the Accounts
1 Accounting Policies
(a) Basis of Preparation
The Group Accounts comprise the consolidated accounts of the holding company and all its subsidiaries, of which the principal companies are identified on pages 36 and 37.
The Accounts have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards and under the historical cost accounting rules supplemented by revaluation of certain properties.
Where changes in presentation are made, appropriate adjustments are made to comparative figures.
In accordance with the exemption available under S230 Companies Act 1985, a separate profit and loss account dealing with the results of the Company only has not been presented.
These Accounts were approved by the Directors on 16th June 1993.
Events occurring before 16th June 1993 have been reflected in the Accounts to the extent required by SSAP 17.
(b) Subsidiaries
Fair values are attributed to the net tangible assets of subsidiaries at the date of acquisition.
The excess of the cost of acquisition over the net assets attributed, so far as not previously written off, is written off to reserves.
(c) Financial Year
Except for certain overseas subsidiaries subject to local requirements, the Group does not operate to a calendar month end accounting timetable.
These Accounts are drawn up for a period of 52 weeks ended on 27th March 1993 and the comparative figures stated are in respect of a period of 52 weeks ended on 28th March 1992.
(d) Foreign Currencies
Income and expenditure in foreign currencies are converted to sterling at rates approximating to those ruling at the date of each transaction; assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
The results of overseas subsidiaries are translated into sterling at average rates for the year.
Exchange gains and losses arising from trading transactions are taken to profit for the year.
Differences on the translation of the net assets of overseas operations are adjusted against retained profits.
(e) Turnover
Turnover represents the aggregate amount invoiced for goods supplied to customers and is stated net of any value added or sales taxes.
(f) Fixed Assets and Depreciation
Certain of the Group's properties are included in the Accounts at valuation.
Additions to these properties and all other fixed assets are included at cost.
Depreciation is provided on all property, plant and equipment on a straight line basis, taking into account residual values.
Estimates of the useful lives of plant and equipment cannot be made with precision and in practice a range of lives exist.
The principal annual rates used are:
(g) Leases
In respect of any assets held under finance leases, an amount representing the original outright purchase price is included in the cost of fixed assets.
The capital element of future rentals is treated as a liability and the interest element is charged to profit and loss account over the period of the leases in proportion to the balances outstanding.
Rental payments made under operating leases are charged to profit and loss account in the period to which they relate.
(h) Stocks
Stocks and work in progress are valued at the lower of cost, including appropriate manufacturing overheads, and net realisable value.
As the Group is vertically integrated, finished goods held by one company may be sold outside the Group or may form the raw materials of other companies within the Group.
In these circumstances, stocks and work in progress have not be sub-classified.
(i) Investments
Investments held as fixed assets are stated at cost less provisions where appropriate for any diminution in value.
Investments held as current assets are stated at the lower of cost and market value.
(j) Provisions
Provision is made for business reorganisation costs when a decision has been made in principle which will result in such liability being incurred.
On acquisition of a business, the purchase consideration is allocated between the underlying tangible assets and liabilities on the basis of the fair value to the Group in accordance with its accounting policies.
Any provisions made in assessing fair value are included under that heading in the provisions for liabilities and charges in the Accounts.
(k) Taxation
Deferred taxation is provided at current rates on timing differences which are anticipated to increase taxation liabilities in the future.
Advance Corporation Tax to be offset against the Corporation Tax liability of the following year is carried forward.
(l) Pensions
Contributions are charged to the profit and loss account in accordance with actuarial recommendations so as to spread the cost of pensions over the employees' remaining working lives with the Group.
(m) Financial Reporting Standard 3
The accounts comply with FRS3, ‘Reporting Financial Performance’, which has introduced changes to the structure of the accounts.
FRS3 is mandatory for accounting periods ending on or after 22nd June 1993.
However, the Group has decided to adopt FRS3 early.
Previous year figures have been restated accordingly (See Note 24).
14 Pensions
The Group operates several pension schemes, the assets of which are held independently from the Group in trustee administered funds.
These schemes are of both the defined contribution type and the defined benefit type.
Actuarial valuations of the defined benefit plans, using the projected unit method, take place regularly and compare the value of the future benefits payable to members against the assets and expected future contributions to the plans from members and the Group.
The assumptions used in these valuations vary according to local conditions, but depend heavily upon the assumed excess of investment returns over the rate of increase in pensionable pay.
The latest valuations assume excesses of 2% to 3.5% per annum, these valuations being carried out as at dates between 1st May 1991 and 31st December 1992.
Total fund assets, the market value of which was £46,945,000, were shown to amount to 122% of liabilities.
A surplus arising from the actuarial valuation of one of the UK funds, after taking account of improvements in benefits to members, is being spread forward over twenty years by reducing the regular annual contributions.
The benefit of the reduced funding rate to profit and loss account in the year was £0.7m (1992 £0.5m).
The charge for the year also benefited from the absence of contributions of £0.3m for past service.
The total contribution cost to the Group during the year was £2.4m (1992 £2.8m).
15 Share Capital
During the year options in respect of 369,606 shares were exercised for a total consideration of £701,399 and 59,336 shares were issued in respect of Dawson International PLC Personal Equity Plans for a consideration of £120,460.
47,643 shares were issued to electing ordinary shareholders in lieu of the final dividend for 1992.
At 27th March 1993 there were options outstanding in respect of 6,759,860 ordinary shares under the Company's share option schemes.
These options are exercisable in the period up to July 2002 at subscription prices between 127p and 334p; the weighted average subscription price is 179p per share.
727,312 ordinary shares were issued in exchange for 1,571 9 ⅜%; Guaranteed Redeemable Convertible Preference Shares of Dawson Finance NV (Note 17).
17 Called Up Preference Share Capital of Subsidiary Undertaking
28,429 (1992 30,000) 9 ⅜%; Guaranteed Redeemable Convertible Preference Shares of Dawson Finance NV issued at £1,000 per share guaranteed on a subordinated basis by Dawson International PLC and are convertible into ordinary shares of Dawson International PLC at a price of 216p per ordinary share at any time prior to 8th January 2004.
The shares are redeemable, at the instigation of Dawson International PLC, in whole on or after 15th January 1994 at their issue price or in certain circumstances upon earlier revocation of the guarantee at prices declining from 105 per cent to 100 per cent thereof failing which they will be redeemed on 15th January 2004.
The nominal value of the shares is £116 per share and the aggregate premium on issue was £26,520,000. 1,571 shares were converted into ordinary shares of Dawson International PLC during the year.
The Directors present their report and the audited accounts for the financial year ended 27th March 1993.
Activities, Results and Dividend
A review of the principal activities and results of the Group for the year is given in the Review of Operations on pages 8 to 16.
The profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders amounted to £20,618,000.
An interim dividend of 2.9p per share was paid on 20th January 1993 and a final dividend of 6.1p per share is recommended to be paid on 27th August 1993 to those shareholders on the register at the close of business on 2nd July 1993.
Corporate Governance
The Cadbury Committee report on Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance recommends that listed companies should state within their report and accounts their degree of compliance with a Code of Best Practice.
Separate Audit and Remuneration Committees under the Chairmanship of  have been constituted to formally replace the Committee of Non-Executive Directors which for many years has provided the Executive Chairman with independent advice on matters concerning the appointment and remuneration of Executive Directors and senior executives and on audit.
Detailed guidance on some aspects of compliance reporting is awaited from the accounting profession before final compliance statements will be mandatory but the Directors are confident that the corporate governance structure within the Company already meets the Code of Best Practice.
Directors
The names and biographical details of the Directors are set out on page 6.
Messrs  and  both retire by rotation from the Board at the Annual General Meeting and, being eligible, offer themselves for re-election.
Both have contracts with the Company terminable at 3 years' notice.
No Director had any material interest in any contract of significance to the Group.
The Company has taken out insurance to indemnify its Directors and Officers against liability when acting for the Group.
Annual General Meeting
The Notice convening the Annual General Meeting for 14th July 1993 is set out on page 7 of a separate circular included with this report.
Employees
The Company's policy and practice is to encourage where possible the recruitment, training and career development of disabled people and any employees who may become disabled.
It is also Company policy to encourage the spread of information regarding developments affecting both an employee's workplace and Company wide.
Briefing groups have been established at many locations and a news bulletin is circulated throughout the Company's businesses.
A third invitation to UK employees to participate in the Dawson International PLC Savings Related Share Option Scheme was made during the year and increased to 1,728 the number of employees who have participated in the Scheme.
Donations
Charitable donations in the UK amounted to £32,000 during the year.
A political contribution of £2,000 was made to the Scottish Conservative Party.
Close Company Status
So far as the Directors are aware, the Company is not a close company for taxation purposes.
Auditors
Resolutions for the re-appointment of KPMG Peat Marwick as auditors to the Company and authorising the Directors to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM