

House Magazine of Stoddard Group
CONGRATULATIONS GORDON HAY, C.B.E.
In the Queen's Birthday Honours list, Gordon Haw was awarded the C.B.E.
in recognition of his services to Scottish Industry.
Since his appointment in 1983 there has been a remarkable turn around in the fortune of the Company as shown when this years £3.1 million profit after tax is compared to a £2 million loss five years ago.
Gordon Hay is a production engineer by profession.
He served in the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders during the last war and has since held many executive positions which have brought prosperity and jobs to Scotland.
Recently he has been appointed Chairman of Lasalle in Aberdeen, and serves on the Advisory Board of the Strathclyde Business School.
He is also past Chairman of Lithgows and holds additional Chairmanships of G. & G. Kynoch of Keith and John Woyka of Glasgow.
He has also of course been Chairman of the Sekers Group for a number of years.
We congratulate Mr. Hay on this well deserved honour.
TAKEOVERS AND RECORD RESULTS
The merger between Stoddards and Sekers is now seven months old, and it is ten months since the acquisition of Mercia Weavers.
The year 1987/88 was a remarkably good one for the Company, a fact that is reflected in an extract from the Chairman's statement in the Annual Report.
‘I am delighted to record that the Group's recovery has been sufficiently strong for us to undertake two acquisitions during the year, Sekers and Mercia Carpets’.
As a result of the merger with Sekers, the Holding Company's name was changed to ‘Stoddard Sekers International PLC’.
In the preliminary statement of annual results issued two months before the A.G.M., the longer term prospects for Sekers following the merger were considered excellent, and subject to the effects of the pound dollar rate, the outlook was optimistic for the current year.
Gordon Hay says, ‘Both Stoddard and Sekers have individually secured solid design led market positions and together as Stoddard Sekers International, we will continue to rely on the quality of our products, progressive management, and strong financial controls to build upon that success.
‘We have created a smoothly running team which is tackling realities of this business by enhancing the inherent value of the new grouping’.
‘I believe in the wisdom of creating a group with the management know-how and financial strength to increase the rate of growth.
We are constantly aware of changing market conditions and the need to continually update our marketing plans.
We have achieved a better than expected pro-forma combined profit and Stoddard Sekers is now putting in place the strategic plans to enable it to grow strongly both organically and by acquisition’.
ABOUT SEKERS…
Sekers, like Stoddard is made up of a group of companies.
They are Sekers Fabrics, David Evans and Vanners Silks, all of which manufacture fabrics which sell at the top end of their markets.
The largest is Sekers itself, founded in 1938, based in Whitehaven, Cumbria.
They supply the trade with top quality woven and printed furnishing fabrics and proudly display the Royal Warrant.
Vanners Silks is by far the oldest company, its history stretching back 250 years to the Huguenot weavers who came over to this country from France.
They employ 100 people and have two sites in the town of Sudbury which process and weave silks into the finest tie fabric.
Their markets are world wide with over 50% turnover exported.
Since 1843 some of the world's most exclusive silks have been printed by David Evans on the banks of the River Cray in Kent.
Their silks are used for furnishing and dress fabrics, ties, shawls, scarves and handkerchiefs.
Most of their production is exported and they are the only company still able to produce the famous Real Ancient Madder.
Recently, they have developed their own retail shops and opened the factory to tourists through the David Evans Craft Centre of Silk.
THE VANNERS FACTORY
THE SEKERS FACTORY
DAVID EVANS: CRAFT CENTRE OF SILK
SEKERS WEAVING
Stop Press
The company has just released the Interim Report showing the results for the first half of the current financial year.
Ralph Ellis says: ‘Once more we have seen a strong performance from the Stoddard companies, with profit rising 28% on sales 17% higher.
This is an excellent result’
The full report shown on Page 3.
CHAIRMAN'S AGM ADDRESS
‘In the current year, is spite of satisfactory carpet division trading, Stoddard Sekers’ results have been undermined by a rise of approximately 75% in Chinese raw silk prices.
Furthermore, it was announced this month that these increases are being imposed retro-actively on outstanding contracts, seriously affecting our margins on existing business.
So far, vehement protests by the main western importers, also at government level, have not influenced the Chinese attitude.
At the half-year the increase in carpet profits will be unable to compensate for the significant fall in Sekers' profits, causing an overall profit erosion.
Although for a while the silk market will be uncertain, we are nevertheless optimistic about the longer term for Sekers and particularly opportunities for joint marketing of furnishing fabrics with our carpets.
It is becoming increasingly common for retailers to sell both types of product.
We have also identified several opportunities within Sekers for improved profitability.
At the key Harrogate carpet fair this month, our new ranges were well received and order intake has improved.
Carpet sales are running ahead of last year.
As carpet imports are minimal in our market segment, we are optimistic and are maintaining the substantially increased promotion investment which we consider vital for the Group's future.
Overall therefore, we anticipate an improvement in the second half’.
Ralph Ellis, Managing Director, explains the financial results to the workforce of Stoddard.
It was one of a series of meetings held in the works canteen.
Separate meetings were also held at Douglas Reyburn in Kilmarnock and at Lyles in Cumbernauld so that everyone in the group was given the opportunity of attending.
THE RUNCORN FACTORY
The latest addition to the Stoddard Group, Mercia Weavers as it was known, is now nine months old and already it is fully integrated into the organisation at Elderslie.
At the time of take-over, there was a separate manufacturing unit in the Isle of Man but this has since been closed and the looms transferred to Runcorn and Elderslie.
The sales side of Mercia merged with the contract division of Stoddard to form Stoddard Mercia Contract.
The manufacturing unit has been integrated with the production organisation at Elderslie to form Stoddard Carpets Ltd., ‘Runcorn Plant’.
Situated on the Cheshire coastline beside the Manchester Ship Canal, the factory employs 118 people.
They have 9 Wilton and 21 Axminster narrow looms exclusively used in weaving carpet for the contract market.
Much of the administrative back-up is provided from Elderslie, i.e. wages and purchasing, allowing the main emphasis to be placed on production and design.
The factory itself was formed by Bill Freeman in 1967, a former employee of Stoddard and now the Contract Director of Stoddard Mercia Contract.
In addition to the more normal Axminster and Wilton qualities, they manufacture a specialised Wilton called Chlidema, a unique form of design in the carpet trade.
It enables borders to be woven as an integral part of the carpet allowing continuation of the design without mitred corners.
It is particularly popular with Interior Designers wanting to create original effects for their specialist clientele.
Many well known buildings have been carpeted from these looms.
The Grand Hotel, Brighton, the Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh and the luxury liner QEII are but a few of their more noteworthy contracts.
Winder Elaine Maddock at one of the Factory's 2 x 6 Head Gilbos Winding Machines.
Anna Pilcher, Trainee Designer, operating the newly installed Design Computer.
Runcorn Chief Designer Ronnie Wilkie and Anna Pilcher in the recently enlarged and refurbished Runcorn Design Studio.
Finishing Assistant Darren Evans operating a Double-Head Finishing Shearer.
Factory Assistant Sharon Dunne handlacing a set of Wilton Jacquard Cards.
STOP PRESS
The results for the 6 months to 30th September 1988 incorporate, for the first time, the results of the Sekers companies on a merger accounting basis.
The enlarged Group made £1,371,000 profit before tax in the six months compared to £1,886,000 in the same period last year.
Earnings per share were 2.1p against 2.2p last year.
Your Board view this as a temporary fall in earnings and have therefore declared an interim Ordinary Dividend of 0.55p per share, a 10% increase on last year's interim.
The dividend will be payable on 19th January 1989 to shareholders on the register on 23rd December 1988.
I am pleased to report that the Stoddard companies continued their growth, with profit before tax rising 28% to £1.4m on sales 17% higher.
The Sekers Group profit before tax fell from £0.8m to a loss of £0.1m on sales marginally higher.
The main reason for the fall in profits at Sekers has been the unsettling effect on world markets for silk products of the unprecedented 75% retroactive rise in raw silk prices from China since April, as reported at the AGM in September.
However, we are now satisfied that we have fully identified and accounted for the areas requiring rationalisation and tighter controls within the Sekers companies, which emerged following the acquisition.
The action being taken will benefit next year.
Group gearing, net of cash balances, was 70% at 30th September 1988 after bringing into the balance sheet factored debts in Sekers (previously shown off balance sheet) to conform with Group policy.
Stoddard's working capital has remained tightly controlled and the new controls at Sekers will make substantial inroads into its borrowings.
The Group is continuing its capital expenditure programme as planned.
With the phased introduction of a complementary range of furnishing fabrics and carpets to be marketed through Stoddard outlets, we are optimistic about prospects for future growth.
We are maintaining our high promotional investment in the carpet sector and, in the face of strong competition, the third quarter has started satisfactorily.
As planned, in the final quarter, production of tufted carpet will increase by over a third with the transfer from a sub-contractor to our own plant, to the benefit of margins.
The outlook in the second half is still troubled by silk prices.
Although they appear to have stabilised, we do not expect those markets to settle down until Spring next year particularly with the impact of a weak dollar.
However, despite the unusually difficult current year we are optimistic about the next financial year and we believe that the management which successfully revived Stoddard will now bring similar benefits to Sekers.
To ensure that this is achieved, Ralph Ellis, who is currently Managing Director of the carpet group, will assume the overall role of Group Chief Executive with effect from 1st April 1989.
STODDARD TEMPLETON SALES TEAM
Stoddard Templeton's Sales Force is twenty-four strong, covering all areas of the country including Northern Ireland.
This does not include the sales back-up staff but only refers to those who are active in the field, meeting customers fact to face on an organised and planned basis.
Jack Millar is the Director responsible for key accounts and administration.
Steve Higgins is the Filed Sales Director leading a team with two Regional Managers, Rex Wolfe (North) and Mike Hanson (South) each with eight representatives.
Stewart Stevenson (also an agent for Lyles Carpets) is responsible for Norther Ireland reporting directly to the Field Sales Director, and their is one agent employed for Devon and Cornwall.
To support the sales team, there are three merchandisers, Les Mannion, the ‘co-ordinator’, David Kilsby, and the newest recruit to the sales force, Neil Russell.
There are 334 individual items in nineteen different ranges available to the customers of Stoddard Templeton.
Each customer can differ in their sample requirements which are all itemised and individually recorded.
New items are regularly introduced so that the representatives, in addition to selling, have also to keep the sample displays fully updated.
The standard of display within carpet shops has greatly improved, with Stoddard Templeton leading the field with new and stylish display units.
Representatives are now able to offer a choice from two exclusive point-of-sale ranges called the Thistle Collection or Heather Collection, and for major customers, a specially designed Flagship Selling Unit can be installed.
It is all part of the service which places the reputation of Stoddard Templeton amongst the highest, at reputation that is upheld by their sales representatives, the ‘Ambassadors’ of the company.
HARROGATE SALES CONFERENCE
Through the year, the retail sales force have regular regional sales meetings but their is only one national sales conference.
This year, it was held in September prior to the opening of the International Carpet Fair at Harrogate, the most important exhibition in the carpet trade calendar.
The complete retail sales force attended the conference where presentations were made covering all aspects of selling.
The company strategy and plans for the Autumn Trading period were laid down by the Field Sales Director, Steve Higgins, Jack Millar, National Accounts & Administration Director presented the future strategy for major customers and outlined the plans for national promotional activity.
John Aytoun presented a selection of new carpet designs which were enthusiastically received.
He was called in at short notice due to the unfortunate motor accident involving Design Director, Bill Naysmith.
New selling aids and point-of-sale material were presented by Michael Saulet, Marketing Director Ralph Ellis, Managing Director, concluded the conference with a review of the trading year in which he re-affirmed the company strategy for the Autumn trading period and laid the foundations for the future.
In addition to the conference, a one day sales training course was held the day before.
It covered subjects which included selling skills, overcoming customers' objections and motivating retail salesmen.
At Harrogate…
A customer carefully notes what is being said by John Gordon (left).
At Harrogate…
On the busy Exhibition Stand, Robin Saunders (centre) talks to a customer.
At Harrogate…
The complete sales force with managers and directors at the Harrogate Sales Conference.
At Harrogate…
Ralph Ellis gives a ‘state of the nation’ speech to the sales force.
EXPORT EXPANDS
‘Now for Action’, the headline in the D.T.I. 's Single Market News, inferred that British firms are not ready to take advantage of the E.E.C.
single market.
This is a generalisation.
The export department of Stoddard Carpets has been operating successfully for 26 years.
Alex Montgomery, Export Director, pioneered a system in the mid 1960's unique at that time in the British Carpet Industry — to deliver carpets door to door from Scotland to anywhere in Europe.
‘Franco Domicile’ as it is called in the jargon of the trade.
No foreign warehouses were necessary and orders were invoiced in the appropriate foreign currency.
Import duties, freight charges, local taxes, agency commission, were all built into the selling price.
By this means of marketing, Stoddard regard all the European and Scandinavian markets as merely an extension of the home market as far as pricing, selling and marketing are concerned.
Franco Domicile price lists apply in each foreign market and the whole operation is backed up by administration and foreign language communication, to provide the efficient, smooth running operation of today.
Developments have also taken place within the last few months, in introducing computerisation of sales order processing within the Export Department.
Exporting invariably requires a great deal of documentation and specialised pricing, a large part of which is now being handled by the new computer system.
It took Allan MacIntyre, Systems Development Manager, and his team about three months to create a programme, make trial runs, train operators and install a reliable system that went live on 1st November.
Today, the Export team is made up of Jim Grandison, Export Sales Manager, who has prime responsibility for Eire, Scandinavian markets and the Middle East; Fraser Gordon who has recently joined as European Sales Manager; Alan Burnett, Export Admin.
Supervisor; Margaret Kerr, Secretary to the Export Director; Ellen McMillan, Ellen Gardner and Betty Ann Aitken, as administrators, and Irene Irvine as Shorthand Typist, with dual responsibility to service UK Contract Sales.
It is a team which has grown since last year, reflecting the important emphasis being placed on Export sales, which have shown almost a 25% increase by value in the last two years.
Assisting the Elderslie Export team are sales agents working in most overseas markets.
In addition to these agents, we have our own wholly owned subsidiary in Sweden, Stoddard Mattor, Stockholm, managed by Anders Falkman and his Sales Manager, Thomas Nilsonne — a successful company operating exclusively in the hotel and contract sector.
In France, out own man, Bernard Violet, has been successfully co-ordinating our appointed distributors Heuga SARL.
The main export activity is in the contract sector providing prestigious carpeting for international hotel groups, restaurants, public buildings, cruise liners, aircraft and generally the fairly wide hospitality market.
There are a few markets, notably, Eire, where there is also a substantial intake of Stoddard carpet used in residential location.
Among the more notable contracts secured by our Export people during the current year are:
Hotel El Aurassi, Algiers
Presidential Palace, Algiers
The Globe Hotel, Stockholm
The Park Hotel, Stockholm
The Savoy Hotel, Malmo
Hotel Meridien, Paris
The Opera House, Bastille, Paris
MAIF Insurance Co., Niort, Nr.
Bordeaux
Hilton  International Hotels in Milan, Cologne, Dusseldorf
Bavarian American Hotel, Nuremberg
Lotte Hotel Group, Seoul, S. Korea
Hilton Hotel, Seoul, S. Korea
Sofitel, Brussels
The Pullman Hilton Hotel, Zurich
Kirkenes Arctic Hotel, Norway
Duna Oasis Hotel, Gran Canaria
Hotel Don Gregory, Gran Canaria
Cruise Ships, Finland
5 Russian Cruise Liners
Kazerooni Mosque, Bahrain
Several International Airlines
The year ahead looks fairly daunting, particularly in light of the strengthening Pound which makes exporting more difficult and conversely makes imports into this country more competitive.
However, encouragingly, our Export Department is well experienced and appears to be well placed to take full advantage of export opportunities.
£5m EXPANSION AT DOUGLAS REYBURN
The expansion scheme which was announced to the press in June is already well underway.
The old car park is now a building site with foundations being laid, concrete pits half completed and a steel superstructure just beginning to rise above two piles of building materials.
Two Haig Chadwick carding machines worth almost half a million pounds each, along with two H.D.B. spinning frames that will occupy the new building, have already been ordered.
It is intended that the main part of the investment programme will be completed by next year, with the remainder phased over a further two years.
A new Petrie and McNaught stainless steel scouring machine costing £430,000 has been installed and is almost operational with test runs being undertaken.
It replaces two ole cast iron systems and will significantly increase production.
At wool blending, two new breakers are being fitted prior to the installation of an entirely new automatic blending system.
It is an exciting time for Douglas Reyburn which is undergoing a period of change that is the most significant in its sixty year history.
Meanwhile, production amidst all the changes continues at full tilt.
Another recent development, is the first phase of a £30,000 Beacon Control system in the dye house.
The dye vats themselves are now controlled by a computer which automatically operates valves, flow direction and controls temperatures.
Boiling over is now a thing of the past, dye bath levels are constantly monitored and an alarm is activated if any problems arise.
Automation however, goes no further as chargehands Joe Farquhar, Robert Long and their team load and unload the hanks of yarn and add dyestuff chemicals by hand.
Sam Rankin, ‘The Dyer’ for Douglas Reyburn, and Douglas Carlyle, Dye House Supervisor, choose and set the programmes on the computer.
A V.D.U.
displays the monitored statistics which are recorded for each dyeing.
In unison they agreed that the new system, ‘improves consistency and is a great asset’.
The quote is apt for a company that soon will be amongst the most modern and well equipped in the world.
Douglas Reyburn clearing the way for the future.
STEPHEN'S BREAKTHROUGH And the Patent is Applied for
Stephen Kunz, Technical Manager at Douglas Reyburn, has developed a new and unique method of dyeing yarns that contain many different colours.
No longer is it necessary to dye each colour separately and then physically blend them together.
By using the latest technology, he has developed a method to do it all at once.
The secret lies in the dyeing technique, using a method which is now in the process of being patented.
These colourful yarns, known as heather effects, are already popular and the demand is expected to increase.
It is therefore a significant achievement and bound to be considerable commercial value.
They are used in plain and patterned carpets creating a rich textured quality of living colour.
Many Stoddard Templeton ranges already use heather effect yarns so the benefit to the company could be considerable.
New scouring machine in operation.
Ian Presly (right) being interviewed by Radio West Sound.
The management team at Douglas Reyburn & Co.
Ltd., Kilmarnock, are shown gathered around the plans of the new building that will form part of the £5 million expansion.
From left to right are, Andrew Steel — Managing Director, Bill Cumming — Financial Director, Ian Presly — Chairman and Bill Brown — Production Director.
LONG SERVICE AWARDS
Twenty-five years loyal Service to Douglas Reyburn — that is what has been achieved by Mrs Isobel Tannock and Hugh Donaghy who are now amongst the special few who have each contributed a quarter century to the success of their company.
ISOBEL TANNOCK
Hugh is the Raw Materials Manager responsible for running the Warehouse, and the initial stages of yarn preparation namely scouring, blending and teasing.
He started as a student doing a summer job until he was offered a permanent position by the present Chairman, Ian Presly.
In those days Hugh prepared the blends of fine wools used in hosiery yarns, a specialist technique that is ‘now employed in the heather effect carpet yarns of today.
He is an expert in grading wools that come from all over the world and blending together the many different types for yarn production.
HUGH DONAGHY
Isobel works in the Spinning Shed and operates a Mackie Flyer, twisting together single strands to make a doubled or ‘folded’ yarn.
When given a choice for her presentation gift from the company, she chose an engraved carriage clock in preference to a watch.
The clock now stands beside the one given to her husband, who worked for many years at Glazier Metals Ltd.
Isobel's clock was presented to her by Bill Service, Personnel Manager, and is inscribed with ‘Twenty Five Years Service Douglas Reyburn & Co.
Ltd’.
APPOINTMENTS
With twenty-six years experience in the business, Robert Maxwell joined Douglas Reyburn in March as dyehouse supervisor on the nightshift.
Previously he worked for nineteen years in Kirkcaldy as a Shift Manager.
He is an expert in Package Dyeing; a method which is soon to be introduced to the dyehouse as part of the new expansion scheme.
With a B.Sc.
Honours Degree in Zoology, Gavin Hanna joined Douglas Reyburn during May as a Technical Manager Graduate Trainee.
After completing his studies at Glasgow University, Gavin worked for a few months at a salmon farm near Ft William, checking for virus infection.
Gavin keeps himself fit by doing weight training three times a week.
He lives in Kilmarnock and is engaged to be married next year.
GAVIN HANNA
Soon after graduating from Strathclyde University with a B.Sc.
in Mechanical Engineering and Marketing, Ron Pilkington joined the company in May as Trainee Production Manager.
In the short period before joining Douglas Reyburn, he worked for five months as an administrator with the National Savings Bank.
Ron lives in Gourock and is a keen sea angler and river fisherman.
RON PILKINGTON
HARROGATE EXHIBITION AWARD WINNER
Lyles carpets have won a prestigious design award at the carpet industry's main exhibition, ‘The International Carpet Fair’ at Harrogate.
Their new range being launched at the show, ‘Super Waverley Velvet’ was joint winner of Category 2 ‘Plain carpets in heavyweight quality’.
LYLE CARPETS LTD CUMBERNAULD
DEVELOPMENTS IN PROGRESS
Work is about to start on a new building that will link two factory units, presently separated by a gap.
It will make Lyles into a single factory and not split into three separate units as it is now with its warehouse inconveniently separated.
Contracts are being signed with the builders and the arrival of materials is imminent.
It is intended that a steel structure forming the skeleton will be erected over the Christmas period.
On completion of the link building, expected t take a matter of months, the external warehouse will be closed and its stock transferred to the new one.
Yarns will also be stored there, allowing more production space for the ‘Templetwist’ range of carpet that is about to be manufactured by Lyles.
A new 15 foot tufting machine is also being installed for this purpose, replacing one which originally came from the Glenvale factory in Paisley.
The new machine is capable of producing 800–1000 square metres daily and should be operational before the Christmas holidays.
The new extension at Lyles will be built in the gap between the two existing factory units.
HELP FOR THE HOSPICE ‘WONDERFUL’
From within the tufting department in Lyles, there comes a great generosity that has resulted in £400 being given to Strathcarron Hospice at Denny.
The money was raised for the purchase of a syringe driver, and in her letter of thanks, the Hospice Matron said: ‘These pumps are extremely useful, and give many people the kind of pain relief that is sometimes difficult to achieve by other means.
It is a tremendous achievement for the twenty-nine people of the department who all contributed towards the donation.
The good work however does not stop there, as another £336 has already been raised and this time will be used to purchase a wheelchair for the Hospice.
To raise the money, each member of the department donates fifty pence a week and at the end of every month, a raffle is held of goods that have been collected together.
It adds up to an amazingly generous £100 per month.
The collections are organised by John Cannovan, department supervisor who stressed that it was a team effort and that keeping the books straight was just a part of it.
In a message to all those who contributed, Miss Parsons, Matron at the Hospice said ‘It is wonderful.
Without people like you, we could not exist’.
The Tufting Department at Lyles, showing all those who contributed to raising money for Strathcarron Hospice.
APPOINTMENTS
After obtaining a B.A. degree in Accountancy from Glasgow College of Technology, Anne Raitt joined British Aerospace in Hull as a trainee accountant for one year.
It was in September that she joined Lyles as Production Accountant.
Anne now lives in Cumbernauld, her home town, and is currently studying in the evenings for the Chartered Institute of Management Accounts (C.I.M.A.) qualification.
ANNE RAITT
With a B.Sc.
in General Science from Dundee University, and a post graduate diploma in Industrial Administration, Martin Sloss joined Lyles in October as Production Planner.
Martin lives in Cumbernauld and to keep fit does weight training four times a week.
MARTIN SLOSS
LOYAL SERVICE AWARDED
Ron Gallacher, Production Director, has completed twenty-five years service with Lyles Carpets.
To celebrate the occasion, an inscribed watch was presented to him by Ralph Ellis, Group Managing Director and John Stewart, Managing Director of Lyles.
The ceremony was attended by the complete workforce.
Ron started his career by working in the laboratory of John Lyle & Co. at Fordneuk Street and also attended Kidderminster College.
Later, he moved to the Cumbernauld tufted plant as a technologist and has progressed through the ranks to become Production Director.
RON GALLACHER
IAN McCULLOCH PROMOTED
Ian McCulloch, appointed Company Secretary at Lyle Carpets in April this year, joined the company as an Accountant from Arthur Young in May 1986.
Ian had previously qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1983 with Downie Wilson & Co.
CA, and then moved to Arthur Young in 1984 to gain valuable post-qualifying experience.
STEPHEN HIND
Stephen Hind joined Lyles in August, shortly after leaving ‘Our Lady’ High School in Cumbernauld.
He is employed as an assistant to the Production Director and is attending a SCOTVEC day release course in Business Studies.
Stephen is a Badminton enthusiast and plays for the Seafar Club in Cumbernauld.
CREATING AN ENJOYABLE EXPERIENCE
Crucial to the success of selling carpets is the manner in which they are displayed in retail carpet shops.
It is at this ‘point-of-sale’ that consumers make their choice, a subject which has been carefully and extensively researched by Stoddard Templeton.
The result over a two year period is a range of display material that has been exclusively designed and manufactured, and is now available to retailers throughout the country.
‘The fundamental message’, states Michael Saulet, Marketing Director, ‘is that the name of Stoddard Templeton is synonymous with quality and one with which retailers can expect to profit.
For the consumer, it is to create a shopping experience that can be enjoyed’.
This accurately sums up the marketing policy and illustrates what is being achieved by the creation of the new point-of-sale material.
Research identified that retailers were using cheap methods of display which had been around since the 1950's.
There was significant room for improvement.
Three systems were then developed.
The Flagship Collection, consisting of modular units, was designed to make the best use of space against a wall, or free standing.
Completely versatile, they can create a shop within a shop.
Samples can be hung on a rod, in slotted pockets or placed on a lectern.
There are display panels, leaflet-racks and ample space for product and range information.
The Thistle Collection offers independent sample units which strongly brand the name Stoddard Templeton.
Different shapes are available, namely Waterfalls, Triple Tombolas and Lecterns, constructed in metal frames and painted in the house colours.
The Heather Collection has a dual role as a window or ‘in-store’ display.
Made of upright panels, they are mounted in attractive solid beech wood frames giving a beautiful surround to samples on pictures.
They come in sets of three or ten panels which can be arranged to any shape, the panels themselves revolving within the frames for even greater flexibility.
In addition, a service is also available whereby the displays themselves are erected by Stoddard Templeton personnel.
Currently, three full time merchandisers equipped with their own vans, operate the service, giving essential and rewarding support to retailers.
Can any retailer afford not to use it?
The Thistle Collection showing the new Waterfall (left) and lectern units.
Flagship Units
The Heather Collection.
Stoddard Templeton's new range of display material.
‘Where are we going for our honeymoon?’ she said ‘Glenmore.’
‘Where's that?’
‘You're standing on it.’
I replied.
A carpet costing around £33 per square yard may seem an unromantic substitute for a honeymoon.
But is may well be a sound one, if it comes from Stoddard Templeton, weavers of fine carpets since 1839.
The Stoddard Templeton range includes Axminsters, Wilton, Fusion Bonded and Tufted carpets.
All in rich wool.
Prices from £12 to over £35 per square yard.
And all are designed to provide something which every marriage needs: a lasting foundation.
At £26 or so a square yard, Cottage Collection may not leave you with a lot to spend on lavish celebrations.
But it does come from Stoddard Templeton, weavers of fine carpets since 1839.
The Stoddard Templeton range includes Axminsters, Wiltons, Fusion Bonded and Tufted carpets.
All in rich wool.
Prices from £12 to over £35 per square yard.
And all are designed to keep their looks, long after the initial outlay is forgotten.
INCENTIVE PROMOTIONS
The marketing department have been increasing the popularity of Stoddard Templeton products by using incentive promotions.
Since April, three major projects have been undertaken offering retailers the chance to win ‘Star Prizes’ such as a trip for two on the London to Venice Orient Express, or a Renault 5 ‘Campus Car’.
As with all incentive promotions, the rewards are only earned through increased business.
The promotions were a success and although the ‘star prize’ targets were not triggered, many more were presented such as calculators, cameras and sports equipment.
One lucky contributor won a week's holiday for two in Spain.
Each promotion was tailor made for a specific group.
Specially printed promotional material was sent to each retailer or delivered by the Stoddard Templeton sales force to further strengthen the promotion with individual shop staff.
Waring and Gillow sales increased by 55% in value during the ‘Choice is Yours’ promotion.
‘Metro Mania’ for the Metro group and ‘Target to the Top’for the ACG group were also well received.
Promotions give a boost to sales in the competitive market and support the overall marketing plan together with good quality, competitive prices, and excellent service — everything that Stoddard Templeton stands for.
Colour Sticks are a new sales aid from Stoddard Templeton replacing the outdated colour cards with a more convenient and stylish method which strongly brands the company name.
MILLIONS OF LEAFLETS DISTRIBUTED
T.V. Personality, Sue Pollard, presents the winner of a Stoddard Templeton competition with £5,000 worth of fitted carpet.
From left to right are Mike Smith of Mike Smith Carpets; Sue Pollard; prize winner Peggy Hopkins from West Sussex and Michael Saulet, Marketing Director of Stoddard Templeton.
The competition was organised in conjunction with Hoover and resulted in the distribution of 8.5 million leaflets promoting Stoddard Templeton.
The presentation was made at a celebration ceremony in London which was attended by four editors of the carpet trade press in addition to many others.
After winning her Stoddard Templeton carpet prize in London,(see story), Peggy Hopkins had a second celebration in her local carpet shop when she met film and stage star, Barbara Windsor.
Considerable publicity was achieved in both the local and trade press by the event.
In the picture are, from left to right, Mike Smith, Peggy Hopkins, Barbara Windsor and Michael Hanson, the Southern Regional Sales Manager of Stoddard Templeton.
NEW BROCHURE
Carpets of Quality is a new fourteen page colour brochure that will help potential customers understand what they need to know about carpets.
It explains how the different types are made and what the names mean.
Q Quality standards and hints on carpet care are given.
There is also a particularly useful section on stain removal.
The brochure is beautifully laid out and illustrated reflecting the quality image of Stoddard Templeton.
A short history of the company is also written on the first page.
Many brochures have already been sent out in response to requests from advertising.
They are used by representatives, and are displayed on the ‘Flagship Units’ within carpet shops.
Carpets of Quality Brochure
STODDARD CONTRACT
The Sales Team from Stoddard Mercia Contract is shown at their Annual Conference which was held at Elderslie in November.
The three day conference covered all aspects of selling, including a presentation from the Design Studio on latest developments and lectures given by fibre manufacturers.
Stoddard Mercia's stand at the Interior Design International Exhibition, where Designers and Architects from throughout the world view the latest in interior fashion.
New appointments to the Stoddard Mercia Contract Sales Force are, from left to right, Representatives: Philip Davis and Alan Jones; Contract Director Designate: Terry Barber; Managers: Kim Dyas and Jim Maxwell.
QUALITY FINISHES FIRST
All important to the reputation of the company is British Standard 5750, the quality assurance scheme set up by the British Standards Institute and to which Stoddard Carpets Ltd., were awarded full registration two years ago.
By displaying its attractive logo, customers are reassured when considering a purchase.
It is an mark of quality, which is vital in today's highly competitive market.
Altogether 16 carpet companies are now part of the scheme which has been tailored to accommodate the new European Standard ISO 9002.
Exports can therefore benefit in a similar way.
The scheme encompasses all aspects of production, supply, administration and sales.
Nothing is left to chance.
Independent inspections are carried out by the B.S.I. who send in experts unannounced to carry out checks.
Since registration, there have already been eight examinations, all of which were passed with flying colours, at all times, a company representative or deputy has to be on call ready to answer any questions.
Terry Hamer, Quality Control Manager, is the official representative with Keith Bill, Works Director; Ian Lamb, Chief Textile Technologist; and David Congleton, Textile Technologist, as deputies.
The extensively documented systems are updated by David Congleton, who recently attended a BS 5750 Auditors Course with Archie Hoey.
It also involves inspections and calibrations of process control equipment such as temperature and pressure gauges, each of which are labelled with dates of completed and future checks.
It is an example of the attention to detail which is characteristic of the whole BS 5750 system.
Many more people are also involved.
Laboratory staff carry out checks on all raw materials and finished carpets.
There are inspections during manufacture, carried out by Quality Controllers.
Robert Stevenson checks the first few metres of each weaving when it is removed from the loom.
Robert Hassan inspects all returns for their validity and between them, a daily check is carried out on the adjustments of each loom.
Tuners, Weavers, Managers, Supervisors, are all brought together if necessary.
Jim Hopkins is responsible for the final inspection of all goods before they are placed in the warehouse.
Two tables have been specially built for this purpose, allowing a large area of carpet to be viewed under daylight bulbs.
These measures form a large part of thee Q.C.
system but there are many more aspects for BC 5750 such as the after sales service.
Complaints are dealt with by John Phillips and his team.
John Sampson, Sales Administration Manager, with Bob Robson and many others, service customer enquiries and take orders.
Training manuals are updated by Pat McGrath in Personnel.
As the man responsible for BS 5750, Terry Hamer sums it up by saying ‘Quality is our watchword’.
BILL FREEMAN…
RETIRES…
Contract Director, Bill Freeman, who recently announced his intention to retire at the end of the year, started his carpet career with Stoddard in 1956.
In part of his retiral announcement during the Contract Conference dinner, he pointed out that thirty two years later he will also be retiring from the same company although much has happened in between.
In 1967, Bill and his wife Pam, sold everything including his house and insurance policies to set up a weaving factory in Cheshire which he called Mercia Weavers.
It was named, he said, ‘after the old Kingdom of Mercia in which it was located’.
In 1980, Mercia introduced narrow Axminster looms to  complement their Wilton Production.
Since then, it has grown into a major production unit in the carpet industry.
Originally, Bill set up Mercia Weavers with a partner, Frank Paterson, also an ex-Stoddard man.
The business flourished and in 1974 was bought by Parker Knoll.
He continued as Managing Director until it was bought by Stoddard Holdings in 1988 when he became Director of the newly formed Stoddard Mercia Contract Division.
In the period since his appointment, he has merged the two companies, their products and the sales force into the single organisation that is in operation today.
He hands over to his successor, Terry Barber, at the beginning of the New Year.
A ROYAL PANIC WITH A HAPPY ENDING
The new museum at the Bank of England was soon to be opened by the Queen.
Everything but the carpet was ready, the carpet that had been woven by Stoddard Mercia Contract.
It was there alright, woven to perfection, but it was not enough; the wrong amount had been ordered, through no fault of Stoddard Mercia.
Late on Friday evening, Bill Freeman, Contracts Director, was contacted by telephone.
He confirmed there was no more available and that a small addition would not colour match.
It was a situation where a complete remake was the only solution.
And re-made it was — nearly 200 linear metres of Decorum Wilton — completed in four working days.
The Runcorn factory had produced a miracle.
The first two bales were despatched on Tuesday with the balance on Thursday arriving at Climpson & Co.
Ltd., International Carpet Specialists by 6.15 p.m.
It was then laid just in time for the Royal Opening.
John De Grussa, Director of Climpson & Co.
Ltd., wrote to Bill Freeman afterwards.
In the letter it said, ‘I still find it hard to believe that such an order could be processed at such rate and standard.
Words fail me in praise of your company and its workforce.
All I can say is please thank ALL of those involved for all their efforts which got us out of one almighty jam.
FAMILIES OPEN DAY
On Saturday, 9th July, over 1,000 people came to the Families Day at Elderslie.
The initiative for this venture came from within the company, and employees in many departments organised and handled every aspect of the day.
The route went through all manufacturing departments and ended with tea and a sandwich buffet in the canteen.
Shortly after the event, Stanley Peters said ‘The response has been outstanding and we, as a company, welcomed the opportunity to meet families and show them the factory’.
‘People’, he said, ‘are our most important asset and recent successes are clearly attributed to the expertise and motivation at every level’.
To accommodate such large numbers, visitors were asked to arrive at different times, all carefully co-ordinated to avoid a jam.
Pat McGrath, Training Manager, was there with his friendly camera and Irish humour capturing the moment on film.
To add spice to the day's events, a draw was organised, the prize being twenty square yards of carpet, chosen by the winner from the ‘Cottage Collection’.
Each visitor had a chance to win when their names were entered using their personalised invitations.
The lucky winner was Lynn Tourish, whose uncle David Tourish and cousin Anne Tourish, both work at Elderslie.
Mrs. Mary Peters (Wife of Stanley Peters) and Father-in-Law
Linda Anderson, her Father Mr. Martin and children Tracey and Alison
Terry Hamer and Family
Miss Leslie Laughlin (Right) and Family
Hugh Stevenson with his wife Ann and Friends (Hugh and Ann are standing on right of group)
Hugh McFadden and Friends
Families Day competition winner Lynn Tourish (centre) chooses a carpet from the Cottage collection with the help of her parents
Sheila McWattie (left) and friends
Frank McGrory with wife and friend
FACTORY WALKABOUT
Many alterations have been made to the factory in recent years with new machines being installed, old buildings removed and departments moving from one area to another.
There is no let up to this activity as more improvements are made and even more planned.
John Cunningham, Chief Engineer, is responsible for co-ordinating these developments.
His team comprises of John Rafferty, Maintenance Manager; Arthur Clark, Project Engineer; George Huey, Maintenance Supervisor; and Jim Armour, Mechanical Projects and Development Engineer.
Between them, they do everything that is required to keep a large factory mechanically sound, safe from the elements and all services running.
From flooding to fires, engines to energy — it's all their responsibility.
On a ‘Factory Walk About’, the most recent developments are as follows:— at the ‘top end’, the old Wilton winding areas has become the pattern room which moved into its new location in April.
With the move came the carpet tile printing machines and the tile store.
It is much larger than previously, giving more room tot he business of sending out carpet samples to hungry customers.
The exterior of the whole building itself is also about to receive new cladding which will smarten up its slightly dilapidated appearance.
The Design Studio has expanded again with a new area custom built for their design computers.
Low level lighting creates a quiet professional atmosphere in which the ‘work stations’ and ancillary equipment operate in the high-tech environment.
Next door, another room has bee converted to house more of the latest technology, this time substituting a manual system of producing hand samples for a mechanical one in the shape of a ‘rapid pegging machine’.
This £15,000 investment makes small carpet samples about eighteen inches square for use by Architects and Specifiers when they ‘approve’ a design specially created for their clients.
Floppy discs from the design computer can be inserted directly into the machine enabling a sample to be made within hours instead of days.
In the ‘top end’ car park, a large brick shed, once a bonded development area, has been converted into a new garage.
Ramps have been built and large ‘garage door’ openings bashed through the walls.
A concrete area for washing cars has also been constructed.
The old garage across the road is to be demolished and sold.
In the main office block, the Chairman's rooms have been completely altered and refurbished to accommodate the changed caused by the formation of Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
The Managing Director's Office, having moved from the floor above, is now part of the new complex situated alongside the Chairman's office.
There have also been new security developments with the completion of floodlights ringing the exterior of the factory combined with T.V. cameras monitoring most areas.
An electronic security curtain is also working in the open area between dispatch and the new Jacquard Looms presently being erected.
At the rear of the factory the old settling tanks are being filled in.
Work has been temporarily held up as old drains are discovered and re-routed.
Lastly, the microscopic area of garden surrounding the factory is to receive more attention with the spring planting of shrubs in the area alongside Glenpatrick Road.
Jim Kelly (left) and John Paterson (right) stand on either side of their workmate, David Mitchell, who retired in September after twenty-seven years as Boilerman.
They are standing in front of the old Boilerhouse which is being replaced by new and smaller gas fired units within the existing factory buildings.
In his time, David has seen the change from coal to oil, and now to gas fired boilers.
CHRISTY RELIVES 1943 NIGHTMARE
When Paisley man Christy Welsh was released by the Americans from the hands of the  Nazis in Brunau, May 4th 1945, the last thing on his mind was a return visit to the little Greek island of Leros, where he had spent five days desperate fighting before being taken prisoner.
However, that is exactly what happened on the 7th of September this year when Christy, 65, from Kelburne Drive, was reunited not only with his British comrades but also the Germans he bravely fought against.
Christy went back across the sea for a ceremony on Leros to commemorate those who had died for their countries during the five day battle.
How, we asked him, did this voluntary visit compare to his treacherous stay on the island over 40 years ago.
‘I had a wonderful time in September’, said Christy, ‘and meeting up with my fellow British soldiers again as well as the Germans was very emotional’.
‘One German in particular, a Major Kuntz, actually remembered me operating from my Bofors Gun position all those years ago’.
Christy remembered: ‘Everyone was so friendly with each other— how very, very different from the wartime liaison’!
‘I joined the Argyll's in Paisley in 1939 at the age of 16, I told them I was 17!
After fighting with the 8th Army at El Alamein I was sent to Leros via Palestine.
I was there for 6 weeks before the German Paratroops arrived’.
Continued Christy: ‘A battle raged for five days before the enemy over-ran us, and I was taken prisoner’.
‘My father then received a letter from my Troop Officer telling him that I had managed to shoot down two Junker 52's and helped to sink a landing craft’.
‘From the Greek capital, Athens, we were taken by cattle truck to Germany — this is when the real nightmare began.
The prisoners were marched for thirty-four days, whilst carrying all our belongings, not to mention the blisters, from Kaisersteinbruch to Brunau.
Anyone who dropped-out was immediately shot by the  Nazis ‘.
‘I was certainly happy to see the American soldiers at Brunau’.
During his reunion, Christy visited the 2nd World War Cemetery on Leros where 183 soldiers are buried.
So, was the nightmare revisited worth it?
‘I wouldn't have missed it for the world’, smiled Christy.
COUNTING THE CHANGE
At the beginning of October, the Finance Department strengthened its organisation with several appointments.
Duncan McCallum was promoted to the new position of Financial Controller, while Craig Barrowman, who was formerly Commercial Accountant became Financial Accountant.
In the Management Accounting Section, Frank McGrory succeeded Duncan McCallum as Management Accountant and Mark Burns was appointed as Supervisor.
In the Purchasing Department, Eleanor Murray was appointed Supervisor.
As part of the overall restructuring, the Commercial Accounting Section was disbanded.
The Customer File Maintenance and Administration Credits duties were transferred to Retail Sales Administration along with the staff concerned.
Other transfers also took place with Stock Accounting being transferred to the Management Accounting Section.
In recognition of 25 years loyal service to Stoddard, Ralph Ellis, Managing Director (centre) presented inscribed watches to Anne Moore and Joe Malley (right).
The presentation took place in the canteen, where many previous holders of Long Service Awards were gathered, together with Directors of the company.
Anne Moore works in the Spool Setting department and Joe Malley is the Head Axminster Weaver.
Deputy Managing Directors appointed to Stoddard Group
Director Appointments
In September, two senior appointments were made.
Stanley Peters, the Group Production Director and Rod Turnbull, the Group Finance Director, have been promoted to become Deputy Group Managing Directors.
Stanley Peters has been with the company for five years.
Previously he was Vice President with International Playtex Corporation and has also been Production Director of a Dawson International subsidiary.
Rod Turnbull, also with Stoddard for five years, was formerly with Arthur Young, the International Accountants.
Stoddard Templeton 
ROD TURNBULL
STANLEY PETERS
JOHN HOOD In October, John Hood was promoted from his position as Works Manager to become the Director responsible for Manufacturing Services.
During the six years since he joined the company, he has been involved in many of the major changes that have taken place.
Production lines have been streamlined and modernised.
The Wilton weaving department was moved and centralised into its present location.
The old Wilton sheds were demolished and the Dye House relocated in Kilmarnock.
The new Gilbos automatic winding machines and jumbo hanks were introduced, and factory wide productivity bonus and payment by results schemes established.
These, and other changes, all contributed to the doubling of productivity within those six years, and he is optimistic that it could be trebled as a result of the fast, electronic and computer assisted information that is now available.
KEITH BILL Keith Bill took up his new position as Works Director at the beginning of October.
Keith, with twenty years experience in carpet manufacturing, joined the company as Chief Industrial Engineer three years ago.
Later, he became Production Manager before his present appointment.
During this period, many changed to production methods were completed and together with others he was responsible for the introduction of incentive schemes, revised staffing levels, and new inspection systems.
The reorganisation of the Pattern Room was also completed and the installation programme of the plant monitoring system was well  advanced .
He is now responsible for all aspects of production from Yarn Store to Warehouse.
APPOINTMENTS
LYNETTE L'HOMME One month after working for the company as a temp, Lynette L'Homme joined on a permanent basis in June and is now employed as a Purchasing Ledger Clarkess.
Lynette originally came from South Wales.
She moved to Scotland in May and is engaged to be married.
Her fiance lives in Paisley.
ALISON CONNAR Alison Connar joined the company in June following the completion of her studies at Reid Kerr College in Paisley.
She is now employed as a clerkess in Management Accounts section.
Alison lives with her parents in Foxbar.
DAVID KILSBY David Kilsby joined the retail sales force in September as Merchandiser for the Southern area which covers from Cornwall to East Anglia.
Previously, he worked as a manager with Goodman Carpets of Kettering and for five years with C. F. Harrison in Northampton.
He is a bachelor and lives in Wellingborough.
IRENE IRVINE After nine years as a legal secretary in Paisley, Irene Irvine joined the Export Department as a Shorthand Typist at the end of May.
She lives in Beith where she in on the committee of the Earl Haig Fund Charity.
AMANDA DIETZ There was no rest for Amanda Dietz who only took one off between leaving Johnstone High School and starting her new job at Stoddard.
She joined the Company in May and is employed as an Accounts Clerkess.
Her home is in Kilbarchan where she lives with her parents.
ALAN RUSSELL Alan Russell joined the Marketing Department as an Assistant in April.
Previously he worked with Strathclyde Regional Council in Paisley, and has also worked with Curry's in Falkirk.
He has a B.A. Hons.
Degree from Paisley Technical College in Business Economics with Marketing.
Alan lives in Paisley and is engaged to be married to Lorraine McDonald, a Research Fellow of Strathclyde University.
DAVID ANDERSON David Anderson joined the Company at the end of March as Product Technician in the Development Laboratory of the Design Studio.
Previously, he worked with English Sewing Ltd., in Newton Mearns and in the Research Laboratory of J.P.
Coats, Anchor Mills.
He is a Chartered Colourist with the Association of the Society of Dyers and Colourists.
David is married and lives in Thornliebank.
His hobbies include ski-ing, squash and tennis.
SCOTT STRUTHERS After obtaining a B.A. degree with Honours in Industrial Relations at Strathclyde University, Scott Struthers joined the Company on 21st September.
He is employed as a Graduate Trainee in Production Planning.
Scott lives in Uddingston and is a keen football enthusiast.
In his spare time he is an Assistant Secretary to the well known Premier League team, Hamilton Accies, for whom he writes the programme.
CAROL McDONALD After working for the Company as a Temporary Secretary for four months, Carol McDonald was appointed to the position of Clerkess in the Axminster and Wilton Yarn Preparation Office.
Previously, she worked as a receptionist in Friars Hall, Paisley, and as a Secretary with C.W.S. Engineering Works in Shieldhall.
It is not the first time that her family have worked at Glenpatrick as both her father and two of her aunts have also done so.
Carol lives in Gallowhill, Paisley.
DAVID CRUSH David Crush was appointed Chief Industrial Engineer when he joined the Company in June.
By coincidence, the day he joined was his birthday.
Previously, he worked with Elida Gibbs, part of Unilever in North West London.
David is a Member of the Institute of Management Services (M.I.M.S.).
He is married and lives in Gourock.
LESLIE McINALLY Leslie McInally joined the company in June as Secretary to the Commercial Director.
Previously, she worked for five years as an executive secretary with Balfour Kilpatrick, the Electrical Engineering Company in Renfrew.
Leslie has an H.N.C. in Secretarial Studies.
ANNE ROGER After eight years as a Product Manager with Robert Young & Co.
Ltd., Glasgow, manufacturers of animal health products, Anne Roger joined the Marketing Department in May as Product Launch Co-ordinator.
Anne has an M.A. degree in French and German from Glasgow University and a Post Graduate Diploma in European Marketing and Languages from Galashiels College of Textiles.
She is married and lives in the west end of Glasgow.
JENNY NEVILLE With a degree in Business Studies from Napier Polytechnic in Edinburgh, Jenny Neville joined the Purchasing Department in September.
It is her first job since leaving her studies during which she spent a year at the Headquarters of John Menzies as part of her four year course.
JOHN NEWTON After obtaining a Degree in Industrial Engineering at Paisley College of Technology, John Newton joined the Company in August as a Trainee Industrial Engineer, one month after leaving college.
He has recently attended a six week Institute of Management Services Course in Nottingham, to obtain his I.M.S.
certificate.
John lives in Glasgow, is an M.G. enthusiast, drives an MGB GT, and plays squash.
TOM REID Tom Reid joined the Company on 3rd October as U.K. Contract Administrative Manager.
Previously he has had nineteen years experience as a Commercial Manager and Senior Purchasing Executive with Anderson Strathclyde in Glasgow.
Tom is married with three children and lives in Carluke.
GEOFF.
HALEY Geoff Haley joined the Company in April to take up his appointment as Chief Designer in the Design Studio.
Previously he had been working as Senior Designer with Firth Carpets with whom he had gained eleven years experience.
Geoff is married, has a young family and has moved from his former home in West Yorkshire to Barmill.
He is a keen golfer and squash player.
ANDREW WALKER After graduating from Strathclyde University with a B.Sc.
in Mathematics, Andrew Walker joined the Company in August.
He works in the Industrial Engineering Department as a Graduate Trainee, and has recently attended a six week course at the Institute of Management in Nottingham.
Andrew will shortly be moving into a new flat in Dumbarton.
NEIL RUSSELL In December, Neil Russell joined the Stoddard Templeton sales force as a ‘merchandiser’.
He has over seven years experience in the carpet industry working with a number of major retail outlets.
His wife Jacky is a bank official and they live in Horsforth, Leeds.
Neil has recently completed an ‘A’ level course in Art at his local college and is an enthusiastic painter.
LISA McDONALD Following the completion of her B.A. (Hons) degree course in Economics and Business Law, Lisa McDonald took her first job with Stoddard, being employed as a Graduate Trainee in Management Accounts.
She now attends a day release course in Glasgow studying for stage two of the Chartered Accountants Examination.
She lives with her parents in Port Glasgow.
FRASER GORDON After spending nearly five years in the Middle East as a Sales Manager for Bremworth of New Zealand, Fraser joined the Export Department in September as an Export Sales Representative.
He has also worked with Goodman Direct Marketing in London and prior to that for five years with Templetons (British Carpets Ltd., as it was then called).
During that period, he also worked on export sales.
Fraser, a bachelor, lives in Kirkintilloch and is a graduate of St Andrew's University.
KIRSTIE ARMSTRONG Kirstie Armstrong joined the company on 3rd October and is employed at the Port Desk.
Previously, she worked for three months on a Youth Training Scheme after leaving Castlehead High School.
The factory will already be well known to Kirstie, as her father, John Armstrong, has worked at Stoddard for many years, and her sister Karen, works in Management Accounts.
Her uncle, George Mathieson, also works for the new warehouse.
The family live at Gallowhill, in Paisley.
STODDARD SPORT
Industrial Engineer Alan McDonald may be desk bound during the week — but at weekends, he's off performing feats that most mortals would regard as extreme.
Many would claim he does them rather well, by riding his motor bike with the style of a  bronco rider all in the pursuit of the ‘Scottish Trial Championship’.
This year Alan took ninth place, competing against the best amateurs that Scotland could produce.
The competition is on a points basis for eight separate rounds, of which he only missed one.
In each trial he won a trophy given to the top twenty percent.
Seven trophies out of seven competitions is certainly no bad going!
The last race in the series was held a few weeks ago near Gifford in which he was placed fifth.
Alan is not the only member of his family who is an enthusiast.
His younger brother Duncan, is a fellow competitor who finished fifth overall, putting him four places ahead.
The practise together in the hilly countryside of Morar which is their home.
Alan uses a Yamaha 250cc Trials Bike which he has modified himself.
Their season is now finished but he intends to compete again.
ALAN McDONALD — RIDES LIKE A COWBOY
GOLFING
It has been another successful season for the two golf clubs operating within Stoddard.
The Stoddard Golf Club — for those employed in the company — organised five events and the Glenpatrick Golf Club which is smaller and also has membership from outside the Company, organised four.
Results of the matches played during the season for the Stoddard Golf Club are as follows:—
Sir Robert Maclean Cup, a singles knockout competition was played throughout the season and was won by David McLeod.
Runner up was Jim Grandison.
The McGeorge Rose Bowl, a pairs knock-out competition also played throughout the season, was won by Archie Lang and Thomas McCluskie.
First of the away-day competitions, ‘The Robert Lambie Memorial Trophy’ was held at Crieff Golf Club on 23rd April.
Like the other competitions of this type, it was stroke play, three ball match with Bill Hamilton winning the day and Jim Hopkins, second.
The Simon Levinson Quaich was played at Auchterarder on 2nd July, with John McAusland as winner and Joe Kerr as runner up.
This popular event was again held in the Elderslie Village Hall on Friday, 18th November.
A total of 72 people attended the evening, made up of Golf Club Members and their guests.
As is traditional, the trophies which were won throughout the year had been saved for this occasion and presented to their recipients after dinner.
Ralph Ellis, Group Managing Director, presented the Sir Robert Maclean Trophy, Stanley Peters, the McGeorge Trophy, Rod Turnbull, the Simon Levinson Quaich, Ian Presly presented the Buchanan Trophy, and Jim Halliday, Past Captain, presented the Bevan Trophy.
Jimmy Shiels, the present Captain, presented the Glenpatrick Four Ball Trophy.
Throughout dinner and afterwards, an entertaining cabaret was provided by the well known ‘Country Dawn’ band with vocalist Lew Benedict.
NEWS
At Taymouth Castle Golf Club, the Beven Trophy was claimed by David Speirs with runner up again being Joe Kerr.
The Glenpatrick Golf Club holds the main golfing event of the year, or one that generates the most obvious competition, and that is the ‘Buchanan Trophy’, the inter-company match.
It was played at Caprington Golf Club, Kilmarnock, on 28th August and won by Douglas Reyburn.
The Glenpatrick Four Ball was won by John Matthews and Jim Hopkins with runner up Charlie Allan and John Gillespie.
At Girvan Golf Club on 21st August, the Autumn Cup was played and won by David McLeod and Jim Hair as runner up.
Lastly, the Spring Cup was played at Livingstone Golf Club on 4th June with David McLeod winning and Eric Price as runner up.
This year, the Stoddard Golf Club Committee is made up of Jim Hopkins, Secretary; David McLeod, Treasurer; Jim Hair, Social Secretary; and Eric Price, Jim Devar, John Rankin as committee members.
The Annual General Meeting of the Club is to be held in February.
The date is still to be confirmed.
BOWLING NEWS
Stoddards Annual Bowling Competition was again held at the Elderslie Wallace Bowling Club by kind permission of its president, Eddie Archibald, and members of the Club.
This year, the competition was played on Saturday, 10th September, and attracted 24 players.
It is called the J.R.
Walker Trophy, named after one of Stoddards late Directors, whose son Mr. Tom Walker, is the longest serving employee in the Company.
The event was arranged by Jimmy Guy with the help of Ian McMillan who organised the 24 players into two leagues.
It was by all accounts a good match and fair weather was maintained throughout.
The winning pair, Jimmy Douglas and Jim Cunningham, beat the runners up by one shot in the final.
It was, as Jimmy Guy said, ‘A close finish’.
Following the match, lunch was taken in the Clubhouse and a presentation made by Mrs. Malcolmson, wife of John Malcolmson, a competitor and former Club President.
Miniature trophies were  given to each of the four finalists.
In a letter to the ‘Glenpatrick News’ James Shiels writes…
As Captain of Stoddard Golf Club, I would like to thank all the members of the committee who have worked so hard to make it such a memorable year.
I congratulate all those who won trophies and I commiserate with the runners up and others, in the knowledge that it may be their turn next year.
It is very nice to see new faces on that Prize List this year and hope that it will be an incentive to others to follow their example.
We were unfortunate to lose the ‘Buchanan Cup’ to Douglas Reyburn in August — however we will endeavour to win it back next year!
To Jim Hair, I send a special thank you for the way he organised the Annual Presentation Dinner.
It was a great night and I'm sure our invited guests were all of the same mind.
In conclusion I would like to thank everyone concerned; tot he management and the golf courses we visited during the year and wish them every success in the coming season.
WINNING CAPTAIN Captain of the winning Ayrshire Cricket Team is presented with the Stoddard Carpets Challenge Cup by Rod Turnbull at Williamfield, Stirling on 25th June.
WINNING CHAMPION
Lost in France?
Not a Chance!
Stoddards Carpets Maintenance Worker Robert Kerr could never be accused of being a high flyer — but he certainly seems to be producing a few.
Robert is a pigeon fancier and a member of the Johnstone Social Flying Club.
In his fourteen years as a fancier he has converted a hobby into something of a triumphant campaign.
Robert has won many trophies in his time, flying pigeons from such diverse outposts as Gretna, Dorchester and Sartilly in France.
Said Robert: ‘I have 36 pigeons at the moment but they don't all race long distance’.
‘I look upon pigeon fancying as a very enjoyable hobby and, through the club, I have the opportunity to race my birds every week of the season, which lasts from March to September’.
And do the birds always come back?
‘Sadly’, says Robert, ‘some of them do get lost during the flight and I never see them again’.
Although with such a large number of birds, it's difficult to grow a particular affection for individuals.
Jim Muir bowling for Perthshire at the Stoddard Carpets Cricket Challenge Cup Final on 25th June at Williamfield, Stirling.