

House Newspaper of Stoddard Group
STODDARDS CLEAR WINNER
Stoddard Templeton Win Best Service Award
At the Blackpool Floorcoverings Exhibition, Stoddard Templeton were presented with an annual award for best service to retailers by the National Association of Retail Furnishers.
Three thousand members of the British Shops and Stores Association (which, since last Autumn has incorporated NARF), were invited to nominate the flooring manufacturer who has given them the best service.
In the face of such severe competition, Stoddards not only won, but was described as the ‘clear winner’.
Jack Millar, Stoddard Templeton's Sales Administration Director, accepted the award at a special reception at the exhibition held in the Galleon Bar of the Winter Gardens.
The award, commissioned by NARF, was designed to portray a floorcovering sample, arranged as a stairway leading to higher achievements.
Rod Turnbull, Joint Managing Director comments: ‘We are delighted to have received this prestigious retail award.
Great credit is due to all sections of the company which contribute to the retail operation and we will be striving very hard to retain the award by offering the retailer unbeatable service.
Jack Millar (right) Sales Administration Director, collects the NARF trophy awarded to Stoddard Templeton for best service to retailers.
Directors Promotions
Four Director level promotions have recently been announced.
Keith Bill (Works Director), Steve Higgins (Retail Director — Field Sales) and Jack Millar (Retail Director — Administration and Key Accounts) have all been promoted from divisional director level to full board directors.
Jack Millar
Terry Hamer
Steve Higgins
Keith Bill
Carpets With Curtains In Harmony
In a major new initiative, Stoddard Templeton has added soft furnishing fabric to its portfolio of carpet ranges.
After a successful pilot exercise last; year, the sales force is now introducing fabric to selected retail outlets throughout the country.
This venture follows the take-over of Sekers Fabrics in May 1988 and the development of stunning new fabric ranges which are being introduced alongside carpets under the banner of ‘Carpets With Curtains in Harmony.’
The trend for design co-ordination and harmonisation, together with the tremendous growth of interest in the whole concept of Interior Design for the domestic market, gives the timing of the initiative significant potential.
Emphasis has been made on colours being complementary rather than the overpowering theme of total pattern co-ordination, a distinction which is already proving to be a success.
THE NEW FABRIC DISPLAY UNIT
Fabric display units have been specifically designed for point of sale and, since the launch of the initiative in January, are being steadily introduced to around five hundred retailers nationwide.
Each unit contains over four hundred items, establishing a major impact on the market with a multi-style choice of plains, patterns, print, wovens and textured fabrics (although the fabrics are manufactured by Sekers, they will be sold under the Stoddard Templeton label).
To back up the launch, an impressive advertising campaign will be featured in trade and national magazines, such as Good Housekeeping, Ideal Home, Homes & Gardens and House and Garden, from May until the end of the year.
The success of the campaign will be maximised by sending each individual inquiry a list of stockists in their local area.
Stamp Accolade
To mark Glasgow's year as the European City of Culture, The Royal Mail is printing a set of stamps, one of which depicts the facade of the former Templeton Carpet Factory.
The famous building, chosen from several other noteworthy contenders on the Glasgow Green, was erected in 1892 — the architecture of which was modelled on the Doge's Palace in Venice.
Designer of the stamps, Paul Hogarth, commented that ‘Glasgow presents a wide spectrum of flamboyant Victorian architecture and it was quite a task to choose something symbolic that would make a good image on the stamps.
Templetons became part of Stoddards in 1981.
Since their manufacturing plant has been closed down and the building converted into the Templeton Business Centre.
The Templeton name is now preserved within the Retail Division of the company.
Altogether, there are four stamps in the set which become available on 6th March.
Apart from the Templeton stamp at 37p, only one other has a Glasgow theme.
It shows the School of Art by Charles Rennie MacIntosh at 20p.
Buildings from Edinburgh and London complete the remainder of the set.
The stamps were unveiled during a civic reception given at Glasgow City Chambers before Lord Provost, Susan Baird, and other distinguished guests.
Templeton Carpet Stamp
New Finance Director
In January, Ian Proudfoot was appointed to the position of Finance Director of Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
Ian had been Group Financial Controller since he joined the company in 1989.
Ian Proudfoot
Institutional Visits
By Ian Proudfoot, Finance Director, Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
In recent weeks you may have noticed groups of young, fresh-faced, well-dressed visitors being escorted round the site by  by directors.
Enquiry as to the identity of those visitors no doubt resulted in the response —‘Institutional Investors’.
The individuals are Fund Managers who are responsible for investment of their clients' funds.
To assist our understanding, it may be interesting to explain the purpose of these visits and what we think (and hope) they achieve.
Firstly, Stoddard Sekers International PLC is a public company whose shares are quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
The shares, within the rules of the Stock Exchange, can be bought and sold freely by individuals, companies etc.
Stoddard Sekers has 62 million shares in issue and you can find the daily share price quoted in many newspapers.
Over half our shares are held by funds such as Pension Funds, Investment Trusts and Unit Trust Funds.
The reasons for these Institutions holding our shares are, no doubt, varied.
What is certainly important is that we maintain the support of our investors (who in fact own the company) and satisfy them that their investment objectives are being, or will be, achieved.
In the UK alone, there are nearly 2,000 quoted companies to invest in and therefore plenty of other homes for institutional Investors cash.
It is in the company's interest to build up a relationship with Fund Managers in order that a position of trust and goodwill is created.
Of course, it is essential that we do not cross over the line of ‘Insider Dealing’ by giving privileged information.
How does the company communicate?
Investors have access to published accounts, interim results, Chairman's statements and any other public announcements or press releases.
This is largely financial information and it is helpful that investors also understand what the management is like, etc.
This achieved primarily by factory visits.
There are numerous demands on the time of a Fund Manager and we must make the maximum impact in the relatively short time available.
Organisation of the Visit.
Normally, the visitors gather together to meet PLC directors briefly before setting off on a guided tour.
In December, when 12 managers visited, they were collected at the airport and taken to Kilmarnock first of all, where Andrew Steel, Managing Director, conducted a tour of Douglas Reyburn's yarn, spinning and dyeing operations.
They were shown results of the substantial capital investment programme.
Then the visitors were driven to Cumbernauld where they were given a tour of Lyle Carpet's tufted operation by Managing Director, John Stewart.
Incidentally, Lyles did provide a buffet which visitors took ‘on the hoof’.
Next it was back to Elderslie to meet Rod Turnbull and Stanley Peters who guided our guests around Glenpatrick Works, before handing over to Bill Naysmith who performed the ‘piece de resistance’ tour of the Design Studio.
Finally, came a question and answer session with the Chairman, Hugh Laughland, Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis and other PLC directors.
Whew!
You will see that this a very  compreshensive and exhausting day.
But it is hoped that, aside from contributing to their understanding of the business, these visits leave a memorable impression of the company's commitment to Quality, Service and Design.
What does the company gain?
The  arrangments for and the escorting of the visits involves a considerable amount of time.
Whilst some time can be spent in ‘tidying up’ it is important that the high standards of housekeeping are maintained throughout the year and generally this is the case.
Any visitor should be able to observe without a special image being presented on the day.
The company and employees should be justifiably proud to demonstrate their skills and sense of purpose at any time.
Small things build up to give a positive lasting impression and provide the main opportunity to enhance the reputation of the company — in this every employee has a role to play.
Virtually all visitors have found the method by which tangled smelly fleeces are turned into a high quality Axminster carpet thoroughly fascinating.
They are intrigued by the process, interested in the machinery and most impressed by the skills of the people.
In conclusion, by taking the time to communicate with Fund  Manangers , an informed group of shareholders is developed who will be prepared to maintain their support of the company.
We have found in the past that visitors have been most appreciative of the efforts made to inform them and have also been most complimentary on what they have seen.
Communication must continue and standards must not slip.
Indeed, some Fund Managers have been so impressed that they have bought carpets!
Container Loads Of Logos
Brand new and shinning in the sun, this forty-one foot container boldly advertises the name of Stoddard Templeton as it travels daily between Lyle & Stoddard.
It is used to transport carpets between the two companies and to make special deliveries to important customers in Milton Keynes, given its capacity load of fifty rolls.
The company logo — which includes the Royal Warrant and a special effect showing the corner of a carpet turned back to reveal the label — was hand painted along it's length and emblazoned on the rear doors.
Even the tractor unit has been painted to match the container.
Built specifically to hold three roles of carpet along its length, it is larger than standard  modles .
The container was commissioned on a contract hire agreement with David Robertson Haulage.
Americans Buy Bonded Machines
After five months of modifications, overhauling and a complete refurbishment by Stoddard's own engineers and tuners, the latest Bonded Machine is on it's way to the Wellco Corporation in Georgia.
Once it arrives in America, a team of experts from Stoddards will set it up and help to train the new operatives.
This is the second Bonded Machine that has been bought by Wellco from Bonded Developments Ltd, a company jointly set up by Stoddards and Pickering Staplina.
Already, there are further orders in the pipeline as another machine has been bought by Shaw Industries of Dalton.
It will built from scratch by Pickering Staplina in their Lancashire factory.
Shaw have already installed an ex-Stoddard one-metre-wide Bonded Machine for development work.
Towards the end of the year, they sent eight of their technical staff to Elderslie on two separate visits for additional development work, using their own materials.
Shaw Industries are the largest carpet manufacturers in the world with a turnover of $1.25 billion.
Six separate presentations were made by Simon Fraser, Director of Bonded Developments Ltd., before the sofa was concluded, backed up with additional visits by Edgar Pickering of Pickering Staplina.
Stoddard's Engineering and Tuners will be well practised at crossing the Atlantic by the time these matches are established and running on the other side of ‘the pond’.
Communication Meetings
RESULTS EXPLAINED
During October, Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, together with joint Managing Directors Rod Turnbull and Stanley Peters held a series of Communication Meetings to explain the financial results.
Using graphics and an overhead projector to illustrate the talk, all companies within the group were visited on a hectic four day schedule.
Over ten, half hour meetings were held so that every employee in the group had an opportunity to attend.
To catch the various shifts, meetings ranged from 6.45 in the morning to 9.30 at night.
Bracken Twist
Stoddard Templeton's latest range was unveiled for the first time at the Brighton Carpet Exhibition in February.
Bracken Twist is a stunning new Tufted range of 12 colours, manufactured in 50% wool, 50% polypropylene.
Hard twist yarns give a textured surface in which the blending of coloured fibres produce a pleasing yet practical heather effect.
Introduced as a competitively priced range, it is aimed at one of the most popular sectors of the market where it has been well received.
It joins three already established twist ranges within the Stoddard Templeton portfolio, expanding the colour choice and price points to suit current market trends.
Other additions to existing ranges were also introduced at the Brighton Show.
Variations Tweed and Highland were each updated with two new colours, keeping them abreast of the latest trends in colour and furnishing styles.
American Eye In Elderslie
In a personal comparison with an American carpet factory, it is good to hear the things they say about us!
Recently, three Americans have been working in the Bonded Department at Elderslie as part of a deal to sell bonded machinery to the States.
Jeff Roman, Dave Morey and T.E.
Dyer, work for Shaw Industries Inc; the largest carpet manufacturer in the world, based in Georgia, U.S.A..
And they particularly admire ‘the way we work as a team’.
‘It's different with us,’ they said.
‘There is a more relaxed attitude here but it's just as professional.
People help each other more.
Back home they are always trying to pinch your job.’
It seems that both sides work just as hard, although holidays are better over here.
‘Somehow you manage to achieve the same goals,’ said T.E.
(he is always known by his initials)‘without the same  hastle .’
He added: ‘Our production is always putting on the pressure.
Things are much smoother here.’
Hopefully, it's our grass that is greener.
It's just good to hear it said once in a while!
The Americans who like the running style at Elderslie.
Public Relations Expands
As an important part of Standards marketing activities, a London based Public Relations Company ‘Condor P.R.
Ltd.’ has been appointed to promote the Retail, Contract and Export Divisions of the Company.
A team of four executives are now concentrating on obtaining coverage in the trade and consumer press on all subjects relevant to the company.
Information and photographs are sent to the editors on all new products and services.
In-depth articles on the Company itself and reporting on the latest innovative trends from the design studio, all form part of their activities.
In addition to product information, news stories have been distributed, such as the Gorbachov/Bush Summit on the prestigious Russian Cruise liner.
The Maxim Gorky being ‘floored’ by Stoddard Mercia.
The press release explained that the venue for this historic first meeting in Malta between the Presidents had bee fitted with carpets designed and woven by Stoddard Mercia.
To attract the attention of journalists specialising in home interiors, a press Show was organised in a London hotel to which thirty eight journalists were attracted.
These activities and many more are now resulting in valuable publicity, all of which helps to influence the sales and credibility of the Company.
Glasgow 1990 Carpets On Show
There is a lot of ‘Glasgowing on’ within the Company as preparations are being made to provide material for an exhibition that will be one of the major events within the Cultural Capital of Europe.
Famous carpets from Templeton's past are being assembled for display in ‘Glasgow's Glasgow’, an exhibition staged in the vaulted arches below Central Station.
This unusual venue was described by the organisers as being ‘rediscovered after two generations.’
The carpets, together with a Chenille loom and a selection of valuable hand painting carpet designs, will be displayed in an area representing Glasgow's industrial heritage of which the well-known Templeton's factory played a significant part.
A separate area is being given to modern day Stoddard, this time representing a thriving Company of significance with a long established history.
The exhibition, open from 13th April to 5th November, is the longest running event of the 1990 Celebrations.
After years of research, it brings together Glasgow's regional and international links covering; architecture, literature, the arts, theatre, industry, commerce and its people.
Super Sax Appeal
In marketing terms, it is known as ‘Brand Loyalty’ when satisfied customers return to make a repeat purchase.
If this loyalty is stretched over a period of 28 years, it is certainly worthy of note!
We can highlight an example of this in an extract from a letter recently received by the company.
It states:I am currently looking at carpets as I need to replace the Stoddard Super Sax in my drawing room which was purchased around 28 years' ago.
It has been, and still is, a source of considerable pleasure and satisfaction.
As quality carpet it still looks as good as ever (apart from two small areas of wear) in spite of being well used (I have five grandsons).
Letters like these are worthy of recording, especially when the writer from Camberley finished with a p.s. that concludes ‘As a satisfied customer, needless to say I have not even looked at any other .’
The writer was requesting advice on how she could obtain the same quality of Super Sax once again!
Promotions…
Stoddard Carpets Ltd. has promoted Stewart Roxburgh to the position of Marketing Services Manager for their Retail, Contract and Export Divisions.
Stewart has many years of experience in both graphic and carpet design, gained as the Senior Designer in the London offices of Stoddard Mercia, and previously as the London Contract Designer with B.M.K.
His extensive knowledge of products and promotional literature will further strengthen the substantial market activities of the company.
Stewart Roxburgh
Ronnie Wilkie has been promoted to the newly created position of Chief Designer responsible for each of the design studios within Stoddard Carpets Limited, Elderslie, Runcorn and London.
Since the acquisition of Mercia Weavers by the Stoddard Group in 1988, Ronnie has been Chief Designer of the Runcorn Studio which specializes in Contract carpeting.
His new appointment will encompass the Retail.
Contract and Export Markets.
Ronnie's design career spans 22 years, during which time he has worked with well known companies such as Templeton, Stoddard, Brintons and Mercia Weavers.
Ronnie Wilkie
Graham Courtney has been promoted from his position as Sales Representative for South West London and Surrey to become the Souther Regional Sales Manager, responsible for the Southern Sales Force of Stoddard Templeton.
(His appointment became effective on 1st November, 1989.)
Graham has been with the company for 25 years and to mark the occasion of his first quarter century achievement, an inscribed watch was presented to him by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive of Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
Graham Courtney
Douglas Reyburn
SPINNING INTO THE NINETIES
After the completion of a £5.5M development over the last two years, Douglas Reyburn is now firmly positioned as one of the most modern spinning mills in the business and the largest woollen carpet yarn spinners in the country.
Andrew Steel, Managing Director, looks ahead to the 1990's as a new era where the company can benefit greatly from these latest developments.
Capacity alone has already increased by over 30 per cent.
Each part of the production system is now well balanced and the new computer controlled lines have improved quality.
When combining the capabilities of both the established and new manufacturing plant, flexibility has also greatly increased.
Research and development into new techniques will continue.
Already, Douglas Reyburn has an established reputation for innovation with their specialised yarn effects.
These are used by carpet designer to create ‘something different’ in the market place.
No longer are spinning mills able to stand in isolation, they are, as explained by Andrew Steel ‘In partnership with the Design Studio, exploring new frontiers of design and texture.’
Although the bulk of production will be consumed by the group, there is still scope for external customers, a point he considers of special significance with the advent of 1992 and the potential of orders from Europe.
With the new machinery in operation, it is not only flexibility that has increased but also the ability to accommodate an increased diversity of product range.
Smaller runs of different products can be efficiently processed thereby complementing the requirement of their customers who themselves operate on tight stock levels.
Within the offices of Douglas Reyburn, there has also been reorganisation and complete refurbishment.
New carpets, partitions, desks and offices have all been installed, together with the creation of a much needed reception area.
During 1990, a package dyeing system will be installed that will greatly streamline the dyeing process.
This will further strengthen the company and ensure that it is well set up to face the next decade with confidence.
Andrew Steel, Managing Director of Douglas Reyburn & Co.
Ltd.
SIX STRIDE OUT FOR CHARITY
It took a healthy five mile walk for Elaine Ruxton and five colleagues from Douglas Reyburn to raise £200 for charity.
In her spare time Elaine does voluntary work for the local branch of the National Schizophrenia Fellowship.
During October, there was a well-publicised world wide campaign called ‘Walk the world for Schizophrenia’ in which the Kilmarnock branch of the charity took part.
The other ‘five mile’ walkers from Douglas Reyburn were George Campbell, Adrian Scott, Graham Richmond, Sandra McWhinnie and Wendy Little.
All had been recruited by Elaine and gave up one Sunday afternoon to complete the circular route around Kilmarnock for which they were sponsored.
The Provost of Kilmarnock, Mr Mills, and Councillor Stirling were both in attendance as many willing volunteers braved their blisters to complete the course.
Prize Draw Winner of a prize draw for charity, Lorraine McDowell is presented with a ‘Barnaby Bear’ by the representative for Barnardos Homes.
The draw, which was organised by the Social and Welfare committee, raised £100 for Barnardos.
25 OF THE VERY BEST
To mark twenty years of loyal service, Hugh Anderson was presented with an inscribed watch by the Managing Director, Andrew Steel (left).
The presentation was made in early December, a little over the quarter century mark which had been crossed in July.
‘In no way is it a finishing line,’ said Hugh, who intends to continue working as long as possible.
Hugh began as a chargehand in the Teasing Department, where he returned to become foreman after a few years in the Dyed Wool Blending Department.
He now works in the Warehouse, keeping control of the inward deliveries and outgoings of raw materials with the assistance of a computer terminal.
To celebrate the occasion, a small party was held at his home in Newmilns, given by his wife and family.
Although Ian Craig and Vivien Allan are both from New Farm Loch, it was not until holidaying in Blackpool that they met.
They were married on 3rd June at the Grange Church in Kilmarnock and after a reception at the Bellisle Hotel, Ayr, they re-visited Blackpool once again for their honeymoon.
Ian has worked with Douglas Reyburn for two years and is employed as a service operator in the Twisting & Reeling Departments.
Their new home is in the Willows housing estate, Kilmarnock.
Jeff Connell was married to Catherine McNeill at St Marnocks Church, Kilmarnock on 28th October, 1989.
Jeff works in the dyehouse and has been with the company for ten years.
He is a keen footballer and is a member of the Douglas Reyburn Golf Club.
His mother has been with Douglas Reyburn for twenty years, now working as a spinner in the mid-flat.
After the wedding, a reception was held in the New Farm Loch Community Centre, followed by a few days honeymoon in York.
Jeff and Catherine now live in their new flat in Harperland Road, Kilmarnock.
Jean Joyce (centre) was presented with a video cabinet, a crystal vase and two china figures from her fellow workers when she retired in December.
With her at the presentation was Nan McKelvie (left) and Jean Murray (right).
For the past eight years Jean has been employed as an office cleaner, having previously worked for fifteen years as a spinner in the ‘mid-flat’.
Contract and Export News
Export Is On The Up
In contrast to the U.K. Home Market, where consumer expenditure has been curtailed, Export Sales have risen substantially on last years figures.
‘Not only have sales risen, but market share has also improved,’ reports Export Director, Alex Montgomery.
The strategy of deciding to concentrate on the Hotel and Leisure Markets has proved to be successful.
This is highlighted by the high performance of Axminster sales which now account for the majority.
The Paris Office, opened early last year, is now consolidated with Bernard Violet managing a team of four agents.
‘A significant amount of contract work is now developing as a result of this activity,’ said Alex Montgomery.
This year has also been notable for a number of major contracts world wide.
Examples are: Brussels Airport, the Famous Players Theatres in Canada, Dhahran International Hotel, Bavarian American Hotel (Munich), Warsaw Hotel Group (Sweden), Milan Hilton Hotel, Lotte Hotels (Korea), and cruise liners from Russia and France.
New agents have been appointed in the U.S.A. and are now beginning to produce results.
‘A satisfying feature of our increased export activity this year has been the balanced nature of our business,’ said Alex Montgomery.
‘Europe has been particularly strong — North America has grown, out business in the Middle East has been rejuvenated and new developments in the Far East, particularly in Japan and Korea, promise well for the future.’
At the time of writing, Alex was visiting America on a hectic tour.
This is to be followed by another visit within a month.
Jim Grandison, Export Manager, has recently returned from the Middle East and Fraser Gordon, European Manager, is about to visit Paris and Austria in the near future.
Arsenal Football Club's famous emblem, the Cannon, has been used as a focal point in a specially designed carpet for 53 executive boxes, a restaurant, the sponsor's lounge and corridors in Arsenal's newly built stand.
A total of 2,000 square metres Wilton quality was laid.
For a prestigious London client who requested anonymity, this close-up of a carpet border shows the details on one corner of the carpet laid within a large reception area.
It is a fine example of Stoddard Mercia Contract's Custom facility, where a special design can be woven.
Stand and Deliver
On the joint Stoddard Mercia/Sekers Fabric stand at Decorex,(one of the main interior design exhibitions in London) are (left to right), Terry Mooney, Sekers Contract Sales Agent for Scotland; Kim Dyas, London contract Manager; Miss Sarah Barton, Sekers Contract Sales Representative and John Reeves, Contract Representative.
Open only to the trade, the exhibition is recognised as having an international reputation which attracts visitors from all major markets throughout the world.
This year, 10,222 visitors were registered.
Few carpet companies exhibit, making it an even more exclusive event for Stoddard Mercia amongst Britain's leading interior designers.
The stand itself was dark in character with an Italian theme of marbleized paint work and pillars, against which, white statues and pools of light provided a contrast.
A specially woven Chlidema Wilton with a border of bows and delicate flower tracery, formed an inviting centre on which visitors could freely circulate.
The Stoddard Sekers Stand at Decorex
Stoddard Fits The Forum
Glasgow's newest hotel, ‘The Forum’ chose Stoddard Mercia's contract carpeting throughout the reception area and two restaurants on the ground floor.
The £23m development near to the Scottish Exhibition Centre, overlooks the River Clyde.
Its all-glass structure dominates the sky-line, with wall to ceiling windows on the ground floor, flooding the main entrance and the carpets with natural light.
Special Axminster designs were woven, using a deep blue geometric style for the main restaurant and a small motif against a an open peach background for the remainder.
New appointment for Kim Dyas
At the beginning of October,Kim Dyas was promoted within the Contract Division to Southern Regional Sales Manager.
He is responsible for a number of Contract Representatives and will remain in charge of key accounts within his area.
WELSH SING ABOUT PRELUDE
Prelude quality Axminster carpet was lain throughout the new Heron Marsh Porterhouse restaurant in Cardiff.
Borders have been used extensively, not only to enhance the perimeters, but also to form larger squares within the design, providing a focal point in open areas.
Prelude Praised
Stoddard Templeton On Show
OVER 8,000 VISITORS AT HARROGATE
HARROGATE ‘89, the international Carpet Fair, confirmed it's world-wide status and drawing power by again attracting an 8,000-plus visitor attendance — 14.4 per cent of the visitors coming from overseas.
Harrogate 89 was the largest and most comprehensive exhibition ever, featuring more than 260 exhibitors from 14 countries.
Its registered visitors attendance  totaled 8,119 (1,167 from overseas).
Exhibitors reported that although the visitors numbers were slightly down on those for ‘88 — due to current trading conditions — their quality and purchasing power were of as high a level as ever.
Stoddard Templeton used the exhibition to launch a number of new items, including Applique, a tufted range of deep pile saxony carpeting, styled with a delicate pattern against an open background.
In addition there were nineteen new items introducing the latest colours and patterns to existing ranges.
Steve Higgins, Field Sales Director (right) makes some final points on the stand to the assembled sales force  befor the opening of the exhibitions.
Whilst visiting the stand, Chairman Hugh Laughland (left) is introduced to Jack Millar, National Accounts Director (right) by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive.
Design Wins Award
The latest edition to the Cottage Collection won a prestigious award at the Harrogate Carpet Exhibition in  Spetember .
The abstract design called Chameleon Slate was chosen against stiff opposition to win the Heavy and Luxury Axminster category.
Presentations were made by Carpet and Floorcovering Review, the leading publication of the carpet industry, at a special reception.
The award was collected on behalf of the company by Chris Elsmore, who created the design at the studios in Elderslie, Chris has worked for the company for four years and was trained in embroidery at Loughborough College of Art and Design.
Chris Elsmore collects an Award for the winning design at the International Carpet Fair in Harrogate.
Stoddard 
The new Applique range of carpets, launched at the exhibition, is shown to visiting customers by Sales Representative, Robin Saunders.
The Stoddard Templeton Stand at Harrogate, one of the most impressive at the show.
A Day In The Life Of…
Eddie McDermid, Territory 101
At 8.30 a.m.
I met Eddie McDermid outside Martin & Frost, one of Edinburgh's largest furnishing stores and an important account amongst Stoddard Templeton's three thousand customers.
It was the beginning of ‘a day in the life of a Stoddard Templeton representative’, one of the seventeen in the sales force that stretch throughout the country, each of whom would be following a similar routine.
As I approach his car, Eddie was already going through the appointments for the day, studying customer record cards on which each call is recorded.
Eddie explained that the day's work had started at seven o'clock the previous evening when two customers telephoned requesting samples.
These would have to be organised between calls, together with other admin details that developed during the day.
On entering the luxurious interior of the shop and making our way to the carpet department, there were friendly ‘good mornings’ from the staff who obviously recognised Eddie as a regular.
Here, Stoddard Templeton was well known; all the staff in the department having been on sales training courses at Elderslie, which they recalled with morale boosting enthusiasm.
After handing over a new Glenmore design requested b a consumer, Eddie discussed other sales enquiries and the latest news from Harrogate, the main carpet exhibition of the year, which had just finished.
Producing a screw driver, he set about updating the display units by inserting new designs and removing discontinued items.
These were customer built display units belonging to Martin & Frost, each requiring samples of a special size, all of which have been prepared using the computer p.o.s.
Placement Report that lists the samples within all Stoddard Templeton stockists.
Returning to the car, or as it could be called the reps' mobile office, there followed an impressive schedule of administration.
The call was recorded on the individual customer Record Card, together with any useful snippets of information.
Then, onto the Daily Call Report, which also logs all p.o.s. information.
At the end of each week, these reports, together with sales requirement details and car mileage, are sent to the Regional Sales Managers and Field Sales Director for analysis and action.
It was raining hard as we drove across Edinburgh to C & R Agencies, another important account.
Inside their specious showroom, Eddie tackled our largest portable display unit ‘The Triple Tombola ’.
It contains samples of all Stoddard Templeton ranges and was custom built for the purposes of branding the name effectively from all angles.
It stood noticeably prominent amongst a room full of competitors' display units in all shapes and sizes.
Reaching for his case, Eddie produced an iron to replace and smarten up dog eared  lables , using it to smooth them back onto the sample.
The socket of course was out of reach, but again the case provided an extension lead.
Next came an aerosol of ‘Super Dazzle’ polish, the latest weapon in the armoury of Stoddard Templeton Salesmen.
This was introduced by Steve Higgins, Sales Director, at the last conference to ‘make sales sizzle with Super Dazzle.’
It worked.
Carpets, being a dusty product makes display stands look neglected, but after this treatment it stood out amongst its rivals.
When finished, the display unit fulfilled its role to reflect a quality image, a necessary advantage in an overcrowded market and one evidently appreciated by the showroom manager with whom Eddie discussed the changes that had been made.
The telephone was then borrowed to order those samples that had been requested the previous night.
Life on the road.
Eddie McDermid tackles the administration side of being a salesmen using his car as a mobile office.
Back in the car once again, Eddie explained that his sales calls were all carefully pre-planned.
Like other representatives, his area was extensive, stretching from Thurso in the North to Berwick on Tweed in the South.
Geography along necessitated careful organisation which followed the company policy of a five week selling plan.
It means that each customer is visited at least once and the large ones perhaps two or three times during the period.
To cover such a large area, Eddie stays away from home for seven nights out of the twenty five in each cycle.
Being a Friday, he was already considering the plan for next week, when he would be away from home for five nights, visiting Inverness, Thurso, Elgin, Brora, Wick, Tain and Huntley.
During his absence, his wife Frances would record the many telephone calls from customers requiring help.
This is part and parcel of a salesman's life.
The next call took us to Great Mills in Portobello, a suburb of Edinburgh running along the coastline towards Musselburgh.
Here Letham Carpets operate a shop-within-the-shop as they do in other Great Mills branches.
New samples were carried and added to the display, labels were checked and ironed and the large Triple Tombola given the ‘Super Dazzle’ treatment.
Details of a promotion were discussed with the manager, a promotion in which he expected to do well having sold a considerable amount of Stoddard Templeton carpet.
Figures were compared and checked against those provided from the computer print-out, leaving the manager optimistic about his potential success.
As there is no photo of Eddie's garage, this illustrates a similar scene.
Stuart McCall, Sales Representative for Gloucester relaxes at the weekend organising carpet samples in his garage.
A total of eight calls were made that day and although a routine became evident, it was never repetitive.
Whilst updating the successful Mark 1 Flagship unit at Vogue warehouse, Eddie's case produced even more tools.
Like Pandora's box, from it came a screw driver, a Stanley knife, scissors and an adjustable spanner, all of which were used to keep the Stoddard Templeton units in tip top condition.
Although the practical side is vital, the subtle sophistication of selling throughout each call was never lost.
The retailer also expects support and this was visibly given.
With many years of experience, Eddie handled each situation as exampled in the last call of the day at Carpetwise, when Dave Walker, the proprietor jokingly strangled Eddie because of a delivery problem This was instantly resolved by a telephone call to head office and followed up with a discussion on the test marketing of Stoddard Templeton's new fabric venture.
This is a collection of Sekers fabrics that will add a whole new dimension to the activities of the sales force.
Eddie McDermid gives a Triple Tombola Display Unit the ‘Super Dazzle’ treatment.
A man for all carpet needs — and Eddie shows that he always has what it takes to make samples look good, including an iron!
With the last call complete, Eddie returned to his home near Dumfermline.
Like all representatives, his garage acts as a warehouse for samples and spare parts.
Although now Friday night, he will spend a considerable amount of time sorting the samples and equipment for his Northern trip next week.
There is, it seems, a lot more than just the day — in the life of a salesman.
Lyle Steps Up Production
Completion of the new extension, which now connects two factory units into one much larger complex, has meant considerable reorganisation within Lyle Carpets.
The ‘link building’ as it is aptly called, houses the warehouse, yarn store, dispatch, a new canteen, and above it a new sales office.
The £650,000 investment funded by the Cumbernauld Development Corporation, in conjunction with Lyle, has been fully operational since September and is well timed to coincide with a considerable increase of activity within the company.
Two-shift working has been introduced on the tufting machines, creating additional jobs, all of which involved training of new recruits.
A £60,000 tufting machine was installed in January, again increasing the production which is approaching 60% up on last year.
Modernisation and an extension to the backing plant has improved quality and removed a potential bottle neck as the volume increase has been matched by a faster throughput.
Administrative systems have also been subject to an extensive review.
Greater emphasis has been placed on the use of computers and V.D.U. 's to streamline both sales and production systems.
The review by Allan MacIntyre, Group Management Services Director, involves a considerable amount of time and inter-company co-operation with staff being trained on similar systems in operation at Elderslie.
The new style canteen has been well received.
Lyle's new warehouse.
Doubles for Charity
Once again the Tufting Department at Lyle has been supporting the Strathcarron Hospice with continued generosity.
Thousands of pounds have been collected over a number of years, resulting in items of new equipment that have each been featured in previous issues of Glenpatrick News.
More recently, they have contributed towards the services of a much needed nurse, and it is for this cause that they continue to donate a set sum each week together with raffle sales and other activities from which they will soon reach their target of another £600, the same sum that was given earlier this year.
Good news has also come from the government who have recently announced that they will match pound for pound any money raised by the charity and donated to a hospice.
It will mean a significant boost for Strathcarron and for the Tufting Department — their efforts will have doubled the effect.
Bill Johnson Retires
At a special presentation during the Harrogate Carpet Exhibition, Bill Johnson retired after forty nine years in the carpet trade.
For the past ten years, Bill has been with Lyle Carpets as Sales Agent for the Midlands Region.
His career also includes twenty two years with the sales force of Stoddard of which he became a regional Manager.
The presentation took place in the St George Hotel and was attended by many of his colleagues.
A set of Edinburgh Crystal glasses and a decanter were presented to him on behalf of Lyles by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive of Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
His wife, Marie, was also presented with a large bouquet of flowers by John Stewart, Managing Director.
Bill is well known, not only in the carpet trade but also as an actor.
For twenty five years he has been a member of Equity and has played a different number of roles.
Recently he has taken part in an advertisement for Skol (amongst others) and will be appearing in Howard's Way, in, as he modestly called it, ‘a walk on part.’
Following the presentation, a farewell dinner in a nearby hotel was given to Bill and Marie, attended by his colleagues at Lyles.
Ralph Ellis (left) presents Bill Johnson with a set of Edinburgh Crystal Glasses.
Bill Johnson was joined by his wife Marie for his  retiral presentation.
Wedding Bells
It was four years ago that Billy Wright was Best Man at his cousin's wedding and were he first met his future wife.
Billy, who operates a Tufting Machine at Lyle Carpets, has been with the company for two years.
He was married in September to Ann Henderson.
The wedding took place at Newart Hill Church and afterwards, the reception was held nearby in The Newhouse Hotel.
They now live in Cumbernauld after spending a two week honeymoon in Torquay.
Bernadette Quigley operating the new £60,000 tufting machine.
New Appointment for Gordon
In February, Gordon Bowers was appointed to the newly created position of Commercial Manager at Lyle Carpets for the purchasing and control of all materials.
Gordon has extensive experience of the textile industry, specialising in production and planning control.
He has also worked for a period, several years ago with the dye house production control at Templetons.
Gordon also worked for a number of years as a P.C. with the Glasgow Police.
Gordon lives in Rutherglen, is married and as a hobby, is a keen yachtsman.
Christmas Party
Just over one hundred children came to the Christmas Party that was held on Saturday 16th December, on a day remembered for its appalling weather.
For the second year running, the company hosted a party that was greatly enjoyed by all.
Because of its popularity the party had to be restricted to those aged between four and eleven years old.
The party was held in the canteen, bedecked in decorations with many activities, that ensured the children were occupied all afternoon.
Santa was there handing out presents.
There was a painting competition, a disco and a clown.
It was non-stop activity as one event moved on to the next, together with a feast of fizzy drinks, buckets of ice cream, crisps and many balloons.
Masterminding the organisation was Hugh McDougal, Personnel Manager, Alec McCaig, Union Secretary and the welfare committee.
Helpers were also involved who included, David Armstrong, Helen McGlaughlin and Bridie Murnay.
Disco dancing was fun with a D.J.
organising games such as pass the parcel and spotdancing.
The painting Competition was won by Eric Gavin and Christopher Houston for the 7–11 year olds.
Each was given a bedside clock as a prize-winner — just to make sure they get off to school on time!
Karen Spiers and Allan Stewart — both aged 5, won the junior prizes, each receiving a toy.
Hugh Caulfield from the Crabtree department, was dressed up as Santa, looking magnificent in his robes and fine beard.
Each child was given a present and to go with it a box of sweets.
As noticed by all, there were some particularly good presents of which Santa's toy factory would have been proud.
In front of Kings and Queens, one party-goer enjoys the taste of Christmas.
‘Are you sitting comfortably?’ said the clown.
Laura McCaig gives Santa a big kiss
Their First Quarter Century
To mark the occasion of twenty years' loyal service to the Company, ten individuals were presented with watches at the annual Long Service Awards presentation held in December.
In his speech to the assembled guests, Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, referred to the experience of the work force as being one of the Company's most important assets.
‘In these times of stiff competition and a market that is less favourable than in previous years, competitors are turning in less good results,’ he said.
‘How do we do it, is the question that is asked, and the answer lies in the fact that we have experience in depth.’
Ralph Ellis continued: ‘We have been there before; we are, as recently reported in the Scotsman newspaper — Case Hardened.’
After these words, Mr Ellis then presented each long service employee with an inscribed watch.
Those presented were Annie Bogle, May McGratten, John Reilly, Robert Blackwood, Alfred Manuel, William Houston, Donald Stewart, Matthew Murney, John Clelland and Graham Courtney.
The Long Service presentations are an annual event to which everyone with twenty five or more years' service is invited, together with the immediate family of those receiving their award.
In a recent survey for the Glenpatrick News, it showed that twenty percent of the Elderslie workforce have twenty five or more years service.
About 120 people attended, including many retired employees who are also an important part of the assembly.
It was held in the canteen where tea and cakes were served after the ceremony.
(Although a group photograph was taken, it sadly did not come out — Ed).
Runcorn Roundabout
Two additional narrow width Gripper Axminster Looms have been installed.
It was a tight fit and  manouvering them into position proved to be a taxing job.
Eric Aspinwall and Ian Lofthouse, both weavers on one of the looms,(opposites shifts), had appendix operations immediately following one another.
The loom under suspicion has been cleared of involvement as they are now back at work, fit and well!
Storage problems have been alleviated by the arrival of two large containers which have now been waterproofed and painted.
The resulting extra space means that the Electrical Department obtains a permanent base with new work benches.
Damien Amos returns to work in the Design Studio after a two year break into the music business: He plays bass guitar with a group that recently recorded an album.
Jacquard cards for a complicated Swedish order are cut by Mrs Wendy Connolly who has been with the company for ten years.
From the Lomax family, both father Eric (pictured above) and son Joe are weavers.
Eric Aspinwall, weaving for an export order to Sweden, operates one of the newly installed Gripper Axminster Looms.
Heritage Loom
A traditional narrow width Wilton loom has been donated by the company to the Royal Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh.
The old loom, it's exact age unknown, is no longer of any commercial value and was given to the museum at the request of their Curator for Engineering and industry.
It will, when space allows, be put on display representing an important part of Scotland's textile heritage.
…new appointments…new appointments…
The Contract Division has been strengthened with the addition of Tony Horner to the sales team covering the London area.
Tony, who previously worked with Meria Weavers, managing the London showroom, returnes to the company after eighteen months.
He was married in June and lives in Watford.
Tony Horner
Chris Stanley has also joined the Contracts Division as Representative for East London, Essex, Sussex and Kent.
Chris Stanley
John Coppard joined the Retail Sales Force of Stoddard Templeton as Representative for area 212, covering West End and South West London and parts of Surrey.
John has eighteen years experience in selling carpets with Allders of Croyden, working his way up from trainee Salesman to Carpet Department Manager.
He is married with two children, lives in South Croydon and as a hobby, is a keen fisherman.
John Coppard
Brian Pask has been appointed the Contract Sales Representative for the East Midlands and East Anglia.
Brian has over sixteen years experience in the floorcovering industry, including working with a firm of specialist Contract Interior Designers.
He lives in Leeds, is married and is a member of the local indoor Cricket League.
Brian Pask
Glenpatrick War Hero Karl Retires
After forty years service, Karl Ptak retired from the company in September.
He recalls with amazing clarity his first day, Sunday, 1st April, when he started on the night shift as a bank boy, keeping the looms supplied with coloured yarn.
Later, he became a weaver and then moved to despatch where he remembers sending ‘tons and tons’ of carpet to America on the first Friday of each month.
He also worked in Walkinshaw Street and Caledonia Works in Johnstone and Paisley (both now long closed) before returning to Glenpatrick as a supervisor.
In 1983 he became Axminster Winding Supervisor during the period when the new Gilbos Winding Machines were installed.
In 1986 he moved departments to become Supervisor in the Yarn Store.
On his retiral, Karl was presented with a Video Recorder by Joint Managing Director, Rod Turnbull, on behalf of the Company.
Unknown to many of his colleagues, Karl had a remarkable experience during the second world war as a member of the Polish Resistance in his native France.
He is the proud holder of the Gold P.O.W.N. medal (Polish Fighting Organisation for Independence) after blowing up railway bridges, cutting down telephone lines and destroying all forms of communications to hold back the German advance.
He later left France to join the Polish Army in Britain and while in Johnstone, he met his wife and decided to settle in Scotland at the end of the war.
His wife and three sisters have also worked in Stoddards.
Rod Turnbull, Managing Director, and Keith Bill, Works Director,(centre) present Karl Ptak (left) with a video recorder on his retirement after forty years service.
FAREWELL
John Cunningham, Chief Engineer, bids farewell to Margaret Love who retired in October, after sixteen years' service as office cleaner.
Margaret was given gifts by many of the staff who also contributed towards a presentation made to her in the showroom.
Her fellow workers also gave her a retiral dinner at a Renfrew restaurant and a gold chain as a memento.
After 40 years with the company, Sammy Cook retired in November.
Recognised for his vast experience as Head Tuner in the Crabtree weaving department, Sammy has seen many changes take place since he joined Stoddards in 1949.
He started as a Tuner in what was then the Gripper Jacquard section, becoming supervisor in 1966.
During this period significant changes were made to the Axminster looms, reconverting them back to two shot weaving and so making great advances in both quality and efficiency.
Sammy's first cousins are also members of the workforce.
George Ballantyne as plasterer and slater and William Ballantyne as joiner.
Before leaving, Sammy was given two presentations, one by the managers, superintendents and his colleagues, and the other by the directors.
At both, he received cheques with which he intends to purchase a camera, some carpets for his house and perhaps enjoy a holiday with his wife Margaret.
Spain is their favoured destination.
He was also delighted to be given a bottle of whisky from his colleagues at Runcorn.
Sammy is already an accomplished player of the electric organ and looks forward to having more time for this and volunteer work.
He is also threatening to join the local bowling club.
On his retirement, Sammy Cook (right) is bid farewell by Rod Turnbull, Joint Managing Director, who presented him with a leather wallet containing a check.
RECENT PROMOTIONS WITHIN STODDARDS
Mairi Marshall
From: Pattern Room Manager
To: Assistant Manager, Quality Control
John Bruff
From: Warehouse Supervisor
To: Pattern Room Manager
Jackie White
From: Crabtree Supervisor
To: Assistant Weaving Manager
Malcolm Blair
From: Crabtree Tuner
To: Head Tuner
Ann Dickson
From: Spool Setting Supervisor
To: Assistant to Preparations Manager
Arthur Breen
From: Warehouse Supervisor
To: Senior Warehouse Supervisor
James Weir
From: Crabtree Weaver
To: Shift Supervisor — Crabtree Department
Alex Ritchie
From: Dyed Yarn Store Supervisor
To: Warehouse Supervisor
On his 65th birthday in October, Malcolm Macdonald was presented with a Music Centre from his colleagues on his retiral, after 24 years' service.
Malcolm, who worked as the ‘Hyster Driver’ in the warehouse, is shown shaking hands with Alec Shaw (right), Warehouse Manager, together with many friends who gathered to wish him farewell.
Subject To…
Her Majesty's Pleasure
As a mark of recognition, the Royal Warrant is known and respected worldwide, and as such, it is of tremendous value to those companies that proudly display the Royal Crest above their name.
Stoddards Carpets Ltd. were appointed as Royal Warrant holders in 1966 and since then the crest has always been displayed whenever possible.
Rules regarding its use are strictly monitored by the Royal Warrant Holders Association.
They confirmed that of those many companies within the United Kingdom, only 850 have been granted permission — of which an exclusive six are in the business of carpet manufacturing.
The Warrant, although used by a company, is always granted to an individual — which, in the case of Stoddard Carpets Ltd., is Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive.
He is held personally responsible for complying with the many rules and regulations that govern its use.
Once appointed, a company belongs to the Royal Warrant Holders Associations which states as its aim to continue those virtues of quality and reliability which initially gained them their Royal Warrant of Appointment, the retention of which is entirely subject to Her Majesty's Pleasure .
Many of Stoddard's carpets have been used in the Palace of Holyrood House, in the private apartment and in the Throne Room itself.
Tartan carpets have been laid in Balmoral.
In London, Buckingham  Place has had special designs woven for its splendid interiors.
Should regular supply cease, the Warrant would be withdrawn.
In addition to the Warrant itself, member companies are expected to attend the exclusive Annual Warrant Holders dinner, inviting a limited number of their important customers as guests.
Last year, in November, 1,600 were present in Grosvenor House, London, seated at 158 separate tables.
It was a formal ‘white tie’ occasion where medals, tail suits or kilts were worn.
Along with such famous names as Rolls Royce, Cartier, Jaguar and Aspreys, Stoddard Carpets Ltd., were represented by their directors, of which the Chairman and two others proudly wore their kilts.
A number of important customers were invited as guests of the company.
Family Forum
In the Hassan family, carpet manufacturing could be said to be a team effort where one loads, another weaves and another would then inspect.
In addition, another family member could be said to ‘weld’ it all together.
Richard Hassan is the longest serving member, with twenty eight years to his credit.
At fifteen he became a bank boy, later to become an  axminster weaver until redundancy in 1974.
He returned within a year to a different job as a threader and then ten years later he became an Axminster weaver once again.
Amongst the group of ‘threaders’(who attach spools of yarn to the loom) is his cousin, Willie Henderson.
And to inspect the carpet when woven, there is his nephew Robert Hassan, a Quality Control Inspector.
Willie has completed 25 years service, also starting as a bank boy, then via spool setting to become a weaver before he was made redundant at the same time.
Likewise, he returned a year later to become a threader.
About that time Robert Hassan joined the company to work in the Pattern Room.
Ten years later in 1983 he joined the newly formed quality control team as an inspector.
Robert is a keen footballer, playing for Stoddard's team in the Paisley and District five-a-side league.
The fourth member of the family team is Adam McFarlane, a brother in law of Richard Hassan, who has been with the company for 8 years.
Adam works in the engineering shop as a welder.
He is also a keen footballer and for the past 18 years has run the Johnstone United Boys Club, where Robert Hassan once played as a teenager.
Ann Marie Ritchie is also related to the family-Willy Hassan is her uncle!
Ann Marie has worked as an assistant in the laboratory for three years.
She is engaged to be married in July.
From left to right: William Hassan, Richard Hassan, Ann Marie Ritchie, Adam McFarlane and Robert Hassan.
Cash For Kids
In response to the Radio Clyde ‘Cash for Kids’ appeal, Nancy Clark, post desk clerkess, organised a collection which resulted in a cheque for £236 being sent to the appeal.
Throughout the year, small change was collected by the post desk, but in November, Nancy took the collection tin around the offices where staff contributed generously towards a total of £136.
The company them added a further £100.
Although running at the same as the national Children In Need Appeal,Cash for Kids is organised locally by Radio Clyde, and the money is used to provide special Christmas treats or presents for needy children throughout West Central Scotland.
The Shaw's Have Staying Power
Alex Shaw and his wife Jean have worked with the Company for a combined total of approximately sixty five years.
This impressive record began when they both joined in 1950, Alex as a bank boy in the Wilton department and Jean as a trainee in Spool Setting.
They were married six years later.
By this time, Alex, a Wilton Weaver to trade, had also qualified in Gripper Axminster — an unusual combination in those days brought about by the unexpected shut down of Wilton manufacturing during 1951/1952.
Alex recalls the old Wilton sheds, now demolished, which stood in the open ground behind what is now the Glenpatrick Mill Shop.
At the time, there were one hundred and twenty looms in various sizes from 10′ 6″ wide (20 quarter) to 18″ wide (2 quarter) in his department, all belt driven with many dating back to 1900.
In 1973, after 22 years, he then moved to the warehouse as Superintendent, becoming Warehouse Manager in 1986.
Apart from a ten year break to raise a family and one other short break, Jean has also worked continuously, mostly as a Spool Setter and then as a Colour Counter, calculating the percentage and number of colours used in each new design.
This was done manually until the introduction of Computer Aided Design which does the calculations instantaneously.
Jean now works in the Design Studio making hand samples for special designs and development work, although occasionally she is still called upon to ‘colour count’.
Not unexpectedly, with Stoddards being a large employer in the local area, one of their children, Elizabeth, also worked at the factory for a time.
Alec also recalls that his grandfather had been a bank boy with the company for a short period many years before he and Jean began their employment.
Alex and Jean Shaw — together they have had almost sixty years with the company
STODDARD SPORT
GOLFERS IN THE SWING
The Annual Dinner of the Stoddard Golf Club was held in November at its traditional venue in the Elderslie Village Hall.
Many people attended the popular event which also includes the presentation of trophies that have been won during the year (see photo).
‘It was a very successful and enjoyable evening,’ said Jimmy Shiels, Club Captain.
Following the dinner, a slide presentation of some of the matches held at Auchterader were shown by Pat McGrath who had captured the day on film — some of which had been published in the previous issue of the Glenpatrick News.
Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis, Joint Managing Director, Rod Turnbull, Retired Chairman of Douglas Reyburn, Ian Presly; Managing Director of Lyle Carpets, John Stewart; Company Secretary Andrew Rennison; Technical Director Simon Fraser and ex-captain of the Golf Club, Jim Haliday, all presented the winners with prizes.
The glittering prizes are all on display at the Stoddard Golf Club Annual Dinner, held in the Elderslie Village Hall.
Football Focus
Football has not played as great a part in the company as it has in previous years.
But Ian Shiels, who works in the warehouse and has been responsible for football activity in the past, is aware of this and is hoping for better things to come.
For instance, he is hoping to organise another football match with the American Navy.
The April friendly match between Stoddards' Amateur Football Club and the US Navy Varsity Soccer team was a resounding success — and Ian's hopes are high for a rematch.
He is also confident that the club can haul themselves further up the league after a disappointing start to the season.
Stoddards AFC finished up in Division Three of the Paisley and District League but they hope to work harder to boost their rating.
Ian says, ‘It's an incredible challenge for the team but everyone is working hard against the odds.
Anyone who wants to come along to the training on Wednesday nights at Keanie Park are more than welcome.’
Jim'll Fix It For The Boys
Jim Clark spends his working day in the store-room of Stoddards Carpets — but in his spare time, he is doing excellent work for Elderslie Boys Club where he has recently arranged a football trip to Holland.
The trip, which will take place during the school holidays, will bring the 36 boys up against European skills — and as Jim will tell you — give them a valuable insight into the kind of football the Europeans play.
Says Jim: ‘It is a costly exercise, but we feel that it's worth every penny.
As well as expanding skills, it is giving the boys a unique holiday opportunity.
Outside the company, Jim has worked hard to raise the money for the trip.
We've nearly raised our target,’ he continues.
‘We've managed to raise the money through fund raising dances, sponsored walks, raffles and race night.
Everyone has been superlative.
Jim is a founder member of the Elderslie Boys Club — which has been going strong in the area for seven years — and the Stoddards employee has himself contributed 17 years to Boys football.
Jim has previously arranged football trips to England, Blackpool and Plymouth — but this one is special to him.
‘I've never managed to arrange a trip abroad with these boys until now,’ says Jim, ‘but hopefully it won't be their last.’
STODDARDS BOWLED OVER
Twenty five Stoddards employees took part in the company's annual bowling contest which came to a close at the Elderslie Wallace Bowling Club on September 9th.
Ian McMillan, from Industrial Engineering, and James Mitchell, from Crabtree Weaving section, took the JR Walker Trophy for the first time in the competition.
The trophy, named after a past director of Stoddard's carpets, has been at the company for the past 37 years, but this is the first time in history that the organisers have opened up the competition for runners up.
First runners up in the competition were Robert Fulton and John Cunningham, both from the weaving department.
Third prize was picked up by Tom Blackburn and Robert Brisco, from the patterns department.
Fourth place was awarded to Pat Leckie, from the weavers department, and John Caldwell, from the finishing department.
Co-organiser John Bruff told Glenpatrick News: ‘It was a  marvelous competition.
Fortunately the weather was excellent on the day and all players had a tremendous time.’
Golf Events for 1990
This year the main inter Company Golf Match is being organised by Lyles and is being played on a Saturday instead of the usual Sunday.
Braehead Golf Club has been booked for the event on Saturday 26th May.
Other outings are:
Robert Lambie Memorial Trophy on 7th April, also at Braehead Golf Club.
Simon Levinson trophy on 23rd June at Biggar Golf Club.
The Bevan Trophy on 8th September at West Lothian Golf Club.