

House Newspaper of Stoddard Sekers International PLC
Annual Results Show Stoddard Sekers Ahead of the Rest
Despite profits which were down a third on last year, Stoddard Sekers International outperformed the bulk of the beleaguered textile section.
Pre tax profits for the year ended 31st March 1991, dropped by £1.24m to £2.51m.
However last year's figure included the exceptional pension refund of £1.23m.
Turnover, at £43m, was 95% of 1989/90 sales of £45.3m.
Interest charges remained virtually unchanged at £0.58m, and with shareholders' funds at £18.48m (1990 — £18.25m) and borrowings of £0.59m (1990 — £0.39m) gearing was held at 3%.
CREDITABLE PERFORMANCE
Commenting on the results, Chairman Hugh Laughland said, ‘The past year has been a stern test of the ability of British industry to weather a recessionary trading climate.
The Company has done this with resolve and dedication and produced a creditable performance, not only in preserving its ongoing business, but also in strengthening its base through acquisition.’
Hugh Laughland — Chairman
‘A small improvement in gross margin partially offset the loss of contribution from the reduction in turnover.
This reduction was limited to 5% by incurring marginal but necessary increases in sales and administrative costs.
Operating profit at £3.1m, was 71% of that earned in the previous year (£4.3m) Although any reduction in profits is regrettable, the drop was limited to 29% such that a return on sales of 7.2% was achieved, a margin which compares favourably with others in our sector.’
‘In a recessionary period fuelled by high interest rates, control of borrowings is vital.
Gearing at 3%, demonstrates astute husbandry of resources.
This was achieved whilst maintaining an appropriate level of investment for the future in design, manufacture and plant.’
DIVIDEND HELD
For those with shares in the company,(including a number of employees through the share option scheme) the board recommended a maintained final dividend of 1.95p per ordinary share making 2.5p for the year (1990 — 2.5p).
If approved at the A.G.M., the final dividend will be paid on 31st July 1991 to those on the register at 11th July 1991.
Shares were unchanged at 48p at close of trading on the day of the announcement.
STEADY AND READY TO GO
Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, said at the time of the announcement ‘The market place is exceptionally difficult just now, but we saw very early on that it was tough — in fact the last three months of our financial year were the toughest experience in my business life.
More recently trading conditions have improved albeit only marginally since 31st March year end.’
He added that the benefits of the Company's recent acquisition — Louis De Poortere U.K. — would become evident during the year.
Hugh Laughland also made reference to the future saying ‘Whilst recent reductions in interest rates are most welcome, the beneficial effect on the economy as a whole will take some time to emerge.
Our plans for the current year, therefore, do not assume a general market improvement, however, our increasing market share and strong balance sheet will ensure that the Company is well placed to take advantage of the upturn when it comes.’
L.D.P. Subsidiary purchased in expansion move
The group announced on March 8th that terms had been agreed for the acquisition of Louis De Poortere Ltd., the U.K. subsidiary of Belgian carpet manufacturing giant E.T.S. Louis De Poortere.
The Warwick based subsidiary, employing about 100 was known in the trade as L.D.P. Ltd. and on last year's turnover returned a £396,000 net loss.
L.D.P. Ltd. with net assets of £2,332,000 was purchased for £950,000 in an all-paper deal involving the issue of 2.37 million new shares at 40p each.
This represents a 3.63% share of the enlarged issued ordinary share capital of Stoddard.
At the time of the announcement, the Stoddard share price rose from around 37p to 45p, a gain of 21% which has since steadily held its position.
Two five year trading agreements form part of the deal.
In future Stoddard will manufacture all of L.D.P.'s worldwide Axminster requirement and secondly, will become the exclusive distributor of their (Belgian) products in the U.K.
Since the date of acquisition, the Warwick factory has been closed and looms have been moved to Elderslie and Runcorn.
Looms from LDP being unloaded at Elderslie.
Questions and Answers on LDP
Basic questions resulting from the takeover were collected together by the Glenpatrick News from all corners of Glenpatrick Works and are answered by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive.
Ralph Ellis (Chief Executive)
Can you give us some background to LDP?
The LDP group is based in Mouscron, Belgium.
In world terms, it was the 9th biggest carpet manufacturer in 1989 with total sales of £170m approx.
It is the second largest carpet maker in Europe.
The LDP group employs more than 3,000.
What are the major trading companies in the LDP group?
The major subsidiary is LDP (SA) based at Mouscron which  manufacturers Wilton and Tufted.
A high percentage of this output is exported.
There are two group spinning mills based nearby.
However, within the past few years, three carpet manufacturing companies have been purchased by the group.
They are Rossifloor in Italy, Balsan in France and Cabrita in Belgium.
They also own the small, specialised narrow Wilton weaver, Flipo (France).
All the LDP companies operate in the middle to upper end of the market.
Can you tell us something about the role of the LDP UK company before we became involved?
The UK company was founded in 1932 at Warwick and had a dual function for LDP.
Firstly, the factory manufactured all the Axminster needs of the group worldwide while the sales operation sold Wilton and Tufted products (broadloom and rugs) in the UK retail market.
These products were manufactured mainly in Belgium.
This retail operation covered around 400 outlets.
To give you some idea of its relative size, Stoddard Templeton trades with approximately 3,000 outlets.
Why have we become involved with LDP?
The LDP group was dissatisfied with the service and quality it was receiving from its Warwick factory.
The result of this was that the sales force on the continent had lost confidence with the Axminster products but needed them for contract work, eg hotels…
LDP therefore decided to look for another manufacturer to supply its Axminster.
That is when they approached us.
We saw it as a tremendous opportunity to secure the future of our Elderslie factory by introducing more volume and generating more profit for our group — particularly at a time when I know everyone is aware that business is very tight in all our trading divisions.
So we bought the UK company from LDP, which also includes a sales operation.
We not have two trading agreements with LDP — one to supply them with Custom Axminster worldwide, and the other agreement is to sell their Belgian products in the UK — both agreements are initially for 5 years, renewable, if both companies are happy with the way it works.
It should be stressed that the Belgian products are complementary rather that competitive with our own production.
The Axminster agreement is quite straightforward but the link with their UK sales operation is not so easy to understand.
Can you explain?
Yes.
I am aware that it is a bit confusing — several people have asked me how it fits in with Stoddard Templeton and whether we are not in fact competing with ourselves.
However, as far as the market place is concerned, the LDP UK sales company is being run totally independently from any of the Stoddard sales companies — just as it was before.
There is nonetheless an important link with Stoddard Templeton and that is Jack Millar — one of the Stoddard sales directors.
Jack is in overall charge of the LDP sales company and the reason for that is to ensure that the same standards and disciplines of product development, point of sale and, most important, profitability are applied to LDP as to Stoddard Templeton.
For example, Jack and Bill Naysmith have already developed an Axminster range for LDP and that will be launched in August.
We believe that this range will enhance greatly the credibility of the LDP name with retailers, and the LDP sales force are very enthusiastic about it.
Instead of paying cash, we bought the LDP company by issuing shares.
Why?
In the current economic climate it is very important to conserve cash, so we bought with shares.
LDP were not unhappy with this arrangement as we have a good track record with dividend payments and they believe, as we all do, that the Stoddard group is well placed to prosper in the years ahead, which should me that the share price will rise.
What has been happening at Warwick since we bought the company?
Since the beginning of March, we have been running down production at Warwick.
Production finished at the end of May and since then, as you know, we have been moving broadlooms to Elderslie and some narrow looms to Runcorn.
Various other items of plant have been transferred to group factories.
The Warwick factory is now virtually empty, although the sales office continues there as before.
However, the factory is now up for sale and we are, therefore, looking for new accommodation for the sales office in the Warwick area.
How is our export division affected by the Axminster agreement?
Are we now in competition with LDP on the continent?
The answer to the second part of your question — we are in competition but we always were!
The difference now is that the same factory supplies production to both sales forces and, in theory, our factories (Runcorn and Elderslie) have two chances to win the order instead of only one as in the past.
Having said that, we have, of course, taken the opportunity to review our own sales operation in Europe.
As you know, we have our own sales companies in France and Sweden, and we are determined to develop these further.
In other European countries we have worked through agents and believe that it does not make sense for us to continue to try to service all those countries when LDP has a substantial full-time sales force already in place.
We are, therefore, in the process of terminating the agencies in Europe.
I should mention that in relation to our total export turnover, sales through those agencies have not been significant.
A further advantage of the new Axminster sales agreement in Europe is that we can now concentrate our export sales resources on other specific markets such as America, the Middle East and the Far East, where we need to increase our ‘call rate’ to realise market potential.
REWARDS FOR LOYAL SERVICE
‘This presentation is one of the most rewarding and enjoyable in my capacity as Chief Executive’ said Ralph Ellis when presenting Long Service Awards to employees with 40 years and 25 years loyal service to the company.
Traditionally, those with 25 service have been presented with inscribed watches, but for the first time the 40 year award has been introduced with a choice of either a canteen of cutlery or a set of crystal glasses and decanter as a gift from the company.
The award ceremony took place in the canteen on a December afternoon where over 100 retired and serving members of the work force were gathered, making it the largest for many years.
Families of those receiving the award were also invited, as was everyone who had previously joined the ‘quarter century club.’
In his opening speech, Ralph Ellis thanked all those who had contributed to the success of the company, emphasising ‘that it is during the tough times when such experience counts.’
Altogether 28 awards were made to a group representing a complete cross section of factory life, including directors, weavers, managers, supervisors and salesmen.
Additional awards were made at a later stage to three individuals who were unable to attend.
Local press also attended the event, organising a number of group photographs before tea was served at the end of the formalities.
It was then the moment for old colleagues to catch up on old times.
Alan Calver (left) received his 40 years service award at the Annual Stoddard Templeton Salesforce Conference from Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis.
Awards for twenty five years service were presented to (left to right): Back Row — John Gordon, Joe Welsh, Drew Barr, Willie Russell, Jim McGarry.
Front Row — Jim Cunningham, Janet Scott (Ralph Ellis), May Heron & Charlie McGhee.
Awards for forty years service were presented to (left to right): Back Row — Alec Watt, Charlie Allan, John Connelly, George White, Tom Walker & Jackie Wilson.
Middle Row — John Matthews, Alex Montgomery, John Malcolmson, Jim Mitchell, Jim Conbrough, Alex Cockburn, John Lees & David Smith.
Front Row — Jimmy Shiels, Bill Naysmith (Ralph Ellis), Alex Shaw, George Johnstone & Jim McCormack.
Absent — Tom Blackburn, Ellen McMillan, Alan Calver.
Ulsterman Wins First Prize
Winner of the 1990/91 Stoddard Templeton Salesman of the Year is Stewart Stevenson from Northern Ireland.
This announcement was made by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive of Stoddard Sekers International Plc., at a presentation in the Elderslie showroom during the annual Retail Sales Conference in April.
Mr Ellis went on to say that sales had held up very well in the worst year for the retail trade that he had seen ‘It reflects great credit on the sales team’ he said.
He then presented Stewart Stevenson with an inscribed silver quaich and miniature as a permanent memento.
John Gordon, representative for Lancashire and Cheshire, was also presented with a cheque as runner up of the closely fought contest narrowly beating Robin Saunders, Alan Calver and James Thomas.
Inter region rivalry was evident when Rex Wolfe, Northern Regional Manager, was announced as winner of the regional Prize.
Token bets had been made by a few on the opposing Southern team, so Rex was able to ‘collect’ from long time colleagues as well as being presented with a cheque b Mr Ellis.
Next year was forecast as being no less challenging.
Salesman of the Year, Stewart Stevenson, representative from Northern Ireland (left) is presented with the silver quaich by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive.
Rex Wolfe (left) Northern Area Sales Manager wins the Regional Area Manager's award.
He is shown receiving a cheque from Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive.
John Gordon (left) runner up to the salesman's award and representative for Cheshire and Lancashire receives a cheque from Mr Ellis.
A family tradition continues as Eddie retires
Eddie McDermid, Sales Representative for the East of Scotland area retired from the Stoddard Templeton Sales Force in April, after thirty two years with the company.
At his retiral dinner in the Normandy Hotel, Renfrew, Steve Higgins, Field Sales Director, said, ‘The whole trade knew Eddie as a gentleman.
He had total respect from all his accounts and great loyalty to the company.’
Rex Wolfe, Northern Regional Manager, knew Eddie perhaps better than anyone, having worked with him as a colleague and friend for many years.
He presented Eddie with a watercolour painting and a bouquet of flowers to his wife Frances on behalf of everyone in the sales force.
Eddie knew Stoddards well, having worked ‘on the inside’ as a member of staff between 1959 and 1968.
He then became the East of Scotland representative.
In 1974 and in 1989 Eddie won the Salesman of The Year award.
Although Eddie is retiring, carpets will continue to be part of his way of life as his son Ian is also in the trade.
Eddie and Frances McDermid are presented with at his retiral dinner.
From left to right, Rod Turnbull, Joint Managing Director: Rex Wolfe, Northern Regional Manager: Eddie and Frances McDermid and Steve Higgins, Field Sales Director.
Trevor Clemmett Retires
After nearly twenty years with the company Trevor Clemmett, Sales Representative for Cambridge, Norfolk and Northants, retired at the end of January.
To mark the  occassion a farewell dinner was given to Trevor and his wife Barbara at the Post House Hotel in Norwich, attended by Joint M.D. Rod Turnbull, Sales Directors Steve Higgins and Jack Millar, together with many colleagues and customers with whom Trevor had worked for many years.
Since 1947
Trevor joined Templeton in 1971, having already worked with both carpets and rugs since he left the R.A.F. in 1947.
It was there he developed an interest in aircraft, a point noted by Steve Higgins who presented Trevor with a fine book of World War II aeroplanes, showing paintings and drawings by the artist Robert Taylor.
A portrait by Coulson of the most famous World War II bomber ‘The Lancaster’ was also given to Trevor.
Although retired, Trevor continues to take an interest in the Stoddard Group as an agent for Lyles, keeping in touch with those he has known for many years.
Bob Doran Retires
After nearly fifty years in the carpet business, Bob Doran, Sales Representative for the West of Scotland area has retired.
An evening buffet was organised on 6th February in the Showroom at Elderslie by Steve Higgins, Field Sales Director, where many customers and colleagues gathered to wish him farewell.
National Sales Director, Jack Millar, presented Bob with a complete Hi-fi system given by the staff and a long service watch on behalf of the company.
David Gibson from Gibson Carpets in Johnstone (and an ex-Templetonian), after a witty speech, also presented Bob with a T.V. set bought from contributions given by customers throughout the West of Scotland.
Jack Millar outlined Bob's long career which, apart from three years with the Fleet Air Arm, was all with either Templetons or Stoddards.
Having spent a few years in both camps the matter was resolved in 1981 when Stoddards and Templetons were merged.
Bob did not retire immediately as he has worked on for a few months to introduced new salesmen to their areas.
Bob Doran (centre) with his son Colin and daughter Karen at his farewell in the Showroom at Elderslie.
NEW APPOINTMENTS
Two representatives were appointed to the Stoddard Templeton Sales Force in November, one month before the retiral of two long serving salesmen.
Trevor Goldsmith (left) joined the company after 17 years with Lowndes Queensway, where he became Store Manager of the Kings Lynn, Carpetland branch.
He takes over from Trevor Clemment and will be responsible for Cambridge, Norfolk, Northants and part of Leicestershire.
He is married with one daughter and lives in Kings Lynn.
Bill Robertson took over responsibility for the West of Scotland area from Bob Doran.
Previously Bill worked with Crossley Carpets and also has extensive sales experience within other retail and manufacturing industries.
For six years he worked in Australia.
Bill is married with two young children and lives in Hamilton.
In February, Mark Borrett was appointed as a Merchandiser to the Stoddard Templeton Sales Force.
Four Merchandisers now support the Retail Sales Force, erecting displays of carpets and curtains within the shops.
Previously Mark had seven  year's of experience with Allders of Croydon, one of the country's largest department stores, where he supervised a diverse range of product displays.
He is now responsible for an area to the South of London and the M4 corridor, including Devon and Cornwall.
Mark's home is in Crawley.
He is married and is a keen golfer.
Bill McNee joined the Stoddard Templeton Sales Force in May.
He is responsible for the East of Scotland area, taking over from Eddie McDermid who retired.
Previously Bill who worked for many years as sales manager with G.U.S.
Group in Falkirk and has considerable sales experience with other consumer goods.
He is married, lives in Falkirk and is a keen golfer.
STODDARD CONTRACT
The two day programme included familiarisation visits throughout the factory to view the latest developments, new machinery, systems and methods of production.
Presentations and exercises on Interior Design, the analysis of successful projects, developing new territories and training films all formed part of the conference.
The new ranges acquired through the Louis De Poortere relationship were also presented.
These additional products will be integrated into the Contract Portfolio of products in the near future, further increasing the scope of what is already a large choice.
Joint Managing Director, Rod Turnbull, gave a review on the year with sales and budgets explained within the context of  cautions optimism and an expanding sales force.
Taken at the Contract's Division annual sales conference in March, the photograph shows the Stoddard Mercia Sales Force together with some of the back-up team, including designers from London, Runcorn and Elderslie.
Throne Room carpet is laid at Holyrood
The Throne Room at Holyrood House, Edinburgh, showing the detail of the new carpet woven by Stoddard Carpets.
Eleven widths of 27 inches wide five frame Chlidema Wilton, Super Decorum quality woven in three ply 80/20 wool/nylon yarn, were joined together to make one large piece measuring 7.6 metres by 15.2 metres.
The design was based on the fine ornate plasterwork of the ceiling, to create a very grand Acanthus scroll pattern coloured in rich red with gold accents.
The Scottish Crown is reproduced in the four corners reflecting those used in the ceiling.
An additional Chlidema rug was specially woven for the pillared dias on which the two thrones sit.
This is also clearly shown in the photograph.
The carpets were laid on a Sunday when the Palace is closed to the public.
It is loose laid on underfelt like an enormous rug with a surround of polished wooden floors.
Theme Attractions at Designer Show
Stoddard Mercia's stand at the Interior Design International Exhibition, London was shared with Sekers Fabrics Ltd., to combine a stunning presentation of carpets and fabrics.
Visitors were able to see the versatility of design and product range by a display which portrayed the four themes of shipping, hotel and leisure, pubs and commercial interiors.
They offered the chance for specifiers to turn their imaginative ideas into reality.
Each corner of the stand was devoted to a separate theme with drawings emerging into three dimensional effects from which fabrics were draped and props arranged.
By structuring the display in such a direct manner, specific enquiries were encouraged resulting in many leads to be followed after the show.
Initial reports suggest that visitor numbers were down on previous years, but that the quality of enquiry was high, helped by the positive reaction of visitors responding to specific areas of business on display.
Prelude makes music at I.D.I.
Illustration shows ‘Giverny’, one of the three new combinations of carpet borders and matching patterns launched at the Interior Design International Exhibition, London in May.
Giverny is an Art Nouveau design inspired by the flowers from Monet's famous garden, using bright florals set against a deep background.
Woven in 80% Wool and 20% Nylon Axminster, it forms part of the Prelude Collection, an extensive range of designs for hotel, leisure and the brewery market, available from stock.
5,000 Metres Square for Westerwood
Seamless carpet borders individually woven to surround pillars is one of the features which contribute to the outstanding quality of the interior in the Westerwood Hotel and Country Club, Cumbernauld.
This newly built five star hotel is part of the Dutch based Golden Tulip Group with 370 hotels in 60 countries, all of which are deluxe standard.
Stoddard Mercia carpeted the complete hotel with Custom Axminster and Chlidema Wilton designs in the public areas and contract quality tufteds in the bedrooms.
In total, nearly 5,000 square metres of carpet were used, the order secured by Jim Maxwell, Contracts Manager Scotland.
Tartan carpet using the Cumbernauld Tartan was laid out in the Country Club and its connecting passages.
Bordered designs were used throughout the remaining passageways with a Chlidema square for the entrance foyer inset in a marble surround.
The foyer carpet was also colour co-ordinated with the open area beyond, leading into the main dining room with its magnificent views.
Several pictures were taken of the installation, some of which are being used for promotional purposes.
The one illustrated shows the entrance to the main restaurant.
NEW APPOINTMENTS
Two members of the Louis De Poortere U.K. Contract Sales Force, Paul Wallond and Kevin Beasant have joined Stoddard Mercia as representatives within the Southern Region.
Paul has over twenty years experience in contract carpeting including a number of years as an Interior Designer and five years with Peachgate, one of London's largest carpet contractors.
For the past three years he has been building LDP's contract business in the South of England.
Paul is an ex-professional clarinetist, still loves music, is keen on sport and plays first division league tennis for Surrey.
Kevin Beasant, representative within the London area has been with LDP (UK) for the last two years.
Previously he was the U.K. agent for Belgium manufacturer Cabrita who themselves were taken over by LDP.
The take over trend continued and now Kevin, with a total of fourteen years in the carpet business, is part of Stoddard Mercia.
He is married, lives in Essex and is a keen golfer.
Paul Wallond
Kevin Beasant
LEADING HOTEL CHOOSES STODDARD MERCIA
One of Stoddard Mercia's largest and most prestigious contracts this year has been to supply the entire public area carpeting for Edinburgh's hotel ‘The Balmoral.’
Over £23 million was spent on the refurbishment of this exclusive world class hotel where normal star ratings are left far behind.
Individual carpet designs, borders, Chlidema squares were all custom made in traditional woven Axminster or Wilton, the broadloom being woven at Elderslie and the narrow at Runcorn.
Formerly known as the North British Hotel, the new Balmoral has restored the Victorian Palm Court room beyond its former glory, subtly understating the heavy plasterwork and reflecting the shape of a huge natural light glass dome in an eight sided central motif on the carpet.
As an example of fine craftsmanship, hand cut carpet borders on the dramatic grand stair case are shown in the illustration, closely following the curved walls.
Classic medallion style designs have been used in the ballroom with a section that can be removed to reveal a dance floor between sets of marble pillars.
Each of the remaining public rooms have individual designs to suit their grand style, some being repeated on the second floor where another series of function rooms overlook Edinburgh Castle and Princes Street.
All corridors, landings and lift lobbies are similarly covered with Stoddard Mercia carpets which, although laid in Edinburgh, were specified by a London designer.
It is one to be proud of.
New Offices for Stoddard in Sweden
After sixteen years at their old address, Stoddard Mattor, the Swedish subsidiary of Stoddard Carpets has moved to new offices in the centre of Stockholm.
An official opening was held at the end of May attended by 150 leading Architects, Interior Designers and Specifiers, including Roger McDowall, Computer Design Manager from Elderslie, responsible  fot the design of many Swedish orders.
At one time the building was used as a ballet school and has been completely refurbished to provide a combined office and showroom complex.
BLAZE OF COLOUR
Sliding rails in the showroom accommodate large samples displaying the Prelude contract ranges for pubs, clubs and hotels, complete with their matching carpet borders.
Other areas are a blaze of colour as spot lights illuminate a vast choice of customer designs displayed on wall units.
It is an ideal setting in which visitors can see at a glance the high standard of design and quality in keeping with Sweden's reputation for advanced and stylish design.
Between the open plan offices overlooking an attractive rear courtyard, and the showroom at the front, a conference room for client meetings has been constructed.
‘It means two groups of customers can attend simultaneously without disturbance’ said Managing Director, Anders Falkman.
The new offices have been obtained on advantageous terms, the refurbishment costs being offset against a significantly lower rent.
Their new position also places them closer to their existing warehouse with its dual purposes of storage and manufacture of patterned bordered rugs.
These are constructed by piecing together cuttings of plain coloured fusion bonded pieces or strips, a speciality of Stoddard Mattor.
Six staff and one agent make up the full complement which, as Anders Falkman said, ‘has strength in a team approach, it is all hands on deck and a good atmosphere’.
VAT HITS HARD
Recently a large 6000m 2 custom Axminster contract for a five star international hotel in southern Sweden was won against stiff opposition from the U.K. and in Berlin, Stoddard Mattor are one of two finalists in quoting for a 10,000 square metre hotel project.
In summing up the potential of the hotel business in Sweden, Anders Falkman said that the hotel trade has been particularly badly hit with the introduction of 25% VAT rate for carpets.
It is causing delays in refurbishment, but in the long term will even out.
Antique furniture is used to make an attractive contrast with a modern floodlit setting in the new Stoddard showroom in Stockholm.
New Appointments
With 32 years experience in the carpet business, Richard Williams joined the Contracts Division in October as Special Projects Manager based in London.
Richard has worked with a number of manufacturers specialising in the contract field.
This included a short spell in Germany and also representing a large American manufacturer in the U.K. He joined Stoddard Mercia from Coloroll Contracts after their closure.
He is married and lives in Wantage, Oxfordshire.
Richard Williams
In December, Derek Kendell joined Stoddard Mercia as a Contract Representative with the London Sales Force.
Derek brings with him 25 years of Contract carpet experience.
He is married, lives in Chelmsford and is an enthusiastic footballer, who trains and manages young players with Springfield Football Club at weekends.
Derek Kendall
Stuart Gerrard is the most recent recruit to the Stoddard Mercia Sales Force, having joined the team in early May, as representative from the North West.
Previously he worked with a flooring contractor and has also extensive experience in the Architectural and Specifiers field gained with a design and build company.
With a B.A. Hons, degree from Preston, Stuart is a keen sportsman and includes rock climbing and pot holing on his list of hobbies.
He is married with two children and lives in Warrington.
Stuart Gerrard
NEIL KINNOCK VISITS STODDARDS
In response to a request by the local Labour party, Stoddards invited Neil Kinnock to visit the factory during the lead up to the two Paisley by-elections in November.
Normally unaffected by any type of political show biz, the factory was deluged by the media as scores of photographers and journalists jostled for the best position.
From every direction microphones, lenses and T.V. cameras followed the entourage as they moved between the looms on a tour of the factory.
It was a time of high political tension as Margaret Thatcher had recently resigned and Neil Kinnock was making the most of it as he held a press conference in the showroom, flanked by the two candidates, Gordon McMaster for Paisley South and Irene Adams for Paisley North.
The welcome he received on the factory tour obviously boded well for the by-election as ten days later both candidates were elected.
With many hand shakes and introductions, the candidates and their leader met as many people as possible as they visited each department.
Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, and Stanley Peters, Joint Managing Director, steered the group the plant ending in the Design Studio, where Bill Naysmith illustrated the latest design developments.
The visit lasted over an hour during which time Neil Kinnock experienced at first hand what carpet manufacturing was all about.
So as to keep a fair balance, invitations were also given to all other parties contesting the by-election, only one of which was finally taken up by the Scottish National Party, about a week later.
This time the ‘gentlemen of the press’ decided not to attend.
Vote winning smiles as Christine Ellsmore, Designer, meets the trio.
Diplomacy.
Both red and blue feature in this one, as Group Design Director Bill Naysmith displays a well balanced design.
No CAD's in politics, but Roger McDowell shows how to use the Computer Aided Design facility.
Best of friends May Houston and Neil Kinnock.
Pleased to see you.
Christine McKirdy (left) and June McGregor meet Neil Kinnock.
So this is canvassing.
Neil Kinnock in conversation with Janet McLaughlin, Anna Thomson and Angela Carmichael.
In the background is Jackie Counor.
Followed by an entourage of officials and clamouring photographers, Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis (left) leads Neil Kinnock, Irene Adams and Gordon McMaster on a tour of the factory.
Politicians under the expert eye of Quality Control Inspectors Grace McCarthy (left) Jackie White and Eleanor Park.
On the left, Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis with Neil Kinnock, Irene Adams and Gordon McMaster on the right.
sekers ATTACK THE FUTURE
Strengthening their product base by increasing choice, Sekers have introduced three new ranges and are commissioning trials with the very latest in manufacturing technology.
Sekers Fabrics are now exclusively targeting the contract market both U.K. and Export with noted success in America.
Keith Jackson, Managing Director, recently returned from an American sales trip which he described as ‘encouraging with orders on the increase and an excellent reception for our new range ‘the U.S.A. Collection’’.
It is one of the two new custom only ranges, with thirty designs each available in a choice of approximately thirty colours all woven in fine worsted yarn.
‘The Specifiers Book’ is the second non stock range where twenty six jacquard designs in 100% wool are available in any colour.
Backing up this almost unlimited choice is a new stock range called ‘Cumbria’, presented in two separate books with six traditional damask designs in one and thirteen multi coloured contemporary designs in the other.
It is a top contract quality, in worsted wool/nylon cloth that was officially launched at the Interior Design International exhibition in May.
On the manufacturing side, Sekers are about to trial the new ‘Electronic Jacquard’— the latest from France, on a sale or return basis.
Only two other U.K. manufacturers have recently installed such a machine which replaces the current punch card system with a floppy disk direct from the design studio's computer.
The benefits to flexibility and streamlining design development could be considerable if the trials prove to be a success.
Not to be outdone by their sister company at Elderslie (who recently sent carpets to Holyrood Palace) Sekers have also recently supplied their product to royalty.
This time it was from the Lauderdale Collection which sent to Buckingham Palace.
Their Tradition is part of the Fabric
Six long service awards and one retirement presentation were made at Sekers Fabrics just prior to the Christmas break.
Retiring after ten years with the company was Joe Lofthouse, while the six others each had over forty year's service demonstrating a tremendous loyalty.
Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis, presented gifts which included canteens of cutlery, decanters and glasses in Edinburgh Crystal.
They went to: Doreen Bethwaite of High Road, Kells, who works in the preparation department and has been there 45 years.
Secretary Anne Branch, of College View, Monkwray, who has been with the Company since 1948 and has been secretary to various Managing Directors including the present incumbent Keith Jackson.
Arnold Denney, of Trumpet Terrace, Cleator, who has worked on the production line for 42 years as either a machine knotter or twister and for a number of years has been a foreman.
Alan Litt, of Mitredale Close, Red Lonning, who joined the Company at the age of 15 as an apprentice overlooker.
As overlooker he has seen the changing face of technology affect looms over the past 47 years.
Werner Reichert, of Egremont Road, Whitehaven, joined the Company in 1950 when a number of skilled German weavers were recruited and is now only one of two left.
He missed the presentations to meet his brother flying from Germany for a family reunion.
Charles Whiteside, of Tivoli Cottages, Moresby, joined Sekers in 1943 as an apprentice overlooker before becoming shift manager and later production manager.
There was also a retirement presentation at the works, Joe Lofthouse, of Scawfell Close, Mirehouse, leaving after 10 years as a loom cleaner.
A former miner, Joe was presented with a cheque together with good wishes for a long and happy retirement.
From the left: Alan Litt, Doreen Bethwaite, Joe Lofthouse, Keith Jackson (Managing Director), Ralph Ellis (Chief Executive), Arnold Denney, Ann Branch, Charles Whiteside.
Missing from the picture is Werner Reichert who was unable to attend the ceremony.
OVERLOOKER
Former weaver Reay McKew (right) has successfully completed a two year apprenticeship to become a qualified ‘Overlooker.’
Reay, photographed with fellow Overlooker Keith Smith, makes the fourth member of the Sekers Overlooker Team.
He explained the word overlooker as being a traditional textile term which changes to ‘Tuners’ in Lancashire and ‘Tatlers’in Yorkshire.
It means in simple terms that Reay is able to keep the looms running in perfect order.
Normally it takes three or four years to complete the apprenticeship, but Reay helped by his ten year's experience of weaving and considerable determination, achieved it in half the time.
He was presented with a certificate by the Secretary of the Blackburn and District Amalgamated Power-loom Overlookers Association in March.
When not working, Reay's main interest is snooker of which he is ‘very, very keen’ and then referring to his colleague, Keith Smith, he said, for the benefit of the Glenpatrick News that Keith ‘loves cream cakes.’
The explanation of why this happens, was not forthcoming but he denies that it is another traditional textile term.
In December, after three years with the company, Linda Clements was promoted from her position as yarn control clerk to become Sample Room Supervisor.
Linda, with a staff of two is responsible for despatching both Stoddard Templeton and Sekers samples to all their customers.
Sekers Service Supreme
Breaking all records, Sekers supplied a customer with specially woven cloth in an amazingly short time.
The order was placed one Thursday evening in March and was delivered in London on the Tuesday.
Richard Edwards, Sales Director, congratulated all concerned —‘I do not know of any other Textile company that could have produced and woven a non-stock item in such a short time.’
The customer was delighted and telephoned Ralph Edwards to say how pleased his client was with the service and that the cloth was flown out to The Yemen within a few hours.
As a result of this excellent service, further orders will be placed within the next few months.
It was a close shave
Raising a laugh and over forty pounds for Comic Relief, Mike Smith allowed Betty Edgar to shave off his beard for charity.
The idea came from a discussion between Andrea Burns and Betty Edgar to do something for ‘Red Nose’ day.
And do it they did, for just at that moment into the sales walked Mike Smith from the yarn store proudly sporting as ever his well known beard.
He volunteered and bravely sat in the middle of the sales office to have it shaved off on the day.
Weeks later, it was reported that a new one was being grown — good spring growth no doubt, being that time of year.
Marathon Man
Tom Jennings, the marathon running weaver is once again heading for the London marathon.
By the time this goes to print it will have been run on the 21st April with Tom hopefully completing 26 miles 385 yards.
Last time he did well and with the odd jog that he does for training, he should do it again.
Some odd jogging!— 32 miles on the Workington to Keswick run which is an annual walk for most people, or 40 miles on the Keswick to Barrow run which he has done in 6 hours 15 minutes.
Tom will be wearing running shorts and vest woven by himself on Sekers Jacquard Looms, using special colours and with the Sekers name across the front.
About 15,000 competitors take part in the London Marathon.
Tom Jennings on the run for Sekers.
New Appointment
After working for two years with textile computer specialists in Macclesfield, Gaynor Bower rejoined Sekers Fabrics in February as Weave Co-ordinator.
This new position is part of the Design function and is based at Seker's Elderslie studio.
Previously, Gaynor worked as a Jacquard Designer in the Whitehaven studio and has gained experience with an International design consultant.
She has an M.A. in Woven Textiles and a B.A. in Fashion and Textiles.
Lyle LOOKS AHEAD
Expansion has been a major part of Lyles' recent history but still the pace of change does not let up.
Computerisation, although established for some time in sales and administration, has been introduced to Production Control.
Gordon Bowers, Commercial Manager, is responsible for the day to day implementation of the new systems which became operational at the end of March.
Whilst this is being achieved the computer itself may be changed to a more advanced system as part of a totally new package for the whole of the Stoddard Sekers Group.
At the time of writing, alternative main frame systems for the group are being considered.
‘Lyle carpets is also in the early stages of BS5750’ said Managing Director, John Stewart, as he described one of the many changes in progress.
The quality assurance scheme will mean the introduction of new procedures which conform to the Institutes' requirements.
Target date for application to join the scheme is late August with final Registration in early 1992.
After attending a two day course for ‘Internal Quality Auditing’ run by the British Standards Institute for BS5750, Ian McCulloch, Company Secretary has been appointed to oversee its implementation.
‘We are, he said, at the initial stages, still coming to terms with what we need to do.’
He expects that many overall advantages will be achieved with the scheme.
Currently there are sixteen carpet companies registered with BS5750, all of which received unannounced inspections.
Stoddards for instance having had about two each year since they joined the scheme in 1986.
The high priority being given to quality is also reflected in plans for additional equipment that will be installed during the July holidays.
New driers worth £150,000 will replace old ones on parts of the backing plant, shortening the length and releasing space for a new inspection table.
Those parts of the drying system recently installed will be retained with the new sections being added as part of a long term policy of improvements.
WIN FOR FLIRTATIONS
At this year's Brighton carpet exhibition in February, Lyle Carpet, was the proud winner of an award for their Flirtations Collection of tufted carpets.
Significantly, the category they won reflects a most competitive area in the market namely ‘domestic tufted, selling at less than £10 a square yard to the trade.’
Receiving the award on behalf of the company, John Stewart, Managing Director, was delighted with the achievement ‘It gives additional confidence to a range that was already well prepared and carefully targeted at a specific market’, he said.
Flirtations is made up of four separate ranges where colours are co-ordinated to give a mix and match choice across the various types.
Two deep pile saxony ranges and a twist range each comprise of fifteen items with a further tweed style range of twelve items, to complete the collection.
Brighton also saw the first appearance of the latest new range from Lyles called Heather Mist.
Using this major exhibition as a sounding board, the range, consisting of an 80 wool 20 nylon twist in sixteen colours was shown to potential customers.
‘The reception was very encouraging’ said John Stewart.
With such a favourable response Heather Mist was launched into the field during April.
Tufting one of the carpets in the Flirtations range which was a Brighton Award winner, is Margaret McLean on machine number ten.
Margaret has been with Lyle Carpets for ten years.
SNIPPETS
by Eddie Docherty
Managing Director John Stewart had his first outing on a ‘proper’ golf course at Braehead.
He thoroughly enjoyed the experience but his score is not for publication!
Adam Clark retired on 18th April.
Adam joined Lyles in July 1977 and was a conscientious employee who was always willing to help out.
During the presentation Mrs Clark received a bouquet of flowers from the company.
We all wish Adam a long and happy retirement.
Warehouse Supervisor Gerry O'Conner's son Brian has joined the professional golfing rank as Assistant Professional at a private course in Airdrie.
Graeme Brown, who works in the pattern department has decided to throw away his civvy clothes and don the uniform of the Royal Air Force.
His training commences beginning June.
We all wish him luck in his new career.
CUTTING TO SIZE
Just two busy people keep Lyle's customers supplied with samples.
Mima Graham, who has been with the company for 18 years and Graeme Brown, with 4 year's service.
Between them they cut thousands of samples each year, binding the edges to stop fraying, applying heat sealed labels with an iron and despatching to destinations all over the country.
Books of patterns, representing the many items in each range of carpets are also compiles, along with the many different sample sizes required for display purposes.
Emergencies, top priorities and (as Mima and Graeme might say) priorities over the top are all as smoothly handled as the routine requests.
It all goes to make it a very busy place.
Isabel Eadie, Senior Sales Assistant, Sales Desk Services, is in the front line of the sales battle giving support to the enlarged sales team at Lyle.
As problem solver, order taker and allocator of stock, Isabel is the first to notice any increase in sales activity.
NEW APPOINTMENT
Mary Devlin joined Lyles at the end of October as Production Planning Assistant.
Previously Mary worked with Pitney Bowes for one year after graduating from Stirling University with a B.Sc.
in Management Science and Marketing.
Her home is in Cumbernauld.
New Agents Appointed
To cope with expanding sales, Lyle have appointed three new agents, increasing their sales team to a total of ten.
Trevor Clemmett, recently retired from the Stoddard Templeton sales force, has stayed within the group as agent for Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk and Bedfordshire.
David Illingworth is responsible for Northumberland, Tyneside, Teeside and North & West Yorkshire.
David Verrall looks after London, in the North, East and South sectors, together with Kent and Essex.
With these appointments, John Stewart, Managing Director, is expanding the service position.
Over the last year two large buying groups have been added to the customer list, their membership potentially increasing the sales base by an additional 370 new customers.
NEWS FROM RUNCORN
The Royal carpet for the Throne Room in the Palace of Holyrood House, Edinburgh, was woven by Paul Roberts on a 27 inch wide, five frame Jacquard Wilton.
Many more cards than usual had to be used for the intricate border work with those not in use stacked ready beside the loom.
Ray Cunliffe Works Manager, explained that it was a very special carpet.
‘The quality was outstanding, way above the normal commercial requirement.’
It took two weeks to weave, working ten hours a day.
Yarn for the carpet was spun and dyed at Douglas Reyburn, using special colours to obtain the subtle difference between shades that are mostly red.
After weaving, the carpet was taken to Elderslie for seaming, the work being done by Ronnie Oldroyd.
Not all of it could be joined together prior to delivery as size precluded it from being transported in one piece.
Ronnie therefore had to finish it on site, spending the best part of a week-end in the palace perfecting the pattern march and joining the last of the pieces together.
Further details of Holyrood Carpets, see page 4.
Ronnie Oldroyd adjusts an extra piece of the Royal Carpet, a separate Chlidema rug that was laid directly under the two Thrones.
Runcorn Round-up
Four Axminster Gripper looms have arrived at Brindley Road, from LDP's factory at Warwick which is being closed down following the take over.
They are to replace some of the narrow Wilton Looms, including the one on which the Holyrood Carpet was woven.
Work has already started.
WEDDINGS/ENGAGEMENTS
Krystyna Skrezeczkowska, Design Studio Co-ordinator has become engaged to John Cheadle.
They are to be married in Coventry on 24th August.
Julie Maddock, a winder has become engaged to Neil Wilson, a Creeler.
Julie has worked with the company for two years and her mother also works in the factory as a cleaner and canteen assistant.
Neil celebrated his 21st Birthday in March.
They are to be married at St Mary's Church, Halton Village on 20th July.
Damien Rosco has worked in the Design Office at Runcorn for nearly two years.
On 27th April he married Wendy Lomax at St Basil's Church, Widnes.
Andrew Kean and Donna Denson announced their engagement in February.
Andrew has worked at the factory for six years and is employed as a yarn storeman.
His parents, Bert and Nancy Kean retired from the company two years' ago.
Donna joined Stoddards within the last two years.
DOUGLAS REYBURN WOOL SPINNERS & DYERS
INVESTMENT CONTINUES AT DOUGLAS REYBURN
Already established as one of the most modern spinning mills in the U.K., Douglas Reyburn is to continue investing in the latest machinery.
The last of the six narrow width traditional carding machines are to go, along with their spinning frames.
One of the new cards will be located on the ground floor of what is known as the flats building, occupying space vacated by previous winding machines.
No disruption to production is, therefore, expected, and extra spinners will be required on the twilight and night shifts to cope with the increased production.
The installation of the other two new cards and their spinning frames is part of a phased operation to minimise disruption but will follow on immediately the first card is completed.
For development purposes, one of the old cards will not be removed, its small capacity being used for trails and experimental work.
A matching spinning frame will also be kept, making an independent unit for research that does not affect routine production.
MORE INVESTMENT:
The second phase of the dye house operation to install a £400,000 Longclose package Dyeing Machine — the twin of the one already installed last year, is also to go ahead with delivery expected in October.
New small capacity dye vats and the repositioning of a bank scouring machine are also developments in the pipeline that make Douglas Reyburn a company confident of its future in a competitive market.
Secrets of the Sticky Toe Pads Revealed by Hanna
There is a type of frog which is known as a Tree Frog, and there are Biologists that are very interested in why tree frogs do not fall off impossibly steep gradiants.
The connection between them and Douglas Reyburn lies in the fact that Gavin Hanna, Assistant Technical Manager who joined the company three years' ago, is now an acknowledged expert with a scientific paper published last January by the Company of Biologists.
The paper is titled ‘Adhesion and Detachment of The Toe Pads of Tree Frogs’ and was selected by a prominent group of twenty professional biologists for publication in The Journal of Experimental Biology.
In his notable achievement, Gavin discovered that apart from surface tension (already known) other components were also responsible for the remarkable adhesion, namely viscosity in wet adhesion, and that each pad was gently peeled away when movement  occured .
There was more but in laymen's terms it was a breakthrough.
The suckers on each toe pad enabled these little animals not only to climb vertically but well beyond, nearly but not entirely, upside down.
Gavin undertook this research whilst completing his B.Sc.
Honours Degree in Zoology at Glasgow University.
He then worked at a Salmon Farm near Fort William before joining Douglas Reyburn, where he now concentrates on new developments and quality control.
DOUGLAS REYBURN WIN GOLF TROPHY AGAINST THE ODDS
Fortunes changed for Douglas Reyburn golf team when the inter company Buchanan Trophy was played on the 23rd June at Belleisle Golf Course, Ayr.
For the past twenty four years Douglas Reyburn have won it only twice before, so it was with tremendous satisfaction that the results were received.
showing their clear win in the Silver Jubilee year of the Buchanan Trophy.
The inter company match was played with ten players from Douglas Reyburn, ten from Stoddards and eight from Lyles, with the scoring being taken only from the best eight in each team.
Organised on Stapleford lines, the scores were Douglas Reyburn 281; Stoddards 267; Lyles 185.
The individual top scorer was Colin Mitchell (handicap two) with a net scratch score of seventy.
This year Douglas Reyburn also acted as hosts with Bill Service, Personnel Manager, organising the administration of the day.
Players were given a welcoming morning coffee, followed after the match, by high tea in the Belleisle Hotel.
It was there that presentations were made to the winning team by Andrew Steel, Managing Director.
Douglas Reyburn's Golf Team: Colin Mitchell, Halbert Oliver, Fraser Smith, Bill Brown, Mat McGeachie, Fred Burton, George Campbell, George McCallum, Alan Ferguson and Tommy Hawthorn.
Get me to the Church on time
It was three years ago that Marilyn Hunter met her future husband at a friend's engagement party.
Marilyn is no longer called Hunter but is now Cleland having Steven Cleland on 13th April in Seamill Hydro.
The weather was fine on the day, a lucky day as it had been raining all week.
Luck, however, was not there when the bridal car broke down on its way to collect the bride.
Friends were able to find an alternative, but for a few moments Marilyn said she could not believe it was happening to her and looked about for the dreaded Jeremy Beadle.
The service and the reception were both held at the hydro, attended by family and friends, and afterwards Steven and Marilyn spent a week in Portugal on their honeymoon.
Marilyn has worked with Douglas Reyburn for just over a year as time keeper, but because of her clerical skills will also be helping out in the office when leave is taken by others.
Her husband Steven works in the family building business and their new flat is in Ardrossan.
Reyburn's Record Baby Boom
Like never before ‘baby talk’ is one of the major topics of conversation at Douglas Reyburn.
It could be called ‘spinning a yarn’ but the blarney for once is true because seven Mums-to-be are away on maternity leave and more Mums are confirmed but not yet on leave.
Of the female work force it represents nearly seven percent and all at once.
It must be the fresh Ayrshire air, or the water, or something.
It is certainly a record for the company and a very happy one.
Open Day BRINGS FAMILIES TO THE FACTORY
Over 1300 visitors came to Glenpatrick works on Saturday, 13th October when the doors were opened to families and friends of all who worked there.
Sixty volunteers gave up their Saturday to act as guides so that everyone could tour the factory and be given explanations of the many processes involved.
Looms could be seen in action, weaving the Axminster and Wilton carpets that are sent throughout the world.
The workings of the design studio were also included in the tour.
Powerful design computers capable of 16 million colours, fascinated both young and old.
The Fusion bonded process, of which Stoddards are the leaders in technology, was also on display as were the many ancillary processes required to make a finished carpet of quality.
Stanley Peters, Joint Managing Director, stated that ‘It was a gala atmosphere and altogether a superb families’ day.
Everyone was shown what went on inside this large factory — familiar to us but a  curiousity to those whose relations work here, and have never seen it before.’
He was delighted that everyone enjoyed themselves.
It is only in the recent past that ‘Open Days’ have been organised by the company.
The last one took place in October 1989, but history does not  related if others have taken place since ‘The Carpet Field’ began production 128 years previously.
Appreciation by the children of such history, craftsmanship and skill was no where more obviously shown than in the canteen where balloons, strawberry tarts and fizzy drinks made a fitting end to a successful visit.
Bertie Brydson, weaver, explains the Axminster process to three generations of the one family.
Joyce Galloway, who works in the accounts department, her husband Mike, his parents and their daughter Beth.
Family's Open Day — the picture that says it all.
Proud grandfather Jimmy Shiels with his two grandchildren Colin and Pamela Ross.
The smiles of William Scarff, Supervisor of the Finishing Department, his wife Elizabeth and sons David and Allan, reflect the mood of the moment — a gala atmosphere prevailed throughout the open day.
May Watson guides two visitors through the darning section.
Cathie James with her husband, son, daughter-in-law, sister, friends and former colleagues, all gather on the ‘spotting frame’ where Cathie works.
Visitors discover the mysteries of the Fusion Bonded process from Jim Fletcher, Manager of the department.
It is the showroom of Stoddard Carpets Ltd, Irene Caldwell (right) winner of Stoddard's Open Day prize draw meets Joint Managing Director, Rod Turnbull.
Helping her make the choice is her close friend Esther Fritton (left) who works in the Pattern Department and invited Irene's family to join her on an open day tour of the factory.
A WINTER'S TALE
With mid-summer approaching, it is hardly the time to reflect on winter festivals, but the success of the kids Christmas party in the canteen on 15th December could not pass without a mention.
Just over one hundred children between the ages of four to eleven came to the canteen which had been transformed with decorations.
There were presents for every child, disco dancing, party games, fizzy drinks and floating gas balloons.
It meant a lot of work by those who volunteered to help, and tremendous enjoyment for the children.
No short straws here.
Adel Craine (left) and Alison Anderson only stop to smile.
The Welfare Committee and friends help out at the children's Christmas party.
From left to right Ann Marie Ritchie, Sadie Ballantyne, Frances Bell, Christine McKirdy and Anna Tannock.
It is an elevating experience filling gas balloons for the Christmas party.
From left to right, David Armstrong, Robert McLay, Amanda Armstrong, Anna Martin and Marjorie McNeillie.
Teenage Memories of Clydebank Blitz
It was fifty years ago on March 12, that Tom Walker, Stoddard's longest serving employee, joined the company.
It was a time in 1941 that he will not forget as a few hours later fifteen year old Tom witnessed the ‘Clydebank Blitz.’
Young as he was, tom was not just an observer.
Standing on the factory roof, after his first day's work, Tom was already on duty as a fire watcher.
He recalls the moment vividly, the clear night almost cloudless and the terrible fires.
It was routine for all factories to have fire watchers, and Stoddards, like many others, had their fire watchers' hut on the roof.
Against the bombs they wore steel helmets for protection which Tom recalls had holes drilled round the rim.
The bombing lasted for two nights.
Doubtless Tom was being specially vigilant those nights as his father, James, was not only Company Secretary at that time, but also Chief Air Raid Warden for the area.
The War Years
Much later in the war Stoddard's factory did have a major fire that destroyed much of what was then called Patrick Bank.
At that stage Stoddards was one of the largest laundries in the country, servicing the life jackets and blankets from ships' convoys returning to the Clyde.
Boyant Kapok fibres used to stuff the life jackets had to be removed and teased open again.
It was during this process that a spark from the machinery set alight to a mass of fibre being blown through large pipes into storage bins.
Soon that part of the factory was destroyed but there was no loss of life.
The nearby offices were saved by the Fire Service.
Fire Prevention
Working on life jackets was then transferred to the Wilton sheds (demolished in 1986).
Steam sprinklers were introduced and on the first day of their operation, they successfully doused another fire that would have probably removed the remainder of the factory had it taken hold.
Tom by this time had joined the Navy, was in the Pacific as a Wireless Telegrapher and probably hoped that this Kapok life jacket was up to Stoddard's normal BS 5750 standards.
APPOINTMENTS
After one year working with the company, as part of Strathclyde University's Teaching Company Associate Scheme, Rhona Johnstone transferred from being on the staff of the University to join the Marketing Department and continue her job in market research.
Rhona graduated with a B.A. Hons (Marketing) degree in 1987, to become a lecturer in Sales, Merchandising and Marketing for James Watt College and the Central College of Commerce.
She then joined Strathclyde and transferred to Stoddards in April 1991.
In January Roy Herring joined Stoddard Carpets Ltd., as Quality Assurance Manager.
Roy has held many management positions and has 36 years' experience in carpets.
Previously he was with the large Coloroll Group introducing the BS 5750 Quality Assurance Scheme to all factories within the group and was also Production Manager at the Crossley Plant.
Roy is married, the youngest of his two daughters is to be married in October after which Roy and his family will move house from Worcestershire nearer to Elderslie.
OBITUARY
On Saturday 26th January, Alex Shaw died suddenly aged 60.
Alex, worked with Stoddards for forty one years.
He became an experienced weaver before moving to the warehouse as superintendent in 1973 and more recently as Manager in 1986.
Many colleagues attended the funeral at Woodside Cemetery.
As the minister pointed out.
‘The respect in which he was held by everyone who knew him was reflected in the very large numbers that attended.’
At home Alex was a family man.
He took great pleasure from visiting their caravan at Loch Eck, near Dunoon, and enjoyed a good game of golf.
He was also a member of the Kilbarchan Masonic Lodge, number 156.
The sympathy of all his friends is extended to his wife Jean, his daughter Elizabeth and his sons Jim and Matthew.
PROMOTION
After three and a half years with the company in Industrial Engineering, Alan MacDonald was appointed Assistant to the Production Manager at the beginning of November.
STODDARD Sport & Hobbies
Tops for Teenage Football Team
The Elderslie Wallace Boys Club, started by Stoddard's storeman, Jim Clark and his friend Andy Lee seven years ago, is going from strength to strength.
Now there is a committee of five and like Jim, all are volunteers who spend their free time organising football for the local kids.
Two teams have now been established, the under 15's and the under 13's.
During his Easter break, Jim took both teams for their first trip to Belgium.
It follows the success of last year's visit to Holland which for many was their first experience of the continent.
The under 13's have already achieved success with the team having reached the final of the 1990 Under 13's Scottish Cup, involving about 120 teams in total.
They were eventually beaten, but only just, as the final score was one nothing.
Helping where it can, the company has sponsored a coach trip to an Ayrshire match and recently donated a prize to one of the club's many fund raising activities — all in aid of the kids.
The committee is kept busy raising funds for such an enthusiastic club.
Some of these activities include sponsored walks, dances, race nights and raffles.
Jim was delighted with the last race night in November where they raised £1,000.
The 1991 season is full of promise with the Under 13's off to a good start and Jim expects the Under 15's to finish in the top  halp of the Paisley District League.
Winner of the prize draw Mary Parker from Quarralton Road in Johnstone, is shown choosing her carpet with Stan James, Company Secretary and Jim Clark (centre) of the Elderslie Wallace Boys Club.
Stoddard's Man Builds Bridge for Billy
At the weekend Cropper Operator, Leslie Ritchie, becomes Lance Corporal Ritchie, Territorial Army.
During the week he operates large shearing machines ‘the croppers’ that shave the carpet surface for a perfect finish.
At the weekends he can be anywhere within a few hours drive doing the job of a ‘Sapper’ the army's word for a Military Engineer.
Based at the Drill Hall in the High Street, Paisley, with 102 Clyde Field Squadron Royal Engineers, L/Cpl.
Ritchie learns many varied skills.
Battlefield Engineers build bridges, clear obstacles, build roads or destroy them.
They lay mine fields or clear them up, provide demolitions and surprisingly provide the water source for units in action.
Practical experience is gained during the week end exercises or as shown in the photograph, when bridge building in Edinburgh.
It is called ‘aid to the civil power’ and as sometimes happens T.A.
units are asked to help.
In this instance it was to create another car access route to the Murrayfield Stadium for the visit of Billy Graham, the crowd gathering evangelist.
L/Cpl.
Ritchie is also a member of the Squadron's shooting team.
He has been with the T.A.
for four years.
Twenty tons of bridge rolls into position across the River Leith, as L/Cpl.
Leslie Ritchie and the Royal Engineers of 102 Field Squadron from Paisley work for 36 hours to complete the job.
ALAN MACDONALD REPRESENTS SCOTLAND IN INTERNATIONAL EVENT
At the end of last season's Scottish Motor Bike Trials Championship in November, Alan MacDonald held fifth position.
This remarkable feat resulted in Alan being selected to represent Scotland at the International Team Trials in Wales, an annual event for top teams throughout the world.
‘I felt it was quite an honour to be picked to represent Scotland’, he said.
His team came tenth out of the twenty five that competed, a result with which he was pleased considering that many of his competitors (although with amateur status like himself) were well funded and backed by sponsors.
In April Alan also took part in The Headway Trials, Bathgate.
This was organised by the Headway Charity which researches into head injuries.
Each year it takes place in different parts of the country and Alan this time, took first place, beating his brother in fourth place and eighty other competitors from throughout Scotland.
For this year's season of the 1991 Scottish Trials Championships, Alan is now in sixth position and hopeful, although modest about improving his chances to reach the top three.
Trials winner Alan MacDonald, holds the Headway Trophy.
GOLF NEWS
The Stoddard Golf Club, with 37 members, is well into the summer season with two knock-out competitions.
The Sir Robert Maclean singles, and The McGeorge Rose Bowl for pairs, being well underway.
On Saturday 20th April, the first match of the season ‘The Robert Lamby Memorial Trophy’ was held at the Holland Bush Golf Club, Lesmahagow.
The cup was won by Jim Hopkins, net score 72 and runner up was Archie Lang — net score 73.
This year, Douglas Reyburn are hosting the Buchanan Inter Company Trophy which was won last year by Stoddard Carpets.
Opening Venue
The newly formed Lyles Golf Club teed off the new season at Braehead Golf Club, led by the season's Captain, Danny Sproull.
The opening competition ‘The Lyles Masters’ was primarily sponsored by Townhead Carpets and owner Jim Laverie willingly competed in the morning round.
The lads were lucky with the weather and history will show that Friday April 5th, was the only ‘dry’ day between mid March and Mid April.
It is also worth noting Braehead Golf Club opened up the summer course especially for Lyles Golf Club!
At the ‘19th’ all prizes were presented by Captain, Danny Sproull where everyone agreed that it had been an enjoyable outing.
The Lyles Golf Club Members with Guests.