

PRESIDENT'S REPORT
The role of President can be compared to that of Chariman of the Board.
It is my duty to report to you, the members — effectively shareholders — on our financial year just passed, in terms of financial results, significant events and to comment on the health and future prospects of the Association.
It would be easy to be a prophet of doom and gloom in these difficult times but in business and in the Association, I sense a new spirit of optimism that better times are just around the corner and that we are at last seeing the tangible signs of recovery.
The recession has not been too unkind to HCIMA.
While, for most of the time, our membership levels have remained static, recent trends have brought an increase, with a significant proportion of these being senior industry figures.
Our results for the financial year, although showing a deficit, are mainly attributable to two extra ordinary items which have been clearly identified in the introduction to the accounts (see p 15).
The significant lowering of interest rates reducing our investment income also had an adverse effect.
Significant events over the past year mainly centred on the appointment of a successor to Elizabeth Gadsby MBE, whose farewell dinner at the Barber Surgeons Hall at the end of January was attended by her many friends in the industry, with fitting tributes.
Her successor, Stephen Martin-Scott, left for a variety of reasons, and the task of guiding the Association for a brief period fell to the honorary officers who received magnificent assistance from all the dedicated team at Trinity Road.
At the end of May we appointed Jeremy Logie to the position of Cheif Executive.
Jeremy joined us as a Fellow of the Association with a long and distinguished career in the industryand took over at the helm of a dedicated and well-motivated teamat Trinity Road.
His energy and enthusiasm have already made a significant contribution to the style and driving forward of the many issues with which the Association is involved.
He will report on our Corporate Plan, international activities and current plans on the drawing board to improve the status and image of the Association and, importantly, the services and communications with our members.
The health anf future prospects of the Hotel, Catering & InstitutionalManagement Associationhave never been better.
The Council is united in its resolve to maintain and develop standards of professional management and competence.
Our relationship with other industry bodies and government are at an all time high as we see the fruits of recent years, efforts beginning to flow through.
With more initiatives in the pipeline, this growth in our sphere of influences in the industry will continue to develop and, in time, fuel growth in our membership.
There has never been a better time to be a member of the Association.
1993 heralds a brighter future for us all.
As President, it has been a privilege to serve the membership and I have enjoyed, immensely, the hospitality and courtesy extended to my wife, Elizabeth, and myself as we have visited branches.
Finally, can I thank, on your behalf, the sterling efforts of all heads of departments and staff at Trinity Road, and all my colleagues in our Council and Committees whose efforts mean so much to the work of the Association.
Chris Robinson FHCIMA
Presidential gathering Denis Broderick FHCIMA, Chris Robinson FHCIMA and John Aust FHCIMA
CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S REPORT
Jeremy Logie FHCIMA
Corporate Plan
During 1992 the Association developed a new four-year Corporate Plan which has eight objectives, each objective having several tasks necessary to achieve the desired results.
These objectives and a brief summary of the main tasks are given below.
Improved Image
To improve the image of the Association among members and potential members and in order to improve the perceived value and relevance of the HCIMA.
Priorities concern improved membership services, relationships with other bodies, public relations, Hospitality magazine and staff training.
Financial Stability
To develop a range of profitable ventures to augment the income of the HCIMA and to provide a surplus of 2 per cent of the total revenue.
The income will accrue to HCIMA Limited, thus preserving the integrity of the charitable status of the main organisation.
Priorities include developing profitable new ventures such as sales of books, videos and other merchandise; growth in company patrons and business affiliates; improved financial situation of publications, particularly Hospitality and the annual reference book.
Membership
To double the current membership in ten years.
This will allow the HCIMA of offer a wider range of services to members and increase its sphere of influence.
Priority tasks include branch recruitment commission scheme, member-get-member campaign, membership promotion through advertising and attendance at exhibitions, student recruitment schemes and encouraging membership retention.
International Recognition
To increase the influence of the HCIMA internationally and within the UK as a truly professional body in order to spread the Association's mission.
Priority tasks will include the completion of the Corpus Knowledge project with an international conference and growth in international membership, together with the development of an EC lobby in Brussels.
Education
To continue the Association's activities in the UK and to facilitate moves to make the HCIMA the natural leader for assessing educational standards for the industry in Europe.
Tasks include the development of a uniform system of accreditation of programmes throughout Europe, the implementation of S/NVQ, promotion of distance learning material.
Management Development
To develop a comprehensive management development programme to encourage members to spend time during their carrer to keep up with new ideas and trends.
Priority tasks include the development of a comprehensive seminar programme, combined activities with other bodies to offer management development programmes, conferences, etc, and to find ways to generate a desire amongst members to participate in some form of development activity each year, during their careers.
Membership Services
To continue the development of a comprehensive range of relevant membership services for the benefit of HCIMA members.
Priority tasks include a review of existing services and the development of new, relevant services which either provide unique benefits to  members, or offer them discounts on supplies of goods or services.
We will also consider how we can better serve the needs of student members and the use of library and information service to the best effect.
Development of UK Branches and International Groups
To provide guidance and support to enable branches and international groups to flourish and to provide a vital link between individual members at the centre.
Priority tasks include the development of more regular communication with branch chairman and secretaries through meetings, written communication and individual contact at meetings and other occasions.
We will also offer additional financial support to branches as soon as funds allow.
The Royal Charter
As members will recall, the Association petitioned for a Royal Charter a few years ago.
After much debate, we were unfortunately refused.
During the past few months, we have again weighed upthe pros and cons of reapplying now, or waiting for the time being.
The original reasons for seeking a Royal Charter remain: it would give greater status to the Association, its members and indeed the whole industry; we would enjoy the endorsement by the Privy Council to our qualifications for membership; recognition by the Privy Council would add weight to the Association's opinion on issues when lobbying Government or debating with others; our members would have the Privy Council's endorsement of being true professionals with the opportunityfor a Corporate member to be called a Chartered Hotelier or a Chartered Caterer.
However, there are some very sound reasons why we should not re-petition just yet.
Firstly, we plan to review many aspects of our constitution and bye-laws in the next year or so.
Making such changes once one has a Royal Charter remain possible but are an extremely slow process.
Such changes are always difficult to work through and additional constraints would be very frustrating for the association and its members.
Secondly, we need to thoroughly review the long term future of our own examination system which willprobably need to be pitched at degree level to be acceptable to the Privy Council.
We need to consult with members and potential members both in the UK and other countries on the relevance of having a Royal Charter in post by 1992 Europe.
Whilst there is no doubt that many will preceive it as a major disadvantage to the Association, there will be those who think it is a step back into the past.
Finally, there are considerable costs associated with a successful petition for a Royal Charter.
Apart from incurring onerous legal fees, we may wish to change our name with the resultant costs of redesigning and reprinting stationery followed by the marketing of our new title.
For these reasons, the Council has decided to defer the matter for three years.
By then we should have completed any changes to the constitution and bye-laws, have decided on the long term future of our examination system and have strengthened our financial position so that we can meet the costs involved.
There is no diminution of our desire to gain Royal Charter status; just as prudent regard to the timing and a realism of the issues involved.
INTERNATIONAL
HCIMA launches its European accreditation initiative in Strasbourg
The Associationhas made great strides in establishing closer links both with major industry players and also educators in many other European Community member states.
Three major initiatives have brought this about and have opened up possibilities for futher development in the years to come.
European Management Skills and Knowledge Research
With the New Year came the signing of a contract with Surrey Universityto carry out an extensive research project into management skills and knowledge in several EC member states.
In addition to the UK these include Fance, Germany, Eire, The Netherlands, Spain and Portugal.
The research findings will totally update the previous Corpus of Knowledge research which has had so many applications both for the industry nad educators since it was first produced in the late 1970s.
The objectives are:
To provide hotel schools and other education/training providers with information which will assist them to develop curricula which facilitate the mobility of graduates within Europe.
To provide hospitality companies with information and advice on the skills and knowledge requirements of managers working in different sectors of the industry, in various European countries, which will assist them in their reqruitment and human resource development activities.
The work takes into account and draws upon the Employment Department Standards Development work carried out by the lead body, HCTC, in conjunction with HCIMA at levels 3 and 4.
Force Project
A major initiative embarked on in 1992 is the project partly funded by  FORCE (Formation Continue en Europe), an EC Group.
The project is co-ordinator is HCIMA Councillor, DavidBattersby FHCIMA, who is working with partners in the UK, France and The Netherlands to devise and pilot training packages which will be supported by the European Management Skills research findings.
FORCE lays particular stress on the needs of small to medium sized enterprises, and HCIMA members will provide valuable help in piloting and evaluating the packages devised.
Accrediting prior learning and arrangements for workplace training are important components in this exercise and the positive response from our industry members in the participating countries has been particularly heartening.
The project is due to be completed at the end of 1993.
European Foundation for the Accreditation of Hotelschool Programmes (EFAH)
1992 saw the emergence of EFAH (European Foundation for the Accreditation of Hotelschool Programmes), a pan-European industry and educational group, working together to devise a European accreditation System for hotel school programmes.
HCIMA has a seat on the Governing Board, as a founding member, together with industry representatives from the International Hotel Association (IHA), the EC trade Association group HOTREC and from hotel schools representing the three levels of qualification banding: craft, supervisory and management.
Much work has been put into the establishment of commonly accepted criteria and documentation to support the accreditation process.
HCIMA's accreditation expert.
MAry Cobb FHCIMA, has played the leading role in establishing systems which are now being tested and, it is hoped, adopted during the course of 1993.
It is considered essential for employers and students to have access to easily understood information about the types of qualifications offered by the many institutions across the spectrum of the European countries.
The EFAH accreditation system aims to provide such information and thus assist all those wishing to emply and seek employment in the various European countries.
International Groups
This year, with the inauguration of two new international groups, and the re-launch of another, the Association has taken further steps forward in the promotion of HCIMA worldwide.
Denis Broderick FHCIMA, President (1991/92) attended the inaugural meeting and Gala Dinner in Weissensberg to launch HCIMA Germany.
Guests included the local chief administrator and founder of the Catering Equipment Manufacturing Company.
The formal re-launch of HCIMA Ghana — in existence for 15 years — took place in June.
The group was able to boast an excellent increase in membership numbers helped by a recruitment drive in the form of a Salon Culinaire.
HCIMA Sri Lanks was launched at an inaugural meeting at Mount Lavinia.
At the group's first meeting held afterwards, HCIMA Awareness seminars were planned to help meet member recruitment targets which the group had set.
The total number of international groups now stands at sixteen.
To further promote HCIMA international activities, all groups have been personally invited to submit details of forthcoming events for inclusion in the HCIMA Events page in Hospitality.
HCIMA Members who participated in the Ghana Salon culinaire
EDUCATION
The period covered by this Annual Report has been a particularly active and rewarding year in the field of education.
In view of the number of changes in education, a fundamental strategic review of the Association's role in this area was undertaken and approved by the Council in December 1992.
Many of the initiatives laboured over in previous years have come to fruition and a host of new ventures has sprung up, bringing fresh opportunities and challenges.
Government legislation for futher and higher education has made its mark in the form of implementation of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 (and associated legislation in Scotland and Wales).
Together with the adoption of the NVQ/SVQ framework for vocational qualifications, this legislation has dramatically changed the face of post-school education in the UK.
HCIMA strives both to interpret for its members and others, and to implement these radical reforms.
Much effort by the Education Services Department has been expended to that end.
The HCIMA Professional Programmes
Enrolment during the second year of operation of the new programmes has been encouraging, with 721 students enrolling on the Certificate and 144 on the Diploma courses.
During the year, 285 students completed their studies to gain the Professional Certificate, and over 100 gained the Diploma.
As some centres off the Diploma part-time over three years, some of thosestarting the initial course in 1990 will only complete in 1993.
The moderation teams continued to meet on a regular basis, to provide feedback and consider further ways of setting and maintaining national standards.
As well as the regular Course Tutors Meetings, Seminar Days were held, for the first time, for Diploma subjects specialist tutors.
All those attending agreed that the one day meetings for both Financial Management and Human Resource Management lecturers were very worthwhile.
Further sessionsfor other subjects specialists have, therefore, been scheduled for the current academic year.
The one year Certificate course for ‘women returners’ at Launder College was well received and another group received funding for the next year.
The programmes are now registered as providing learning support for NVQs at level 3 (the Certificate) and level 4 (the Diploma) which means that any students paying their own fees should not be required to pay the 25 per centincome tax component on either the HCIMA assessment fees or the college fees.
This has been a considerable help to the many students who finance themselves through their HCIMA studies.
Distance Learning
1992 has seen the launch of the distance learning support material for the Professional Certificate and Diploma programmes.
Thanks to the commitment and expertise of our teams of writers under the firm guidance of the co-ordinator Angela Ringguth, the material is of exceptional qualityin terms of content and user friendliness.
Its value as support material for a wide range of hospitality programmes has also been recognised; ot bears the NVQ logo, indicating that it can be of use to those working to gain NVQs at levels 3 and 4.
Interest has not been confined to the UK; overseas groups and colleges have expressed a wish to use the material, and Norwich City College, our principle international centre, has assessed the material for use by candidates around the world.
Enrolments will begin in September 1993.
HCIMA/CITY & GUILDS Awarding Body for NVQ
January 1992 saw the launch of the NVQ framework of qualifications for the catering and hospitality industry and the licensed trade.
Earlier in the month an agreement had been signed between HCIMA and city and Guilds to form a partnership to award NVQs at level 4.
Our joint submission to the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NVCQ) was duly approved and work commenced swiftly to implement this new venture, which was seen as a positive and exciting contribution to the Government's radical reform of vocational education.
An NVQ co-ordinator, Gill Murdoch, was appointed in May to carry forward the challenging work of developing assessment strategies for level 4 qualifications and informing and helping potential centresand candidates in implementing the new qualification system.
This partnership with City and Guilds is the latest collaboration in what has been a long and fuitgul relationship.
With an excellent track record in providing awards for all industries, City & Guilds has proved to be a very good partner, offering scope for candidates needing NVQs covered by a range of lead body standards.
Awarding SVQs
Parrallel arrangements for vocational qualifications were launched by SCOTVEC in April 1992.
HCIMA formed a joint partnership for awarding Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs) at level 3 and 4 with SCOTVEC, HCTC and, for licensed trade qualifications, British Institute of Innkeepers.
Our Scottish Officer, Ros Sutherland MHCIMA, has worked closely with SCOTVEC throughout the year on the implementation of the new framework.
She has also produced an assessment guide for level 4 qualifications which will be available in 1993.
DEVELOPMENT
Accreditation of Prior Learning
The APL scheme has gone from strength to strength this year, with highly competent managers from several factors including civic and local government, contract catering, hotels and the armed forces using this route to gain full membership.
The national team of mentors has been expanded to meet the growing need for people to guide applicants through the process of identifying their areas of competence and compiling of evidence.
Continuing Professional Development
A new programme of hospitality seminars eas launched in the Autumn to provide practical management development seminars, covering a range of issues, at venues nationwide for easy access for members.
The programme is run by industry training specialists Progressive Training, and the concept will be further developed to meet the needs of members in the future.
An arrangement was signed with the Educational Institute of the American Hotel & Motel Association by which the HCIMA became the sole UK distributor of the EI's comprehensive range of management development resourses.
This initiative will enable the Association to assist its members and their staff to keep their knowledge and skills up to date.
The concept of continuing professional development has been fostered by the Board of Fellows in its recent work and members should now keep records of all their reading, lectures, seminars and conferences attended in order to support applications they may wish to make in due course for upgrading to fellowship.
WORKING FOR INDUSTRY
Company Links
The HCIMA attended a number of company management conferences and meetings during the year to support members and raise awareness of the services available to assist managers in their jobs.
These relationships and the accreditation of in-company training programmes will be developed in 1993.
Business Affiliates
A new programme was launched in the Autumn to provide a formal link between the association and suppliers to the industry.
Ten companies have already joined the programmes and will be meeting on a regular basis.
They represent a wide variety of suppliers ranging from equipment manufacturers to linenhire services to software suppliers.
Carrers Advisory Work
During the year there were 9,000 requests for careers information.
Career enquieries increased steadily during 1992, with a notable increase in those generated at trade shows and exhibitions attended by our staff.
A record number of licentiate applications have been assessed, reflecting the increased promotional activities carried out.
Nearly all were processed and rigorously assessed within the self-imposed six week target period.
Joint Hospitality Industry
The Association has fully participated in this new initiative to draw together opinion and comment from across the widest spectrum of our industry, in a bid to provide the industry with a united voice to Government.
Other members of the group include the British Hospitality Association, the Hotel & Catering Training Company, the British Institute of Innkeepers, the Brewers Society, the British Slef Catering Federation, the European Catering Association and the Restauranteurs Association of Great Britain.
The Association is also actively onvolved in the Hospitality and Foodservice Industry Forum which encompasses suppliers, manufacturers and distributors to the industry.
Education/Industry Interface
An initiative first launched some years ago by a member of Her Majesty's Inspectorate, the Hotel Employers Group and education groups were revived in 1992.
The main thrust of the education/industry interface involves devising best practice agreements covering student and teacher placements, which will be agreed by participating industry and education partners, and will provide opportunities for adult professional development.
The Association was approached by the originators of the idea, as well as NEDO, to take on board these objectives and carry them forward.
The HCIMA sought support from all of the relevant industry and education groupings to determine whether this would be supported by all concerned.
By the end of the year universal support and enthusiasm had been received.
It was agreed that a steering group, led by HCIMA, would develop an action plan to bring this education/industry interface into being as soon as possible.
MARKETING
During 1992 initiatives were undertaken to raise the profile and image of the Association, promote membership and improve awareness of the benefits and services offered.
Despite a continuing diificult economic climate membership levels were held steady, and a 4 per cent increase in new members was achieved over the previous year.
A new public relations company, William Murray, was appointed to assist the HCIMA in these objectives.
Membership Promotion
During the Winter/Spring 1991/2 an advertising campaign was run to promote membership, generating over 1,000 enquiries.
A member-get-member campaign was run in the Autumn of 1992 in which 400 colleagues were proposed for membership by members.
Membership was also promoted with a special offer to Cater Club members, and directly within a number of companies through their employee magazine.
Branches also became involved in the national recruitment activities.
Market Research
Research was undertaken to canvass the views of members on the development of Hospitality magazine.
A survey was also conducted to investigate the concerns and needs of hospitality students across the country.
Exhibitions
The HCIMA stands at Hotelympia proved overwhelminly successful, with 654 memberships enquiries received — a record level of interest.
In September a stand was manned at the Restaurant Show, the first time the HCIMA has attended this exhibition, and a joint stand with the British Hospitality Association was taken at HOTEC.
The Fast Food Fair was attended in November.
In addition to the HCIMA stand, the Association ran a Business Advice Shop and also a seminar entitled ‘Beating the Recession’ with 100 attendees.
Members were also able to benefit by a special rate to join the Cater Club.
The HCIMA helped to man the Industry Careers stand at Careers ‘92 in Manchester and London, and also provided advice to visitors to the Caterer & Hotelkeeper Careers Fair at the Connaught Rooms in October.
MEMBERSHIP SERVICES
Membership Services Directory
For the first time all members received a membership card and Member Services Directory, which summarised the range of services available.
Nearly 1100 requests for further information have been received as a direct result of this initiative.
New Services
This year saw the launch of five new membership services.
Financial Helpline — operated by the Conway Partnership, DBS Financial Management representatives, and offering a dedicated financial helpline exclusive to members.
Under the scheme enquiries are referred to one of 700 qualified independent financial advisors who are able to offer local advice.
Property & Construction operated by Kennedy Woodward Allen, Chartered Surveyors and Architects and offering members a discounted service on a range of constructional services.
Royal Over-seas Leaque — offering HCIMA members a discounted annual subscription and waived entrance fee for corporate membership to this commonwealth organisation with club premises in London and Edingburgh.
Energy Management Consultancy — operated by Resource Conservation in association with Sani-Duct Installations Limited and Burke Ford Reed Limited (insurance Brokers) and giving members the opportunity to take advantage of discounted consultancy rates.
Executive CaterClub — special membership for two years to Reed's long-standing Executive CaterClub, entitling members to free pre-registration to all Reed's Exhibitions’ catering events during the membership period, private visitor lounge facilities complimentary breakfast, at the exhibitions and discounted magazine subscriptions.
Established Services
The Association continues to offer the following services:
Events
The 1992 AGM and annual lunch was held at the Hilton on Park Lane, London.
The two guest speakers were Zygmunt Tyskiewicz, Secretary General UNICE, and Lord Astor, Government spokesman in the House of Lords for the Department of Heritage.
500 members and friends of the Association atytended the lunch.
The Nat Abrahams Rose Bowl for the winners of the National Catering Business Game was presented to a team from South Devon College.
The President's Dinner was held in September at the Cafe Royal to honour in-coming President, Chris Robinson FHCIMA.
This year, the event eas ‘black tie’, and was enjoyed by 250 members and guests.
Once again the HCIMA Carol Serivce was held in the Queen's Chapel of the Savoy in aid of the HCBA, followed by mulled wine and minced pies at the Savoy.
We are most grateful to the Savoy Hotel for their generous support of this event each year.
Other events during the year included the Quality Forum held at the Institute of Directors, and a seminar on future trends in the world market for consumer catering in conjunction with Euromonitor.
INFORMATION & PUBLICATIONS
Library and Information Service
The promotion of the library and information service to members continues to bear fruit.
Over 10,000 enquiries were handled by the team in the information office at Trinity Road during 1992, an increase of 25 per cent over 1991.
The office now has two dedicated telephone lines as well as connection to the main switchboard.
Technical Advisory Group
The Technical Advisory Group gives advice and guidance on technical matters which affect the hospitality industry.
The information was complied and assessed by the group updates the HCIMA Library and Information Service and is the bais for the technical briefing documents.
Members of the group attend specialist organisation meetings including BSI Standards for Catering Equipment Committees, UK Federation of Food Science & Technology, BS7750 Environmental Initiative, HSE Health & Safety in Catering Liaison Committee, HCIMA Quality Working Group.
Hospitality
This year the new editorial team has made great strides to develop the editorial content within a limited budget.
Advertising continued to be disappointing although there was a good improvement at the latter end of the year.
The magazine has changed its appearance and the design of both cover and inside pages now has a more open, cleaner design.
By the year end the magaine was published in full colour throughout and agreement was reached to relaunch the magazine in the Spring as a far better quality publication.
Reference Book
The 1992 edition of this favourite publication once again covered a range of industry-relevant articles to keep members up-to-date.
The directories and listings within the publication provide a useful source of reference throughout the year.
Technical Publications
A seminar was held to explore the issue of BS5750 — Quality Management and its relevance to the industry.
As a result, senior industry members developed a publication on quality management making reference to the specific requirements of BS5750.
The Association has produced technical briefs on Cook Chill Catering, and revised A Guide to Electric Lighting, The Thawing of Poultry and Providing Accessible Accomodation.
Bibliography
The HCIMA Bibliography now renamed Current Awareness Bulletin of Hospitality Management, contains abstract from over 60 journals from the trade press giving a broad overview of development in the hospitality industry.
College Restaurant Directory
The Association is grateful to British Gas for its sponsorship of the second edition of this publication which it had, with HCIMA, launched the previous year.
It has been very popular with the public and local media and is an excellent vehicle for highlighting the high standards of catering available in the college restaurants.
Education Publications
The rapidly changing scene within the field of education caused some anxiety during the year.
This promoted the HCIMA to produce an Education Brief and also A Guide to NVQs.
Both were widely circulated and well received.
REPORT OF THE COUNCIL The Council submits its report and audited financial statements for the year ended 30 November 1992
The Association
The Association is a company limited by guarentee, not having any paid up share capital.
Charitable status, registered number 326180, was obtained on May 21, 1982.
Result of the Year
The deficit on the income and expenditure account for the year amounted to £65,988 (1991 — deficit £21,759) which is transferred from the accummulated fund.
Review of the Business
The principal activities of the Association during the year were the promotion of standards in the practice of good catering and accomodation management, and the advancement of education and training in the hotel catering and institutional management industry.
Auditors
Touche Ross & Co have expressed their willingness to continue in office and a resolution to reappoint them will be prosposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
HCIMA Ltd
The above company was formed during the year.
It has not yet transacted any business but will look at ways to develop commercial opportunities.
AUDITOR'S REPORT TO THE MEMBERS
We have audited the financial statements on pages 14 to 16 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Association's affairs at November 30, 1992 and of its deficit for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Council
The members of the Council and directors of the company during the year ended 30 November 1992 were: