

RETURNING TROUBLES
In many ways entry into middle management proved to be the exciting new challenge I was hoping for.
The initial interview with an MD seven years my junior was largely comfortable and amicable apart from the minor irritant when he asked if I thought I could relate to young people in the office.
At that point we had six teens and early twenties at home and I was doing a great deal of relating to young people.
Ability to work to a deadline under pressure was another skill I was quizzed about.
Try a part-time job, two kids with chicken-pox and an impending twin christening with 35 guests and 7 staying overnight, I thought, but I resisted the temptation to pat him on the head.
‘I can cope,’ I said and he took my word for it.
His youthful 41 years accepted my aged 48 with obvious reluctance.
Learning office skills and disciplines was less daunting than I had expected.
The word-processor, the photo-copier and the fax were three more machines to master after half a lifetime using a plethora of household machinery.
There were the same satisfactions of seeing a job well-finished and the same frustrations when the machines refused to function.
There were even the familiar masculine responses when the machines broke down.
‘You wouldn't understand,’ a young male engineer responded loftily when I asked what was wrong with the photocopier.
It was tempting to march him home and face him with my sewing machine and its 10-point threader.
‘Thread that!’
I would have liked to say but of course I didn't.
Instead I smiled sweetly and asked if he could try to explain so that I could understand.
The word processor proved to be, and still is, a joy after my own old typewriter at home.
You would have to know my typewriter to appreciate fully the luxury of being able to hop about in a text making alterations, counting the words at a touch of a button and running off endless perfect copies.
Relating to the ‘young people’ was another pleasure.
It was all so familiar.
The concerns about what to wear, the latest haircuts and how to deal with acne were subjects I knew well — and I could identify with the girls' interests too.
There were the boyfriend troubles, the wedding arrangements, the curtains for the new flat, tales of hilarious drinks parties when everyone was ‘out of their trees’, arguments with girlfriends, mothers-in-law and baby sitters.
It all reminded me of the warmth and life at home and it was easy.
After a year or two I was nipping out at lunchtime to pick up a new skirt for the office party, calling at the dry cleaners, handing in the photos to be developed and meeting friends for lunch with the best of them.
There had to be a snag, of course, a fly in the ointment.
I never expected the job to be perfect but I was surprised by the nature of the problem.
What was under test was not my skills or abilities but my moral judgement.
Even within a mobile industry the staff turnover of 95% in 4 years was high and as the office handled a steady influx of new faces, there were subtle changes in the chemistry of the staff.
An unwelcome element of anarchy crept in.
The newly French-polished lift was scored and scratched.
I muttered like a fractious housewife.
Books were not returned, articles went missing and I disapproved silently.
The staff notice board became a crude depository of sixth-form humour, soft porn and actionable libel.
I averted my gaze and felt uncomfortable.
Language was spiced with four-letter words, not simply in anger but in everyday transactions.
‘Playground language’ I used to call it when my sons explored that path.
I closed my ears and tried to close my mind to what was happening.
It was no help to discover that I was not alone in my distaste for the new order because, along with the ever-present sexism, I had to fight the crueller jibes of ageism.
A mild protest could ignite feelings that burned in the manly chests of the arrogant young.
‘Now you're showing your age’ was the brazen response.
Two recent incidents have led me to question my responses in a job that I continue to enjoy and do well.
A farewell card to a secretary seemed innocent enough.
It is a long tradition within the firm to produce handmade farewell cards and there have been some beauties — apt and humorous — which have left the donors proud of their efforts and the recipients amused and flattered.
The latest effort, a crude, page-three photograph with the recipient's head superimposed contrived to be both offensive and pathetic.
The open sexism, the lack of care about the effect on the leaver and the dearth of a single fresh idea stunned me.
I refused to sign it and one or two brave souls joined me.
The price of this small moral victory will be an increase in ageist and sexist remarks but an important line has been crossed.
The second and more troubling event has left me — the self-styled, experienced, capable, worldly-wise individual — in a moral dilemma with no idea how I should respond.
At the end of a busy week it was no surprise to hear sounds of hilarity in the corridor.
A ripping noise was soon identified as the sound of parcel masking tape.
The noise continued for same time and as the male laughter increased I realised the parcel must be a large one.
It was considerably later that I discovered that the teenage office lad had been strapped and bound with tape and left in the lift on the top floor.
I was assured that the lad didn't mind, he liked it and, ‘we're going to get him again next week!’
Bullying was never easy to handle.
I hated it when our own kids suffered from it and I still hate it almost more than anything else.
But at least I knew what to do when the victims were mine.
The tigress is quick to surface when your young are threatened and I could face up to any bully to defend my own.
How to react with strangers is a different matter.
Do you step forward and object?
Or do you wait till they tire of the taunting and go to release the victim when the coast is clear?
Would release embarrass him or cut him off from that obscure membership of the masculine club?
Would any direct action stem from promptings of age or gender?
Worst of all, would the option to ignore the incident make me party to an action I abhor?
And would ignoring these apparently trivial matters lead me to ignore any future escalations?
The exercise of skills in the workforce as a mature returner has been a rewarding experience in so many ways but I never expected it to test my personal standards or challenge my courage to stand up against what I believe is wrong.
WORKING IT OUT AT 50
‘You're so lucky!’ a friend told me recently.
‘You lead such an exciting life meeting interesting people.
I feel as if life has passed me by.’
On the face of it she was right.
A stranger might look at her home routine and compare it very unfavourably with my busy 9 to 5 in the city.
What isn't obvious is that work for the over 50s is an acceptance of life as a minority and often an  unprivileged minority at that.
A glance at the recruitment pages or the cards in the job centres will confirm the real truth that ageism remains largely unchallenged in the female workforce.
While it is forbidden to stipulate black or white, male or female, it is perfectly acceptable to restrict work to under 25s or under 30s.
Despite statistics which reveal a reducing young population, only a very few employees will accept 40s and they are rare indeed who even interview 50s.
The result is an inevitable imbalance within the workplace.
In my office the majority of female employees are under 25 and, at 50, I am a good 10 years older than any other woman in the building.
Of course, with benefit of experience, this is no problem in everyday work.
A pleasant smile and a willing spirit melt barriers and keep communications civilised.
What a pleasant manner cannot do is bridge the social gap, not in class but in age.
Every age has its own preoccupations.
At each stage, half the fun comes from sharing the trials and triumphs with friends who are undergoing the same experiences.
The students with relationships, night life, travel and exams; the engaged with pre-wedding preparations, flat-buying; the young married with nights out, children and baby sitting — at 50 you've been there and done all these.
However, being 50 in the office bars you from any sense of belonging to the group.
True, you can offer advice when it's asked for but no-one really wants advice — particularly if it's 20 years out-of-date.
You have to avoid being Nellie-know-all and hold your tongue to allow a younger generation to enjoy the fun of discovery.
The 50+ pre-occupations of grandchildren, elderly parents and retired partners are unimagined territories for those who have not yet reached that stage.
They might listen politely but they're not actively involved.
Pleasures are different too.
Office parties are fun if you're 25, fending off the office Lothario and downing a beer with the boys.
50+ finds little pleasure in ‘getting smashed’ and little prospect of the opportunity to squash unwanted attentions.
(A pity, really, just at the point when you could do it so well!)
Organised team games like soft-ball or squash hold small attraction even if there was the remotest chance of being selected for the team.
What remains is an acceptance of peripheral existence on the social level whilst being totally integrated at a work level.
No invites to weddings but a cheerful inclusion in the gift contribution lists.
It isn't all gloom because there are compensations and saving graces.
It is possible to observe and enjoy from the sidelines, and, of course, there is life beyond the office — hard for the young to believe but as rich and full as any corporate involvement.
One of my own compensations is the bus journey into town.
The bus may be crowded, the journey slow, the pavements wet but my fellow travellers are now good friends.
En route the 41 club exchanges news and views and puts the world to rights once a day before we take our individual paths into the isolation of a busy office.
The extra bonus — the thing that makes me truly lucky — is that I can go home to the real friends and neighbours whose tales of burst drain-pipes, complicated recipes and domestic dramas sound every bit as interesting to me when I lack the leisure to enjoy them myself.
I suppose my friend is right.
I am lucky — and she is part of my luck!
WEE JOE AND THE BULBS
Wee Joe was sitting on the rug playing with a toy car when William and Jenny came home from school.
‘Look what we've got!’ they said.
Mum and Wee Joe looked.
They each had a paper bag with something in it that looked like onions.
‘Onions?’
Joe asked.
Jenny giggled.
‘No, silly.
They're bulbs.’
William saw his wee brother looking puzzled and said kindly, ‘Wee Joe hasn't seen them before.
They're for growing in pots.
We have to get special stuff called bulb fibre and wet it and put it in a bowl and then we plant our bulbs in it.’
What happens then?’ asked Wee Joe.
‘I'll tell you,’ said Mum.
‘You see there's a tiny flower sleeping inside each bulb.
We put it to bed in a bowl and cover it in bulb fibre like a blanket.
We give it a drink of water when it's thirsty and then the tiny flower begins to grow.’
Jenny said, ‘It grows really big and our school's having a competition to see who can grow the biggest flower.
Can we buy some fibre, please, Mum?’
Mum smiled.
‘We'll buy some today when we're at the shops.’
After tea that day they all gathered in the kitchen and Mum brought out two great big bags full of dry brown stuff that she bought in the flower shop.
Wee Joe watched as William and Jenny poured it into bowls and dripped water into it.
‘You can help if you like,’ William said, and he showed Wee Joe how to mix in the water and squeeze it in his hands until the bulb fibre was wet through.
It was funny because it didn't go runny like mud.
You could brush it off your hands and they weren't even dirty.
Jenny and William planted their bulbs in the middle of the bowls and covered them over with more wet fibre.
‘There's some left,’ Mum said.
‘would you like to plant some in this bowl, Joe?’
‘Will mine grow big too?’ he asked.
‘'Course it will,’ Jenny told him.
‘If you leave it in a dark place and keep it wet it's bound to grow big.
I'm going to put mine in the cupboard now.’
‘Shall I help you with yours?’
William asked.
‘No, I can do it myself,’ Wee Joe said.
‘I know how to do it.’
So Mum and Jenny and William carried their bowls off to the cupboard under the stairs and left Wee Joe to do his planting.
When he had finished he put his bowl beside theirs.
It did take a long time for anything to happen.
It was weeks before the bulbs in William and Jenny's bowls began to show green shoots.
After a while they brought their bowls out of the cupboard and the green leaves grew taller and flower buds began to fatten.
But in Wee Joe's bowl, nothing showed at all.
No tiny shoots.
No green leaves.
Mum and William and Jenny were surprised.
‘Maybe he didn't have good bulbs,’ said William.
‘Maybe he planted them upside-down,’ Jenny said.
Mum said,’ We'll wait a bit longer and see.’
One day when great big pink flowers opened up in William and Jenny's bowls Mum took Wee Joe to have another look at his one in the cupboard.
It was strange.
There was still no green showing.
‘I think we'd better have a look to see what's wrong,’ Mum said.
She carried Wee Joe's bowl to the kitchen table and they all watched as she gently moved away the bulb fibre.
’ That's funny,’Mum said.
‘I can't find your bulbs, Joe.
Oh, wait a minute.
Here's something.’
Carefully Mum lifted something hard out of the fibre.
It was a toy car!
Wee Joe looked sad.
‘It didn't grow bigger,’ he said.
They all laughed and laughed.
Then Mum said,’ But what did you do with your bulbs, Joe?’
‘Put them in the window box’ Joe said.
They all rushed to the window and looked.
There were two beautiful, tall, pink spikes of flowers with glossy green leaves.
William patted  joe on the back.
‘Never mind Joe.
Cheer up!
You didn't grow big cars but you've grown much bigger flowers than we did.’
And suddenly Wee Joe felt very pleased with himself.
1 THE DRIVING BED
Pete and Mum were coming back from the shops.
They stopped at the Zebra Crossing and Pete watched the big lorries and buses and cars roar past.
Pete loved to watch all the traffic.
‘Brrrrr —’ he said as the Green Man signalled it was time to cross.
‘I'm driving a big bus.
Brrrr —‘.
As usual they walked past the toy shop and Pete stopped to look in the window.
There was a tank, some racing cars and a wee motor boat at the front and a big orange plastic tractor with a trailer at the back.
In the middle of the window was a shiny red car you could sit in with a driver's wheel you could turn and a horn you could peep.
‘What do you like best?’
Mum said.
‘Well,’ said Pete, ‘the tractor's nice and I like the motor boat but I like the wee red car best.
I wish I could drive a wee red car.’
Mum shook her head.
‘I know.
It's a shame we've no room for a car in our flat.
And no money to buy one either.
Maybe one day.
Come on, it's nearly dinner time.
Let's go home.’
Pete lived with his Mum at the top of a big block of flats not far from the shops.
They had to cross a stretch of waste ground where buildings had been knocked down.
People dropped all kinds of rubbish in amongst the lank grass and an old rusty car had been abandoned on a concrete platform where a garage once stood.
Lying on the ground near the car Pete spotted something round and shiny.
It was the driving wheel of the car.
Someone had ripped it out and thrown it away.
‘Can I have it, Mum?’
Pete asked and Mum grinned and said ‘Well, I suppose so but I'll give it a good wash when we get home.’
Pete ran ahead and opened the big glass doors as he usually did and Mum lifted him up to press the button for the lift.
He couldn't wait to play with his car wheel.
The big lift took them up higher and higher until they reached the top floor when it stopped with a little bump.
Once they were in their own flat Mum put down her shopping and put the kettle on.
Usually Pete liked to look down and watch the traffic from the window in the living room but today he bobbed about in the kitchen until Mum filled the basin with hot soapy water and scrubbed the driving wheel clean.
Then Pete sat and polished it dry with a soft cloth until the wheel was shining.
‘Brrrr —’ he said as he held it up, ‘Brrrr — I'm a car driver, Brrrr —’
The next day when Pete and Mum went to the shops Mum had to buy fruit and vegetables from the  green-grocer .
She bought potatoes and carrots and apples and bananas and oranges and every time she lifted her bag an orange fell out and rolled on the floor.
The  green-grocer laughed and said,’ You would be better with a box.
I'll see if I've got one.’
He came back with a strong cardboard box and helped Mum to pack everything in it.
Pete looked hard at it and said,
‘Mum, when we get home, can I have the box?’
‘Of course you can if you help me to carry it,’ Mum promised.
When they got back to the flat, Mum emptied out all the vegetables and fruit and Pete took the box to his room.
He turned it upside dawn and sat on it.
He held the driving wheel in his hands and said,’ Brrrr, I'm driving my car, Brrr —’
That day they had a visitor.
It was old Mr Bennet from the flat next door.
Mum sometimes did shopping for him when the weather was bad.
Pete said, ‘Mr Bennet, I've got a car.
Come and see.’
Mr Bennet smiled when he saw Pete's box and his driving wheel.
’ That's a grand car,’he said.
‘maybe you and I could make it a bit bigger though.’
‘How?’
Pete said and Mum shook her head.
‘There's not much room here for big cars, Mr Bennet.’
Mr Bennet put one finger at the side of his nose and looked over the top of his glasses.
‘I think we could manage something,’ he said.
‘I'll just fetch a few things we might need.’
Pete could hardly wait until Mr Bennet came back.
‘What do you think he's bringing, Mum?’ he said and Mum shook her head and said, ‘I can't imagine.’
When Mr Bennet rang the doorbell he had his hands full of pieces of cardboard and balls of string and sticky tape and over one shoulder he carried a bright red blanket.
‘Show me your bed, Pete,’ Mr Bennet said,’and we'll get started.’
First he took scissors and cut four big cardboard circles.
‘These are the wheels,’ he said.
‘Can you find some crayons and colour them in?’
Pete rushed off and fetched his big crayons and Mum showed him how to colour the middle of the wheels to make hub caps.
Soon the four wheels were shiny black with bright red centres.
While he was busy Mr Bennet was looking at Pete's bed and nodding.
‘That will fit nicely,’ he said.
He fastened the panel from an old radio to the headboard with sticky tape and tied the driving wheel to Pete's cardboard box with string.
Mum helped to fix that to the headboard too.
When the wheels were finished they taped them to the four corners of t]he bed and Mum spread the red blanket over the covers.
Pete could hardly believe it.
‘It's a red car!’ he said.
Old Mr Bennet stood back.
‘My goodness, so it is,’ he said and winked at Pete.
Pete jumped on his bed and sat in front of his driving wheel.
‘Brrr —, beep, beep, beep!’ he called.
‘There's room for a passenger in the back.’
Mr Bennet sat behind him and Pete turned the driving wheel.
‘Brrr —, beep, beep, beep!’
Mum said, ‘Thank you very much for the driving bed, Mr Bennet,’ but he shook his head.
‘I only brought in some old rubbish.
It was Pete who turned it into a car.’
‘Brr — Brrr — I did it!
I did it!’
Pete smiled as he drove away in his very own red car.
1 DUNCAN THE BABY DINOSAUR
Duncan was a baby dinosaur.
He lived in a big, warm cave with his mother and father dinosaur.
They were all very happy except for one thing.
Duncan wouldn't eat.
Mother dinosaur put a bundle of bright, fresh, green grass on the cave floor in front of him.
‘Try this, son,’ she said.
But Duncan wasn't too sure what that green stuff was so he closed his baby dinosaur lips tight shut and shook his head.
Father dinosaur tried too.
He brought a big bundle of weeds dripping fresh from the loch.
‘Just wait till you taste these, son,’ he said.
But Duncan had never seen weeds dripping fresh from the loch before.
He sniffed the bundle and a drop of water fell on his nose and made him jump.
So Duncan closed his baby dinosaur lips tight shut and shook his head.
‘What are we going to do?’
Mother said to Father.
‘If he doesn't eat he'll just get thinner and thinner and who ever heard of a small, thin dinosaur?’
Father dinosaur thought for a bit.
‘He needs some fresh air.
Come on, son.
Come for a walk with me and we'll see if we can find something good to eat.’
So they walked out of the dark cave into the bright sunshine.
Father showed Duncan the path that led to the grassy slopes of the hills.
‘Just try this, son,’ he said.
‘It's one of my favourites.’
Duncan looked at the long green grass and, as he looked, the wind blew strong and the tall, green grasses swayed and whispered in the wind.
Duncan was afraid to go near all that long, green swaying grass and he closed his baby dinosaur lips tighter than ever.
After a bit Father dinosaur said kindly, ‘Never mind.
If you don't like this, maybe you'll like the weeds in the loch.’
They walked down the path together until they reached the shores of the loch.
Bright green weeds lay thick and juicy under the surface of the water.
‘Come on Duncan,’ Father dinosaur said.
‘You taste these.’
Duncan peeped down into the water of the loch and, just then, the wind blew strong and fast making the water splash and ripple and the green weeds slithered about under the surface.
Duncan was too afraid to taste them so he shut his baby dinosaur lips and shook his head again.
‘Oh dear,’ said his father, ‘I think we'd better go home to the cave.
I think your mother might have a surprise for you.’
Duncan trotted back with him and, sure enough, Mother dinosaur was waiting for them with a big smile on her face.
‘You're just in time.
I've made something really special.
It's a birthday cake for you Duncan.
Happy Birthday, son!’
There on the floor of the cave was a bright green grass birthday cake decorated with red and yellow leaves.
It looked lovely.
It didn't drip water and there was no wind in the cave so it didn't move.
Duncan sniffed and then he nibbled and then he chewed.
All the time Mother dinosaur was smiling and smiling.
‘I knew you'd like that, Duncan,’ she said.
‘After all, everybody likes birthday cake!’
And from then on Duncan ate grass and leaves and grew to be a real, big dinosaur.
FAST KATY
Katy was looking very pleased with herself when she came home from the nursery.
‘We were running races,’ she said, ‘and I was the fastest.
I can run faster than anybody.’
Wee brother Jamie looked interested.
‘Can we run races now, Katy?’ he said.
Katy laughed.
‘You can't run races with me, Jamie.
I'm too fast for you.
I'm the fastest at everything.’
Jamie looked disappointed and Dad said, ‘Never mind, Jamie.
You can come and watch me paint the window frames.’
‘I'll come too,’ said Katy.
Jamie and Katy watched Dad dip his paintbrush in the thick white paint and slowly, slowly stroke the brush along the narrow window frame.
‘Can I do that?’
Katy asked Dad.
‘If you're very careful,’ Dad said.
Katy took the brush and dipped it carefully in to the  paintpot .
But then Katy said, ‘I can do it faster than Dad.’
And before anyone could stop her, Katy went slap, splosh, slap with the brush.
Same of the paint went on the window frame; a lot of it went on the glass; and most of it went on the floor.
‘Oh, Katy, No!’
Dad said.
‘You can't paint windows fast.
You have to do them slowly.’
Jamie laughed.
‘You're too fast, Katy,’ he said.
Katy rubbed a sticky spot of paint on her hand.
‘I don't want to paint any more,’ she said.
‘Come on Jamie, we'll go and talk to Grandma.’
Grandma was sitting by the fire with a big pile of wool.
She was winding one end of it into a little ball.
Katy watched as Grandma wound it slowly round and round and the ball of wool grew bigger and bigger.
‘Can I do that?’
Katy asked.
‘If you like,’ Grandma smiled.
‘Just hold this wee ball of wool in your hand and wind it round and round.’
Katy took the ball of wool.
‘Look, Jamie, see this!’ she said, and she began to wind the wool so fast that it tangled up in a big knot and the ball bounced right out of her hand and rolled underneath Grandma's chair.
‘Oh, Katy, No!’
Grandma said.
‘You have to wind wool slowly.’
Jamie crawled under Grandma's chair to fetch the ball of wool.
‘You're too fast, Katy,’ he laughed.
Katy looked crossly at Jamie.
‘I'm not winding wool any more.
I'm going to see Mum.
Come on.’
They found Mum baking in the kitchen.
She was putting spoonfuls of sponge mixture from a big bowl into tiny paper cases.
‘Can I do that?’
Katy asked.
Jamie laughed.
‘You're too fast Katy.
You'll just make a mess of it.’
Mum smiled.
‘I think if you watched me first you could both help.
Put on a nice big apron and wash your hands and then I'll show you how to do it.’
Katy and Jamie got ready very quickly and Mum gave each of them two wee spoons.
‘Now, lift a spoonful of mixture out of the bowl with one spoon and use the other spoon to push it into the paper case like this,’ Mum said.
Jamie and Katy soon saw how to do it.
It was great fun and they worked so carefully they didn't spill one single drop of sponge mixture.
When they were finished Mum called Dad and Grandma to come and see.
Dad laughed.
‘Well, Katy,’ he said, ‘you're too fast to race with Jamie and you're too fast at painting windows and you're too fast at winding wool but, when it comes to baking, I think you're just right!’
STAN, THE FOSSIL MAN
Imagine an ordinary young man coming home from work and walking his dog in a disused  coalyard .
Imagine the same man 30 years later.
He's a  paleontologist and a world authority on fossils.
It may sound like a story from Boy's Own Annual but it happens to be true.
Stan Wood is the man and he can already claim a place of honour amongst the great fossil hunters of the world.
Stan lives with his wife, Mary, and daughter, Emma, in a smart modern home overlooking the sweep of the Pentland Hills in the village of Currie, south of Edinburgh.
When I went to visit him we sat in his book-lined study surrounded by all the trappings of an academic career but in his garage there were untreated specimens and a range of specialist tools.
Stan is not limited to the confines of a library.
Stan is a practical man.
As he lit a cigarette,(he rolls his own from a tobacco mix in a tin) he told me about his early life.
There were certainly no signs of youthful promise.
Born n 1939 he lived in Sighthill, an estate on the city fringe with few facilities for anything but basic living.
Leaving school in 1954 at the age of 15 and with no qualifications he became an apprentice engineer in the shipyards at Leith Docks.
It was a 16 mile round trip by bicycle from Sighthill gardens to Leith docks and back, 7.30 am start and 5.30 pm finish.
This was a hard life.
Home after 6 to an empty house with mother away cleaning offices, there was no free time and no free energy.
‘Scrape the muck off, make tea, go to bed — all for £2.5/6 a week.’
Mother got £2 and Stan had 5/6 for himself.
The docks were tough.
In the winter spanners and hammers froze to the hands.
It was a relief when, at 21, Stan was called up for National Service.
He chose to be a marine engineer reckoning to go as far away as possible from the wastes of Leith and hoping to see the world.
It didn't work out like that.
Instead he served for the next three  yearswith a merchant shipping company.
Now he worked 7 days a week down below in the engine room stripped to the waist in constant temperatures of 113F and all for £10 a week.
The ship's company was based in London but the ship was hired to foreign countries and although she sailed from Australia to Canada, all Stan saw was the engine room.
This period came to an end when, on a two months home leave Stan met Mary, his future wife, at The Cavendish Ballroom in Edinburgh.
He left the sea and became an engineer with Brown Brothers at Bonnington Toll where he worked night shift for 3 years.
Now 26 he decided to make a major leap into white collar work.
Stan became an insurance man with The Prudential.
It was during the next 8 years that he began to experience the first stirrings of an interest destined to change his life beyond all imaginings.
Stan had discovered that he was a good insurance salesman.
The work was not taxing and for the first time in his life he had flexible free hours.
From his first home with Mary in Canonmills he would take their mongrel dog, Penny, to the nearest open space which was a  coalyard , a spur off an old railway.
Here he began to spot that some discarded lumps of coal, or sandstone disguised as coal, held the impressions of ancient plants.
He collected some and showed them to a friend who worked in the Geology Department of the Royal Museum, Chambers Street in Edinburgh.
His friend told him that if he wanted to make a meaningful collection he should try to find fossils of back-boned animals which were very rare.
For the first time in his life Stan had been given an objective.
He began looking in Wardie Bay, a neglected area of coastline on the fringe of the city.
Catching low tide in the early hours and searching through mud was no particular hardship to Stan and he soon began to find fossil fishes.
He took them to Mahala Andrews, an expert in fossil fishes at the Chambers Street Museum to learn that these were specimens no-one had ever seen before and they included a species of  fresh water shark.
(Mahala recalls his immense energy and enthusiasm.
He was always very good at keeping bits and pieces to find out whether they were going to be important or not).
Stan started to sell his fossil finds to the museum and with the money he earned he was able to buy tools and a microscope which gave him a further insight into the subject.
He was approaching a turning point in his life in 1974.
On the practical side he was now selling more fossils than insurance.
More importantly, he felt like a great sponge waiting to be filled.
He needed to develop his mind.
Always a man of action, he enrolled at Napier College for a self-learning course and, in his own words, ‘respectfully departed from insurance and never regretted it.’
By this time Stan had found in Wardie Bay several thousand fossil fishes which are now in the Chambers Street Museum.
The keeper of Natural History was Ramsay Traquair, an authority on fossil fishes from the 1890s to the 1920s and the museum became a Mecca for Stan always hungry to learn more.
From the 340 million year old oil shales round Wardie Bay he collected specimens of ray-finned (paleoniscoid) fishes which were once as common as cod is now.
Of the four kinds of sharks he found, three had previously been known only by teeth and spine fossils.
These finds were of such international importance that one of the new ones was named after him — Diplodoselache Woodi — a one metre long, double-toothed shark which became extinct 220 million years ago.
At that time the area we now know as Scotland was situated near the present equator and much of the area was covered by the sea which explains the exotic nature of the finds.
1974 was the time of a change in direction not only in career but also in fossil hunting.
Stan began to look for the even rarer amphibians.
Newspaper accounts of open-cast coal workings led him to Cowdenbeath in Fife and after several visits he found the remains he was locking for.
Extracting fossils from the rock and removing the rock that partially hides the specimens takes a great deal of time and expertise.
Through his museum connections Stan knew Dr Alec Panchen, a reader in the Department of Zoology at Newcastle University who was an expert on animal fossils.
Impressed with Stan's success rate Dr Panchen offered to employ him as a collector of specimens for the University using a grant from the National Environmental Research Council.
The contract gave Stan three and a half years based in Edinburgh with carte blanche to roam about collecting fossils.
From November ‘74 he began to find what he was looking for.
Coal Board contractors removed overlying rock and Stan and his co-workers systematically excavated 10 tonnes of bone bed for closer laboratory study.
The results were exciting.
He found six different amphibians — more than had been found in the whole of Europe in rocks of 330 million years old.
One almost complete skeleton of Crassigyrinus had previously been known from only one skull fragment.
At the end of the Newcastle contract Stan found a new employer.
Dr Ian Rolfe, then of the Hunterian Museum at the University of Glasgow snapped him up as supervisor of YOPs on a Manpower Services scheme to develop fossils in rock which had been excavated in Australia in the 1960s.
Stan was eager to increase his knowledge of the preparation of specimens.
He devised a crude but effective way of exposing fossils from the rough rock.
His methods and his diligence were such that in less than six months he had completed the work which had been expected to take 2 to 3 years.
Initially Stan journeyed to Glasgow every day from his home in Edinburgh.
Now he decided to move to Bearsden, a pleasant Glasgow suburb north of the city.
With extra time on his hands he walked the dog by the Manse Burn in Bearsden and in outcrops of shale his trained eye saw parts of fish fossils.
A trial excavation in 1981 with his YOP team revealed preserved shrimps and complete fossil sharks previously unknown in Britain.
One year later he opened a huge quarry much to the delight of the local children.
Dr Keith Ingham of the Hunterian Museum attended the site and he recalls that Stan never chased the children away.
Instead he told them that if they intended to stay they must help.
The site was often populated with young helpers in wellie boots.
Perhaps as a result the area was never vandalised or disturbed by curiosity seekers.
The deeper excavations produced the first complete fossil Bradyodont (broadtoothed) Ratfish to be found in Britain and for the fist time it was possible to see how five separately named fossil fragments previously supposed to belong to five different creatures actually fitted together like a jigsaw to form one.
Study and classification of the Bearsden finds is a long and laborious business but Dr Michael Coates of Cambridge hopes very shortly to be able to publish the names and details in scientific journals.
The end of the YOP contract marked another change in the fortunes of Stan.
Lack of funds through University cut-backs along with his own lack of paper qualifications made it impossible for the Universities to continue employing him.
The practical man thought his way through these apparent obstacles.
He enrolled in The Open University as a student of Earth Sciences and, with his wife's support, he sold their home in Bearsden, moved into rented accommodation in Livingstone and with his small capital, rented factory premises to set up his own small business.
The university course was, in a sense, another field of discovery for Stan.
He says he wanted to find out if he had the intellectual ability to complete a degree starting from nothing.
In his study he now proudly displays the degree certificate of BA in Earth Sciences — positive proof that the ability was there.
Setting up a business was a different challenge and Stan, with help from the Scottish Development Agency also took a sixteen week course with The Scottish Business school to help him with the mechanics of being an employer, selling and marketing his fossils.
Three years later, his venture established, he opened a shop in the Grassmarket in Edinburgh.
Mr Wood's Fossils is now one of Edinburgh's most attractive specialist shops.
The manager, Julie Nisbet is a qualified zoologist who takes a pride in the presentation of a wide range of specimens from tiny ammonites at 20p to the most expensive item on show, a slab of rock found in the Wyoming Green River area which contains the fossilised remains of 3 different types of fishes — a beautiful display which costs £3400.
Meanwhile, for Stan the basic business of discovering fossils proceeded at a dazzling pace.
From Berwickshire and Bathgate he found rare specimens of at least four fossil land amphibians including the earliest known ancestor of frogs and salamanders; millipedes and the earliest known harvestman spider.
He found a fossilised head which belonged to a 10 feet long scorpion.
(The writer, Bernard Levin, who has a phobia about all creepy crawlies has nicknamed him Stan, Stan, the Scorpion Man.)
Bathgate's abandoned shale quarry proved to be the site of Stan's most remarkable find to date.
In March, 1988 he uncovered the fossil remains of a 340 million year old lizard-like reptile which some experts believe could be the earliest known ancestor of dinosaurs.
Dubbed Lizzie by the Press, this find has stirred up controversy amongst  paleontologists.
The problem at first was how best to tell the world about the find.
Graham Gauld, a public relations man was asked by a friend at SDA if he could help.
He set up a Press release and organised a Press Announcement to be made in London at The Natural History Museum.
The invitation to meet the oldest reptile in the world drew the major world Press.
The Times carried five columns about the find, Nature magazine featured it and so did the New York Times.
Stan captured the imagination of the journalists almost as much as Lizzie.
Graham received a phone call next day from Los Angeles Business Radio Network.
‘What do you mean he's a  paleontologist ?
This guy has a business picking up fossils and selling them?
Let's talk to him.’
And talk they did in a 23 minute live broadcast telephone interview from LA to Scotland.
More importantly, as a result of the publicity, Stuttgart Museum in West Germany offered Stan £180,000 for Lizzie.
Now scientists in Britain were disturbed.
Ethics were involved here.
Should a fossil reptile found in Scotland be allowed to be sold to Germany?
Should it not, because of its rarity and scientific significance, be kept in Scotland?
For Stan the issue was simple.
He decided to sell it because he wanted time to look for other things and because whichever organisation bought it would automatically attract people who would want to study it for different scientific reasons.
The find was his to dispose of as he liked.
Treasure Trove laws do not apply to fossils any more than they would to a lump of raw gold or a precious stone imbedded in rock.
Stan was running a business and needed funds to buy stock and time to work on new finds.
The price proposed was on the open market and Stuttgart was happy to offer it.
Some might say that compared to the prices paid for works of art £180,000 is a modest sum for a unique creature — the oldest reptile on earth.
As the arguments raged, Stuttgart came up with a possible solution.
If Edinburgh could match the offer by June 1990 they could keep Lizzie.
The race is now on to fund what would be a major buy for the museum.
So far the museum has raised about half the amount and fingers are crossed that they can find the rest before June.
The problem is that there is a principle at stake.
Stan may well discover more rare and precious fossils but with current funding the Scottish Museum would never afford to buy them all.
Their hope is that people will become aware, not only of the scientific importance of these discoveries which help to map our distant past, but also of their supreme beauty.
And, of course, people who do help by sponsoring these items could even choose to have a rare creature named after them in an unusual form of immortality.
While controversy rages, Stan, unruffled by the fuss, keeps looking for fossils.
He was awarded the Geological Society's R. H. Worth prize for his contributions in the field of vertebrate  paleontology and he was featured on television with Sir David Attenborough.
One of his proudest moments was the presentation by Prince Charles of an Enterprise award for Small Businesses during a television ceremony at Pebble Mill in Birmingham.
Since then he has been permitted to search on Crown estates in Morayshire which were last excavated by the Duke of Richmond in 1860.
Records of that time mentioned the discovery of a fossil fish bed but the exact site was unknown.
Stan has now rediscovered the fish bed and is currently preparing new specimens to astonish and delight the world.
On a shelf in his study are two of his latest finds.
From the heart of a large flat pebble-shaped stone he has revealed two fishes in brilliant, iridescent blues.
For the uninformed like myself it came as a surprise to find that fossils are not simply stone coloured but range through rainbow shades of unbelievable beauty.
Stan now trades in fossils from many countries.
He visits the trade Fair at Munich and also corresponds with international friends and experts.
In his thriving shop he expected only specialist collectors to be interested but he is surprised and delighted to find that 95% of the customers buy on aesthetic appeal.
These fossils are beautiful.
Occasionally a customer will express doubts about the selling of such specimens when they should, perhaps be displayed in museums.
Julie is able to reassure them.
Stan never sells rare specimens to the public.
These will always go to scientific institutions where they can be properly recorded.
Museums would already have samples of the fossils on sale in the shop.
Often it is a case of find and rescue.
In one area of Germany a quarry was being excavated for paving slabs and the fossils removed from there would otherwise have been destroyed.
I asked Dr Ian Rolfe, now at Chambers Street Museum, how he felt about the selling of fossils.
The subject is complex.
Contents of shipwrecks belong to the state.
As with treasure trove the finder is rewarded with the intrinsic value of the find.
However, there are worries about State control.
It encourages smuggling and theft and there is a risk of items going underground and therefore becoming lost to science.
Being realistic, he believes that selling fossils brings the subject of geology to the attention of the public.
Stan has a love of children and his fossils may possibly encourage the next generation to study the subject and continue the search.
He has been called the Bellamy of fossils for his ability to inspire his listeners.
One possibility propounded by a colleague is that there should be some kind of pay-back to the museums perhaps in the form of a levy for their help in identifying finds.
This would build up a fund from which they could afford to bid for new discoveries at fair market prices.
Talking to Stan about fossil hunting makes you aware of the passion that drives him on.
‘A fossil hunter is one who seeks out evidence of the past from the natural history of the rocks.
You need an enquiring mind and the ability to communicate.
Then you can call yourself a scientist.
I always like to work alone.
No meaningful work is ever done in a crowd — that is amateur.
‘If you want to find fossils don't go to a library.
Go out and use your eyes.
Learn what are the right kind of rocks.
Success comes from determination and commitment.
Work ten times harder than the person who's not getting the luck.
‘You need self confidence.
Everyone has ability but some never take the trouble to find out what that ability is and so the world goes by.
‘There's always a challenge to do a job others can't do.
Each locality places a different set of cards in front of you.
You can crack the code by a process of elimination.’
Of those who disapprove of his methods he shrugs.
‘There are always those who disapprove; who lack vision.
I will always make people angry or happy because I make things happen.
I can leave a wake of controversy behind me but science is all about discussion and debate.’
On the question of money, Stan refers to himself as an entrepreneur.
Fossil hunting is a costly business.
Hiring some machinery can cost £2000 and you may find nothing.
However, there is no point in throwing a fishing line off Granton pier and, from that, giving an account of the fauna of the North Sea.
You have to trawl a huge area to be able to draw conclusions.’
What about tomorrow's fossils?
Stan explained.
‘Fossils are found where special circumstances preserve animal life and there is a change from organic substance to mineral.
The field outside is full of foxes and rabbits but none of them will be preserved because you need the right conditions.
Rapid burial is the main factor along with continual subsidence of the land surface to stop predators from getting at it.
When a carcass is trapped underground, oxygenating bacteria cannot dissolve away the bones.
A landslip or fall of volcanic ash are ideal areas for fossil hunting and in little pockets throughout the world, preservation is taking place right now.’
Stan does not always go down well with the establishment.
There are some who would say that his humour can be course and his language crude.
There are some who would question his recording of details on site suggesting that in his eagerness to move on to the next find he may neglect to tidy up the details left behind.
None, however would deny his energy and enthusiasm for the subject.
Tales of Stan's exploits are legendary.
There was the famous occasion when he picked at a wall behind a bus stop while waiting for a bus and found a rare specimen fossil; and the occasion when he cut his leg while climbing a  rockface at Craigleith Quarry and failed to notice it until his Wellington boot was full of blood, whereupon he drove to the nearest hospital for stitches and a transfusion.
Why is Stan apparently more successful than many geologists?
Some would say that there is a tendency for geologists to dig in distant places across the world on the assumption that Britain has been well explored.
Stan seems to take a mischievous delight in turning up specimens under people's noses.
He would say that unless he has examined an area himself he regards it as unexplored.
Perhaps an attitude of mind may account for his amazing abilities.
One thing is sure.
Stan Wood is a shining example of that proud Scottish tradition — a self-made man, the archetypal Scot who makes the world sit up and take notice.
RIP PETS
When pets become late departed it isn't always easy to decide what to do.
So much depends on the size of the pet and the way you feel about it.
The loss of a goldfish might be felt as keenly as the loss of a family dog in certain circumstances.
Another deciding factor may be the size of your purse.
For people who own gardens the simplest solution is probably a small plot, clearly marked, although there can be disadvantages to this solution.
The depth required to protect from marauding cats or birds might be too much of an effort for an elderly owner.
Also, problems arise when the family want to move house.
However, there are other options.
Strictly speaking, small pets like fish, birds or mice might be carefully wrapped in plastic and disposed of with the normal waste collection but after spending a lifetime with a faithful companion an owner might be reluctant to part with a pet in this way.
The Cleansing Department are aware of this and suggest making a phone call to the department who will arrange to uplift the pet and remove it.
Environmental Health rules insist that designated dumps must be covered with at least 4’ of soil every night to avoid any danger of interference from animals or seagulls.
If the pet has been in the care of a vet, of course, he will be happy to make the necessary arrangements.
When a pet becomes incurably sick, the vet will administer euthanasia and arrange for cremation.
Vets in Scotland use the Veterinary Investigation Centres attached to the Scottish Agricultural Colleges.
Their headquarters is in Perth and there are centres in Thurso, Inverness, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, St Boswells, Dumfries and Ayr.
Generally the remains are collected from vets and cremated in bulk unless there is a special request for ashes in which case the pet would be dealt with separately.
A more personal service is offered by a company set up by Mr David Smith in Perth.
Pet Cremation Services will collect pets of all sizes from goldfish to a small horse.
The pet will be removed from the family home or the vet's surgery and will be transported to Perth in a lined casket.
The company has been in existence for eight years now and is completely independent.
They operate a 24 hour call-out scheme and charges range from £55 for cremation only to £85 for clients who want the ashes.
For some owners who have been deeply attached to their pets, the only acceptable option is a proper burial in the Pet Cemetery at Piershill in Edinburgh.
Here there is a Pet Corner offering solace to grieving owners.
Charges vary according to size; dogs £40: cats £30: rabbits, guinea-pigs, parrots and budgies £10 or less.
Owners have to deliver the deceased to the cemetery which will also supply plaques or granite memorial stones costing from £40 to over £100.
This cemetery has been in existence since 1965 and is lovingly tended by regular visitors who often bring fresh flowers to mark the last resting place of a faithful friend.
Most pets would be accepted here apart from horses which are not considered domestic.
Moving even further upmarket, perhaps the final option is taxidermy.
As few as 2 or 3 a year opt for this method of preserving the memory of a devoted pet.
It has to be said that this presents great difficulties for the taxidermist.
Ideally owners are looking for a snapshot or portrait model but the problem is that the modeller has to work without having seen the live model.
It is extremely difficult under the circumstances to achieve a satisfactory likeness.
However, for those who select this method for dogs, cats, parrots or fish the cost would be from £300 to £600.
The fact is that the ultimate choice will not matter to the departed pet but it could make all the difference to the real pain of separation from a beloved companion.
A FRIEND FOR CHRISTMAS
In Madge Mackenzie's opinion, Christmas was a vastly overrated festival.
The letter on the mantelpiece irked her and she eyed Mrs Rae over the steaming cup and wondered at the impulsive gesture that had made her invite the woman in for tea.
They had met at the close mouth as she was inserting her key into the heavy outer door.
‘Oh, you've got your key.
That's fine.
I don't know where I put mine.
It's terrible to be getting old and forgetful.’
Mrs Rae had muttered and moaned her way up the stone stairs.
‘You've not been here long, have you?
At least you're not in a top flat like me.
You're lucky.’
She heaved her bulk up the next flight, her face reddening and her breath coming in short, painful puffs.
Madge had offered to carry her bag but she drew away and clung to the bannister rail.
‘Not much in my bag these days.
Christmas shopping isn't the same when you're on your own.
The doctor says I'm too fat.
I said to him, ‘Doctor, what I eat wouldn't feed a sparrow.’
but he never listens.
You're nice and slim.
You're lucky.’
By the time they reached her landing Madge couldn't bear it.
The woman was in obvious distress.
‘Come in and have a cup of tea,’ she said.
Mrs Rae sat at the other side of the fireplace and Madge watched her small eyes dart about in silent appraisal.
‘Nice place you have here,’ she observed.
‘This has always been a nice close.
When my mother was alive we knew everybody and they were all very friendly.’
Madge nodded.
‘I haven't had time to meet everyone yet although I've spoken to Mr Patel across the landing.’
Mrs Rae's face darkened.
‘Indians!’ she said.
‘My mother would turn in her grave.
Indians in this close!’
‘He seems very pleasant,’ Madge protested mildly.
‘You don't live above them like I do.
The noise!
All those children…what is it?
Four?
Dear knows where they all sleep.
And the smell!
Curry morning, noon and night.
And if there's one thing I can't stand it's the smell of curry.
It makes me sick.
I wouldn't mind but we've never had dirty people in this close before.’
Madge frowned.
‘Dirty?’
She shook her head.
‘Oh, no.
I'm quite sure you're wrong, Mrs Rae.
I see the children on their way to school every morning and they're always very well turned out.’
Mrs Rae sniffed.
‘Have you seen her sweep the stair?’ she demanded.
‘Not once.
Not a single time since they came here.
He pays up for the Big Turn but,’ she shook her head and compressed her lips together, ‘she's never once swept that stair.’
She nodded as Madge offered more tea and reached out a podgy hand for another piece of shortbread but the injustice still rankled.
‘Never once!’ she repeated between sips.
The custom of cleaning the close had been explained to Madge on the day she moved in by a small woman carrying a metal pail and a large card.
‘There's eight people in the close, right?
Once every eight weeks the card'll be on your door for the Big Turn and you pay me to scrub the close.
Then you put the card on the door across the landing.
In between times every landing sweeps their own  stair.
 turn about, every day, right?’
Complex but it seemed to work.
‘Perhaps she doesn't understand.’
‘Oh no.
It was explained to her the day they moved in.’
There was an uneasy silence.
‘I like your Christmas cards,’ she changed the subject.
‘Nice having a card tree.
Saves lifting them to dust.
You're lucky.
You've got a lot of cards.
Do you come from a big family?’
‘Quite big but scattered since Mother died.’
‘Oh.
you don't have to tell me.
I know what it's like.
I've got two sons.
One in Africa and one in the south of England.
And do you know when I'll see Jim?
February!’
‘That's not long now,’ she tried to sound cheerful and bracing as she saw her neighbour's lower lip tremble.
‘It's a long time to me.
I'll be all on my own this Christmas.
What are you doing?
Are you seeing your family?’
‘I've been invited to join them down south.’
Madge glanced at the envelope on the mantelpiece.
‘It must be nice to be wanted.
You're lucky.’
Mrs Rae sighed.
‘I've booked a table for one at the restaurant round the corner.
It's not worth cooking for one.’
There was another silence filled by the ticking of the mantel clock and the soft hiss of the gas fire.
Madge was becoming restive.
If the woman didn't move soon she would have to invent an excuse.
The shrill jangle of the door bell made them both jump.
‘Oh, are you expecting visitors?
I don't want to intrude.
I'll just get away.’
‘No.
I'm not expecting anybody,’ Madge reassured her as she opened the door in the small  hallway .
Mr Patel looked extremely agitated, his normal dapper appearance marred by a collar that lay askew round a hastily knotted tie.
‘Miss Mackenzie — oh please can you help me?
The telephone box on the street corner — it is out of order.
I need very badly to telephone for a doctor.
My wife — it — it's the baby.’
Madge stretched out a hand and said soothingly, ‘Please come in Mr Patel.
I will phone at once.
If you tell me what is wrong with your baby I can explain to the doctor.’
‘Ah — no, no.
It is my wife.
The baby is coming very soon now.’
He cast an agonised glance at the open door across the landing where four small figures stood watching with large dusky eyes.
No need to question an experienced father's diagnosis.
‘An ambulance.’
Madge nodded understanding.
‘I'll phone for an ambulance.
You go back to your  wife.
She dialled with steady fingers, watched by Mrs Rae who looked curiously excited.
‘Fancy that!
No wonder she didn't sweep the stairs, poor thing,’ she said.
‘What a to-do!
And this was always such a quiet close.’
She waited an the landing with Madge, reluctant to part before the matter was resolved.
She was the first to hear the distant wail of the ambulance and tapped Madge's arm reassuringly.
‘They're coming, dear.
They're on their way.’
They watched the dark-clad figures manoeuvre the stretcher up the stairs and heard the cries through the open door of the flat.
Mr Patel appeared at the door looking distraught.
‘They want me to go with her.
She does not speak English very well.
But I cannot leave the children.’
Madge never hesitated.
‘Of course you must go.
I will look after the children.’
To her astonishment Mrs Rae patted Mr Patel and said,’ So will I. Off you go, dear.
We'll see to the family.’
Madge collected her keys, locked her door and together they walked across the landing into the strange flat.
They stood aside to let the ambulance men pass with their burden.
There was a glimpse of dark, pain-filled eyes peering out from the folds of the red blankets.
The anxious group moved with a slow urgency round the curve of the stair and Madge closed the front door.
A siren wailed and faded into the sounds of general traffic below prompting them to action.
‘Well, now.’
Madge looked at the four children clustered in the  hallway .
The oldest must be about seven.
‘How about something to eat.
Have you had your tea?’
Four heads shook.
‘What would you like?’
‘I can't cook curry,’ Mrs Rae whispered behind her.
‘How about scrambled eggs on toast?’
Madge smiled and the heads nodded silently.
They worked together efficiently in the spotless kitchen and beamed satisfaction when they cleared four empty plates from the table.
‘What are we going to do with them now?’
Mrs Rae murmured.
‘He could be gone a long time, you know.’
Madge looked round the living room for inspiration.
There seemed to be no television set and she was reluctant to explore the flat further.
Two childish Christmas cards, obviously made at school, stood on the mantelpiece.
The star was shapeless and the candle spattered with glue reminding her of her first efforts.
Only, hers were so bad they were consigned to the back of the sideboard behind the huge glittery cards that came through the post.
Mother always liked things to look good.
Especially when the family came home for Christmas in later years.
‘Madge will have your rooms ready.
Hot water bottles in every bed and flowers in every room.
You must be hungry.
Madge, bring in the tea tray and try not to spill it.
Of course you can bring a friend.
Madge, set out another two places.’
She shook her head to dispel the shadows and looked at the four children sitting listlessly on the couch.
‘I have an idea.
Wait here Mrs Rae.
I'll be back in a moment.’
Her hands fumbled with the bunch of keys as she let herself into her own flat again.
They were in the hall cupboard.
Two large cardboard boxes.
Should have been thrown out really but somehow she could never bring herself to do it.
Back in the Patel's flat she deposited the boxes on the table and beckoned to the children.
They crowded round with curious eyes as she untied the string but it was Mrs Rae whose face broke into a beaming smile first.
‘A Christmas tree!
How nice!
It's years since I had one in my house.’
They unfolded the stiff green branches and set up the metal stand.
Mother always liked this one for the dining room because she was afraid that the needles of the real one would get into the food.
Eager hands unrolled the garlands of tinsel and draped them round t]he branches.
‘It could do with some baubles.’
Mrs Rae looked critically at the tree and said, ‘Silver foil.
I saw some in the kitchen.’
‘I know.’
The seven year old spoke for the first time and darted away to return with the roll of foil.
‘Now then!’
Like a magician Mrs Rae produced a box of chocolates from her shopping bag.
She glanced apologetically to Madge and her plump face creased into a smile.
‘A wee treat for Christmas.
Never mind.
It'll help me to slim.’
Gently she showed the children how to wrap the chocolates one by one in silver foil.
A bag of red wool was produced from a work basket and the looped baubles glittered on the tree.
They were all surprised when the front door opened and Mr Patel appeared.
‘A son,’ he announced as the four young ones ran to his open arms.
‘You have a baby brother.
Tomorrow we will go to see him.’
He looked up.
‘Dear ladies, how can I thank you?’
Suddenly embarrassed Mrs Rae and Madge hastily gathered their belongings together.
‘It was nothing at all, dear,’ Mrs Rae assured him.
‘You just look after this lovely family of yours.’
‘Do you need help to put them to bed?’
Madge asked.
‘Not at all.
So kind.’
They made their way to the door.
‘But you have left your tree,’ Mr Patel called.
Madge shook her head.
‘It's a present for the children.
We would like you to keep it.’
They stood together again awkwardly on the silent landing.
‘Well, I'd better go on up,’ Mrs Rae said.
Madge nodded.
At her door she turned and said, ‘Mrs Rae, Do you think you could book another place for Christmas dinner at that restaurant?’
Mrs Rae stopped and looked back.
‘For you?
What about your family?’
‘My brother and his wife can manage very well without me,’ Madge replied.
‘that's settled then.
Lunch for two on Christmas day.’
She opened her door and waved up at the smiling figure on the stair.
In the living room she sat by the fire and glanced again at the envelope.
Unanswered.
She lifted it down and read the brief note inside.
‘Dear Madge,
Just a quick note to say we won't be coming North this year.
Since you moved out of the old house we can't stay with you and Jane hates hotels.
Anyway, there are some functions here we want to attend.
Jane and I think it would be a good idea if you came down here for Christmas.
Jane could do with a bit of help in the kitchen and you know you are the children's favourite baby-sitter.
You won't mind sharing a room with Penny and Julian, will you?
Let us know when you're arriving and we'll try to meet you.
Regards from  Robert 
Madge collected the writing pad and pen and wrote,
Dear Robert,
Thank you for your kind invitation.
I'm afraid I can't come down this Christmas as I've arranged to have Christmas dinner with a friend.
Love to Jane and the children.
Happy Christmas!
Madge.
KATY'S BIG DANCE
Katy just loved to dance.
Everywhere she went people would say, ‘Keep still Katy.’
and Katy would say, ‘I'm dancing.’
Once her wee brother Jamie heard a pattering noise coming from Katy's bedroom.
He rushed to tell Mum and they both heard the pattering noise.
Mum opened the door slowly and quietly and there was Katy waving her arms in the air and pointing her toes.
‘What are you doing, Katy?’
Jamie asked.
‘I'm a ballet dancer,’ she said, and they laughed as she pattered across the floor on her tip-toes.
Another time they heard a terrible clatter coming from the kitchen.
When Mum rushed to see what was wrong, she found Katy wearing a pair of Dad's shoes and clattering all over the kitchen floor.
‘What are you doing, Katy?’
Mum asked.
‘I'm a tap dancer,’ Katy said, and her feet went clatter, clatter.
One day Mum took Katy and Jamie to visit their big cousin Jane.
Some workmen had left a wooden board on the pavement beside the bus stop and Katy danced on top of it until the bus arrived.
Her feet were still dancing tap, tap, tap, on the floor of the bus.
Everyone stared, Mum frowned and Katy smiled.
Cousin Jane was smiling when she opened the door.
She told them that she and Mike were going to be married very soon and they could have a look at her wedding dress as it was nearly finished.
Katy thought the dress was beautiful.
It was white and frilly with a long, long skirt.
‘It's a dancing dress,’ Katy said.
Cousin Jane laughed.
‘Yes, I'm going to dance in it.
Would you like to come and dance at my wedding?’
Katy nodded and looked at Mum.
‘Can we?
Please, can we?
And will I have a dancing dress?’
Mum nodded.
‘Yes, Katy, we'll all go to the wedding and we'll find a nice dress for you to wear.’
Katy was so excited she could hardly wait.
They bought a lovely white dress for her with little red spots all over it and she opened the wardrobe every day to have a look at it.
At last the wedding day arrived.
Mum wore a pretty blue dress and Dad was wearing his best suit.
Even wee Jamie looked smart in a new shirt and trousers and a bow tie.
Katy twirled in front of the mirror and smiled and smiled.
She thought this was the prettiest dancing dress she had ever seen.
The big church was filled with baskets of beautiful flowers and an organ played soft music.
All the people sat and waited.
At last the music grew louder.
 Boom- boom, boom, boom!
Cousin Jane came into the church with Uncle Albert.
Katy thought she looked lovely.
She walked right up to the front of the altar and stood still beside Mike.
The organ stopped playing and the church was very quiet.
Katy looked round.
‘Is this when we dance?’ she said.
Mum said, ‘No Katy.
Sh-sh!’ and some people laughed.
After a long time, the music started to play again and Cousin Jane and Mike walked back down the aisle and out of the church and everyone followed them into the sunny afternoon.
‘Is this when we dance?’
Katy asked but Mum shook her head and told Katy to stand very still while a man took photographs.
He took hundreds of photographs and Katy thought Cousin Jane and Mike must be tired of photographs too because they climbed into a white car and the car drove away while the man kept clicking his camera again and again.
‘It's time to go to the reception, now,’ Mum said.
Dad drove them to a big hotel and Jane and Mike were there already waiting for them.
Katy looked round the hotel.
There were big baskets of flowers everywhere and waitresses were giving everyone sparkly drinks and asking them to sit at long tables in the dining room.
In the middle of the room was a huge polished floor.
‘Is this when we dance?’
Katy asked.
‘Later  Katy, Dad answered.
‘We're going to eat now.’
Katy sighed and sat at the table beside him.
When they had all finished Mike stood up and said thank you to everybody for coming.
After that lots of people stood up and thanked everybody.
Katy sighed again.
Cousin Jane looked across at her and smiled and whispered something to Mike.
Mike stood up and said ‘I have one last announcement to make.
This is a special announcement for Katy.
Katy — this is when we dance!’
Everyone laughed and clapped and the music started to play.
Jane and Mike began to dance and soon everyone joined in — especially Katy.
STUART AND LINDA
Every Saturday morning Stuart went with his Mum to the big William Low supermarket to help her with the shopping.
Mum always made a long list of groceries she needed but some days she bought even more things because there was so much to choose from.
Mum drove the car into the huge car park and Stuart looked out for a parking space.
They followed the white arrows painted on the road between the parked cars and at first they couldn't see a space anywhere.
‘There's one!’
Stuart pointed just ahead of them but as he spoke, a little white Mini sped past them and slid into the place he had spotted.
‘Well — really!’
Stuart's Mum sounded vexed and Stuart glared out of the side window at the woman getting out of the Mini with a girl he recognised.
‘It's Linda Paterson and her Mum.
Trust them!’
They were just about to move away when a big estate car eased out of a space in front of them and Stuart's Mum parked with a grateful wave to the driver.
Standing next to their car was a red Lancia.
Stuart had a book about cars at home and he recognised it straight away.
What a beauty!
He examined it with interest while Mum collected her handbag and locked up.
‘Look at this,’ Stuart said.
‘I bet it can go really fast.’
He put out his hand to touch the shiny paint but there was a man at the wheel who didn't seem to like Stuart.
He glared and said ‘Get off’ in a gruff voice so Stuart moved away quickly.
As they crossed to the supermarket they had to wait as an assistant wearing a jacket over his uniform wheeled a long line of trolleys from a loading bay into the store.
Stuart thought the man must be really strong to push about a hundred trolleys at one time.
The man smiled at him as he guided the long snaking bundle into a bay near the automatic doors.
‘Is that not very heavy?’
Stuart asked him and the man smiled again.
‘No,’ he said, ‘the wheels move as soon as you touch them.
It's easy.
Do you want to try?’
Sure enough, as soon as Stuart touched them the row of trolleys slid forward.
‘See what I can do!’ he said and Mum said ‘Very good, now come on!
Lets move.
It's time we started shopping.’
Mum collected an empty trolley from the bay and they started to walk slowly past the butter and margarine display.
She read out what she wanted from her list and Stuart ran to fetch it.
‘A packet of butter, two packets of margarine, six tubs of yogurt, a tub of whipping cream and a piece of cheese.’
As Mum turned the trolley into the breakfast cereal aisle she saw Linda Paterson's Mum and stopped to talk to her.
Stuart sighed and Linda Paterson stuck out her tongue at him.
He pulled at his Mum's coat and she stopped talking for a minute.
‘Stuart, can you get me a big packet of  Cornflakes , please,’ she said.
‘Oh, I need that too,’ Linda Paterson's Mum said.
‘Linda, be a good girl and fetch one for me.’
The two mums smiled at each other as Stuart and Linda raced off down the aisle.
The cornflakes were exactly where Stuart knew they would be.
The small packets were on the bottom shelf, medium on the middle shelf and large packets on the top.
Stuart tried hard to reach but the shelf was just too high.
Linda tried too but she was even smaller than Stuart and her fingers were nowhere near the shelf.
‘Can I help you, dear?’ a kindly voice offered.
‘Oh, yes, please.
I need a big packet of cornflakes’ Linda said to the tall  assistant He smiled and handed one down to her and she raced off.
‘I need one too, please,’ Stuart said and the tall assistant turned back to the shelf.
‘Sorry — that was the last packet.
You'll have to wait while I get one from the back store,’ he said.
By the time he re-appeared Stuart's Mum was looking round impatiently for him.
‘You've taken your time,’ she said.
‘Linda brought hers back ages ago.’
‘There were none left,’ he protested but Mum had moved on and Linda Paterson was grinning all over her face.
Once they had filled the trolley and checked off everything on their list Stuart and his Mum looked for a checkout that wasn't busy.
He found one near the exit where the checkout girl was just opening up and Mum wheeled her trolley into the space.
While she piled all the groceries on the counter and the girl began to check them out Stuart sat by the door and looked round.
As he watched, a supervisor carrying a big black bag began to move along the line of checkouts followed by a young assistant who was holding a large plastic container with a flap in the front like a letter box.
At each till the supervisor used a key on a chain to unlock the drawer.
She took out a bundle of £10 notes each time and placed them in an envelope from her bag.
Then she posted the envelope into the assistant's container.
They moved quite quickly and by the time Mum had paid for her shopping and packed it in bags, they had almost reached t]he last checkout.
Mum paid for her shopping and gave Stuart the long receipt and they finished packing their bags into the trolley again while the supervisor took the cash from their till.
Stuart would have liked to see where she would go next but Mum called,
‘Stuart, come along.
I'm going to the car.’
He ran to the open door to catch up with her when, suddenly, a man wearing a hood over his head pushed past him and nearly knocked him over.
Stuart turned to speak and was just in time to see the man snatch the plastic bin from the young assistant and run back towards the door.
There was the sudden roar of a car engine and a screech of tyres and the red car that Stuart had been looking at sped forward and stopped at the entrance with its passenger door swinging open.
The man in the hood raced past Stuart and climbed in the open car door.
The car engine roared again and the red car moved off but it didn't go far.
Stuart's Mum was reversing out of her space and her car was blocking the way.
Stuart could see that the red car was going to turn back.
In a minute it would escape from the car park.
Inside the shop people were shouting and running about and the supervisor was shouting into the wall telephone.
Stuart had an idea.
With both hands he pushed the line of trolleys stacked at the entrance beside him.
The big snake began to roll across the road right in the path of the red car.
m There was another squeal of tyres and a crunching noise as the car hit the trolleys.
Now there was another noise — a police siren screamed into the car park and in a minute there were people everywhere, rushing out of the shop and crowding round the crumpled car.
Stuart's Mum rushed up to him in a panic.
‘Are you all right?
It all happened so fast.
I thought he was going to hurt you’.
Stuart wriggled as she cuddled him.
Linda Paterson might be looking.
The shop manager came out of the shop in a hurry as they began to move away.
‘Hold on.
I want a word with you,’ he said.
‘Stuart, what have you done?’
Mum said.
‘I saw exactly what he did and if it hadn't been for Stuart those thieves would have got  away.
 The manager patted Stuart on the back.
 I think you can expect a reward for what you did, son,’ he  smiled.
 and then he looked at the row of trolleys tangled in the front of the car.
‘Of course we might have to deduct a bit to replace my trolleys.’
Stuart grinned and wrinkled his nose at Linda Paterson standing on the edge of the crowd.
‘Beat that,’ he thought.
THE FOUNTAINBRIDGE PALAIS, EDINBURGH
The Palais de Dance at Fountainbridge was opened on Friday December 24th 1920.
Owned by the ‘Palais de Dance and Cinema Company’, it was one of the first large custom built ballrooms in the city of Edinburgh.
Takings of £170 on the opening night were donated to the funds of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
At first the Palais advertised separately from the other dancing establishments.
In the Edinburgh Evening News a box advert on January 21st boasted,
‘Daily sessions 3pm 2/6 7.30 3/6
2000 can dance at one time
Two celebrated jazz bands.’
However, by March 16th 1921 the Palais had joined a growing list of ballrooms in a new column headed ‘Dancing’.
Previously dancing was advertised under ‘Tuition’.
Now the Palais promised, ‘A buffet lounge, tea rooms, dancing partners, bewildering surprises, wonderful new musical dance selections, brilliant flashlight illuminations, gorgeous decorations and fantastic stunts.’
In 1930 the gallery was opened to non-dancers to watch the tea-dancers in the afternoon.
One of the early attractions was a fountain in the middle of the floor.
Mr Banister was the popular manager in the 30s.
Jack Payne and Jack Hylton both made visits with their bands after shows at the Empire Theatre.
On each occasion the band played for more than 1½ hours continuous dancing.
Many famous people danced at the Palais including the Duke of Windsor and the Duke of Kent from their yacht in the Firth of Forth.
More recently the young Sean Connery was a regular there.
The Palais was run by a private company — Lucas and Son — originally.
In 1937 a new company was formed — The Edinburgh Dance Halls Ltd run by Alan B Fairley and Mr Heimann who leased the Palais from Mr Lucas.
They made major changes including the famous revolving band-stand and a new balcony.
Business thrived under the new manager Mr Bernard Dilworth.
John Holton's band incorporated a Hammond electric organ which was new to Scotland.
By November ‘37 the ballroom was taken over by Mecca and enjoyed the benefits of belonging to a larger company.
The huge revolving stage which allowed one band to follow another without break became a big attraction with dancers waving farewell to the retiring band and welcoming the new arrivals.
Another novelty was the installation of an American Soda Fountain.
In the early years there were dancing partners but these were eventually replaced by demonstration couples.
One lady who used to demonstrate with her partner tells the story of a strange event at the Palais.
‘During the war a young couple, regular dancers, asked if they could be married in the ballroom.
It was arranged that they could hold the ceremony in front of the band stand following which they danced their favourite dance together.
Very shortly afterwards the young man was called up and sadly, he was killed in action a few weeks later.
The young widow came back to the ballroom to make one last request.
She asked permission to scatter her husband's ashes on the ballroom floor.’
This story may well be apocryphal as there is a similar story connected with a ballroom in Dundee.
It does serve to illustrate the kind of myths that can attach to crowded ballrooms.
The Palais always gave big prizes to dance competition winners everything from the fully fitted wardrobes of 1928 to the Mecca Gold Cup in 1940.
The Palais Club had a membership in 1928 ‘well past the ½ thousand mark’ and it grew fast as dancing became the major pastime of the 30s and 40s.
A monthly programme was issued gratis to dancers.
There were always cabaret acts novelties and competitions.
Jack Buchanan appeared there in 1932.
Big bands visited the Palais regularly — Lionel Jeffries and his Rialto Orchestra, Jack Hylton, Teddy Joyce, Nat Gonella and Joe Loss.
The Palais was the ballroom which entertained the Rugby International crowds and held the Flannel Dances of the tennis sets.
In the War years tea dances were a special feature and account for the slogan, ‘Twice a day the Mecca Way.’
New dances were welcomed with demonstrations from the experts — the Rumba in ‘31 and The Chestnut Tree in ‘38.
Mr Harry Gordon compered the Theatrical Cabaret Ball in ‘34 and throughout the decade John Holton and his Band were popular residents.
Typical of the Fountainbridge Palais was the ‘Let's Be Cheerful Week’ in 1940.
On Thursday evening everyone wearing uniforms was admitted for half price and on Friday nights dancing was free for the RAF.
The changing styles in the fifties and sixties affected this great dance hall like all the rest.
In 1963 Mr Bill Robertson became manager.
He struggled to bring in attractions like the popular singer Sandie Shaw but the ballroom was in trouble.
A stabbing brought in the police one night.
The boiler burst and the balcony was declared unsafe.
Sadly Mr Robertson closed the doors in the ‘67/'68 season.
OH HOW WE DANCED
OH HOW WE DANCED takes a nostalgic look at what was an important phase in our social history.
Since a high proportion of the over 40s in the population met their marriage-partners in dance halls, this nostalgia extends far beyond the group who might regard themselves as ballroom dancers.
It extends to America, Canada, Australia and all the countries whose troops packed our dance halls during the war years.
It extends to musicians, singers, managers, electricians, waitresses and doormen — all those who supported what was once the major leisure activity in our country.
The story in Scotland begins with the first Assembly Rooms in Edinburgh where, in 1710, noble ladies waited patiently to dance a minuet with their partners — one couple at a time to accommodate the huge dresses.
Strong opposition to such Assemblies was silenced by a very modern excuse — they were doing it for Charity.
The 19th century brought the waltz and an eventual break-down of class barriers allowing everyone to dance.
It also brought Victorian attitudes dictating that dancing lessons in dance schools were more acceptable than dancing at large public Assemblies.
As we move into the 20th century it becomes possible to tap the folk memory directly.
Farquhar MacRae, now in his eighties and still dancing, recalls Glasgow in the 20s and 30s — the dance-crazed city where everybody danced.
Dorothy Glendinning, who died recently, recounted the style of family life in a school of dancing in Edinburgh from 1910 to 1950.
Barbara McCall talks about the days in the 20s when her husband was assistant manager at the massive Marine Gardens in Portobello — the largest ballroom in Britain — and how he discovered a young soldier singing in a beach talent contest who grew to become a star — Donald Peers.
Alex Warren, Scottish ballroom guru, traces the growth of the major competitions in ballroom dancing.
This is an unfinished work because everybody has a story to tell.
To date the author has collected over 250 photographs, mostly unpublished, and at present the script is 30000 words.
The subject has not been fully researched before and the author feels strongly that it is important to record these memories before they fade and are finally destroyed.