

SPECIAL TOPIC: OPTICS THE CAMERA
The shutter—controls the duration of exposure Focus adjustment—alters lens-to-film distance View finder—Shows angular field of view Aperture stop—determines area through which light enters the camera
For a given visual angle, image size depends on focal length.
The width of standard film is 35mm; part of the width is taken up by the sprocket holes, and the picture or ‘frame’ size is 24mm X 36mm.
The diagonal is therefore 43.3mm.
The distance from the picture to the corner is 21.6mm.
The corresponding angle of view is the angle whose tangent 21.6/ (focal length), e.g. 21.6/50.
The angle in this case being 23.4, the full field of view will be 23.4 or nearly 47 in total.
The view finder safes the operator doing such calculations when taking photographs
With a telephoto (long-focus) lens, an object of fairly small visual angle may fill the picture while a wide angle (short focus) lens would have a much shorter length.
The effective diameter of the beam of light entering the camera is determined by a circular hole in a ‘diaphragm’.
The diaphragm is usually made in such a way that the hole size can be varied and decreasing its size is called ‘stopping down’.
The diaphragm is placed between components of the lens system.
The diameter of the entering beam of light is specified as a fraction of the focal length, e.g. if the apparatus is f/4, the diameter of the light beam entering the lens is ¼ of the focal length.
The denominator of the fraction is called the f-number, N. A large aperture implies a small value of N; D=f/N
The shutter controls the length of time for which light is allowed to reach the film.
To avoid any blurring effects which small movements would produce, shutter times are usually very short.
Although these times are usually referred to as ‘shutter speeds’, ‘exposure time’ is a more accurate description.
The amount of light which reaches the film depends on the area of the lens aperture.
A circular aperture has an area proportional to the square of its diameter, so doubling the aperture diameter increases the image illumination by a factor of four; to double the illumination, the diameter need only be increased by a factor of 2.
The numbers used to label the aperture settings on cameras therefore form a series of numbers with a ratio of 2: 1, 1.4, 2, 2.8, 4, 5.6, 8, 11, 16, 22, 32.
Reducing the aperture is known as ‘stopping down’, exposure can be altered both by altering exposure time or size of aperture, e.g. an exposure 1/50th second at f/8 is equivalent to one of 1/100th second at f5.6.
If the ray focus does not fall exactly on the film, the image will be blurred.
Blurring may go unnoticed, provided the size of the ‘blur spot’ is not too large.
The limit is usually taken to be about .05mm on the film.
The depth of focus will be small if the lens aperture is larger, ‘stopping down’ will bring the extreme rays closer to the axis so that the true focus can be further from the film while still giving the same size of blur spot.
The depth of field increases as you stop down; stopping down will reduce the amount of blurring of out-of-focus images.
SPECIAL TOPIC: LENSES
In order to find out where an image will be, it is only necessary to know were two of the rays go.
For an object point on the principal axis of the lens, one of these rays can be the axis itself.
Within limits, the deviation of a ray by a given lens depends only on its distance from the lens axis—tilting the lens or angling the ray about the point makes no difference to the angle of deviation of the ray.
If the image and object are on opposite sides of the lens, moving the object closer to the lens shifts the image further away and vice versa.
In principle, everything applies to diverging lenses just as well as to converging lenses.
The image produced by a diverging lens is however frequently virtual and consequently the focal length does not seem easy to determine.
If the sun is shining the focal length can be measured just as easily as for a converging lens: the lens is held so that its shadow falls on a sheet of paper.
The distance can then be adjusted until the diameter of the ring of refracted light is exactly twice that of the shadow; the distance from the lens to the paper is then numerically equal to the focal length.
If the object is very distant, linear magnification becomes vanishingly small.
A very distant object has to be extremely large to produce an image of appreciable size.
A much more suitable way to work out the image size is given by z = f tan 0, where 0 is the angle which is ‘subtended’ by the object.
The angle 0 depends on the size and distance of the object.
To use the formula, it is necessary to know the value of angle 0.
One way to determine this would be to old an ordinary ruler at arms length and note how many millimetres the width of an object appears to occupy.
If this is noted as 5 mm and the observer's arm was 600 mm long the angle would be 5 in 600, its tangent would be 5/600, thus it would 1/2.
This angle is often called the ‘visual angle’.
This angle can then be used to find the size of an object whose distance is known or to work out the size of the image through a given focal length.
When an image an ordinary magnifying glass forms on a screen it is not perfectly sharp all over, no matter how the focus is adjusted.
This is because rays from the outer parts of the lens are brought to a focus nearer the lens than rays close to the axis.
This is called ‘spherical aberration’ as it is characteristic of lenses with spherical surfaces.
It can be corrected by making the surfaces non-spherical or ‘aspheric’ but the more usual cure is to share the refraction over more surfaces and to balance the opposing defects of converging and diverging lenses.
The balancing treatment is also used to reduce the colour effects which a single lens would produce because of the dispersion of the glass (chromatic aberration).
20/8/87 ENERGETICS
Ideas and Language of Thermochemistry
Chemical change is accompanied by a change in HEAT CONTENT (ENTHALPY, H) as reactants form new products.
ENTHALPY CHANGE, H-H — the evidence for the enthalpy change is often a change in temperature
Exothermic reactions heat is given out-
temperature of the products rises to above room temperature
Energy is then lost to the surroundings; so the heat content of the products is less than that of the reactants.
i.e. H<H, so H is NEGATIVE
Endothermic reactions heat is required—
this is taken from the reactants
temperature of the products falls to below room temperature
Energy is then ABSORBED from the surroundings; so the heat content of the products is greater than that of the reactants i.e. H>H, so H is positive
These reactions follow the laws of conservation of energy—
Energy may be exchanged between materials and the surroundings but the total energy of the materials and surroundings remains constant.
Closed Systems
For an insulated exothermic reaction:—
Temperature of system RISES but heat content of the products is still less than that of the rea-cta-nts as heat wou-ld have to be REM-OVED to restore the temperature to original
For an insulated endothermic reaction:—
Temperature of system falls but heat content of the products is still higher than that of the reactants as heat would have to be SUPPLIED to restore the temperature to original
THE STRUCTURE OF CELLS
The bodies of plants and animals are composed of cells and the products of cells.
The term CELL was first used by ROBERT HOOKE in 1667.
The CELL THEORY was formulated by SCHEIDEN and SCHWANN in 1839.
As revealed by light microscope, all cells, although differing in size and shape according to the tissue have three characteristic features:
a)
A CELL MEMBRANE which envelops the cell.
Plant cells are also surrounded by a thicker, more rigid structure—a CELL WALL.
b)
CYTOPLASM, within which are various inclusions—the most important of which is:
c)
A NUCLEUS, which is a densely staining region.
Further detail is revealed by the technique of ELECTRON MICROSCOPY.
THE ELECTRON MICROSCOPE
In electron microscopes, light is replaced by a stream of electrons and glass lenses are replaced by electromagnets.
The image appears on a fluorescent screen or a photographic plate.
In a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM), the electrons pass through the object.
In a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), a three dimensional electron micrograph is produced.
The beam of electrons can only pass through a vacuum so the specimen(s) must be dry and therefore not alive.
The objects can be studied at magnifications of up to 500, 000 times without any loss of clarity.
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
The Endoplasmic Reticulum is a network of membranes continuous with the plasmalemma on the outside.
They form an interconnected series of flattened cavities (CISTERNAE).
In a modified form the ER creates the nuclear membrane (NUCLEAR CISTERNAE).
a)
Rough ER—attached to the matrix side of the membrane are numerous particles rich in RNA.
These particles or ‘RIBOSOMES’ are the site at which amino acids are brought together and are united to form protein molecules.
Ribosomes are arranged in small groups called polysomes which appear as granules.
b)
Smooth ER—a system of particular membranes lacking ribosomes.
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE ER:— A large internal surface is provided for reactions and there is provision for rapid internal transport of materials
PLASMALEMMA
It is very thin and often has deep infoldings and outpouchings so binding together with neighbouring cells.
Chemically, it consists of glycoprotein.
According to Danielli and Davson the plasma membrane consists of three layers, a bimolecular layer of lipids sandwiched between two layers of protein, the lipid membranes being at right angles to the surface (for diagram see notes, pg.
6).
Research has however shown that in terms of the arrangement of the protein molecules this model is no longer accurate.
It is now thought that the proteins do not form a continuous layer covering both sides of the lipids proposed by Davson and Danielli.
In fact it would now appear that
a)
some proteins are exposed only to the exterior surface of the cell.
b)
some proteins are exposed only to the interior surface of the cell.
c)
some proteins form an integral part of the membrane and are exposed to both the exterior and interior surface of the cell.
The plasma membrane is also thought to be far less rigid a structure than originally proposed.
Experiments suggest that it has a fluid consistency and that there is movement of the liquid molecules within the membrane.
It would also seem that some proteins are free to move laterally within the membrane.
This new picture of the cell membrane is called the fluid-mosaic model an it was proposed in the early 1970s by Singer and Nicholson.
MITOCHONDRIA
Mitochondria are potato-shaped bodies with shelf-like cristaes.
They are the dynamos of the cell being the site where sugars are oxidised to form Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP), the chemical which is the immediate source of energy for most vital processes.
The Krebs' Cycle takes place solely in the mitochondria.
GOLGI APPARATUS
This is a collection of flat paired membranes with cell secretions.
They are perhaps involved in protein synthesis is (for diagrams see notes Pg.
9)
THE CENTRIOLES
The pair of centrioles which occur in the centrosome of animal cells.
They are the first to divide in cell division and form the poles at each end of the cell.
They therefore play an important part in cell division.
LYSOSOMES
Lysosomes are dark spherical vacuoles containing powerful enzymes.
They destroy worn out organelles within the cell (see page 10 notes for diagram).
NUCLEAR MEMBRANE
The Nuclear Membrane is perforated and being perforated it allows the passage of messengers from the genes inside the nucleus out into the CYTOPLASM.
The membrane consists of two protein layers and a central space containing fat.
THE NUCLEUS
The nucleus contains Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)(the nucleus is rich in RNA)
This in the nucleus forms thread-like material, the chromosomes which control the activities of the cell and play and vital role in inheritance.
FAT GLOBULES are energy reserves.
In PLANT CELLS starch grains are energy reserves.
The CELL VACUOLE contains CELL SAP and is surrounded by the TONOPLAST (inner membrane of the cytoplasm).
CHLOROPLASTS which occur in green plants are oval bodies bounded by a double membrane.
Internally, numerous sheet-like LAMELLAE run from one end of the chloroplast to the other.
Each lamella consists of a pair of membranes which at certain points are interspaced by a third membrane, the GRANAL REGION of the chloroplast.
VILLI and CILLIA
These occur in both unicellular and multicellular organisms.
They consist of projections of the plasmalemma extending out from the surface of the organism.
They beat back and forth rhythmically.
They have a diameter of about three micrometers.
Internally each contains eleven hollow fibres or tubules.
At the base of each projection is a basal body of nine fibres, from there nine rootlet fibres pass into the deeper layers of cytoplasm.
ATP is involved and the rootlet fibres are rich in enzymes.
NERVOUS SYSTEM AND BEHAVIOUR
Functions of nervous system:
1)
Makes an organism aware of its environment
2)
Coordinates the activities of different parts of the body
Structure:
1)
Central Nervous System (C.N.S.)
a)
Brain
b)
Spinal cord
c)
Nerves—cranial nerves, spinal nerves
2)
Special sense organs, e.g. eye, ear
3)
Autonomic nervous system
a)
Sympathetic
b)
Parasympathetic
Neuron—cell body containing the nucleus Fibres—Axon, dendron, dendrites — covered with fatty sheath, insulating layer
A nerve is a collection of nerve fibres inside a coat of connective tissue.
(for diagrams see notes: book 1, page 3)
REFLEX ACTION
Reflex actions are automatic involuntary reactions which result as response to particular stimuli.
They occur before the subject becomes conscious of the stimuli.
The path taken by the stimulus is called a reflex arc.
It involves very few neurons.
This is useful as the path involves very few synapses.
A CONDITIONED REFLEX occurs when as a result of experience an associated stimulus brings about the response, thus where the taste or smell of food brings about salivation; and the ringing of a bell does not; after a series of experiences where both stimuli are given simultaneously, the ringing of the bell by itself results in an animal salivating.
The animal is said to be conditioned by the stimulus.
Nerve fibres do not carry sensations, i.e. cold, sweet, yellow.
The sensation only occurs when the nerve impulse reaches the brain.
An impulse passing along a nerve fibre is in some respects similar to an electric pulse passing along a wire.
However, there are two differences.
While in an electric shock pulse travels through the whole wire or solid substance, the nerve impulse travels only along the service plasma membrane surrounding the fibre and where as the electric current passes at 300 million meters per second, the nerve impulse is very much slower.
In a resting fibre sodium, potassium, and chlorine ions as well as charged protein molecules are so distributed that the outside of the fibre carries a positive charge relative to the inside.
If a stimulus is below a certain intensity, the threshold, no impulse is set off along the fibre.
There is an all or nothing effect.
A strong stimulus induces the passage of a greater number of impulses per second than a weaker one.
As the impulse passes any point on the fibre, the membrane allows a sudden thrust of positive sodium ions.
This momentarily reverses the positive charge on the outside.
This in turn brings about an increase in the permeability of the sodium ions of the adjacent part in the direction in which the impulse is passing.
This change of potential difference is termed the action potential.
Following this permeability change, the sodium ions are pumped out from the fibre so restoring the original state.
That original state is referred to as the resting potential.
Until this resting potential has been attained which takes about 0.0004 seconds no further impulse can be passed along the fibre.
THE SYNAPSE
Neurons are not in direct contact with their neighbours; there are tiny gaps known as synapses between them.
The action potential stops at the synapse, but its arrival causes the release of a transmitter substance from the neuron which diffuses across the gap.
Arriving at the post synaptic membrane, it causes a change in its permeability so that a new action potential begins.
The transmitter is broken down enzymically, to prevent it from continuously initiating action potentials.
Several transmitter substances have been discovered, but two important ones are acetyl choline and noradrenaline.
Not all transmitters excite the post synaptic membrane, some inhibit it so that it is more difficult for it to carry an impulse.
Blocking of nervous pathways in this way helps the direction of impulses through the nervous system.
BEHAVIOUR
There are two types of behaviour, species characteristic behaviour and individual-characteristic behaviour.
Species—characteristic behaviour is behaviour which is shown by all members of a species.
Individual-characteristic behaviour is behaviour that varies from one individual to another.
Species-characteristic behaviour includes stereotype behaviour distinctive to the species to which it belongs, e.g. copulation, however not all instinctive behaviour is species characteristic.
The fundamental processes of an animal's behaviour include reflex action, orientation, and learning.
BEHAVIOUR OF A PARAMECIUM
When a strong concentration of sodium chloride is placed near to paramecium they turn and go off in the opposite direction.
This swimming is a type of orientation, negative chemotaxis in response to the salt as getting too near the salt would result in dehydration of the paramecium.
When paramecium are placed near acetic acid they swim quicker and towards the acid, they are attracted by positive chemotaxis as the acid is a source of food i.e. carbon dioxide.
COURTSHIP AND MATING IN STICKLEBACK
The male stickleback migrates upstream to breeding grounds in Spring.
The male claims a territory, builds a nest and develops a red belly.
This is known as TERRITORIAL BEHAVIOUR.
This belly is stimuli to any intruding male to elicit an aggressive attack.
The Stickleback then becomes interested in females.
When a female appears, her swollen abdomen holding eggs is a stimulus for him to engage in a zig zag dance.
The male shows the female the nest he has made.
He prods her rump as she enters it, stimulus for her to lay her eggs.
The male then passes through the nest in order to fertilise the eggs.
The male then chases the female away.
The male then looks for another mate and he may escort as many as five females through the nest.
After mating, by stimulus of the presence of the eggs, the male guards the nest and fans the eggs which keeps water moving over them so they are well supplied with oxygen.
FEEDING IN YOUNG HERRING GULLS
The contrast between the yellow bill and the red spot on the bill of a herring acts as a stimulus to cause the young gull to feed off their parents by pecking their gulls.
Niko Tinbergen found that the red colour of the spots acted as a stimulus; no spot on a yellow model had very little response from chicks.
A white spot on a yellow model gathered very little more response.
Various other spots were tried on the yellow beak, the red spot causing the greatest response.
A model of a totally red beak showed an even greater response showing the attraction to the red colour of the spot on the herring's beak.
RESPIRATION
THE BIOCHEMISTRY OF RESPIRATION
1.
GLYCOLYSIS.
The substrate (carbohydrate, fat, protein) is broken down into pyruvic acid (3C).
2.
KREBS' CYCLE.
i)
The pyruvic acid (3C) forms carbon dioxide (1C) and Acetyl Coenzyme A (2C).
ii)
The Acetyl Coenzyme A (2C) unites with a molecule of Oxalacetic Acid (4C) to form Citric Acid (6C).
iii)
The two basic chemical reactions are:
a)
DEHYDROGENATION.
Hydrogen atoms are removed under the influence of the enzyme dehydrogenase.
The H atoms are taken up by an H carrier or acceptor, which is thereby REDUCED (whereas the substrate is ‘OXIDISED)
b)
DECARBOXYLATION.
Carbon dioxide is removed and passed out of the cell.
iv)
As a result of the series of reactions there is a formation of Oxalacetic Acid—the 4C compound which combines with the Acetyl Coenzyme A.
3.
CITOCHROME SYSTEM.
This consists of a battery of pigments (containing iron) and other substances which are reduced by the addition of hydrogen and re-oxidised by its removal.
The H atom, which was collected by a carrier from the Krebs’ Cycle, passes to a second carrier.
This second carrier is reduced, whereas the first carrier now becomes re-oxidised.
In this transfer sufficient energy is released for the synthesis of a molecule of ATP.
This process of oxidation-reduction is repeated with two further carriers; the H atoms finally combining with oxygen atoms to form water (see diagram R. 1).
(See notes pg.
65 for DIAGRAM FOR RESPIRATION PROCESSES)
ANALYSIS OF AIR SAMPLES BY GAS BURETTE TECHNIQUE
Water can be placed in a burette and the fresh air can be collected displacing the water by removing the stopper and releasing the tap.
The tap is then closed and the stopper placed back on the tube to prevent release or contamination of the air.
The volume of the air can then be measured.
Potassium hydroxide is injected into the tube to remove carbon dioxide.
The burette is placed in water and the air pressure equalised by opening and closing the tap.
The volume of the sample is again measured.
Alkaline progalyne is then added to the sample removing any oxygen and the air pressure in the burette is again equalised and the volume measured.
The difference in the first two volumes is the volume of carbon dioxide originally in the sample.
The difference of the last two volumes is the volume of oxygen originally in the sample.
These can be compared to the original volume to calculate the percentage of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the air.
This is then repeated for respired air blown into the burette.
RESPIRATORY QUOTIENT
The Respiratory Quotient (R.Q.) of an organism is the ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide given off to the volume of oxygen absorbed during respiration.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
THE HILL REACTION (LIGHT STAGE)
The Hill Reaction will proceed in the absence of carbon dioxide provided that a suitable hydrogen is present.
The evolution of oxygen in this process occurs as rapidly as it does in photosynthesis.
This process is referred to as the PHOTOLYSIS OF WATER since the overall effect is to split water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen, the oxygen being evolved in molecular form while the hydrogen combines with a hydrogen acceptor.
In this process chlorophyll acts as a catalyst.
This process can be shown by normal carbon dioxide being passed through a tube containing algae in water with the heavier O isotope and carbon dioxide with the heavier O isotope being passed through another tube containing the same type of algae in normal water.
The oxygen evolved from the two samples can be collected and tested for the heavier isotope using a mass spectrometer.
The algae in the tube with the heavier isotope in the water produced the isotope in the oxygen evolved.
THE DARK STAGE
Essentially the dark reactions involve the reduction of carbon dioxide to form carbohydrate.
Its an endorgenic process requiring energy.
Energy is supplied by ATP, formed in the light stage, and NADPH which carries high energy electrons and also supplies hydrogen for reducing the carbon dioxide.
This reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates takes place in a series of small steps, a metabolic pathway (the sequence of steps).
Each step is controlled by a specific enzyme.
In the first step the carbon dioxide combines with a five carbon compound called ribulose diphosphate, RuDp.
RuDp acts as a carbon dioxide acceptor and fixes the carbon dioxide.
This combination gives an unstable six-carbon compound which immediately splits into two molecules of three-carbon compound, phosphoglyceric acid (PGA).
The PGA is then reduced to form a three- carbon sugar, triose phosphate.
This is then built-up to a six-carbon monosaccaride or else enters a series of reactions which result in the regeneration of ribulose diphosphate.
The end product is not only the formation of glucose but some of the PGA can be found in fats and amino acids.
GENETICS
Structure of chromosomes
The nucleus of a cell is composed mainly of nucleoproteins, substances consisting of protein and nucleic acid.
Two common nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
A CHROMOSOME may be thought of as DNA coated with a protein.
It is believed that it is the DNA alone which is responsible for the inheritance of traits.
Chemically DNA is a very large polynucleotide molecule.
Each molecule has three parts:
1)
A sugar unit—deoxyribose
2)
A phosphate unit
3)
An organic base of which there are four possible
Adenine (double ring)
Thymine (single ring)
Guanine (double ring)
Cytosine (single ring)
Hence there are four possible nucleotides, which in combination form the molecules of DNA.
REPLICATION OF DNA
The DNA molecule uncoils from one end, the opposite strands separate, the bonds between opposite bases break, and the free nucleotides find their opposite nucleotide on each strand.
The bonds between opposite bases form, sugar-phosphate bonds form, and the daughter molecules coil into double helices (for diagram see pg.
32 notes).
RNA AND PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
RNA is a molecule similar to DNA except that:
1)
RNA consists of a single strand
2)
RNA's sugar is a ribose rather than a deoxyribose
3)
URACIL is used in the place of Thymine
4)
It occurs not only in the nucleus but also in the nucleolus in the cytoplasm.
Proteins are molecules composed of chains of amino acids.
There are about twenty different amino acids and these may be arranged in any sequence.
Each specific protein has its own particular sequence of amino acids and a singular protein molecule may consist of dozens, hundreds or even thousands of these amino acid units.
It is believed that each of the twenty amino acids is represented in DNA code by a particular sequence of three bases.
This is the BASE
TRIPLET HYPOTHESIS.
A triplet of bases signifying an amino acid is referred to as a CODON, e.g. GCU is the codon for Alanine.
The sequence of bases in DNA in a nucleus is TRANSCRIBED as a single thread of RNA.
This messenger RNA (mRNA) leaves the nucleus, enters the cytoplasm and attaches itself to the ribosome.
In the cytoplasm are short pieces of RNA called TRANSFER RNA (tRNA).
The transfer RNA each have a triplet of bases called the ANTICODON.
There is a different tRNA for each amino acid.
The tRNA attaches itself to the appropriate amino acid.
The units of tRNA with amino acids attached travel to the ribosome and seek the complement to their anticodon on the messenger RNA.
As the amino acids are brought into position they connect with each other and build up a protein, which becomes detached from the messenger RNA and is used by the cell.
CHROMOSOMES
The number of chromosomes is constant for a given species, for example in humans all the somatic body cells have 46 chromosomes (diploid number).
The gametes contain 23 (haploid number).
When fertilisation occurs the diploid number is restored.
Halving of the chromosome number occurs at gametogenesis by meiosis.
In this process:
1)
The homologous chromosomes become arranged in pairs
2)
The chromatids of the chromosomes in a bivalent pair intertwine with one another and exchange sections of points termed chiasmata (cross-over)
3)
At this late stage the nuclear membrane disappears and a spindle forms.
4)
The modified homologous chromosomes separate and move to opposite poles where new nuclei form, each with the haploid number of chromosomes.
5)
The REDUCTION DIVISION is immediately followed by the second meiotic division at right angles to the first in which the chromosomes form a normal metaphase arrangement and separate their chromatids in the normal mitotic fashion.
6)
In this way, as a result of crossing-over the haploid gametes are different from one another and from the parental.
SIMULTANEOUS INHERITANCE OF MORE THAN ONE CHARACTER
Experimental evidence from a dihybrid cross.
By crossing plants which are heterozygous for two characters Mendel obtained nine double dominant, three each of one character dominant and the other recessive, and one were both characters were in recessive form.
By Mendelien cross.
Assuming that segregation gives rise to equal numbers of four different types of gametes, sixteen possible fertilisations might occur.
These are illustrated by means of a PUNNET SQUARE.
(For example see FIGURE 2.1)
CO-DOMINANCE (BLENDED INHERITANCE)
‘Blended Inheritance’.
Although two red-flowered snapdragons, when crossed, produce exclusively red-flowered offspring; and two white-flowered snap dragons, when crossed, produce exclusively white-flowered progeny; the result of crossing red-flowered with white-flowered plants gives an F1 generation in which all the flowers are pink.
However these flowers do not breed true and in the F2 generation red, pink, and white-flowered plants are produced in the ratio 1:2:1.
In this case expression of the character evidently depends on the gene dosage present in the individual organism.
If the alleles for flower colour are R and W, with RR producing red flowers and WW giving white flowers, then the hybrid RW produces only half as much pigment as when RR is present in full dose.
It is obvious that the genes themselves had not been blended and passed through the F1 generation to the F2 generation unaffected.
Many characters are affected by gene dosage in the same way.
Thus was found Mendel's first law (the law of segregation):
Genes do not blend but pass intact from one generation to the next, after segregation.
MULTIPLE ALLELES
When more than two alleles exist, e.g. blood characteristics
In blood, groups A and B are dominant while group O is completely recessive.
Transmission of the alleles behaves according to Mendelien law and there are six different possible genotypes AA, AO, BB, BO, AB, and OO.
But there are only four phenotypes as O is recessive A, B, AB, and OO.
A cross between a parent having AB and a parent having OO would result in 50% of offspring having A and 50% having B.
LETHAL GENES
In yellow mice alleles for colour can be shown as Y for yellow fur (the dominant trait) and y for grey fur (the recessive trait).
Those mice with the YY genotype died at birth concluding that the Y gene is lethal (and recessive) and y gene is non-lethal (and dominant).
MUTATION
A mutation is a sudden change in hereditary material due to:
1)
Changes in the chromosome number
2)
Changes in the individual chromosomes
3)
Changes in the individual genes
A MUTANT is the descendant of an individual which has passed on a mutant gene.
Mutants show the effect of the mutation in their phenotype.
I
NUMBER OF CHROMOSOMES
The number of chromosomes is abnormal.
This is visible under microscope
a)
NON DISJUNCTION.
In this case a pair of homologous chromosomes fail to separate from one another during meiosis.
One daughter cell receives both; and the other receives none.
After fertilisation the zygote would have three or only one of that particular homologue.
This may have a profound effect on the organisms development, e.g. Down's syndrome (extra 21 chromosome), Kleinfelter's syndrome XXY (outwardly male, female characteristics).
b)
POLYPLOIDY.
All the homologous pairs undergo non-disjunction.
Half the gametes will have two of each type and fertilisation of one of these with a normal haploid gamete gives rise to a zygote with a triploid number of chromosomes.
If both gametes are diploid the zygote will be a tetraploid.
Polyploidy is rare in animals but more common in plants.
II
GROSS STRUCTURE OF CHROMOSOMES
One of the chromosomes may be of abnormal shape.
It may or may not be visible microscopically.
It is seen best when the homologous chromosomes are pairing at meiosis I. Since equivalent loci lie adjacent to one another(loops or twists indicate these mutations having occurred) the result is the alteration of the number or sequence of genes on the chromosome.
i)
Deletion.
The middle piece of the chromosome falls out.
ii)
Inversion.
The middle piece of the chromosome falls out and rotates through 180 degrees and then rejoins.
iii)
Translocation.
A piece of one chromosome breaks off and joins another chromosome.
The two chromosomes are not homologous.
iv)
Duplication.
An extra length of chromosome is added on.
III
GENE MUTATIONS
Gene mutations are errors or alterations in the DNA code.
They can have far reaching consequence in the development of an organism, e.g. one error of a base results in haemoglobin S being produced which results in sickle cell anaemia.
There are four types of error:
i)
Substitution where an incorrect nucleotide is substituted for the correct one in the DNA code that results in incorrect RNA; an incorrect protein.
Such a trivial error can alter the organism's life and its potential for life and survival.
ii)
Insertion where an extra nucleotide is inserted into the DNA which results in an altered RNA and an incorrect protein.
iii)
Deletion where a nucleotide is deleted from the DNA, resulting in an altered RNA; an incorrect protein.
iv)
Inversion where a section of the DNA is inverted which also results in an altered RNA; an incorrect protein.
Gene mutations occur spontaneously and can be induced by mutagenic agents such has high temperature, mustard gas, and radiation.
GENETIC TERMS
Allele:
One of a pair or more of alternate forms of a gene
Bivalent:
A pair of homologous chromosomes situated together during meiosis
Centromere:
A part of the chromosome which has no genes and by which the chromosome becomes attached to the spindle.
Chromatid:
One-half of the chromosome when the chromosome splits longitudinally during cell division.
Chromosome:
A thread-like structure, bearing genes and located in the nucleus.
Diploid:
Describes a cell that has two sets of homologous chromosomes.
Dominant:
Describes an allele whose effect is seen in the phenotype of a heterozygote, in spite of the presence of an alternative allele.
Equator:
The plane through the middle of the cell, at right angles to the main axis of the spindle.
Gene:
A unit of hereditary material, located on the chromosome.
Genotype:
A description of an organism in terms of certain of its genes.
Haploid:
Describes a cell with a single set of chromosomes.
Heterozygote:
An organism with two different alleles of the same gene.
Homozygote:
An organism which has two identical alleles of the same gene.
Phenotype:
A description of an organism in terms of what can be seen or measured.
Recessive:
Describes an allele whose effect is not seen in the heterozygote, because of the presence of a dominant allele of the same gene.
Replication:
During replication each strand of DNA generates a new strand complementary to itself.
RNA:
RNA is a long molecule made up of hundreds of bases of four types A, U, G, and C. RNA is made on a template of—
DNA:
A forming alongside T, U alongside A, G alongside C, and C alongside G.
Spindle:
An arrangement of cytoplasmic fibres, between the poles of a cell, along which the chromatids (or chromosomes) move during mitosis (or meiosis).
Transcription:
During transcription each strand of DNA generates a molecule of RNA complementary to itself.
Translation:
Translation is the synthesis of a protein molecule using the information encoded in messenger RNA.
BIRDS
CHARACTERS OF BIRDS
1.
SHAPE.
Streamlined.
2.
FEATHERS.
Body is covered with overlapping feathers which give a smooth surface, large surface are on the wings (for easy locomotion), and provide good insulation.
3.
HOMEOTHERMIC.
Birds have a constant warm temperature thus providing optimum conditions for biochemical processes (enzyme reactions.)
4.
FORELIMBS are modified as WINGS
5.
SKELETON has several modifications
a)
Many bones are HOLLOW and contain air sacs so they are light weight
b)
Many bones (e.g. pelvic region) are fused—so increasing strength
c)
Some are modified in shape to provide anchorage for muscle blocks, e.g. the sternum has a KEEL
d)
Flexible vertebrae of neck permit shift of the centre of gravity (in line with the hip joint when walking, in line with the pectoral girdle when flying.)
6.
BEAK of light weight horny material replaces the heavy jaws and teeth.
7.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM: Includes a crop in which food is stored and a gizzard in which food is ground by stones contained there.
8.
MUSCULAR SYSTEM.
Muscles are well developed and contain MYOGLOBIN (a pigment which is an oxygen reservoir).
9.
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM.
Female birds have a single ovary and they lay calcareous (hard shelled) eggs.
Birds also have a complicated system of courtship.
10.
EYES are very well developed.
There is a third eyelid for a keen sense of vision.
FLIGHT
In section a wing is an AEROFOIL.
Air flowing over this generates an upwards thrust or lift.
If the weight of the bird is greater than this lift it will fall.
If the weight of the bird and the lift is the same it remains static.
If the weight of the bird is less than the lift then the bird rises.
1)
HOVERING.
Strong wind.
Bird remains airborne without being beaten.
2)
SOARING.
In a thermal up-current
3)
GLIDING.
The bird is ‘falling’ along a path which ensures a speed adequate to avoid ‘stalling’.
4)
POWERED FLIGHT/ACTIVE FLIGHT
Wing movements are brought about by powerful muscles, the depressor and elevator pectoral muscles.
(see diagram B. 1 for muscle/skeleto flight system in birds)
The pectoralis major muscle contracts, the wing is pulled down (‘depressed'), air resistances gives an upthrust on the wing.
The upthrust is transmitted from wing to coracoid and the whole body is raised.
The humerus rotates in its socket and alters the plane of the wing.
The pectoralis minor muscle contracts and its tendon, the foramen triosseum, passing through pulls up the wing.
PROPERTIES OF WATER
The usefulness of water to organisms results from several properties, the most important of which are:
1)
CHEMICAL COMPOUND:-It is a colourless compound of hydrogen and oxygen (H2O).
2)
STATE:-At normal temperature and pressure it is a liquid.
3)
STABILITY:-The molecules have an extremely stable structure and do not readily decompose into hydrogen and oxygen.
Water does, however, ionise slightly to form positively charged ‘hydrogen ions’ and negatively charged ‘hydroxyl ions’.
4)
SOLVENT:-It is a solvent of many chemicals, miscible with many organic substances.
5)
ABNORMAL EXPANSION:-Just before solidifying (i.e. between 4°c and 0°c) it expands and becomes less dense.
6)
SPECIFIC HEAT:-It has a high specific heat capacity, so it warms relatively slowly, holds a lot of heat, and cools down relatively slowly.
7)
LATENT HEAT:-It has high latent heats of evaporation and solidification (e.g. 2 ½ times as much heat is required to cause boiling water to change into water vapour as is required to bring cold water to the boil).
8)
SURFACE TENSION:-The surface tension of water is high, forming a ‘skin’.
BIOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE OF WATER
1)
ENVIRONMENT
Water is the habitat in which many organisms live and is the habitat in which life originated and evolved.
2)
COMPOSITION
Water constitutes the major mass of an organism.
3)
TRANSPORTATION
Water is used as a solvent, e.g. in blood.
Water assists in the movement of nutrients, metabolic wastes and cells within the body.
4)
TEMPERATURE CONTROL
Water helps to cool organisms, i.e transpiration in plants.
5)
METABOLISM
Water is an important raw material.
It is a raw material necessary for photosynthesis.
It is a by product of respiration.
It plays a role in processes, hydrolysis and condensation of carbohydrates and proteins.
6)
LUBRICANT
Water assists in the swallowing of food and in the movement of joints, i.e. sinovial fluid.
7)
SUPPORT
Water imparts turgor to cells and tissues and so helps to maintain the shape of an organism.
8)
REPRODUCTION
In both plants and animals the movement of gametes depends upon the presence of water.
SUMMARY OF WATER RELATIONS OF CELLS
INNATE MOBILITY OF PARTICLES:
The molecules and ions in gases and liquids are in a state of constant motion.
By impacting with neighbouring particles they vibrate about a locus, and only appear to remain in a fixed position.
This movement on account of its rapidity and small scale cannot be observed directly
Brownian Motion
Small particles in colloidal suspension, e.g. smoke particles in air or pollen grains in water display erratic movement.
This is the result of imbalanced impact of the molecules of the medium (air or water).
Such movements can be observed by microscope.
Diffusion
This is the movement of molecules or ions from a region of high concentration to a region of lower concentration.
In diffusion, particles flow down the concentration gradient.
Osmosis
The movement of water by diffusion through a semi-permeable membrane.
Osmotic Pressure
The pressure built up in a system as a result of the intake of water by osmosis.
Osmotic Potential (O.P.)
The potential of a solution to create an osmotic pressure.
Hypotonic
Having a lower osmotic potential than a standard.
Isotonic
Having the same osmotic potential as another solution.
Hypertonic
Having a higher osmotic potential than a standard.
Water Potential (W.P.)
The potential of a cell (or other ‘system’) to give out water to another cell or solution.
Since W.P. is sometimes used as an abbreviation for ‘wall pressure’, it is advisable to use the Greek symbol for psi.
XEROPHYTES
Xerophytes are plants which are able to survive in areas where water is scarce.
i)
Physical Drought—very little water available.
For example, a sandy soil or very shallow soil.
ii)
Dry Air- Results in high transpiration rate, e.g. on moors, high mountains, hot deserts.
iii)
Physiological Drought—Where water is not available although it is present.
For example, a salt marsh, cold soil.
Adaptations to xerophyte conditions
1)
ROOT SYSTEM:-Roots may be long and slender, going down to great depth and absorbing water from distant sources; or very shallow rooted and superficial, catching rain water before it evaporates away.
2)
WATER STORAGE:-In which the stems are swollen or the leaves are fleshy, i.e. succulents, e.g. cactus, stonecrop (on dry walls), grasswort, saltwort (saltmarsh).
3)
REDUCTION OF TRANSPIRATION:-Achieved in a number of ways:
a)
Thick cuticle, preventing water loss from epidermal cells, e.g. holly, laurel, rhododendron.
b)
Covering of hair or scales on the leaves.
This traps a layer of moist air between stomata and external atmosphere, e.g. edleweiss, coltsfoot.
c)
Sunken stomata.
Stomata in pits or grooves, e.g. oleander, pine.
d)
Leaves small or absent.
(Photosynthesis is carried out by the stem), e.g. heather, cacti
e)
Rolled leaves.
Moist hair is trapped outside the stomata, e.g. heather.
f)
Rolling leaves.
Under dry conditions the leaves become rolled, but when water is plentiful they flatten out, e.g marram grass.
g)
Dwarf habit.
Low structure and tussock shape, which gives protection from drying winds, e.g. heather, bilberry.
THE MODERN THEORY OF STOMATAL MECHANISM
1)
In the light carbon dioxide is used in photosynthesis and so the concentration of carbon dioxide in the tissue falls.
This causes an increase in the pH.
2)
The rise in pH in the guard cell causes:
3)
The glucose-1-phosphate is hydrolysed: which causes the osmotic potential to rise.
4)
The O.P. of the guard cells rises and water moves into them by osmosis from the surrounding cells.
Turgor increases and the stomatal pore opens.
The reverse process occurs in darkness, i.e. levels of carbon dioxide rise, pH falls, glucose-1-phosphate is converted to starch which is osmotically inactive, the guard cells lose their turgidity and the pore closes.
OSMOREGULATION IN AMOEBA
Amoeba is a protozoan that lives in fresh water.
The result of this is it takes in more water by osmosis than it gives out.
To counter this, water is secreted into a contractile vacuole as fast as it enters the amoeba.
The contractile vacuole expands and eventually discharges the water it contains to the exterior through the cell membrane.
The process is then repeated.
MOVEMENT OF WATER WITHIN THE XYLEM
The cohesion-tension theory explains how water can be lifted to great heights in a tree.
Heat from the sun provides the energy for evaporation, causing the leaf cell to lose water.
Cohesion, the force holding the water molecules together, causes more water to move into the leaf cells from the xylem.
The remaining water in the xylem is placed under tension and piled upwards in an unbroken column.
More water is furnished by the root cells to the xylem.
The root cells extract water from the soil by osmosis because the concentration of inorganic compounds within the root cells is greater than the concentration of the compounds in the soil.
Thus an unbroken column of water extends in the tree from the root cells to the leaf cells.
The force of cohesion and tension in this column account for the upward rise of the water.
The cohesion-tension theory is favoured by most biologists today as the best explanation of the rise of water in plants.
THE TRANSPORT OF MATERIAL WITHIN A PLANT
a)
Water.
Absorption of water and its movement within the system has already been described.
The transpiration stream is the flow of water from roots to leaves.
b)
Oxygen and carbon dioxide.
These gases diffuse down their concentration gradients, e.g. through stoma pores or lentices to the intercellular spaces of leaf mesophyll or stem cortex.
From there they diffuse, in the form of gas or in solution, to and into the cells.
Oxygen is absorbed also from the soil atmosphere by the root.
(It is because of lack of oxygen that growth is poor in water-logged soils).
c)
These are absorbed by the root hairs against a concentration gradient.
This active transport involves the expenditure of energy (Steward's experiment with potato tissue and bromine salt).
Once in the xylem, the salts are carried passively in the transpiration stream to the upper parts of the plant.
THE NEED FOR A TRANSPORT SYSTEM
In order to live, every part of an animal must be adequately supplied with food and oxygen and have its metabolic waste products removed.
These materials are soluble in water, and hence can move from place to place by diffusion.
In minute organisms, such as the Protozoa, the movement of material is diffusion, in association with the protoplasmic streaming which normally occurs within living cells.
Although adequate for the needs of single-celled animals (and such others as Hydra, where the body is only two cells thick), diffusion is too slow a process for most multi-cellular animals.
The trend through evolution, however, has been towards an increase in size and complexity.
The method adopted by larger animals to speed up the distribution of essential materials is to force carrier-fluid through transport systems.
The simplest form of transport system circulates the external watery medium.
Thus in the Porifera and some Coelenterates the fluid is propelled through channels so that the food and oxygen it contains reach every part of the body.
Nomatodes use their body-fluid as a transport medium and depend upon contractions of the body wall for its movement; while in insects blood is pumped round the haemocoel by a dorsal heart.
Echinoderms are the only group of animals to possess a water vascular system.
The majority of animals of any size have specialised blood vascular systems for the transport of materials.
The essential compounds of a blood vascular system are:
1)
A transport medium — the blood—containing the dissolved materials such as food and oxygen.
2)
A pumping device — the heart—to make the blood circulate.
3)
Valves to make the blood flow in one direction.
4)
Blood vessels carrying the blood from the heart to all parts of the body, and from all parts of the body back to the heart.
5)
An arrangement in the tissues whereby the body cells can obtain needed substances from the blood and deliver up to its waste products.
RATES OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS
1)
Reaction rate is affected by the surface area of reactants, concentration (partial pressures for gas), temperature, catalyst, and light.
2)
Effect of concentration on reaction rate:
i)
Concentration of [Br2]against the
ii)
tangents to the curve are drawn from various values of ‘t’— the gradient of each tangent is the reaction rate at the value of t, expressed as (-d[Br2 ]/dt); against Br2.
iii)
Reaction rate = k[Br2] (rate law, rate equation)
3)
Reactions with very fast rates often involve particles known as free radicals.
Free radicals are formed when a covalent bond is split homolytically, i.e. when each bonded atom or group takes one of the bonding pair of electrons.
Energy must be supplied to break the bonds between atoms to produce free radicals.
Reactions which are started by the absorption of light energy are photochemical reactions.
4)
A)
Reaction between chlorine and hydrogen in sunlight.
B)
Reaction between methane and chlorine occurs rapidly in sunlight or at temperatures greater than 300oc.
5)
The rate equation is a statement relating the rate of a reaction at a fixed temperature to the concentration of the reacting species by means of a rate constant and indices known as the   where k = rate constant for a particular temperature m = order of the reaction w.r.t.
A n = order of the reaction w.r.t.
B m and n are usually small integers (0, 1, 2, and 3)
6)
For experimental data obtained by measuring the concentration of A at various times, the following steps can be carried out to find values for k and n in the reaction
i)
A graph of [A]against time.
Tangents are drawn at various values of t.
Gradients of the tangent give reaction rate, i.e. 
ii)
A graph of reaction rate is plotted against [A].
The order of reaction and the rate constant can be determined from inspection of the graph in (ii) as follows.
7)
For a zero-order reaction, and is equal to k.
Dimensions of k: concentration time-1.
8)
For a first-order reaction,
A graph of  against [A]will be a straight line graph through the origin with gradient = k.
Dimensions of k: time-1.
9)
For a second-order reaction,
A graph of  against [A]will be a smooth curve and a graph of  against [A]2 will be a straight line with gradient = k.
Dimensions of k: concentration-1time-1.
10)
In radioactive decay, half life (t1/2) is the time taken for for [A]o to decay to 1/2[A]o.
If we substitue these values we get 
so for any radiactive decay, t1/2 = 0.693
11)
Titration can be used to follow the change in concentration of a reactant or product.
This method is suitable for reactions which take place in solution.
In the hydrolysis reaction for an ester the reaction is followed by measuring the concentration of alkali at various times throughout the reaction.
Samples from the reaction mixture are removed and quenched by running into ice cold water.
The remaining alkali is filtrated against standard acid using phenolphthalein as indicator.
12)
Colorimetric analysis is suitable for reactions in which one of the substances is coloured.
The intensity of the colour of either reactant or product can be followed during the reaction using a photoelectric colorimeter.
(Diagram RR1).
This method is suitable for reactions involving ions in solution.
Any change in the number of ions present will cause a change in the electrical conductivity of the solution.
Inert electrodes are immersed in the solution under test and the change in electrical conductivity is measured at suitable time intervals.
13)
In chemical reactions where gases are evolved the volume of gas can be measured using a suitable gas syringe at selected time intervals.
This method is used for the reactions of metals and acids and the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
Some gaseous reactions involve changes in the number of moles of gas.
If these reactions are carried out at constant volume changes in number of moles of gas with change in gas pressure which can be measured using a manometer.
14)
The graph (diagram RR2) shows the energy distribution of particles in a gas from two temperatures, Tk, and (T+10) k.
For (T+10) k more particles have sufficient energy to overcome the energy barrier than do for Tk.
Fractions of particles with energy , where R = gas constant (8.31 Jk-1mol-1).
15)
k = Ae-EA/RT, where A is the Arrhenius constant or pre-exponential constant.
This is called the Arrhenius equation.
16)
The Arrhenius equation provides a useful method for calculating the activation energy.
Therefore,
By plotting a graph of lgk against 1/T for a given chemical reaction, where the gradient =  and  and thus the activation energy can be found.
17)
Most chemical reactions which proceed at a measurable rate are believed to take place in a series of simple steps.
This series of simple reactions is known as the reaction mechanism.
The slowest step in a reaction mechanism is called the rate-determining step or rate-limiting step.
18)
In a reaction between two gases A and B, a molecule of A must collide with a molecule of B before a reaction will occur.
The collision frequency is porportional to the product 
For most chemical reactions the rate of reaction is much slower than the collision frequency so you must assume only a small fraction of collisions result in a reaction.
19)
The activation energy for a reaction is the minimum energy which colliding molecules require for a reaction to take place.
We can use the Arrhenius equation to look at the effect of the temperature and activation energy on reaction rate.
Thus the rate of reaction practically doubles at 308K.
In practice, many chemical reactions with EA of approximately 50kJmol-1 double in rate over 10K.
20)
It is thought that molecules must collide with each other in a favourable spacial orientation for a successful reaction to occur.
Z = rate at which molecules collide
A = rate at which favourable collisions occur.
21)
The transition state theory looks in detail at the ‘course’ of a collision between molecules.
As two molecules approach each other, their electron clouds mutually repel.
The effect of this is to slow the molecules down and as this happens the kinetic energy associated with moving particles is converted into potential energy.
The changes in potential energy that take place during a reactive collision can ne shown on an energy profile, e.g for  (See diagram RR3)
As CH3. and HCl approach, the potential energy increases to a maximum.
The arrangement of molecules at the potential energy maximum is known as the ‘activated complex’.
The activated complex exists in a transition state during the course of collision; once formed it will change into the products of the reaction.
HOMOLOGOUS SERIES
Homologous Series: The alkanes
General formula: C H
Prepared: By fractional distillation of crude oil.
They can be prepared by the removal of carbon dioxide (decarboxylation) from the appropriate alkanoic acid, e.g. methane is prepared by heating soda lime (calcium oxide with sodium hydroxide) with ethanoic acid.
Boiling points: The lowest members are gasses with low boiling points.
The highest members are liquids with high boiling points.
Solubility: The alkanes are non-polar molecules and are only soluble in non-polar solvents.
They are insoluble in water but are soluble in tetrachloromethane.
Combustion: The alkanes burn and are used as fuels.
Reactivity: The alkanes are unreactive compared to other chemicals and are said to be ‘saturated’.
Substitution: In the reaction between methane and chlorine, an atom of chlorine is substituted for a hydrogen atom in the methane molecule to form chloromethane.
By supplying addition molecules of chlorine it is possible to replace all the hydrogen atoms.
Homologous series: The alkenes
General formula: C H
Prepared: Alkenes can be prepared by dehydration of the appropriate alcohol, e.g. ethene can be prepared by heating ethanol with twice its volume of concentrated sulphuric acid at 180 
Solubility: Like alkanes, they are non-polar molecules soluble only in non-polar solvents.
Combustion: Alkenes burn to give carbon dioxide and water.
They burn with a more sooty flame than alkanes.
Reactivity: The alkenes are much more reactive than alkanes because they are ‘unsaturated’(have double bonds in their structure).
Addition:
1)
Hydrogenation
2)
With halogens
3)
With halogen acids
4)
With sulphuric acid
As this reaction is not shared by alkanes it is useful for separating mixtures of alkanes and alkenes.
5)
Bromine water
Ethane decolourises bromine water with the formation of 1,2-dibromoethane.This is a test for alkenes as alkanes do not decolourise bromine water.
Nomenclature of alkanes
1)
Take the longest unbranched carbon chain as the parent
2)
Name the branches (methyl, ethyl, propyl)
3)
Indicate the number of branches (di for two, tri for three)
4)
Indicate the position of the branches by a number (labelling the parent chain from the end nearest the branches)
Naming of the alkenes
1)
Take the longest unbranched chain containing the double bonds as the parent
2)
Number the carbon atoms from the end nearest the double bond.
Name the alkane chain appropriately, e.g. prop-1-ene
3)
Name the branches
4)
Indicate the number of branches
5)
Indicate the position of branches by a number (remembering to number the parent chain from the end nearest to the double bond).
Homologous Series: The alkynes
General formula: C H
Prepared: Alkynes are prepared by the action of alcoholic potassium hydroxide on dibromoalkanes, which have the bromine atoms on adjacent carbon atoms.
Ethane only can also can be prepared by the action of water on calcium carbide.
NB: This is not a general method of preparation of alkynes.
Boiling points: The boiling points graduate in the same way as other homologous series.
Solubility: Alkynes are soluble in non-polar solvents.
Combustion: Ethyne burns to form carbon dioxide and water.
When ethyne is tested with a lighted paper it burns with a yellow sooty flame.:
Addition:
1)
Hydration
2)
With halogens
3)
With halogenic acids
Ethyne reacts with hydrogen chloride to form chloroethane (vinyl chloride).
4)
With water and dilute sulphuric acid/mercury (II) sulphate as a catalyst the alkyne is oxidised to the corresponding aldehyde.
5)
Decolourises bromine water slowly
Substitution: When ethyne is bubbled through ammoniacal solutions of copper (I) chloride or silver (I) nitrate, metal derivatives called acetylides
Both of these compounds are unstable and decompose explosively when dry.
CYCLIC COMPOUNDS
Cycloalkanes have similar properties to alkanes and are isomers of the alkenes. (fig. 1)
Cycloalkenes have similar properties to alkenes and are isomers of the alkynes. (fig. 2)
ORGANIC OXYGEN COMPOUNDS
Alkanols (alcohols)
Alkanols both contain the -OH, hydroxyl group
Primary alkanols have no more than one alkyl group attached to the carbon atom linked to the -OH group.
Secondary alkanols have two alkyl groups attached to this carbon atom.
Tertiary alkanols have three alkyl groups.
Primary alcohols oxidise to form alkanones (keytones).
Secondary alcohols oxidise to form alkanals (aldehydes) and then alkanoic acids.
Tertiary alcohols do not oxidise.
Alkanones are not good reducing agents and do not react with reagents.
Alkanals are good reducing agents.
Benedict's reagent goes orange, Tollin's reagent gives a silver mirror, acidified dichromate solution goes green, and Fehling's reagent goes bright red.
These reactions are therefore used to discern between keytones and aldehydes.
Alkanoic acids are weak, i.e. only partly dissociate.
Organic acids contain a polar group.
The smaller molecule acids are soluble in water.
The large molecule acids are not.
Organic acids react with bases.
AROMATIC COMPOUNDS
‘Aromatic’ was originally applied to substances which had a sweet smell.
It is now taken to mean the compound benzene, C H, or compounds which have similar structures and properties to benzene.
Benzene is possibly a chain with triple bonds or more probably a ring compound with double bonds (see fig 3.1).
Benzene does not decolourise bromine water as other unsaturated compounds do, so neither of the structures suggested is satisfactory.
BENZENE Bonding:
1)
The bond angles are all 120
2)
The molecule is a regular hexagon
3)
The carbon to carbon bond lengths are slightly larger than that of the average C-C bond.
The structure is often simplified to:
Prepared: Sources of aromatic compounds are coal, tar, and petroleum.
Benzene can also be prepared by dehydrogenation of hexane.
Solubility: Benzene does not dissolve in water, as it is a liquid it is usually referred to as immiscible with water.
Combustion: Benzene burns to form carbon dioxide and water.
The flame is very sooty when the oxygen supply is limited.
PHENOL
In phenol, the -OH hydroxyl group is joined to a benzene ring.
Its formula therefore is C H OH.
Phenol dissolves in water to produce a weak acid solution.
Phenol is more soluble in alkali than in water.
Decreasing the pH of the solution will result in phenol coming out of the solution.
AMINES
Amines react with copper (III) sulphate solution to produce a deep blue colour.
This test is used to provide evidence for ammonia or an amine.
Amines are a series of organic compounds related to ammonia.
Amines are soluble in water, aromatic amines are less soluble.
Anilene is an important aromatic amine.
One of the hydrogen atoms in ammonia is replaced by a benzene ring.
Uses: is used in the manufacture of nylon.
Amine groups are found in medicines and aromatic amines are used to make dyes.
There are three types of amine, depending on the number of hydrogens substituted by alkyl groups.
(see fig. 3.2)
Amino acids contain both an acid group and an amine group.
Amines react with acids to form salts.
Amines can be prepared by heating and alkyl ammonium salt with an alkali.
RADIATION
particles are stopped by a sheet of paper and have a range of only a few centimetres in the air.
particles are stopped by a sheet of aluminium and a have a range of a few metres in the air.
radiation has a range of about a hundred metres in air and is stopped by about five centimetres of lead or concrete.
The half-life of a radioactive substance is the time interval taken for the radiant species present to lose half its radioactivity.
Each radioactive element has its own characteristic half life, e.g. carbon 5570 years (C) and uranium (U) 4.51 X 10 years.
Nuclear equations Nuclear equations must balance, the total mass must be the same on the left and right hand sides.
1) Consider the emission of an -particle from Po to form Pb.
Consider the emission of a -particle from Pb to form Bi.
The difference in atomic number can be explained by considering the breakdown of a neutron to form a proton and an electron.
atomic number is increased by one.
Radioisotopes are used in agriculture as tracers to detect fertiliser distribution in plants.
They are used in medicine for the treatment of cancer and to detect thyroid gland disorders.
They are also used in industry to detect flaws in metals.
Carbon dating
This method of dating involves radioisotope C which is formed in the upper atmosphere by neutron bombardment of nitrogen:
The carbon then decays: and as C has a half life of 5570 years, it is suitable for dating organic remains.
The method of carbon dating is based on the assumption that these two reactions have been occurring at a constant rate for the past 15000 years.
All plants absorb carbon in the form of carbon dioxide during the process of photosynthesis: This carbon dioxide contains a small amount of C. This CO is taken into living things directly or indirectly by photosynthesis.
The living system thus contains a constant amount of C. When a plant dies it absorbs no more C and that already present begins to decay.
By comparing the amount of C in organic remains with that in a similar living plant the age of the remains can be determined.
MASS SPECTROMETER A sample is made into a gas and the atoms or molecules are passed through an ionisation chamber where they have one or more electrons ‘knocked off’ to form positive ions.
The positive ions are accelerated to a narrow beam by the use of negative plates and a high voltage.
Different ions are made to strike the deflector by changing the size of the magnetic field.
The results are then recorded, usually by means of a graph.
Ions are deflected according to: a) mass—lighter ions are deflected more than heavier ions b) charge—2 ions are deflected much more than 1 ions.
The amount of deflection depends on the mass/charge ratio.
The lower the ratio the higher the deflection of the ions.
POINTERS
A pointer is a simple data type, consisting of an unbounded set of values, which addresses or otherwise indicates the location of a variable of a given type.
The word ‘pointer’ is not a reserved order in Pascal; ‘pointer’is not used in defining a pointer variable.
In the above example Ptr1, Ptr2, and Ptr3 are pointer variables as denoted by the ∘ in their type definitions.
The first declaration is read: ‘Ptr1 is a pointer to a variable of type Range’.
Ptr1 can point to an integer variable whose value is in the subrange of 1 to 25.
The declaration causes the compiler to name a memory location Ptr1, the contents of which will be a memory address.
However, as usual, the value of Ptr1 is not yet defined.
Even though Ptr1 exists, the variable it is pointing to (dynamic or referenced variable) does not.
A referenced variable is a variable accessed not by the name but through a pointer variable; a dynamic variable.
The statements  would leave the address in Ptr1, Ptr2, and Ptr3 of each of the newly created referenced variables.
To access the newly created variables, the pointer variable followed by a ∘ gives us the variable pointed to.
For the referenced variables just created, these are valid assignments:
Pointers of the same type can be assigned to each other.
Pointers are important for creating dynamic data structures.
Since we must have some way of linking each component to the next one in the structure, each component must contain a link or pointer that points to the next component in the structure.
The record is ideal as a component of a dynamic data structure.
It can contain fields of different types with the pointer being one of them.
When defining a dynamic variable you describe what the variable can look like in the Type section.
In the var section you declare a variable to be a pointer to a variable of that type.
When one of the referenced variables is needed, use the procedure NEW which has as its argument a pointer declared in the var section.
This procedure creates the variable, but instead of returning the created variable itself, it returns a pointer to it.
You use the pointer to access the variable itself.
Notice the definition of PtrType includes the identifier PERSON which is not yet defined.
A type identifier must be used in the definition of a pointer type.
This type identifier is an exception to the normal rule that identifiers must be declared before they are used.
This allows us to define a pointer to an object (referenced variable) before defining the object itself.
This is called dynamic storage allocation because the variables of type PERSON are created as we need them in the program.
Repeated use of NEW allows us to generate additional variables of this type.
Between these calls to NEW, we link the variable we have just gotten to the previous one to form a dynamic data structure
Any operation that is legal on a named variable of that type is legal on a dynamic variable of that type.
However, only assignment and test for equality are legal operations on pointer variables.
In other words, we can make two pointers reference the same variable, or we can test whether or not two pointers point to the same variable.
An algorithm is considered to be practical if it runs in polynomial time, i.e run-time O(nk) for some constant k.
Otherwise, the algorithm is impractical (e.g. if run-time is > Cn).
Several problems seem to be intractable (no practical algorithm).
These include the Travelling Salesman Problem, the Steiner Tree Problem (adding flexibility to a minimum cost spanning tree), graph colouring, exan timetabling, and thousands of other innocent-looking problems.
If any of these are found to be tractable, then they all are.
DEPTH-FIRST SEARCH
Depth first search is a recursive procedure.
Application of depth first search
Problem: Is there a path im G from s to t?
Solution:
DIJKSTRA'S ALGORITHM
Dijkstra's algorithm can be used to find the shortest path from one specified vertex s to another vertex t in a weighted graph.
As a by-product it also finds the shortest paths from s to all other vertices in the graph.
In order to use the algorithm, we must assume that all edge weights are positive.
The algorithm works by progressively updating a label D[u] assigned to each vertex u until D[u] becomes equal to the shortest path length from s to u.
A set F of vertices whose labels are known to have already reached their final values is maintained.
F is initially empty; on each iteration of the while-loop one new vertex u has its label finalised and is added to F. After n iterations, all final vertex labels have been computed.
The invariant for the while-loop consists of two parts:
(i)
for each vertex u F, the label D[u] has its correct final value.
(ii)
for each vertex u F, D[u] is the length of a shortest path from s to u which, apart from u, passes only through vertices in F.
The initialisation prior to the while-loop takes time O(n), where n is the number of vertices in G. Line (1) can be performed in time O(n) by scanning through each vertex in turn.
The same applies to line (3) assuming an adjacency matrix representation of G so that the test (u, v) is an edge of G may be performed in constant time.
Each iteration of the while-loop therefore takes time O(n); since there are n iterations, the total time for the loop is O(n2).
This dominates the O(n) initialisation time, so the runtime of Dijkstra's algorithm is O(n2).
SHORTEST PATHS (ALL PAIRS)
Dynamic programming is used to compute a shortest path between every pair of vertices in a weighted directed graph G. This algorithm does not require all edge weights to be positive, but we have to ban negative length cycles.
Floyd's Algorithm works with the adjacency matrix representation of G. For convenience, let us assume that the vertex set of G is  so that G is represented by a variable A of type 
The runtime of Floyd is dominated by the three nested for-loops, and so is O(n3).
ABSTRACT DATA TYPES
We only need to know what a procedure does, not how does it; a wall can be built between the program that uses procedure T and the implementation of procedure T. This leads to modular programs.
As a result, a function can be replaced by another, perhaps more efficient version, without changing the rest of the program as long as the external behaviour remains the same.
Programs are constructed out of Data Structures as well as Algorithms.
Data abstraction builds a wall between the user of some data and the representation of the data using the operations on the data as the interface.
Typical operations on data: put data into a data structure take data out of a data structure ask questions about the data in a data structure
Data is normally organised by: position (e.g stacks, queues etc.)
OR value (e.g. tables, priority queues etc.)
An abstract data type (ADT) is a set of operations, operating on a collection of stored data, defined so that they are rigorous enough to specify completely the effect that they have on the data, but abstract because it must not specify how the data is stored nor how the operations are carried out.
The choice of implementation depends on a number of factors:
Fixed size vs.
Dynamic structures — Are there natural limits to the size of the problem?
Time efficiency — Does the efficiency of the operations cause a bottleneck in the overall performance of the system?
Which operations are used more frequently, and so should be supported most efficiently?
Often two implementations will differ in the speed of each operation, but neither will be faster than the other for all operations.
Space efficiency — Is the space used to represent objects of this ADT critical the program's overall space requirements?