

Getting Started
Have you joined the RSPB to learn more about birds and the countryside?
Then read on…
Everyone can enjoy birds and the countryside.
Share them with your family or friend.
All you need is an open, enquiring mind and the ability to wonder at the fascinating world of wildlife.
Birds are simply the vehicle for a greater environment as a whole.
They are the most accessible and lively elements of the natural world around us.
There are many ways of enjoying birds.
They have an enormously wide appeal.
Birds are great memory joggers, evocative of times past and places visited.
It may be the song of the curlew that recalls childhood holidays on the moors and dales, the calls of oystercatchers that bring to mind the seaside, the smell of the salt, the sunshine and ice cream; or the song of the thrush that brings back the memory of a walk, a place, a friend who shared a memorable day.
Birds can be an inspiration, as they have been to so many artists and poets.
Who has not been cheered by the song of a robin or thrush, the sight of a kingfisher or the flickering patterns made by a rising flock of lapwings against a dark winter sky, and not felt the better for the experience?
Birds also make a wonderful focus of ambition — everyone has a special bird he or she would one day love to see.
And then, after the years of expectation and hope, the reading and planning, suddenly it is there, in the flesh — and it is great!
Equally, birds can be a total surprise.
The discovery of a bird when and where it was least expected can be a magical experience.
It does not have to be rare.
For many people birds become an obsession — but for most they are but one part of the whole countryside experience.
Indeed, they may be appreciated as a lively addition to the garden, to be watched from time to time from the kitchen window.
But they add an extra dimension to a country walk, a drive by the sea, even a journey on a train.
Taking a stronger interest in birds requires more effort.
Identifying them is a problem for a start — many species tend to look just like several others!
And where are all those that are in the book that we have never seen?
Enjoying birds is easy — look and listen and nothing more is required.
But identifying them, learning about their behaviour and distribution and understanding what makes them tick, requires some enjoyable investigation.
You have to get started as a birdwatcher.
What do you need?
Simply a pair of binoculars and a bird book.
The book will help you tell one bird from another and that will be the spur to further enquiry.
After all, knowing what a bird is will always be the first step.
You can drive along a motorway for years and see nothing, but once you learn the quivering shape above the verge is a hovering kestrel looking for voles in the short grass, it becomes difficult to pass a kestrel ever again without mentally noting what it is, what it is doing and why it is there.
Good books are now easy to find and reasonably priced — look for The RSPB Book of British Birds (Macmillan), the Country Life Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe (Collins), The Shell Guide to the Birds of Britain (Michael Joseph) and, above all, The Complete Book of British Birds (RSPB/AA)
Binoculars will become essential almost from the start.
Get a pair that you can afford, that are easy to handle, and have a magnification of from 7 to 10 (resist the temptation to go for higher power).
Binoculars are described by two figures — such as 8x30 or 10x50 — the first being the magnification (or "power" ) and the second the diameter of the larger lenses in millimetres.
The bigger the lens, the brighter the image — but there must be a compromise because bigger binoculars are also heavier and harder to hold steady.
With higher power, you need more light, so bigger lenses — so try 8x30, 8x40, 10x40 or 10x50 at a good store, and shop around for the best price.
Most reputable suppliers advertise in Birds magazine.
To get help from an experienced birdwatcher is useful.
Join a local RSPB members' group (get the address from the RSPB regional office) and go on the outings if you can.
There will always be someone who will be only too pleased to help.
Why not try an RSPB birdwatching holiday?
The county bird club will probably produce an annual report — ask at the library or contact the RSPB regional office — and that will help you to find out where to go to see birds, which is one of the most difficult things to discover without something or someone to point you, literally, in the right direction.
You will discover many more places to watch birds, as well as much more about the fascinating world of bird life, in The Complete Book of British Birds published by the RSPB and AA.
This up-to-date, beautifully produced book, full of sparkling colour illustrations, is a must for anyone new to an interest in wild birds.
You can buy a copy from an RSPB shop or by mail order from RSPB sales, or from any good bookshop.
The crucial thing to remember in all this is that you are looking at birds and getting out and about in the countryside — the birds may just be the excuse — because you enjoy it, not to pass an "A" level.
So, if you find that after a year you still can't tell a sparrow from a dunnock, it will not matter.
Don't get depressed — bird identification is difficult and there is no quick way to proficiency.
Just enjoy the birds.
One way to see plenty of birds at close range is to attract them in to your own garden.
All you need is to give them a regular supply of food and water.
You may have an opportunity to offer some of them places to nest, too.
Birds in the Garden
Food should be put out from autumn to the end of winter, but not in spring and summer.
Use a variety and put it in more than one spot, if you have space, to allow more birds to feed at one time.
A bird table is a good idea but not essential.
Plastic mesh bags of peanuts suspended from a suitable branch, post or table are ideal, but you can also put out most kitchen scraps (not salted nuts, desiccated coconut or uncut bacon rinds), suet, sunflower seeds and grain.
A shallow dish of water (better still, a pond) for drinking and bathing is very valuable, even in mid winter.
Some birds, especially blue tits, use nest boxes in gardens.
For details of how to make a box and where to place it, write to the RSPB.
You can buy a ready-made box from the RSPB sales catalogue, which will be sent to you each year.
You and the RSPB
Membership benefits include some that arrive through the post, and others that are waiting for you just around the corner…
Four times a year you will receive a superb, full colour magazine called Birds.
This is our members' exclusive magazine, which cannot be obtained anywhere else.
Your first copy is enclosed.
Once a year the magazine includes an Annual Report and Accounts for those who wish to look more deeply into Society affairs.
Birds will keep you up to date with RSPB conservation work at home and abroad, and give you top-quality photographs and paintings of birds and other wildlife.
You will have FREE entry to any of the 115 RSPB reserves, some of which are listed on page 12.
You will have a super day out at any one of these, seeing many interesting birds, some very rare, in their natural habitats.
Many of the reserves have specially built hides which you can use, to give you the best and closest vantage point for watching the birds.
Our team of wardens and volunteers will be on hand to help you.
If you are a landowner, then you may be interested in more advanced advice for the farmer, or woodland manager.
the Society's Conservation Advisory Service produces manuals and will give advice on the management of land with wildlife in mind.
The Society has a network of regional offices — the addresses are shown on page 7 — for contact on a more local level.
The regional office will also be pleased to put you in touch with your nearest members' group if you would like to attend the meetings or become more involved in helping the RSPB.
This need not be an onerous task — but local groups are always in need of volunteers, whether to raise funds, clear ditches, plant trees, give lectures, act as treasurer or serve on the committee, deliver newsletters, type — or simply make the tea!
In whatever role, executive or tea boy, you will find a niche in the local volunteer network.
And of course what you really get from your membership is the satisfaction that your money and your support are going towards bird protection: that the RSPB will be putting its money where its mouth is.
It is the charity that really gets things done for birds the countryside — action for birds, on your behalf.
The junior section of the Society is the Young Ornithologists' Club, over 100,000 strong the biggest wildlife club for children in Europe.
Members of up to 15 years of age receive their own award-winning magazine, Bird Life, six times a year.
The YOC organises its own holidays and courses, members' days roadshows and projects.
There is a large list of local YOC groups and a major presence in schools (in the form of school groups and regular mailings of newsletters and posters to teachers), allowing members a local involvement in conservation and fun with approved leaders and other members of their own age.
Young people and the RSPB
Your Subscriptions Count
We use your money to do more for the conservation of birds — and we also welcome your support
The Society is a charity that relies on its members and supporters for its income.
We have no state aid and individuals such as yourself are the life blood of our conservation work.
Subscriptions and contributions to various appeals provide the bulk of our finances.
The relationship between member and Society is therefore a crucial one and must be of mutual benefit.
You have joined the RSPB because you want to help protect birds and their habitats — when we talk about "helping the Society" it is always taken to mean "helping the birds" through supporting the organisation that does most to protect them.
And we can help you, too.
There are several ways in which you can help the Society and make more of your membership.
By covenanting your membership you simply divert some of the tax you pay into conservation.
We gain extra money, at no cost to you — so simple that it must be a good thing!
And, by signing a direct debit, you also help us to cut costs at no cost to yourself.
A charity such as ours must constantly strive for greater efficiency, to put every penny of your subscription to good use.
Paying by direct debit is one way to assist us in that aim.
And you don't pay a penny more!
making membership count
You can also apply for the RSPB Visa card.
Every card issued means a donation from the bank to the RSPB and every time you use the card, the Society benefits again — at no cost to you.
It will interest you to know, too, that the cost of producing Birds, the members' exclusive magazine, is covered by advertising revenue.
You receive this splendid, full colour magazine four times a year, with only a proportion of the postage costs coming from your subscription.
Your money goes towards protecting the birds.
The magazine is vital for communication between the Society and its members, keeping you informed about conservation issues and the action taken by the RSPB.
But it also helps you to discover the fascination and beauty of birds and their habitats, from gardens to RSPB reserves and special places in other countries.
RSPB sales produces a catalogue full of value-for-money, quality gifts, cards, books and other items which also help to raise money for bird protection.
The profits made by the sale of goods are ploughed back into wild bird conservation.
So please remember our catalogue when deciding on what to buy as Christmas or birthday gifts.
On the other side of the member/Society partnership, there is the network of members' groups all over Britain and Northern Ireland.
These take the work of the Society to the members at a local level — and our groups are more active than ever before.
Local activities
During our Centenary year the local groups planned the most ambitious programme of events ever, aiming to raise many thousands of pounds and recruit new members for the RSPB.
Group events include evening and afternoon indoor meetings, with guest speakers, films and socials, outdoor meetings, locally or visiting exciting places further afield — even long weekends or longer birdwatching holidays.
You can join a group to increase your own enjoyment of birds, to meet like-minded people, or to find ways of increasing your involvement by joining the committee, or raising funds, or taking part in practical conservation work.
Groups are good fun — and make good sense.
If an active role is what you are after, perhaps voluntary wardening on an RSPB reserve is for you.
It is a great way to become strongly, personally involved at a reserve.
Many volunteers return many times and become strongly attached to a favourite reserve — and make firm friends.
But if you simply want to enjoy the birds, you will want to visit the Society's reserves and see for yourself what wonderful places they are.
We guarantee nothing — wild birds are free to go where they wish and, though we can give them the best possible conditions, we can never be certain that they will stand in front of a hide!
All the same, Minsmere in spring, the Gwenffrwd in summer, Titchwell in autumn, Elmly in winter are full of beautiful and exciting birds and you can be sure of a superb day out.
Reserves for birds — and people
Our reserves include the largest privately owned nature reserve in Europe — Abernethy in Scotland, a glorious piece of mountain, moorland and native Scots pine forest with exciting and rare birds like the crested tit, capercaillie, Scottish crossbill (the only species unique to Britain), golden eagle and ptarmigan.
This magnificent reserve was purchased with unparalleled support from the membership, whose generous donations to the Abernethy Appeal made it all possible.
In years to come, we hope to extend the forest to more than twice its present size to increase the opportunities for the unique birds and rare mammals — including red squirrels, pine martens and wild cats — which live there.
RSPB Nature Reserves
To whet the appetite — a selection of treasured places to visit, enjoy, and visit again and again.
This reserve, projecting into Poole Harbour, protects a wonderful piece of heathland with heather, gorse and scattered pines, as well as woodland and saltmarsh along the shore.
Heathland in southern England is perhaps the most threatened wildlife habitat in Britain, despite the fact that its international importance is well established — the Dartford warbler, nightjar, stonechat, sand lizard and smooth snake make up just a part of the splendid fauna.
At Arne all six British reptiles, 22 species of dragonflies and a varied flora add to the birdlife to make a precious reserve in the face of continuing threats from housing schemes.
England Arne, Dorset
The reserve is reached from Wareham, west of Bournemouth.
The railway station in Wareham is connected to Stoborough by bus; then there is a three mile walk to the reserve.
By car, take the A351 Swanage road south of Wareham, turning left after less than a mile.
At Arne, park in the reserve car park (where there are toilets) and walk along the public bridleway near the church to Shipstal Point.
There is a nature trail, with a leaflet.
You may see many of the good birds from the trail, and the foreshore is excellent for waders and wildfowl, including red-breasted mergansers, goldeneyes, wigeon, black-tailed godwits and spotted redshanks.
Birds of prey are frequent in winter, with sparrowhawk and hen harrier likely.
From Flamborough Head northwards there is a stretch of spectacular limestone cliff scenery, reaching its highest point around Bempton.
Three miles of cliff are owned by the RSPB and, in summer, are packed with nesting seabirds.
This is a marvellous place, with the true atmosphere of a giant seabird colony — the warm, fishy smells, continual lively activity and echoing calls of tens of thousands of birds.
Kittiwakes and guillemots are the most numerous, nesting on precarious ledges, swirling in the air near the cliffs or swimming on the sea just offshore.
There are also razorbills and a few puffins, fulmars and herring gulls.
Walk north from the car park and you will come to a thriving colony of gannets — the only English colony and Britain's only mainland one.
By 1986 there were 650 pairs at this growing gannetry.
Brampton Cliffs, North Humberside
There is free access at all times to the clifftop path, from Bempton village (where there is a railway station on the Hull to Scarborough line) on the B1229 from Flamborough.
There are four safe observation points overlooking the seabird colonies, but visitors must keep to the clifftop path — sheer, high cliffs are dangerous.
The best time to visit is from early May to late July.
Part of the North Kent Marshes is leased by the RSPB and has been managed to create a splendid reserve, full of birds.
By taking a piece of grazing marsh with freshwater fleets, controlling water levels, making watery scrapes and building hides, it has proved possible to give visitors excellent views of thousands of wigeon, mallards and teal, with white-fronted geese frequent in winter.
Redshanks, lapwings and shovelers nest and many waders pass through in spring and autumn.
Hen harriers, merlins and short-eared owls may be seen in winter.
Elmley Marshes, Kent
The reserve is open daily except for Tuesdays, from 9 am to 9 pm or sunset; there is a mile walk from the car park to the hides, but elderly and disabled visitors may drive to them.
The car park is reached along a farm track from the A249 a mile north-east of Kingsferry Bridge, before the junction with the A250.
A large and lovely reed swamp with open pools, in the bottom of a wooded valley, makes an important and exciting reserve in northwest England.
The limestone slopes help to give a very varied selection of flowers and butterflies, adding to a superb variety of birds all year round.
In summer the reedbeds resound to the songs of reed and sedge warblers, and in spring up to a dozen bitterns boom mysteriously from the reeds.
This makes perhaps the most inportant breeding area in Britain for this threatened bird — and bitterns can be seen from the hides here more regularly than anywhere else.
Marsh harriers pass through and have recently bred, and even a passing osprey is a possibility.
Terns and waders can be frequent on migration.
Leighton Moss, Lancashire
A special feature of Leighton Moss is its population of otters, which may often be spotted from the hides, especially at dusk.
The reserve is open every day except for Tuesdays from 9 am to 9 pm or sunset, free to members.
Pathways link five birdwatching hides and there is an exhibition centre, toilets and a shop to investigate — especially if it rains!
There is a railway station at Silverdale, close to the reserve entrance.
By road, take Junction 35 or 35a from the M6 to join the A6 near Carnforth; take narrow lanes via Yealand Redmayne to Silverdale.
Flooded as part of wartime defence measures, the reedbeds of Minsmere have become famous for their bitterns and marsh harriers, and the muddy "scrape" with shingle islands near the beach is a splendid place for waders, ducks and terns, including a thriving colony of avocets.
Surrounding heath and woodland (though severely damaged in the 1987 gales) add even greater variety (including excellent numbers of nightingales which make the air throb with their incomparable songs in late spring).
Minsmere gives a chance of one of the most varied day's birdwatching in Britain at any time of the year, with many exciting birds at very close range.
Minsmere, Suffolk
The reserve is open daily except for Tuesdays, 9 am to 9 pm or sunset, members only on Sundays and bank holiday weekends.
There is also a public hide open to visitors from the beach, reached on foot from the car park at Dunwich Cliffs.
the reserve centre, toilets and shop are reached from Westleton or through East Bridge, from the B1122 Leiston to Yoxford road.
Follow the clear RSPB signs — and have a wonderful day!
A lake and a big reedbed seem unlikely in a town centre, but at Weymouth some excellent wildlife habitat has survived to become an RSPB reserve.
Reed, sedge and grasshopper warblers, bearded tits, Cetti's warblers, great crested grebes, kingfishers and cormorants are regular visitors in summer, and in spring and autumn many terns, gulls and waders, including rarities from time to time, move through.
Hides and footpaths give close views and there are listening posts and a tap rail for handicapped visitors.
Radipole Lake, Dorset
Beside the car park is a visitor centre.
Reach it and the reserve entrance via the Swannery car park signposted from the seafront; there is a main line railway station and coach station adjacent.
With a reserve in the Clyde Valley near Motherwell town centre, here is an opportunity to see good birds almost in the heart of an urban area.
Winter is perhaps most exciting, when there are up to 50 whooper swans from Iceland resident on the floods and meadows.
Wigeon, teal and other ducks will also be there.
In the spring and summer, watch for kingfishers, common sandpipers, redshanks, reed, sedge and grasshopper warblers and whinchats.
Scotland Barons Haugh, Strathclyde
There is free access to this reserve at all times.
There are hides and a footpath around the reserve which takes about an hour to walk.
Entry is from Adele Street opposite Motherwell Civic Centre, to North Lodge Avenue from which a lane leads into the reserve area itself.
From the A894 between Scourie and Laxford Bridge, in the rugged far northwest corner of Scotland, a little lane winds down to the coast at Tarbet.
From there, except on Sundays, one may take a boat between April and September, to visit one of Scotland's most spectacular little islands — Handa.
Here there are sandy beaches, little moorland lochs, and cliffs which rise sheer from the surging Atlantic.
Breeding birds include great artic skuas which dive at your head as you walk near their territories, rock doves, ringed plovers and red-throated divers.
On the cliffs there are magnificent colonies of guillemots, razorbills, puffins, fulmars and kittiwakes and, offshore, gannets and shearwaters pass by even whales may add to the day's impressive wildlife list.
Handa, Highland
The island is safe, with good vantage points, but nevertheless special care must always be taken near to the edge of sheer cliffs.
If you are within striking distance of Speyside, visit beautiful Loch Garten, sign-posted via Boat of Garten from Aviemore, and see the famous ospreys.
From mid April to late summer, depending on the success of the breeding season, ospreys will be around and, if you visit in July or August and the season has been a success, you may be lucky enough to see a new family of young birds exercising their strengthening wings.
Watch out, too, for Scottish crossbills flying over and the distinctive little crested tits in the pines.
On the loch, you will probably see goldeneyes, rare nesting birds encouraged by the provision of special nesting boxes.
Loch Garten, Highland
Loch Leven, east of Kinross, is famous for huge numbers of wild ducks and geese in autumn and winter.
The RSPB reserve on the south shore at Vane Farm is an excellent centre from which to see the birds.
Vane Farm, Tatside
Greylag geese, pink-footed geese, wigeon, whooper swans and curlews are to be expected, the geese making a splendid sight (and sound) as they return to the loch in the evenings from October (when there are many thousands in the area) through to March.
There is a hide and a nature trail which is always open.
The visitor centre is open from April to Christmas, 10 am to 5 pm, and is reached from the B9097 east of junction 5 on the M90.
North of Llandovery little country lanes wind through Rhandirmwyn towards the new reservoir of Llyn Brianne. on the left is a conical hill, clothed with oakwood, a car park and an information centre which is open in summer.
From there a nature trail winds around the hill, rough in places, which gives excellent opportunities to watch pied flycatchers, redstarts, wood warblers, treecreepers, tree pipits and, overhead, buzzards and ravens. there is always the chance of a passing red kite or peregrine.
Wales Dinas and Gwenffrwd, Dyfed
At the Dinas Information Centre you may ask for details of the Gwenffrwd nature trail, along walk over the hills further west, open only by arrangement with the warden.
This is a beautiful part of mid Wales, with heather moor, plantations and hillside oak-woods above a winding valley with small fields and bushy hedges and a rushing stream.
It is a superb place for a day out at any time of the year, but spring and early summer are certainly the best for birds; in late summer (from July onwards) they can become very quiet and elusive in the dense foliage of the oaks.
A splendid reservoir and its catchment area of heather moorland and conifer forest are managed by the RSPB in agreement with the Severn-Trent Water Authority.
The road around the reservoir gives good views and woodland trails are always open.
Watch for redstarts, grey wagtails, common sandpipers, dippers, pied fly-catchers, woodpeckers and tree pipits in summer, and goosanders on the lake.
There is a good chance of seeing buzzard, raven, sparrowhawk and peregrine, and the possibility of spotting a red squirrel and a good variety of butterflies.
All you need is a sunny day!
Lake Vyrnwy, Powys
There is an Information Centre in a converted chapel at Llanwddyn, just to the west of the dam, open during the daytime throughout the summer.
This peninsula into Lower lough Erne has a good variety of woodland birds, including sparrowhawks, long-eared owls and siskins, plus farmland species including a few corncrakes.
Water birds include breeding common scoters and red-breasted mergansers, and wigeon, goldeneyes and whooper swans in winter.
There is a hide and footpaths which are open at all times; the reserve is entered from the A47 road to Pettingoe four miles east of Belleek.
Northan Ireland castlecaldwell, Co Fermanagh
The foreshore of Lough Foyle, reached by minor lanes from the A2 from Ballykelly and Cregan, makes a splendid area for viewing large numbers of birds in autumn and winter.
It is outstanding for thousands of wigeon, teal, mallards and brent geese, plus oystercatchers, dunlins, curlews and foraging groups of snow buntings.
Access is free at all times, though it is easy to disturb the birds, so care is needed when approaching the shore.
lough Foyle, Co Londonderry
Past, Present and future
What has your society achieved in the first century of existence?
The RSPB is firmly established in the world of conservation.
It has long been the largest voluntary nature conservation organisation in Europe.
In 1989 the Society reached the grand old age of 100 years.
The ladies who founded the Fur and Feather Group, soon to become the Society for the Protection of Birds (and "Royal" by 1904) were outraged at the callous slaughter of thousands of herons, egrets and grebes (usually at breeding colonies, so their young were left to starve) for the use of decorative plumes in the fashion trade.
The threats to birds are different now, but in their own way more serious, more sinister in their potential effects on bird populations and our own environment.
the use of pesticides, which had grave implications for creatures at the top of food chains where the chemicals were concentrated, became the major problem of the 60s; oil pollution of the sea was sometimes catastrophic in the 70s.
Now it is everything from barrages across estuaries, the Common Agricultural Policy and afforestation of the north Scotland Flow Country to housing development on New Forest and Dorset heaths and nitrate pollution of our lakes and rivers.
Increasingly, too, there is international involvement.
Birds cannot be conserved by protection in Britain if they are facing greater problems elsewhere.
Many of "our" birds are migrants, coming here in winter after breeding far to the north, or nesting here but spending the winter far to the south.
Many millions are killed each year as they cross the countries bordering the Mediterranean.
Rare species like the roseate tern, which breeds on our rocky islands, are severely threatened in their wintering areas.
In its efforts to counteract these difficulties, the RSPB works closely with other organisations to support foreign bird protection societies, to help train their staff, and to help bring birds to people who have previously had no opportunity even to read a bird book.
The RSPB is a very professional society.
If action is needed, we take it.
But we ensure we first know what we are talking about.
Conservation is not well served by ill-informed arguments.
The RSPB goes to great lengths to research the topics in which it involves itself, so that people will take notice of what the Society says and does and treat its views with respect.
It reaps valuable rewards.
By carrying out thorough and painstaking research, we were able to make informed and positive comment on the disaster in Caithness and Sutherland — the threats to wild birds in the Flow Country from large-scale planting of alien conifers in places where the economic justification was questionable and the damage to the environment immense.
This helped persuade the Government to take action altering tax incentives for planting in the 1988 Budget.
The fight continues.
By co-operating in detailed research and undertaking special projects, the RSPB found evidence that lead weights, accidentally lost or spilled by fishermen, were killing large numbers of mute swans which swallowed them with their food.
The solution to the problem was to replace lead weights with non-poisonous substances.
Our next move was to co-operate with anglers by meeting the National Federation of Anglers and taking a joint initiative to remove the use of lead in anglers' tackle.
After much research, suppliers were able to produce viable alternatives to lead which the Society helped to promote, with informative booklets produced jointly with anglers' organisations.
Legislation was introduced to limit the sale of lead weights and bye-laws banned their use in most parts of the country.
In this way the waterside environment was cleaned up and swans could once again safely sail along our rivers — a success story, though still a situation that requires regular monitoring to ensure that the new laws are enforced.
Saving Swans
After decades when ospreys were absent as breeding birds in Britain, a pair returned to nest in Scotland in 1955.
The early years of the recolonisation were beset with difficulties.
Eggs were stolen, the nest blew from its tree in a gale, attempts were made by vandals to cut down and to burn the nesting tree at Loch Garten.
But the Society persevered in its efforts, employing wardens and organising a cast team of volunteers to mount 24-hour guards over the nest every summer.
At the same time, the ospreys were shown to the public, and over a million people have enjoyed the magnificent sight of the spectacular, fish-eating birds of prey from the RSPB viewing point.
Scottish ospreys have gone from strength to strength.
In 1988 some 50 pairs nested, rearing 75 young birds (the highest number this century).
Operation osprey
There have been many other successes, but there are still problems to solve.
Upland moors, in some ways the wildest of all our habitats, are threatened as never before — over 30 square miles of heather moor has been lost from the North Yorkshire moors since the war; on Dartmoor less than 3,500 acres of moorland remains; in Galloway, The Borders and Northumberland vast tracts of land, once farmland and open moor, now grow solid, dense plantations of alien conifers — and every year much more is targeted for afforestation.
The implications for birds of the open moor — hen harriers, red grouse, golden plovers, dunlins, even golden eagles — are obvious.
Moorland losses
Some 140,000 miles of hedgerows were grubbed up between 1946 and 1976 and RSPB research shows that a further 3,000 miles are still lost every year.
The place has actually increased in recent years.
The beautiful and sensitive heather and gorse heaths of southern England, with their unique assemblage of wildlife including Dartford warblers, nightjars, sand lizards and smooth snakes, are under threat from housing, gravel extraction and road schemes.
Despite our knowledge and appreciation of these places and the awareness of their value among planners, still over 100 acres of health are lost every year.
Unless we do something now, heaths will vanish within 20 years.
Can you walk out from your home to a wet meadow, where snipe drum and redshanks call, or to a pond with frog spawn in spring and dragonflies in summer, or to a flowery meadow alive with buttercups, oxeye daisies and poppies?
They are all common enough — or are they?
No longer do the flower-rich fields and lowland wetlands survive in numbers.
Continual efforts to wring out every drop of water from our landscape by improving drainage for agriculture have made the glories of water meadows, winter floods and even overgrown streams extremely rare and precious.
Disappearing wetlands
You have made an impressive start by joining us.
With your support the RSPB can continue to tackle the problems that beset our wild birds.
How can you help?
£5 will plant five trees in a woodland project £10 will clean 25 yards of ditch to improve plant and insect life £20 will help guard an eagle's nest for a day £50 will pay for a black-throated divers' nesting platform £75 will buy an acre of unplanted Scottish moor £100 will build a new nest platform for another pair of ospreys £350 will buy an acre of damp lowland meadow where snipe and redshanks breed.
Action for Birds
The RSPB slogan "Action for Birds" neatly sums up all our operations
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds is the charity that takes action to protect wild birds and the environment.
The conservation of birds wild and free, and the natural environments in which they live is our concern.
The RSPB is not a welfare society for sick, injured or captive birds and you will not find caged birds on public display at our reserves.
The threats to birds are real.
River pollution, destruction of heathlands, moorlands, hedgerows and estuaries and illegal shooting, trapping and poisoning all pose increasing problems for birds.
The RSPB fights these threats, with your support.
We wish to expand our membership because we believe that birds are everyone's concern.
By protecting them we ensure a healthy environment — for ourselves and our children as well as for the wildlife.
The RSPB buys land for nature reserves — and now has over 115 reserves including sites close to urban centres (including Glasgow, Manchester, Birmingham and north London), accessible and beautiful woodlands and marshes, and vast, remote areas of moorland, mountain, forest and coastal cliffs.
The society works closely with landowners and other managers of the environment — foresters, farmers, water authorities — to help create a better countryside.
We believe in fruitful dialogue and discussion, though we do not shirk necessary argument, and we provide courses and authoritative manuals for people who work in woods, manage our rivers and create new gravel pits which can eventually become havens for birds.
Close co-operation
We keep constant watch on planning proposals and fight those which will prove damaging for birds.
Staff attend public inquiries and examinations, often time consuming and very expensive.
The threats to our major estuaries alone take up considerable time and effort.
Developments elsewhere, for example on Dorset heathland, require strong opposition if the fragile habitat of rare wildlife is to be saved.
Protecting birds is not always a battle — the Society is so large, experienced and well-respected that Government and other bodies frequently come to us for advice.
With staff who are expert in many fields — from woodland, farmland and river management to socio-economics and interpreting the countryside to visitors — the RSPB can give valuable, practical and commonsense advice to those who have a responsibility for looking after the countryside.
Some of our rarest breeding birds require more intensive, on-the-spot protection, often involving round-the-clock guards and electronic surveillance against egg collectors or others who wish to harm the birds.
Some of these schemes are necessarily secret, but others have presented golden opportunities to interest the public and allow many people to see the birds concerned — the famous ospreys at Loch Garten are an example.
special protection
Through reserves, events, books, magazines and films, and its network of members' groups with their busy meetings programmes, the RSPB brings stimulating and enjoyable wildlife experiences to people of all ages.
As a new member, you will, we hope, take full advantage of what we have to offer.
Above all, we have room for everyone.
If you simply enjoy the countryside, we can add an extra dimension — and protect that which gives you so much pleasure.
If you like birds but know little about them, you can repay some of the debt to the wild creatures which cheer your days.
If you are a real expert, you can see good birds on our reserves and know that we are working hard to protect the birds you watch and places you like to visit.
You don't have to be an expert to take part in the Society experience — you just have to care.