

Designed to Delight
Designer Tricia Guild took her ideas for inside the house and applied them to her garden.
The result is cool, calm and welcoming as Glenn Barker discovered.
Interior design may be her job — but Tricia Guild's hobby is very much "the outdoor room" .
For that's the way she sees small gardens like her own.
She believes they should be decorated and furnished every bit as tastefully and with as much care and attention to detail as the indoor rooms of any home.
Living in London with her husband and daughter, Tricia isn't particularly used to big gardens — so the town variety has become her speciality.
Yet within it she's able to create plenty of space.
She set about her present Chelsea garden three years ago, keeping the structure of one already there.
 "I thought it was a basically good shape but added features like the pond and lots of pots," she says.
Rising from a low-level patio behind the elegant five storey house, the garden is dominated by two high trees — a lime and an ash — which mean a lot of shade for Tricia to cope with.
It is here that Tricia loves to entertain and eat out when the weather's right.
 "But we don't barbecue," she says emphatically.
A noisy, colourful barbecue atmosphere would, in fact, seem somewhat out of place here in this green oasis with its feeling of calm and utter privacy, lovingly created by Tricia.
 "The secret of the small garden is getting the balance right — making it feel interesting enough, so that it's not just a small patch of ground," she says.
"I definitely see it as an extension of the house.
It's another place which needs treating — if you like with some of the same rules you would apply inside.
"You have to look at things like lighting, the height, colour and texture of the various plants or furnishings, and how you want to use the area — all the practical aspects of it.
 "It's terribly important to get the balance right between the levels of plants the height of the trees, shrubs and ground cover plants and the main areas of shade and sunlight, as well as the seasons at which each plant will be at its best." 
"All these things are vital, of course.
My first garden 15 years ago was completely shaded and I didn't understand then that plants will only grow where they want to.
Now I've realised that's one of the most important parts of designing a garden."
Flowers and plants are very much a part of Tricia's work as a designer of beautiful fabrics and wallcoverings and over the years her job and her hobby have become complementary to one another.
The result is an attractive hardback book, "Design a Garden with Tricia Guild" which is being published in October,(Viking £15.95).
The book includes many of Tricia's garden design ideas and some colour pictures taken in her own garden.
 "I think the publishers liked the way I approached garden design," she says.
"Not all designers want to be actually involved in gardening.
It just happens that I do which is really why I was interested in doing the book.
I think one thing feeds the other."
Besides the planning element of opening up views and vistas — even in the smallest of gardens — and dividing up available space with walls and hedges, pergolas and arches, the book has plenty of ideas on which plants to choose for planting on given colour themes.
But besides town gardening, country plots also get the designer touch, and there's special reference to shady gardens — widespread in towns — and those featuring water and wildlife.
There's a substantial chapter on planning gardens using just one theme colour and the "plant catalogue" is full of tips for dramatic looking plants, large or small, tiered, weeping or busy shrubs, according to the demands of the proposed layout, plus hedging and ground cover.
In the course of getting to know the right conditions for plants to survive well, in addition to looking their best in the overall scheme of the garden, Tricia — internationally known as an interior designer — has naturally become something of a plantswoman.
 "I love foliage and I think you have to rely a lot on that in small gardens because you don't have room to leave dormant areas where nothing is happening for a long period," she says.
 "There are some really wonderful foliage plants to be used and all those lovely shades of green are what you come back to — what you rely on." 
"I don't like bedding plants but I love to use things like Alchemilla mollis and all the ground covers like creeping mint and thyme, chamomile and Tolmiea menziesii.
 "There are so many amazing, wonderful plants and in this garden they're all very uncontrolled." 
Towards the back, the bright lime green of Robinia frisia, the false acacia that Tricia planted fairly recently, stands out from the darker greens,
 "It's one of the best plants for a gloomy town garden," says Tricia."
I love it because it's always that amazing bright lime colour and I think It just lifts the others."
 "That's the great thing about hostas, too, because they come in everything from grey to lime to variegated greens." 
This spot, so secluded despite being totally surrounded by tall buildings, has its walls and fences covered in a riot of climbers — wisteria, old-fashioned roses and clematis.
The pond, although formal in shape, is softened by its central bird bath and pots of various plants placed around it.
Strategically positioned too is the garden seat, near a group of scented leaf geraniums with hostas and hydrangeas — but everywhere there's something of interest.
Among the flowers, hydrangeas in big pots are a favourite.
 "Somehow I don't think they look right planted out in the ground when you've only a small space to use," explains Tricia.
Lilies have to push their way through thyme covering the soil of their pots, so that there's a green covering even when the eye-catching bulbs have finished flowering.
 "In the summer there are lots of white lilies which look marvellous," says Tricia, who also uses agapanthus, delphiniums and many gentle, old-fashioned plants like London Pride, Saxifraga xurbicum.
The big, soft-textured leaves of the mint geranium are much in evidence, along with other scented varieties, and ferns have an obvious role.
Herbs for decorative effect — as well as their use in cooking — also make a very special contribution.
 "Basically this garden is blue and white and I think in a small garden one has to pay great attention to the colours, otherwise it can look an awful hotchpotch," says Tricia.
 "You have to try to go with one thing-so although I do have a large variety of plants, there's always a certain harmony." 
Most of her flowers therefore tend to be in blue, which she would really prefer to combine merely with white to set against all the greens of the garden — but soft shades of mauve and pink also creep in.
Amid lots of blue clematis are some deep purple and striped roses as well.
The lower patio with a flight of brick steps leading to the main garden is organised as an extension of the basement dining room, with lightweight Italian garden table and chairs and more formal pots of lilies, hostas and scented leaf geraniums.
Overhanging vines, wisteria, white roses and blue and white clematis, plus a few strawberry plants complete the picture.
 "I tend to overplant," says Tricia.
"Basically I use a lot of different hostas and the alchemillas because the lovely bold shape of the hosta leaves goes with the finer stems of alchemilla.
And I like lots of really low ground cover and plants like campanula with those lovely blue flowers."
"In a small garden, I think it's nice to use lots so that you can move them around and build up height where you might not have any.
I think they're terribly important."
"The problem with pots, though, is that they do need a lot of care.
If you won't water them regularly, they die — even in a fairly miserable, rainy summer — and that's something you really do have to bear in mind when you're planning a garden which includes them."
 "But pots are spectacular for adding interest and raising cuttings and all sorts of things that friends give me." 
 "I love the idea of that sort of gift, because it's so special and you always remember where it came from and who gave it to you." 
Paved Havens
A patio can completely transform the way you used and enjoy your garden.
Ian Hodgson finds quick ways to help you build your own.
The main benefit of owning a garden, no matter how small, is getting out there and enjoying it to the full.
There's nothing quite like having breakfast, dinner or tea outside or even stealing a quiet nap in the sun.
When entertaining friends, the garden can act as the fitting backdrop for a successful party.
Today, the nerve centre for all this activity is the patio, a sheltered, paved haven which can be crafted to suit all your personal outdoor requirements.
It can be anything you want it to be and even if you don't get around to tackling the rest of your diminutive plot, the patio is the best place to start.
Few gardens are blessed with an ideal site.
The main consideration is that it should be in a sunny, sheltered position.
Seclusion and privacy is also seen by many to be important.
If lacking, these aspects can easily be created using fence panels, trellis or planting.
Where should it be
Access may also determine location.
If used for entertaining, it's a good idea to locate it as close to the house as possible.
However, if this is north facing it may make more sense to move it to a sunnier position.
The size of your patio will be determined by the space available and its intended uses.
Even the smallest plot will have sufficient room for a small table and chairs, You may also want to include a barbecue.
The mobile types can be positioned as required.
A permanent brick structure will require more space.
Using the space
Patios are not just featureless hard-paved areas; they are ripe for individual decoration.
Water features, such as a bubble fountain, large pots brimming over with flowers and areas of rocks, gravel or pebbles, can also be included in the layout.
All of these require extra space, so list your priorities and consider your design as carefully as possible.
Sitting down with a slip of graph paper and jotting down a few ideas will help, you make sense of your thoughts.
Look at as many garden design books as you can, as they may provide the kernel of an idea.
Always remember the simplest ideas are often the most effective, particularly in a small garden.
Pavings for patios come in all shapes, sizes and colours.
Most popular are precast concrete paviours and slabs, but look around for the more interesting surface textures and designs.
These vary from York stone and granite sett look-alikes to hexagonal and other geometric shapes.
Concrete paving blocks are a more flexible and more versatile alternative to slabs.
Being brick-sized, they can be used to create a wide range of more detailed patterns in themselves but can also look attractive when interwoven amongst larger paving units.
Materials to use
Look out for products from companies such as Marshalls who have an attractive range of paving from the rugged, riven-faced textures of Heritage through to the seven shades of the brick-sized Keyblock system.
ARC Conbloc also produce a stylish range of paving to suit all tastes and pockets.
Watch for the rich earthy tones of their Etruscan paving, the mosaic patterns impressed on the slab capturing the mood of the Mediterranean.
Stratex paving has a brushed non-slip finish and comes in six different colours.
Brad-stone and Countryside are two other companies whose quality products can be seen for sale in many garden centres and DlY stores.
For style, elegance and versatility, the Classico paving system from Marley is an attractive option.
Based on the contours of the granite sett and cobble, "Classico" paving blocks can be laid in a very wide variety of geometric patterns based on circles, fans or a more freeform of design.
Marley have produced a pattern book along with technical advice to give you plenty of ideas.
Blocks come in four types, the rectangular "Classico" stone, the square stone and two types of radius stone for constructing circles and tight bends.
The system comes in a range of four colours, natural (grey), russet, brown and charcoal.
Combining colours in the design further extends the range of effects.
Small areas are best paved in a single colour using a simple design to avoid being over fussy.
Once you have decided on your layout, mark out the boundaries of the area to be paved.
Existing hard surfaces should be broken up beforehand.
Keep enough material to use as hardcore in the sub-base.
New ground should be cleared of perennial weed, removing deep roots of docks, thistles and bindweed.
Laying Marley classical paving
Site Preparation
For patios, the 21/4in (6cm) thick blocks are laid on a 2in (5cm) thick bedding course of sharp sand, beneath which is a 4in (l0cm) thick sub-base of hardcore.
This gives an overall depth of 81/2in (21.5cm).
Always ensure that the surface of the paving is 6in (l5cm) or just more than two courses of brick below the damp-proof course of the house.
Knock in a series of pegs at regular intervals to obtain an overall general level.
The tops should be level with the surface of the sub-base.
Knock in rows of pegs just outside the patio boundary.
The tops should be level with the finished surface.
All paving should be laid to a fall of about 1-50 to shed water away from the house.
Remember to take this into account when setting the height of the boundary.
Excavate as necessary and add the 4in (10cm) layer of hardcore.
Ram this down hard to ensure that no large cavities remain.
Blind off the sub-base with a layer of coarse sand allowing it to fill the remaining holes.
Peg Positioning
Once the edging is set, the paving can be laid.
Although laid on 2in (5cm) of coarse sand when finished, in practice the blocks are laid on a bed 21/2in (6.5cm) thick and vibrated into position.
laying the Blocks
Pour in the sand and skim to produce a level surface.
Then simply place the blocks in position, edge to edge according to your design.
Work systematically through the plan, leaving those which require cutting to fit the remaining gaps till last.
Use boards to work from to avoid disturbing newly laid blocks and only lay sufficient sand to deal with a comfortable number of blocks at any one time.
Blocks can be cut quite easily with a hammer and cold chisel.
Better still, hire a block splitter, which severs blocks cleanly and quickly particularly if you have much cutting to do.
Cutting Edges
On boundaries that don't butt up to existing walls, blocks must first be concreted in position.
Setting the Boundries
To obtain the contours of the design, flex and nail strips of hardboard or plywood between the edging pegs flush with the final level.
Lay a bed of concrete on which to lay the boundary blocks and allow to harden.'
Allow a minimum of 1/2in (12mm) gap on which to lay the blocks.
Butting them together, lay the blocks on a bed of mortar.
Tap down with the top of the formwork.
Haunch up with mortar behind the outer edge of the block to within about 3/4in(5cm) of the top.
Don't mortar the joints.
The boundary blocks may also be laid on edge for added support.
Once all the pieces of the giant jig-saw are in place, the blocks are vibrated into position.
Before doing so, fine gravel produced by Marley specifically for the task is brushed into the joints.
The plate vibrator or 'Thwacker' can be hired from most plant hire shops.
Finishing off
Start the engine and simply run over the blocks as if using a vacuum cleaner.
Work systematically around the paving until the blocks are flush with the desired level as set by the edging blocks.
Once settled, brush in more fine gravel until all the joints are filled.
Sweep off the excess and brush in a finishing layer of fine, kiln-dried sand, also sold by Marley.
Brush in the sand on a dry day to prevent it sticking.
Being sand-jointed, the paving will drain away surface water but if the joints become blocked rake them out with a spike, adding more final gravel and sand.
For gardeners who want a patio or pathway but have restraints on space, The Marley Paving Company has the answer.
Marley's Classico system is based on four individual blocks.
The combination of these blocks allows the creation of curves and circular, fan-shaped or fleur-de-lis patterns in up to four colours: russett, charcoal, brown and natural.
Palisade, from The Marley Paving Company, is a deeper block and is the same size as the largest Classico pavior, it can be used for steps, raised borders or edge restraint.
win a £1,000 Dream Patio
Hidden in the Classico patio design below are 15 words describing the uses and appearance of Marley Classico concrete block paving.
The words run along each concentric circle and not across circles.
Simply find and send us a list of the words using the coupon provided.
After completion, post it in a sealed envelope to Patio Competition, Small Gardens, Bushfield House, Orton Centre, Peterborough PE2 OUW to arrive no later than December 31st 1989.
What you have to do
The prize will be awarded to the first correct entry checked after the closing date.
The prize winner will receive a new patio worth up to £1000 laid by The Marley Paving Company.
Should the patio to be laid require the removal of a substantial concreted area, this may necessitate a contribution towards the removal costs of the winner.
The prize must be accepted as offered: there can be no cash or other alternatives.
The Editors decision is final in all matters.
The competition is open to readers of 'Small Gardens' and entries will only be accepted on the entry coupon provided.
Winners will be notified and published in Small Gardens.
Employees of EMAP plc and Marley Paving company are not eligible to enter.
Rules
Dial "D" for Delightful
In a garden no bigger than a pint pot, Bill moran proves that small can always be beautiful.
Jean Stowe investigates
Gardening is sometimes considered the preserve of the middle aged and elderly.
This is quite unfair, as most young people — once they have a place to call their own — enjoy planning and constructing their own garden.
Bill Moran moved into a new development in Beaconsfield 2½ years ago.
Despite only being in his 20's, it is his second house.
Since then he has created a garden few of us would aspire to after a lifetime of gardening.
A chef by profession, he does have the advantage of being able to snatch an odd hour in the garden during the day.
But basically his success is due to making the most of the resources available, and grabbing opportunities for improving the garden when they arise.
The brick walls and paving of the front garden are clean and tidy, but rather harsh.
Bill has collected a range of ingenious containers which are planted up to soften the area.
The scheme is dominated by three bold, wooden barrels.
Converted whisky barrels like these can be bought at a reasonable price in most parts of the country.
When Bill was setting up his first home, he used to attend auction sales, looking for reasonably priced furniture.
One particularly successful foray yielded the wheelbarrow and the milk churn, both used in the front garden, and a rack for storing apples.
The window boxes were home-made, from pieces of skirting board begged from the builders.
Trellis supports a climbing rose up a wall and hanging baskets also take the eye upwards.
Lavish planting in summer depends on half hardy subjects such as fuchsias, geraniums, lobelia, Glenchoma hederacea "Variegata" and helichrysums.
Permanent plants include the architectural Cordyline australis, and the winter flowering cherry Prunus subhirtella "Autumnalis" , which has flowered for the last two years.
Finally, a seat snuggling in front of the window encourages lingering to enjoy the detail of this fantastic display.
Bill's back garden is very small indeed, 12ft wide and 28ft long (3.6m x9.1m).
A third of the area is occupied by the conservatory, an impulse buy.
A friend told him about an ex-demonstration model available at a heavily discounted price.
It was too good an opportunity to miss.
Like most conservatory owners, Bill has found that it enhances both his garden and his home.
In the summer it is crammed full, with pots hanging from the roof, and larger pots standing on the ground.
A "bargin" conservatory
The same Yorkstone paving slabs in both the conservatory and the garden provide continuity and make the small area look bigger.
In summer, meals are eaten in the conservatory.
Then in winter the wicker table and chairs are moved back into the house, to be replaced by an old formica kitchen table.
This is a propagation bench for the winter and spring — different cuttings and seedlings are tried each year.
An electric fan heater maintains a temperature just above freezing point.
Before he moved in, Bill spent a lot of time drawing sketches of the garden.
In the end he decided the simplest plan was best.
The centre of the garden was to be paved, leaving irregular borders for planting at either side.
Unfortunately a concrete path, provided by the builders, had to be broken up; but it did provide a hardcore base for the paving.
The back garden contains a variety of half-hardy plants for colour.
In addition Bill has taken great care to create structure and all the year round interest with shrubs and conifers.
There is one tree, a weeping birch, Betula pendula "Youngii" .
Foliage plants such as Alchemilla mollis, hostas, Ajuga reptans "Purpurea" and the Gardener's garters or ribbon grass, Phalaris arundinacea "Picta" provide a leafy oasis in the summer months.
Features include two old chimney pots and a sundial.
Before Bill had his own house he lived in lodgings and helped his landlady with her garden.
When he left, she gave him two chimney pots, which had previously been on her house.
The sundial looks expensive — the metal part was a Christmas present from his brother, and it sits on a piece of balustrade given by a friend.
A shed was needed for storage, and Bill really searched hard for one that was visually attractive as well as functional.
He certainly succeeded — in a local DlY centre he found the "Octavia Chalet" , which is custom built to order.
Although Bill is a gardening fanatic, he doesn't want a larger garden.
He takes a pride in what he can do in a small space.
But he did confess to one problem — when the washing goes out, the sundial has to be moved.
With small gardens the work should not be excessive — you should be able to sit down and enjoy the fruits of your labour.
Bill does spend time dead heading, and picking off dead leaves — up to an hour a day in the summer.
This has a dramatic effect on the health and appearance of the plants.
Watering with a hose pipe doesn't take long and weeding as a task hardly exists.
I asked about feeding, but Bill makes short shrift of this too — once a fortnight with Phostrogen.
Another question I asked was how Bill learnt his gardening skills.
Like so many of us, he learnt from his parents, his mother to be precise, who was a keen gardener.
Inspiration is obtained from gardening books — which Bill buys and reads avidly.
He did once enrol on a home study course but couldn't get motivated.
Perhaps a gardening class would be more satisfactory — learning always comes more easily, plus is much more enjoyable, when it's a shared experience.
However, some good came of the course — he discovered the recommended textbook, Handyman Gardener by David Stevens, Octopus 1989, £1.50.
Triumph in the Shade
A patio which spends most of the day in the shadow has called for ingenuity and imagination, as Gill Page discovered in michael Blood's bijou garden…
Michael Blood's small garden is in shade for most of the day.
Undeterred, Michael has made an asset of the problem, choosing plants that will thrive in this environment such as ferns and hostas with busy lizzies and begonias to add colour.
The garden is "L" shaped with one half of the L measuring 30x30ft (9.1x9.1m) and the other part 25 x 13ft (7.6 x 4m).
When Michael moved into his Victorian house 11 years ago with Malcolm Bescoby the only sign of life outside was a Castor oil plant.
The concrete slabs were taken up and replaced with a crazy paving patio, and gradually they developed their plans, as money allowed.
There's a lot of architectural detail in the terraced garden and it required much thought to get the right scale for the small plot.
The patio takes up over half of the area.
 "When we started the garden the soil was very poor,'says Michael 'But we have gradually added plenty of peat and it has improved greatly." 
Surrounded by walls, this north-facing garden has a very intimate feel.
Michael told me about the interesting feature in one of the corners.
"We added an extra 6ft (1.8m) to the top of the wall, using old bricks.
Then we constructed three alcoves to house terracotta busts and used two Doulton tile panels inset into the wall.
We wish we hadn't done this as they are valuable now and we can't get them out!"
 "We are planning to have a Victorian summerhouse built in the corner so the tiles will then be inside it." 
Potted plants enhance this corner; hostas, ferns, lilies and Rheum palmaturn all look lush and healthy in terracotta pots and ivy grows up the wall.
The big tree with huge leaves is Paulownia tomentosa which grows about 15ft (4.5m) tall and produces foxglove-like flowers when well-established.
It can also be used as a foliage shrub if pruned back annually.
The other tree in the garden is the golden-leaved Gleditsia triacanthos "Sunburst" , which is very popular for small gardens as it only reaches about 16-20ft (4.8-6.1m).
An existing conifer hedge had to be removed.
 "It took up too much space Malcolm said and nothing would grow near it." 
A familiar problem especially in small gardens.
It has been replaced with trellis which is planted with variegated euonymus, five clematis, a climbing rose and evergreen honeysuckles.
In other parts of the garden there are more shade-loving plants such as bergenias, Dicentra eximia with pink flowers and the large-leaved gunnera.
But sun lovers also survive in the brighter spots — agaves in terractotta pots, a palm (Trachycarpus fortunei) and bright marigolds.
The pretty little Corydalis lutea with yellow flowers likes some shade.
Michael is also interested in unusual plants and buys a lot from Bressingham Gardens.
He has a collection of 10 hostas, some rare, lilies and 12 varieties of ferns.
Until this year he has used a lot of bedding plants to add colour.
 "Now I plan to grow more unusual perennials," he says.
"But I will still stick to my favourite plants — busy lizzies and begonias which do so well in the shade and provide lots of colour.
I buy the busy lizzies as seedlings in the market and grow them on.
All the perennials are bought in containers and I grow them for a year in their pots to see how they cope with the conditions, then I plant them out in the garden."
Michael has planned the garden ornaments around wrought iron to match the balcony on the house.
The table and chairs and windowboxes all fit in with the period of the house.
Most of the other ornaments are terracotta including two handsome dogs which guard the patio.
One of the walls has a wrought iron black-painted gate set in it.
 "We get on very well with our neighbours," Michael explained,"and we decided that we'd like to be able to look into each other 's gardens.
It's a false gate which can't be opened.
"The neighbours were so impressed with Michael's achievements that they have made their own garden into a mirror image of it.
Apart from the addition of the summerhouse and more perennials Michael is satisfied with the results in the back garden.
He has changed the front of the house from a square lawn into a courtyard garden.
When I asked Michael how much time he spends in the garden he said,"We live in it!
There's always something to do.
In Winter we're digging and in summer we eat outside as much as possible and enjoy looking at the fruits of our labour."
Planned to Perfection
Wondering what to do with your empty small space?
Over the next 16 pages, our five beautiful plans, taken from real-life situations will provide you with plenty of inspiration.
When confronted with a small garden for the first time, its often difficult to know what to do for the best.
Few of us are blessed with ideal situations, often having to endure steep slopes, narrow alley-ways or deep shade.
The smaller the garden, the more acute these problems seem to become.
The next 16 pages are packed with exciting ideas all taken from real-life situations covering many of the problems you are likely to be confronted with.
The solutions encompass a wide range of options to suit all tastes and pockets.
You can either use all or just adapt part of the design to suit your needs.
We've also included a full colour planting design from each garden to provide you with even more inspiration!
All the plans have been prepared by top garden designers at Individual Gardens Ltd, whose managing director David Stevens designed the award winning B and Q garden at this years Chelsea Flower Show.
David already has six Chelsea gold medals to his credit.
He is also a familiar face on the TVS series "That's Gardening" and has written eight books.
This is a garden of average size and main tasks here are to give the design a real feeling of space and movement that will lead the eye away from those awkward boundaries.
The integrated garden
A useful rule to remember is that a diagonal line between opposite corners of any rectangle is the longest dimension available.
If a garden design is turned at an angle to the boundaries then one helps to create a feeling of greater space by using those longer lines.
This is just the, approach we have taken here and the terrace, contained by courses of brick leads the eye across to the seat, facing due south to catch the sun.
Pots will be attractive to add instant colour and a path sweeps away under the pergola towards the rockery where it turns through a right angle in front of the rose bed, eventually ending at the vegetable plot that is neatly screened by the hedge.
Paths give access here while espalier fruit can be both productive and a real space saver in a small garden.
The main lawn and border shapes have been laid out in a flowing line that leads you through the garden, echoing the curve of the path.
The positioning of the rose bed acts as a pivot to the design and also partially breaks the sight line, adding a degree of mystery as one wonders just what is around the corner.
Bomb shelters, although not common are an almost indestructible nuisance in some gardens.
Contrary to popular belief, they are practically useless for growing mushrooms and are too far away from the house to make an effective wine cellar!
I have seen one turned into a grotto and another used as a play room, but both approaches needed more than a little hard work and cash.
In this case the interior was dry and provided useful garden storage.
If it is possible to get rid of it then do so, if not, then screen the hideous concrete with heavy planting as we have done here and grow a rampant climber over the top.
So often gardens today are geared towards large drifts of shrubs and herbaceous material, which, although ideal for easy maintenance, display little in the way of infinite details.
the integrated garden
This planting contrasts the delicate form and foliage of small low growing plants that could be planted in a rockery or raised bed.
There is a balance between evergreen and deciduous material while this collection would provide interest throughout the year.
Tiny gardens are not just the perogative of new housing estates.
Much pre-war inner city housing has little in the way of space and more often than not a backyard is the best you can hope for.
Our own first home in London was just such a problem but with a little thought and flair the space can become an outside room in the fullest sense of the word.
The narrow garden
Of course, the situations are not always ideal and this little yard measures only 18ft (5.5m) across, having the added disadvantage of facing almost due north.
Such criteria mean that space has to be planned carefully and, in this particular garden, a low budget was also stipulated.
Moving away from the house there is little point in a large patio as this area will be in shade for much of the day.
Access is important however and in order to reflect as much light as possible we considered a pale coloured paving slab.
Brick paving gives a visual link with the building but don't lay the old stock type used in the house — they are too soft and quickly deteriorate in frosty weather.
If you have a young family a sandpit can be popular but don't site it at the bottom of the garden out of sight.
We have suggested a position close to the kitchen window and it could of course be converted to a raised bed or pool at a later date.
Herbs too are a practical addition so keep them near the back door, perhaps framed with a fragrant low hedge of lavender or santolina.
From the small paved area near the house a path leads down one side of the garden, giving access to the rotary drier and flanking the small lawn that is built up from a strong flowing curve, this helping to lead the eye away from those rectangular boundaries.
Trees can make a difference in an urban garden, helping to break the line of overlooking windows and add a much needed haven for wildlife.
These days it can be very worthwhile to buy a substantial specimen to give a small garden instant maturity.
Here we chose a cherry with pale pink spring blossom, a welcome sight early in the year.
At the base a broad timber seat doubles as a table and play surface, the paving at this point in the garden catching far more of the available sun.
In any garden one has to think of the practical as well as the more decorative elements and so a shed and compost area were included.
The shed is neatly screened by a clematis, trained over a trellis while the compost fits neatly into the corner, reached by a stepping stone path.
This area ranges from almost full sun, beyond the herb bed, to deep shade adjoining the house.
In the latter position both skimmia and hosta are ideal while Hydrangea petiolaris, planted on the wall has a wealth of bloom once established, even on a north wall.
Hypericum patulum "Hidcote" and Weigela florida "Variegata" break the line of the fence while the architectural line of acanthus is offset by heuhera and the sun loving helianthemum at a lower level.
Many people these days have a busy lifestyle and although they may enjoy gardening there is often little time to carry out many of the day-to-day tasks needed to keep a plot in perfect order.
This means that a low maintenance composition needs to use materials and planting that are not only easy to care for but look good throughout the year.
The wide garden
This is a small garden, on an awkward plot measuring just 45ft by 27ft (14m by 8m), facing north east and sloping away from the house.
One problem lies in the fact that the space is considerably wider than it is long and this means that any design needs to lead the eye away from the all-too-close rectangular boundaries.
Moving away from the house we have suggested turning the whole paving pattern at an angle and this immediately sets up an interesting shape, away from the building and fences.
Crisp precast concrete slabs are teamed with brick, the latter helping to soften the overall surface.
When you use the latter, be sure to choose a hard, well-fired variety that can withstand winter frosts.
Pots will be attractive here and the pool acts as a real focal point, set within a brick circle at a slightly lower level than the patio.
A rock outcrop, set into the bank, acts as host to a stream that tumbles into the water below.
Surrounding the pool the ground has been levelled and floored with a combination of timber slices and gravel, again building up an interesting texture that is both cost-effective and easy to maintain.
Such a surface is best contained in some way and here this is achieved with a neat curve of bricks, laid on edge.
From the paved patio one steps down to the path that leads around to the side of the house, diving access to the rotary washing line that is set in a bed of loose cobbles and sculptural boulders.
These have a slightly Japanese feel and provide the perfect ground cover if laid over a weak mix of concrete or polythene.
Gaps can be left to accommodate the areas of planting.
Such round, smooth shapes are the perfect foil to the railway sleepers that are used as informal steps down to the lowest level of all, a curved brick paved sitting area that looks back up towards the house.
Sleepers should be chosen that are as clean as possible and can usually be readily obtained from advertisements in "Exchange and Mart" or "Farmers Weekly" .
Failing this, try your local demolition yard or British Rail depot.
Bed them on well rammed soil and, if the slope is steep, secure them with wooden wedges driven firmly into the ground.
If a slightly boggy area can be created next to a garden pool it will give you the opportunity, as here, to include one or two moisture lovers such as caltha and astilbe.
A pool is also a focus of attention and you can use plants with contrasting flower and foliage that set up interesting patterns in their own right.
Thus the bold leafed hosta is the perfect foil for "Ajuga" as is the sculptural line of Euphorbia wulfenii and the delicate fritillaria.
In this age of intensive housing it is not uncommon for homes to be positioned close to one another, the divisions between properties being constructed from fences or, ideally, by walls.
Such estates, if sensitively planned can produce fine architecture and the spaces around and between houses can provide endless design opportunities.
The formal garden
There is also a long standing and somewhat unique tendency in this country to treat front and back gardens as separate entities, the former being for parking and access, the back for everything else.
It is a refreshing change when cars are in fact parked in a separate, but linked area allowing the front garden to be developed along slightly different lines.
In this garden the area is surrounded by walls and, instead of an uninteresting rectangle, the garage juts into the space, providing a definite challenge to the designers.
The main access is via steps that drop down from the street between walls that tend to increase visual tension.
Paving is a combination of random rectangular slabs, which could be either precast concrete or a more expensive natural stone and this has been teamed with brick, helping to soften the overall surface and also define the various planted areas.
Hedges have been used as a positive design element: yew to provide shelter and screening at the front of the property; box, fashioned into sweeping curves at a lower level.
Both these species are relatively low in maintenance, needing a clip once, or at the most, twice a year.
To provide vertical emphasis and break the line of those surrounding walls, pergolas and a rose covered arbour have been introduced.
The former also help to emphasise the main path towards the house and the view from the bay window to the statue at the end of the walk.
The arbour in particular is a novel yet sensible idea in this front garden as there is ample privacy provided by the walls and the area catches plenty of sun.
In the final analysis, this is a formal yet asymmetrical composition, the eye being led along very positive paths and sight lines to various focal points.
Such focal points have been aligned to be both clearly seen from the house and as elements of surprise when walking through the garden, an essential element of any good design.
This is a strongly conceived space, with the box hedge enclosing the area in a flowing curve.
There is a blend of both shrubs and herbaceous material, the former adding structure, the latter softness.
Fragrance is particularly important in a walled or enclosed garden and both the lilies and the philadelphus will provide scent.
Colour is another consideration and here it has been kept pale and cool.
This is a relatively small garden measuring 33ft by 36ft (10m by 11m) and our main task is to provide a real feeling of space and movement as well as rationalising the steep slope that drops down away from the house.
The sloping garden
Patio doors lead out from the house onto the sweeping lines of a brick paved terrace, the latter providing ample room for sitting and dining.
The severe drop down to the lower parts of the garden means it is sensible to provide a physical barrier and this has been cleverly achieved with a seat and barbecue that matches the sweep of the terrace itself.
To the left of the steps, constructed from solid railway sleepers that drop down to the lawn, we have suggested a raised bed, this being filled with soil from the levelled area below.
When carrying out levelling operations in the garden always be sure to keep the fertile topsoil and infertile subsoil separate, if necessary disposing of the latter.
A well-chosen statue as a focal point in the middle of the bed and a brick "mowing edge" has been incorporated at the bottom of the wall to make grass cutting and edging a far easier proposition.
Such an edge should be set just below the level of the turf so that a machine can run smoothly over the top — simply neaten up once a year with a half moon iron or spade and save that chore of hand edging.
The lawn itself has been built up from strong flowing curves and these naturally lead the eye away from those rectangular boundaries.
The levels have been carefully graded back towards the house and there is room here for the rotary washing line.
A climbing frame adjoins the grass while that awkward, narrow gap at the back of the garage is the ideal place for a small compost bin.
Planting is chosen for ease of maintenance and it is particularly useful to use the two trees, birch and sorbus provide vertical emphasis, helping to counteract the steep slope.
As both these species are comparatively compact, with a light foliage they are an ideal choice for the smaller garden.
Low maintenance is an important criteria in many modern gardens and this planting combines ground cover with taller shrub material.
Colour is also important and here the grey of senecio, rosemary and santolina is the perfect foil for the purple sage, choisya and ceonothus, the latter ideally planted against that southerly fence.
The arrangers garden
Every plant must earn its keep in a small garden — so those which make good garden plants and provide fresh and dried material for flower arranging must be top of the list.
Everybody has their favourite and no two experts will agree — but here is my own Top Forty!
Lonicera hitida "Baggesons Gold" .
A delightfully graceful shrub retaining colour well throughout the year.
For a bolder outline try Choisya ternata "Sundance" Bright.
yellow/green leaves, needs a sheltered position.
Elaegnus pungens "Maculata" is a slow evergreen led by cutting for indoors, Buxus semparvirens "Latifolia Maculata" (variegated box).
Going for gold
Ligustrum ovalifolium "Aureum Marginatum" (golden privet) grown as a bush is invaluable for flower arranging.
Hosta fortunei "Albo picta" has beautifully variegated strong leaves.
Milium effusum (Bowles golden grass) has light seedheads which air-dry very well.
Eucalyptus gunnii can be encouraged to grow as a shrub, not a tree, by pruning very hard back every spring.
Juvenile growth produced as a result is marvellous for cutting and preserving.
Super silvers
Senecio greyi is a useful shrub with strong branches of grey/white foliage.
Its pretty yellow daisy flowers are best removed when faded.
Cineraria maritime (try "White Diamond" or "Silver Dust" ), normally used for summer bedding, can be over-wintered for several years to give foliage for cutting much earlier the following years.
Group plants in fives or sevens, don't remove in autumn but interplant with "Queen of the Night" tulips.
Also try them with Achillea "Moonshine" and the non-invasive Artemesai absinthium "Lambrook Silver" .
Sedum spectabile "Autumn Joy" has boldly fleshy shoots with butterfly — attracting pink flowers in late summer which dry off on the plant to orange/brown heads useful for winter decorations.
Achillea "Moonshine" has acid-yellow flowers which air-dry beautifully — cut the first crop when mature to encourage a second flowering.
Artemesia absinthum has flowers that dry a soft grey.
Stachys canata ( "Lambs Ears" ) is a perennial whose flat carpets look attractive in the garden alongside clumps of Helichrysum angustifolium (the curry plant).
Flowers and foliage from both air-dry well and retain good colour.
Superb fresh material can be cut from all of the last five plants.
Berberis "Rosy Glow" — pink-splashed-white on new growth maturing to burgundy.
Makes a neat shrub and is essential!
Plant one near "Euphorbia armygdaloides" Rubra ", which makes lovely mounds of red foliage followed by yellow flowers, and heuchera" Palace Purple"with its smooth burnished brown/red leaves.
They co-ordinate beautifully while giving good change of form and texture — ideal for cutting material.
Almost bronze!
Salvia officianalis "Purpurea" (purple sage) for floral art and cookery, contrats well with stiff spikey clumbs of "Phormium tenax"  "Purpureum" a long-lasting cut leaf.
Here comes the greens
Staphenandra tanakae has lovely long arching sprays of mid-green leaves, which change to yellow in autumn, after panicles of white flowers in early summer make this a plant of considerable value.
It can be pruned quite hard, making it controllable for small gardens.
Skimmia females need male pollinators to produce berries but I would settle for Skimmia reevesiana "Rubella" (male) for its attractive red flower spikes — it makes a compact shrub.
Bergenia "Bressingham Ruby" has large smooth long-lasting rounded leaves which turn deep red in winter conditions and rich red flowers.
Deserves a place in all gardens.
Euphorbia "Robbiae" , with dark green foliage rosettes for winter use and lime green flower spikes in Spring which on an orangey tint late, is another essential.
Alchemilla mollis (lady's mantle).
No arranger would be without it.
Its geranium-shaped leaves and lime-green flowers both condition well and the flowers preserve too.
Helleborus foetidus leaves and flowers preserve well — and it's evergreen as a bonus.
Iris foetidissima has spikey leaves which stand well all year round.
Insignificant flowers produce dramatic orange-berried seed heads in late autumn, for use fresh or dried.
Prefers shade.
Aconitum "Ivorine" has cream spikes of flowers turning into seedheads which dry well.
It's best in shade.
Anemone pulsatilla (pasque flower) produces clematis-like fluffy seed-heads following wonderful purple flowers.
These can be preserved.
Chives look well, too, providing leaves for salads and pink flowers for air-drying.
Hederas (ivies).
Small-leaved kinds planted into land-drains set amid borders allow trails to cascade well without them clinging to brickwork.
Try H. "Discolor" , H. "Glacier" , H. "Ivalace" , and H. Conglomerata is an erect bushy variety worth noting.
I constantly cut trails for use indoors.
Ivy houseplants past their best get "gardened" for more permanent use.
Arum italicum "Pictum" with its marbled arrowhead leaves, is a must for winter and spring cutting.
Hydrangeas can give much pleasure in a patio tub.
The fresh flowers keep well and dry off naturally, once mature, while in use in arrangements.
Keep cut stems short so that next years flower buds are retained.
Good cutting material can come from annuals grown from seed.
Papaver somniferum (opium poppy), Nigella damascena (love in a mist), Digitalis Purpurea,(foxglove) produce excellent seed-heads for drying, as well as fresh material.
Limonium sinuatum and various grasses — briza, lagurus, phleum, among others produce a useful harvest for interior decoration, and there are many more.
Fresh material should be put into water and allowed to drink for several hours as soon after cutting as possible.
The ideal is to take the bucket with you!
Should time elapse, re-cut the stems.
Always cut stems obliquely (a knife is best as scissors tend to crush the side wall of the stems) creating a larger area for water absorption.
Pointed stems are also inserted in foam more easily.
Remove any foliage likely to come below the water line.
Conditioning
Have patience!
Always choose material mature enough to condition well.
Shiny new growth will often droop.
The leaves should feel turgid.
Sometimes earlier in the season cutting further back onto old wood will ensure better success eg with Senecio greyi and Cineraria maritima.
Wait for a fully developed seedbox before cutting hellebore flowers.
Inserting the cut end of a stem into boiling water for a few seconds (protecting the flower) often prevents wilting eg with roses.
Great benefits come from the use of cut flower foods now readily available eg Chrysal, particularly with bought flowers.
Flower shops are at last taking up the challenge and offering a wider choice from the wealth of materials available from all over the world.
Supplementing garden material with florist flowers is both sensible and necessary at certain times of the year.
When possible check that foliage or flower stems are firm and green (eg chrysanthemums), that pollen has not yet shed and there are plenty of buds (eg lilies) and that the colours are still sharp.
Clean swept floors, no faded blooms or tired houseplants are good indications of good husbandry and therefore reliable product.
It is still prudent to re-condition bought materials.
Shopping around
Hang stems in small bunches in dark airy dry conditions.
Remove superfluous leaves.
Lightly dust flowers with borax powder to preserve colour better.
To dry
Mix one part Glycerine with two-three parts hot water.
Stir well.
Remove dampened leaves, split woody stems and place into 2in (5cm) depth of mixture.
Once seed heads/leaves change colour remove and hang upside down for a while ensuring the tips preserve too.
Seedheads should be unopened but mature.
To preserve
Store preserved and dried material in well ventilated lidded boxes in dry conditions.
A Prize Creation
Trees and shrubs with unusual variegated leaves form the back-bone of Barbara and Neil Doughty's small garden in the West Midlands, as well as providing interest and colour all year round.
And they make an attractive alternative to fencing for the boundaries of their confined plot, while a narrow, curving lawn helps to lead the eye down its length to the summerhouse, bog garden and pools at the bottom.
In 15 years the couple have added so many features and new plants to their garden that it bears no relation to the bare and treeless area they look over.
Mow it has become a showpiece of Wallheath and won many gardening contests.
 "We have had a lucky spell for the past few years," explains Barbara.
The latest coup was winning the Challenge Cup for the West Midlands.
 "The judge asked how we could possibly do any more with the garden, and it's true that the only way forward is by making small changes, which we like to do as it gives us so much enjoyment." 
And to look at the colourful display of begonias, geraniums and fuchsias set against the trees and shrubs, the unusual rockery plants, the miniature acres in their raised beds, linked pools and waterfall, emptying into a small bog garden, and the greenhouse brimming with plants raised from cuttings and seed, you would think the Doughtys spend hours every day keeping it all in trim.
Yet because they both work odd hours, Barbara as a hairdresser and Neil as a plumber, the garden is planned for easy maintenance.
 "Everything has to be done as quickly as possible; the only time we spend extra hours in the garden is over the few weeks we are entering competitions, just to make sure it looks at its best," says Barbara.
The first problem they had to overcome when they moved in was to deal with invasive weeds like bindweed. nettle and mare's tail, encroaching from the nearby canal banks.
There was also a tribe of ravenous slugs and snails, intent on devouring bedding plants and anything newly planted.
 "These problems are now more or less under control, with the mature plants helping to blanket out the weeds," explains Barbara.
There was also a lot of clay in one part of the garden and sand in the rest, but the soil has been much improved over the years by generous additions of peat.
The garden is at its best from mid-summer onwards when the heathers are in flower, the begonias are decorating the summerhouse and fuchsias, geraniums and other bedders add colour to the various raised beds, baskets and tubs.
The, main basket this year, which was displayed on a stand, won the couple second place in another local competition and contained trailing geraniums.
fuchsias, nepeta, artemisia and trailing antirrhinums.
 "We also enjoy experimenting with ornamental plants and climbers, including gourds, ornamental cabbages, vines and yuccas" .
They like to blend colours and to create contrasting areas of interest.
An ornamental wall topped with trellis was designed to screen the shed and coal-bunkers and to add colour to a previously stark corner, here, Japanese acers, impatiens and clematis form an interesting mix.
The summerhouse area was originally part of the neighbour's garden but now forms the main focal point of the Doughty's own garden.
It is reached by stepping stones over the lawn and a small bridge crossing the bog garden and two linking fish pools.
The summerhouse and bog garden are lit at night and the couple often entertain there.
"We use the summerhouse area every day during summer and often eat our own meals there.
This is probably our favourite spot and you can choose between sitting in the sun or shade; it's a very peaceful place to unwind and enjoy the view of the garden", says Barbara.
This is where the couple often sit to chat about the day's events and plan.
 "We are always looking for new ideas on planting and design to see if we can vary them to suit our garden." 
The most recent idea was making a path at the side of their home incorporating large circles made of paving setts to break up the monotony of a straight path.
The couple's interest in gardening began with the desire to grow fuchsias to fill a few pots and baskets.
 "We still like to take fuchsia cuttings but we are now more interested in small trees and shrubs, and most recently, in water and marginal plants" , explains Barbara, whose interest really began when her grandfather gave them his greenhouse when he was too ill to look after it.
 "He gave it on the condition that we cared for it and, although my husband already liked gardening, that was what started my interest" .
They are both convinced that the key to a good garden is "putting your heart into it" .
 "Enjoy what you do in it and treat it with as much care as you do your home." 
Ideas and Innovations
Sitting and relaxing in the sun is one of the great benefits of owning a garden.
We liked this little scene for the corner of a patio: the cane chair is just right for the simple planting around it and extra interest is created by using a large limestone boulder, gravel and creeping plants such as thyme.
Herbs and other cottage garden plants are back in fashion and what a novel way this is to grow them attractively in a limited area.
You might be able to get a cart-wheel of your own from a local bygone auction or junk yard.
If not, use lengths of treated timber laid on edge instead.
You could divide your plot into squares or like the spokes of a wheel.
Sculpture adds that human touch to the garden.
We absolutely adored this amusing lady woven from willow wands.
It might not be to everyone's taste or be able to last for hundreds of years but you have to admit that she would turn a few heads if she appeared sitting casually in your garden.
This understated formal water feature would look sensational nestled in a secret corner of any small garden.
Original lead water tanks are prized collectors items but a few companies are making excellent reproductions so look out for them.
Pots and containers brimming over with flowers or foliage are an indispensable garden feature particularly for adding that finishing touch to patios.
The globular heads or ornamental onion, Allium karataviense make a stunning display in this large clay pot in May and June.
The pale pink flowers and grey-green leaves would match with most other plants placed against it.
Simple, but both beautiful and functional: this small garden was designed with a family in mind.
You can almost hear the excited children using the swing or running on the lawn, with parents sitting in the sun, looking on.
Skilful planting embellishes the boundary and patio whilst the pergola would make an impressive feature fixed to the back of the house.
The sound of gurgling water creates a therapeutic atmosphere.
This grindstone bubble fountain makes an attractive incidental feature in this narrow border and is not difficult to make.
These kinds of features re ideal for those garden owners with young children.
Parents can let youngsters play with the water without fear of an accident.
The sculptural qualities of driftwood can from the basis for an unusual and interesting arrangement.
Planted up with sun-loving, drought-tolerant plants such as sedum and houseleek, here it has been used to effect when laid on the gravelly shore of a small pond.
Compost should be pushed into the crevices and plants securely anchored until established.
For shady places you could include small ferns or ivy.
Steps should be attractive as well as functional.
We liked the way the broken slates filling the step echoed the state wall border.
This would look appropriate in a rustic or upland garden with plants allowed to grow and spill onto the steps.
Stout timber posts anchored into the ground are essential to prevent the edges collapsing.
For a stouter edging you could use sections of railway sleeper.
Sandpits keep young children amused for hours but they are often difficult to integrate into a small garden, particularly near the house.
This clever idea allows the pit to be shut away when not in use, making it look attractive while keeping the sand clean at the same time.
The timber lid is in two parts and could be easily made from a few lengths of timber stained or painted to match the surroundings.
Its usefulness outgrown, the sandpit could then be converted to a formal pond feature or planting bed.
Centre of Attraction
Just because days are getting shorter it doesn't mean you can forget having a bit of fun in the garden.
Mind you, it's not sunbathing or badminton I have in mind but planting — what more satisfying thing is there to do in the garden than to plant bulbs, or a tree or shrub to give you joy for years to come.
And the garden centres are geared up to help you make the most of this autumn opportunity.
There was a time when autumn was one of the busiest seasons in the garden.
When few plants were sold in containers, autumn was the big planting season — trees, shrubs, fruit trees, border perennials and bulbs all had to go in then.
And this makes sense because the ground is still warm from the summer so roots can start to grow out into their new soil straight away and the plants will settle down quickly.
Now that plants in containers can go in at any time when the ground is not frozen or sodden, many gardeners opt for the spring or early summer.
But why add to the spring jobs when there are seeds to sow, weeds to deal with and grass to cut if you can plant in the autumn?
garden centres should still have plenty of bulbs to choose from.
You'll find them loose in bins so you can fill a bag yourself or they may be pre-packed with a colourful label to show you what you're buying.
Buying loose bulbs enables you to choose those which are a good size and not damaged or soft.
What's more they're usually cheaper.
Pre-packed bulbs come in a much wider range of varieties but tend to be more expensive.
Daffodils like to be planted as early in the autumn as possible so get those in now.
Crocus, tulips, grape hyacinths and the rest can follow.
It usually pays to buy the biggest bulbs as these will have the most flowers in the first year and probably split in the soil to two fat bulbs for next season.
Bulbs for naturalising in grass are usually sold in bulk, sometimes in mixtures.
Buy a metal bulb planting tool while you're at it to help take the frustration out of planting into the grass.
Some fruit trees are still dug up from the nursery in autumn and sold with their roots bare.
These need more care than trees grown in containers and in particular the roots should never be allowed to dry out.
Plant them as soon as possible after you buy them.
But most fruit is sold in containers and the big news this autumn is the brand new range of Ballerina fruit trees.
These four varieties are ideal small garden plants, as they grow on a single stem and don't need pruning.
Buy some planting mixtures, a stake and a couple of tree ties when you buy your tree.
The autumn is a big time for planting roses and you'll find them for sale ready pruned and with their roots wrapped in polythene.
Although you may still find them on sale in the spring, they're unlikely to be at their best by then so now is the time to buy them and get them planted before the bad frosts.
Look out for the following varieties: "Silver Jubilee" — a pink Hybrid Tea which is the most disease resistant rose of all.
 "Margaret Merrill" — a fairly new, strongly scented white Floribunda.
 "Madame Gregoire Staechlin" — a very adaptable, sweetly scented, pink flowered climber which is good on north walls.
Unless you want to snap up your special favourites for sowing in spring before they're sold out, sweet peas are the only seeds to think about in the autumn.
They're pretty tough so you can sow them now and you'll get far more flowers next summer.
Look out for the sweet peas back in Unwins Seeds Plants Plus collection.
The pack not only contains three new Unwins sweet pea varieties, but also three sachets of Chrysal cut flower food to help your cut sweet peas last longer.
Now the summer bedding plants in tubs and window boxes are fading or frosted, chuck them out and replace them with flowers for the winter and spring.
 "Universal" pansies should be available in pots now and will flower in mild spells all winter followed by a big burst in spring.
Polythanus are also ideal.
In window boxes plant grape hyacinths, dwarf daffodils or dwarf tulips first and then the pansies on top.
In tubs try dwarf tulips or outdoor hyacinths.
Cyclamen, azaleas, primulas, poinsettias, capsicums — there's some lovely flowering plants to be had in autumn and winter.
But remember that they're tucked up in a nice warm greenhouse and it can be pretty chilly outside.
So get the checkout staff to wrap your plant in a paper or plastic sleeve to protect it from the wind.
Put it on the floor of the car behind a front seat, wedged upright with some other shopping to stop it falling over.
Don't put it in the boot of the car which can be very cold.
When you get them home keep them cool and water sparingly to encourage them to last well.
The Notcutts chain of garden centres in the midlands and south east has a special "preparing for winter" promotion this autumn with discounts on cleaning materials and other useful products.
Look out for similar promotions elsewhere and even if there's no discounts, the right products are still worth having if they help you do a good job.
Mowers.
Scrape clean, wash and spray with an oil-based protectant.
Conservatory and greenhouse.
Clean the glass using a special cleaner like K6 and insulate with bubble polythene to keep the warmth in.
House plants.
Water much less from now on, a watering meter from Rapitest will help prevent accidental overwatering.
Ponds.
Sling a piece of garden netting across the pond to keep out leaves which will sour the water.
Timber.
Seats and tables should be treated with preservative before the bad weather sets in, especially if you have nowhere to store them under cover.
Look out for discounts on mowers and other summer equipment.
If you need potting compost now, buy just enough for your immediate needs and then buy more in the spring as it can go off.
If you have bulbs or sweet pea seeds in a frame buy a "safe" mouse bait like ICI Mouser to kill mice but not birds or pets.
If you see prepared hyacinths still on sale, don't expect them to flower at Christmas — it's too late.