

Agricultural Questions of the Day
What is biotechnology and what is its potential?
How can it benefit crop production?
Could it help to limit environmental pollution?
Are there risks involved?
What controls are there?
Biotechnology has the potential to revolutionise the world of living organisms, whether they are plants, animals or microbes.
This is a result of the increased knowledge of the biochemistry of life and of the way in which individual characteristics are transmitted from one generation to another.
New organisms can be created and others modified by manipulating genetic material.
This can lead to a significant improvement of plant and animal life.
But are there dangers that it could also have undesirable or even disastrous consequences both to living organisms and to the environment?
Biotechnology: Risk or Revolution?
Doubts have been raised both on ethical and scientific grounds.
Is it ethical for man to interfere with the genetic constitution and physiological functions of living organisms, especially of man and the higher animals, in order to make them perform in a different way?
Should man interfere with natural processes, and could it cause suffering?
Scientific fears are based mainly on suggested risks which might arise from releasing new organisms into the environment, whether they are plants, animals, bacteria or viruses.
Past introductions of new species into a strange environment have sometimes had unforseen and undesirable consequences.
Might a new microorganism released for a specific purpose such as disease control, mutate and become a threat to other plants, animals or the ecological equilibrium of the environment?
These fears are especially strong where man himself might become directly involved.
Mutations are continually occurring in nature and are the basis for breeding — indeed they are a prerequisite for the evolutionary process of natural selection.
So is a speeding up of the process through biotechnology really any different?
The significance of such questions can only be assessed in the light of present knowledge and potential benefits weighed against potential risks.
Biotechnology is defined as the process of developing or applying functions of living organisms or living systems to the production of goods and services of value to mankind.
Agriculture, as the industry producing plants and animals as good or raw materials, is a major sector for research.
What is Biotechnology?
Biotechnology is not new.
It has been used in baking and brewing ever since primitive man became domesticated.
But one aspect which is new springs from the advances which have been made in molecular biology.
These have made it possible for scientists to manipulate more precisely the genetic make-up of living organisms.
It is this so-called "genetic engineering" aspect which is receiving the greatest attention.
Other important applications in agriculture are, for example, the bio-degradation of animal and plant wastes.
Single genes (the units of heredity) can now be transferred, added or deleted by manipulating the genetic material.
Genes are, essentially, segments of DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid, a complex chemical compound constituting the basis material of the chromosomes through which the individual traits of an organism are passed on from one generation to the next.
What is Genetic Engineering?
Short segments of DNA can now be excised from the cells of one organism and transferred in various ways to those of another.
This introduces new characteristics to the recipient.
These may be transferred to the next generation when individual reproductive cells have been manipulated.
In this way, scientists are able to "design" (though, as yet, only to a very limited extent) organisms with particular characteristics.
This accomplishes in one generation what, in the past, took plant and animal breeders many generations to achieve by conventional selective breeding methods.
There are two main ways in which genetic engineering can be used in agriculture:(1) by the introduction of a specific gene or genes into a plant or animal cell so that the performance of that plant or animal is enhanced in a particular way through the new trait which has been added, and (2) by the introduction of a gene or genes into a bacterial cell which will cause the bacterium and its subsequent generations to perform a useful function, for example, to produce a protein toxic to insects or a specific compound especially valuable to farm animals or to man.
How might agriculture be affected?
Agriculture could be affected by genetic engineering through the adoption of either "lower input" systems, or by more cost effective intensive systems.
Farmers might be provided with plants or animals with, for example, in-built resistance to specific diseases or pests; faster growth rates; more efficient use of inputs, and higher quality end products.
There could be a saving in the cost of pesticides and a consequent reduction in the risk of environmental contamination by residues.
The main areas, all closely related, in which biotechnology is being applied to plants are: Improvement of crop varieties Disease and pest resistance Nitrogen fixation Deletion of undesirable traits Tissue culture and cloning Production of compounds within plants Biodegradation of plant material
What are the main applications in plant production?
It is now possible to transplant genetic material for a desired characteristic in a single generation, without the risk of adding undesirable genes.
How can crop varieties be improved?
Historically, increases in yield or improvements in specific traits have been achieved by classical breeding techniques involving crossing, back-crossing and selection.
Such methods are very time consuming, somewhat "hit and miss" and very costly.
The entire genetic make-up of the plants is involved, just to fix one or two desirable genes, or to eliminate undesirable ones.
By genetic engineering, it is now possible to transplant genetic material for a desired characteristic in a single generation, without the risk of adding undesirable genes.
In future, gene transfer could greatly increase the possibilities for improved crop performance, not simply by increasing yield, but also by modifying other characteristics.
One example is the research into the proteins in the wheat grain on which bread baking quality largely depends, particularly the gluten fraction responsible for the elasticity of the dough.
Gluten is deficient in many high yielding varieties of wheat used in Britain, local flour being fortified by the addition of high gluten varieties imported from North America.
If suitable genes for gluten production could be added to British varieties, or if the genes in British wheat were made to produce more or better gluten, imports would be saved and farmers would get a higher price for a better quality wheat.
Another example is the breeding of new varieties specifically for certain environmental conditions, eg, for better performance under dry land farming conditions, for quicker growth in northern areas where the growing season is limited or for more efficient photosynthesis.
Some plants already possess genetic resistance to attacks by insect pests while others resist certain fungal diseases.
For years plant breeders have attempted, with varying degrees of success, to breed such characteristics into new crop varieties, eg, mildew resistance in cereals.
Can disease and pest resistance be increased?
Many cases of resistance depend on only one or a very few genes.
When these are identified, it should be possible to incorporate them directly into existing varieties, so avoiding the necessity of a lengthy breeding process.
This would have particular benefits for world crops such as cereals, rice and maize.
Similarly, crop plants and microorganisms with a high degree of resistance to damage by  some herbicides are under investigation to determine the genetic nature of the resistance.
If the relevant gene(s) could be incorporated into wheat, for example, it would reduce the number of herbicides required and extend the period of application.
Tobacco plants have already been produced by gene manipulation with resistance to the effects of atrazine and glyphosate, two wide spectrum herbicides.
There has also been a breakthrough in the breeding of soya beans (126 million acres are grown annually worldwide) where resistance to damage by glyphosate has been genetically incorporated.
As this herbicide is toxic to a wide range of weed species, only one spraying would be needed to control the weeds in such a crop.
Viruses, generally transmitted by insect vectors, cause very heavy losses in crops.
Biotechnology can enable the early detection of some viral infections.
For example, cucumbers, lettuce, tomatoes and tobacco are very susceptible to attacks from the Cucumber Mosaic Virus.
By introducing a satellite RNA Ribonucleic Acid (closely related to DNA), it has been possible to establish in a tobacco plant a heritable agent capable of preventing the development of the mosaic virus as it enters the cell.
After testing for any side-effects on the plant or on neighbouring plants, it will be tested on a field scale.
If successful, the technique open up enormous possibilities for controlling viral infections.
A different type of biologically engineered pest control is claimed to have been effected through a free-living soil bacteria.
Bacillus thuringiensis.
Due to the presence of a particular protein in its make-up, it is toxic to several soil-borne insects which destroy plant roots.
But the bacteria does not live on the roots, and is not effective in preventing damage.
By transferring the capacity to produce the toxic protein to a different microorganism which does live on roots, it should be possible to kill the insects before they are able to do any material damage to the crop.
Such examples point towards a revolution in disease and pest control.
Bacteria in the root nodules of legumes (Rhizobium) have the capacity to fix nitrogen from the air, which then becomes available for use by the host plant in the form of ammonium compounds.
Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to transfer this capacity for a symbiotic relationship between the host plant and rhizobia to crops other than legumes.
What are the prospects for nitrogen fixation in plants?
A major research effort is now being devoted to solving this problem, especially the transfer to cereal crops.
If the gene or genes governing acceptance of the bacteria could be fixed in such crops, significant benefits would result from the reduced use of nitrogenous fertilisers — now running at 60 million tonnes a year on a world scale.
This might influence the amount of nitrogen reaching watercourses.
As techniques of gene transfer advance, it is expected that the solution will eventually be found.
In the meantime, advance have been made in the culturing of rhizobia and the preparation of inoculants for use with existing leguminous crops, and considerable increases in yield have been obtained when applied to crops in the field.
(See Figure 1).
Just as it has been possible to insert beneficial genes into crop plants, there is scope for eliminating, replacing or masking certain genes which have a deleterious effect on crop production.
An example is the deletion of an ice nucleating gene from a strain of bacterium which makes crops susceptible to frost damage at temperatures just below freezing point.
Leaves coated with a strain of engineered bacterium from which the offending gene has been eliminated do not suffer from the formation of ice.
Can undesirable traits be controlled?
The masking of a gene in tomatoes has recently been achieved by scientists in both America and Britain.
As tomatoes ripen, an enzyme is produced which causes softening by breaking down the pectin in the cell walls.
The crop therefore has to be picked in an immature state if retailers are not to run the risk of being left with over-soft, unsaleable tomatoes.
In the genetically engineered strain, an extra gene has been inserted.
This nearly, but not completely, cancels out the effect of early softening.
It allows the fruit to be left longer on the plant to ripen, improving its flavour and quality.
It remains firm in transit and has a longer shelf life before the softening gene finally overcomes the effects of the inserted gene.
Tests are being carried out to assess the commercial value of the engineered strain.
As the same gene is thought to control softening in other fruits such as peaches, there are wide  implications for the future quality and marketing of fruit.
Many plant cells continue to grow and divide, even when divorced from the parent plant, if placed in a suitable culture medium.
This can be achieved with naked cells, that is, cells from which the walls have been removed.
These are called protoplasts.
In many species whole plants can be regenerated from such cells or protoplasts, or from larger segments of detached tissue.
Such techniques can greatly accelerate the development and propagation of new and uniform strains and varieties of plant.
They also provide much greater uniformity than is possible with strains derived from conventional plant breeding methods.
What is tissue culture and how might it be used?
More important still is the opportunity this provides for introducing DNA into cells and protoplasts, in order to alter the characteristics of the plants grown on from them.
This is a very laborious and exacting technique and, to date, it has only been used with a few plants.
Particularly significant is protoplast fusion.
Protoplasts from different strains of plant have been joined, giving rise to a completely new variety blending characteristics from each parent.
An example of the value of protoplast fusion is provided by control of the Potato Leaf Roll Virus, which causes serious yield losses in potato crops.
By the fusion of protoplasts from the wild strain containing genetic resistance to the virus, with those from the domestic variety, a new resistance commercial strain has been bred.
Tissue culture techniques provide excellent opportunities for cloning — the production of large numbers of organisms of identical genetic constitution — and for the rapid reproduction and multiplication of new strains resulting from genetic engineering.
Cloning produces large numbers of identical organisms for research purposes, such as the initial testing of new pesticides on plant species.
In the commercial horticultural field, the mass production of pot plants has been facilitated through cloning.
Yes, both bacteria and animals are already being engineered to produce specific compounds which can be extracted and used for the benefit of farm animals or man.
Research is in progress to modify crop plants genetically to make them yield more than one product.
This would be valuable for those crops processed before use, eg, oilseed rape, sugar beet or soya beans.
Oilseed rape is likely to be engineered to produce more than one type of oil: for margarine, cooking oil or lubrication.
Sugar beet might be given the capacity to produce new amino-acids of value to man which could be extracted at the same time as the sugar.
Can plants be made to synthesise new products?
The potential for producing multi-purpose crops is clearly very great.
But the production of such crops in the field appears to be some years away.
In the immediate future, the biological synthesis of specific products is likely to be confined to bacterial cultures under strictly controlled conditions.
Some years ago much interest was shown in the production of Single Cell Protein (SCP) either by the bacterial degradation of oil products or by the intensive culturing of algae in a medium containing inorganic nitrogen compounds.
Can biotechnology be used for other than genetic purposes?
Many commercial undertakings failed owing to high energy costs, technical problems or poor acceptability.
But one animal protein feed has been produced from bacterial synthesis using ammonia, methanol from North Sea gas and minerals.
Fungi are also being used to produce mycoproteins, and some crops can provide raw materials for the production of plastics.
Bacterial synthesis of protein from industrial residues or organic wastes such as wood pulp is under investigation and it is probable that viable processes will be developed.
Most of the technology needed is already known.
It is largely a matter of economics and much hinges on the current price of energy.
Classic examples of the use of crops for industrial purposes rather than for food are: the production of ethanol for fuel from sugar cane in Brazil and from maize in the USA, and alcohol from potatoes.
If fossil fuel costs rise to a high level, either from shortages or for political reasons, crops could be grown specifically for biological conversion into various forms of energy.
Experiments are now in progress on afield scale to produce biomass crops, ie, those that will produce the maximum amount of organic material in the shortest time from a given area of land.
There are trees such as willows which can be cut and harvested at frequent intervals.
The resulting material could be used either as fuel or be biologically degraded by special engineered microorganisms to produce specific compounds for industry.
Alternatives to fossil fuels?
Another example is the use of both urban and agricultural wastes to produce methane gas under controlled fermentation.
On the farm, slurry from solid and urine residues is digested by anaerobic bacteria in closed chambers.
The methane gas produced is used for heating and generating power for the farm buildings.
Such bacterial digestion has the added advantage of reducing the Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) of the slurry residues, and limiting the pollution of water courses.
With urban wastes, the process is generally in two stages: digesting with  algae and then moving on to anaerobic bacterial fermentation.
This is not used widely in Britain, though it is on the Continent, in China and India, where small local waste digestion plants are very common, providing cheap energy for the community.
This is the question which cuts across the whole range of biotechnological activity.
In plant production there appears to be little concern over the techniques involved in breeding new varieties, except possibly in relation to breeding for herbicide resistance.
There is some fear that such resistance might pass into weed populations so making both them and "volunteer" crop plants more difficult to eradicate.
Are risks involved?
The greatest concern is over the so-called recombinant DNA organisms and experiments.
Fears have been expressed that the release of any genetically engineered microorganism could get out of control and become harmful to plant or animal health.
The risks are thought to be very small:(1) because the balance of the natural environment is primarily controlled by the species already present which appear to operate to the detriment of new introductions; and (2) because in new releases of microorganisms to date, all very closely monitored, there has been no evidence of any of them getting out of control or adversely affecting the environment.
As a result, some countries are now slightly relaxing their most stringent controls.
But some legitimate worries remain and strict monitoring is still necessary.
All the scientific evidence collected so far suggests that biotechnology is really very safe.
Two important international conferences in 1988, which reviewed the progress of techniques and controls, reached the same conclusion.
This suggests that some previous doubts are groundless.
Nevertheless, extreme vigilance and monitoring are still needed each time a new product is sanctioned for release into the environment.
Ethical considerations are far more difficult to rationalist.
Views range between two extremes: on the one hand, that man should not interfere in any way with what God has created, or on the other, that the benefits to society are great and the risks are unproven.
Between the extremes, there is a wide range of opinion, much of it ill-informed.
This is inevitable in a subject of such complexity, and one so difficult to explain in simple terms.
The public has to rely on the media but some presentations seem to be made more for dramatic effect than to provide unbiased information.
This can lead to the condemnation of biotechnology as a dangerous and frightening playground for "mad scientists" .
What is required is a fair balance and as much factual evidence as possible.
Research in biotechnology will continue, although controls may be imposed in some areas.
The potential benefits to man and agriculture are far too great to be ignored.
if it is accepted that biotechnology is here to stay, how can it be controlled to the best advantage?
The biotechnology explosion has been more dramatic in the USA than in Britain.
In the past 15 years, 600 biotech companies have been formed, mostly in North America.
What controls are there?
No product can be released into the environment without the prior authorisation of the relevant controlling body.
Each new application is assessed individually within a co-ordinated framework.
There are wide-ranging powers to limit or restrict the manufacture and release of a product until the agency concerned is fully convinced of its safety.
In the UK, responsibility for biotechnology ultimately lies with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), but because of the involvement of other bodies such as the Health and Safety Executive, the Department of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Department of the Environment and several Research Councils, an Interdepartmental Committee on Biotechnology (ICBT) was set up in 1982 to co-ordinate all developments.
This body, in turn, is advised by the Advisory Committee for Genetic Manipulation (ACGM), set up in 1984 specifically to establish guidelines for risk assessment in the case of recombinant DNA research.
The ACGM provides a regulatory framework within such scientists, employees, industry, and the Government work.
It provides advice, after a comprehensive scientific assessment, on the planned release of genetically modified organisms and is responsible for monitoring the outcome of each release.
To date, such monitoring has not revealed any deleterious effects from the limited number of organisms which have been released.
But the Committee has no legal powers to prevent the release of new organisms — a power which is available to the control bodies which operate in the United States.
With the rapid increase in biotechnological research, stricter controls with powers of enforcement may well prove necessary in Britain.
Another function of the Committee is its responsibility for the overall supervision of the so-called "collections" of pools of biotechnology materials, which are held at a number of research stations, and which make genetic material available to research workers in other institutions.
In Europe, different countries have adopted different policies, some setting very strict standards.
By 1992, it would clearly be desirable for all EEC countries to follow similar policies.
A possible framework was provided by the 24 countries of the OECD in 1986.
This covers the testing procedures and assessment criteria to be applied before licences can be granted.
The ideal is that the system adopted should guarantee (1) a unified internal European market for the products of biotechnology,(2) a consistent regulatory approach in all EEC countries, and (3) a common level of human and environmental protection.
Meanwhile, in Britain, the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution has published a report with  further recommendations.
(Thirteenth Report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, The Release of Genetically Engineered Organisms to the Environment, July 1989.)
The Commission proposes that it should be a criminal offence for anyone to release into the environment a living creature whose genes have been altered in the laboratory — unless the proposed release has been scrutinised and licensed by a committee of ecologists and environmental scientists.
Considerable problems have been raised through the desire of commercial companies and research establishments to patent products or processes, which they have developed, as it is difficult to define accurately the parameters of a biological process.
Can biotechnological products be patented?
In the UK, the present position is that microbiological processes are patentable so long as there has been a significant human intervention in the discovery of the organism and its isolation.
It is possible to patent new microorganisms per se; the processes of producing them; the processes for using them, and the products obtained from them, and the products obtained from them.
It is also possible to patent plasmids (double stranded DNA molecules) and cultured cell lines.
But ordinary plant and animal varieties, and the processes for producing them which have not involved a significant technological input in their production, are not patentable.
There are certain to be cases which do not fall within these guidelines, and these will cause problems until such time as "case law" has been established.
Biotechnology opens up almost unlimited possibilities.
Even if only a limited number of the more extreme pipe dreams become part of everyday life, the developments are likely to have far reaching effects, especially in agriculture.
If plant and animal production is made much more efficient in its use of resources, food surpluses could remain a recurring problem, certainly in the short term.
What of the future?
If some smaller producers were forced out of business and lower quality land ceased to be farmed, the fabric of the countryside could be seriously affected.
Another possibility is that biotechnology itself might be able to redress the balance through the use of surplus agricultural and woodland products as feed stocks for manufacturing processes or as sources of energy.
Few new scientific discoveries are completely beneficial.
There is often a price to be paid for their advantages (eg, nuclear energy), and biotechnology is unlikely to be any different.
However, the concerns that have been expressed cannot be underestimated.
Nor is it inevitable that all the products of research will find a ready market.
But research will continue.
It therefore becomes the responsibility of those who control its application to prevent any developments which could have undesirable effects, either on society in general or on limited sectors such as agriculture.
It is essential that the decisions taken should not be based purely on narrow scientific considerations.
The widest possible implications must be considered when either sanctioning or preventing the application of a new biological process.