

Changes for 1989
Change to A4 format for better presentation of text, tables and illustrations.
Upgrading of paper to give improved quality half-tone reproduction New cover design to reflect the changes within the journal…take a look inside…
Parasitology
Editors F E G Cox & C Arme Parasitology is an important journal covering the complete spectrum of parasitology.
It is the first established specialist journal in this subject, and 1989 sees its eighty-first year.
Parasitology publishes definitive papers on all aspects of pure and applied parasitology including the latest discoveries in biochemistry, molecular biology, immunology, genetics and physiology, the applications of new techniques, long term epidemiological studies, advances in the understanding of life cycles, chemotherapy and major systematic revisions.
In 1989 the journal changes to A4 format, with up-graded paper quality and a new cover design.
Regular reviews of topics not usually covered elsewhere and of particular interest to those teaching or studying parasitology will also be published.
Parasitology will still public papers of the same high standard from authors of international reputation, making it essential reading for all those working and researching in the field.
Each year the proceedings of the BSP symposium are published as an extra issue, which is included in the subscription price.
In 1989 two extra issues will be published: "Vaccines and vaccination strategies" (April, 1989) "Research development in the study of parasitic infections" (August 1989) These two supplements are available separately at £21.00 each — see order form.
The 1988 supplement "Molecular transfer across parasite membranes" is available separately at £20.00 — see order form.
The Symposia of the British Society of Parasitology
Edited by Diane McLaren Contents Basic concepts and new aspects of vaccine development Strategies for viral vaccines: scientific challenge and regulatory aspects.
Problems specific to parasite vaccines [The Wellcome Trust Lecture]An update on candidate malaria vaccines Schistosome vaccines: reality or fantasy?
Experiences with leishmania vaccines: from mice to men Immunological control of livestock parasites Parasite vaccines versus anti-parasite drugs; rivals or running mates?
1989 supplement: Vaccines and Vaccination Strategies