

In the Vanguard, Olympus in the UK
Welcome to the first edition of Olympus Scientific Products News.
Keeping up to date with the latest product developments can be a full time job, particularly in the scientific world.
To save you time this newsletter gives concise details of important new developments from the Olympus Scientific Products Division.
There are seven major product areas within Olympus in the UK.
The Central London Office looks after cameras, pocket recorders, microscopes, measurement and image analysis.
The Biomedical Products Division has brand new offices in Eastleigh, Hampshire, as described in detail overleaf.
Medical endoscopes, industrial boroscopes and related equipment are looked after by Olympus Keymed and Olympus KMI in Southend.
In this and coming issues we will be concentrating on microscopes, measurement and image analysis.
For further information on any of the items covered, complete and return the appropriate card or form.
We will be happy to give advice if there is a particular application involved.
The phone numbers and addressed for the remaining divisions are listed below, should you be interested in other Olympus products.
New Zoom Stereos
The streamlined outer casing of the new SZ series of zoom stereo microscopes conceal a host of operational improvements.
Particular attention has been paid to increasing the versatility of the range and in reducing operator fatigue.
New Greenhough type optics improve image contrast and field flatness.
Great care has been taken with the positioning of the zoom controls for operator comfort and there are options of 45° or 60° angled eyepieces.
Whilst many of the developments will be beneficial to all disciplines, certain aspects are particularly relevant to the electronics sector.
Increased working distance and greater depth of field make the new SZ series ideal for use with bonding or probing machines.
A special adapter allows direct replacement of existing Bausch and Lomb heads without modification to the machinery.
Low cost coaxial illumination is available throughout the magnification range for examination of glass encapsulated devices.
A ¼ wavelength retardation plate ensures a high level of brightness through the depth of the specimen.
The philosophy of the new SZ series follows on from the successful SZH research stereo providing interchangeability and versatility — indeed the SZ heads can be used with the SZH stand for superior transmitted light.
Olympus have over twenty-five years' experience in the design, development and manufacture of clinical chemistry analysers. 1990 heralds two major changes in the European marketing of these products.
New Biomedical Products Division
The operation of clinical analysers requires diagnostic reagents and until now Olympus have concentrated on the analysers themselves, sourcing the reagents separately.
The purchase of an 85% stake by Olympus Europa in the Human Group, a leading diagnostic reagent manufacturer based in Germany, enables Olympus to offer total systems including analytical instruments, reagents and service with applicational and financial consulting.
Complementing this development is the formation of a new Biomedical Products Division in the UK which will look after the servicing and supply of analysers and reagents for this country.
Operating from a purpose built office and demonstration facility at Eastleigh, Hampshire, the new division is headed by Alan Trinder, with over fifteen years' experience in the field.
The widely used BH2 range of microscopes now offers a new fluorescence system with the BH2-RFC attachment.
Bright images have become an accepted advantage of the existing system and the new design increases the brightness even further.
Particular attention was also paid to user convenience.
New Reflected Light Fluorescence Systems
Any three of six filter blocks can be mounted simultaneously, increasing the changeover speed and the choice of excitations available at one time.
This allows the user to select the precise excitation wavelength for he fluorochrome in use.
This versatility combined with the brighter images increases the range of specimen types that may be examined.
New Condenser
Combining  fluorescence microscopy with a transmitted light contrast enhancing technique has proved a useful method when considering the dispersion of fluorescent material through a specimen.
The new BH2-NCF condenser facilitates this with rapid changeover between Epi-fluorescence, transmitted light brightfield, phase contrast and differential interference contrast using just two slide controls.
The new CHK and CHD student microscopes have been developed to provide the facility for using high quality interchangeable objectives at low cost.
New Student Microscopes
Equipped with sturdy heads to withstand the rigours of the classroom, both come with the superb LB objectives used on the existing Olympus range.
Based on the highly versatile and successful CH2 range the new instruments make the ideal choice when cost is the overriding factor.
The Olympus CUE range of image analysers is designed to offer "off the shelf" solutions to many requirements yet remains flexible enough to accept tailor made programming.
Advanced Image Analysis
Three highly specified systems make up the range the CUE2 with a resolution of 512 x 512 pixels provides an extremely sharp and easy to work with image.
Complete control of the contrast transfer function, displayed measurement parameters, versatile image editing and ability to detect 256 grey levels are a few of CUE 2's abilities.
In addition to the power and flexibility of CUE2, CUE 3 offers real colour analysis suitable for applications including textiles, dyes, paints, inks and geological materials.
The top of the range CUE 4 provides the scale of power and versatility required for complex research.
Capabilities include fast fourier transforms, user defined filters, advanced statistics and menu controlled user programming.
Let us know your requirements and we can show you how CUE can help at our new demonstration facility.
The new CUE MS is a purpose built automated XY stage and is available for use with all Olympus microscopes.
New XY Stage
Manual control on the stage is now possible together with the existing joystick.
This makes control easier when looking down the microscope or when operating a computer keyboard for image analysis.
Direct drive stepping motors eliminate backlash and speed can be varied from 50-5000 microns per second with a focus resolution of 0.5 microns for precise control.
Programmable movements on a given slide are possible using the Olympus microscope controller with appropriate software.
Faced with awkward specimens, particularly when using stereo microscopes, the most infuriating problem can be illumination.
Versatile Illumination
Using interchangeable light guides the Highlight 2000 and 3000 can cope with almost any illumination requirement.
Twin self supporting light guides can be used to light from an almost infinite variety of angles, and ring lights are available as are focusing lenses.
Light intensity is linearly controlled with constant colour temperature and light emission angle.
If you have ever wished that you had a third hand to make notes we have the answer.
Hands Free Notemaking
Olympus have been producing pocket recorders since 1969 and invented the microcassette that combines the advantages of a normal size cassette including excellent sound quality and lengthy recording time   whilst allowing the recorder to be truly pocketable.
The latest model, the Pearlcorder S912, has a voice controlled microphone that starts and stops recording as you speak leaving your hands free, yet costs only £49.
Ideal for leaving on the bench to record as many details as you like, it is so portable you can take it with you wherever you go.
Part of the new BHM universal series of metallurgical microscopes the BH2-MJLT has been designed for inspection of large wafers and photomasks in the IC industry.
Prime consideration has been given to eliminating dust or dirt generation.
The new UMA universal illuminator allows rapid changeover between brightfield, darkfield, Nomarski Differential Interference Contrast, and reflected light fluorescence observation methods with a single set of optics, minimising the risk of contamination.
The different observation methods cover inspection for flaws or dust, surface differential, substance detection and checking for residual photoresist on Ic wafers which shows up particularly well under fluorescence.
Inspection and Measurement in Electronics
Microscope for Large IC Inspection
Further protection again dust is provided by a motorised nosepiece.
Wafer and mask holders are available in 3″ and 6″ sizes.
Variations in the size and shape of CBs make the choice of a suitable inspection stand absolutely vital.
Surface Mount Inspection Stand
The latest surface mount inspection stand designed for use with the Olympus fixed magnification stereo microscope heads has an extra large XY stage that will accept most board sizes.
An extended arm supports the microscope head giving stability whilst allowing room for large boards to be examined.
Both conventional and oblique viewing are possible.
Designed for use with a microscope or macro lens the new VMS video microscalers, provide fast and accurate line width measurement.
Video Microscalers
The variable intensity parameter lines can be solid, dotted, large or small dashed, and positioning is controlled by a large sensitive rotary control or optional joystick for remote control.
All models provide 1000 line resolution and the VMS1000 with simple horizontal measurement has a 4 digit panel display in metric or imperial.
Additional facilities on the VMS2000 and VMS300 include 5 digit display on panel and screen and multiple calibration programming.
The VMS300 can measure vertically, diagonally and horizontally with the option of Digital Automatic Targetting.
Using a vacuum pick and transfer system the AL1-BL is a compact dual arm loader for 4″, 5″ or 6″ wafers with clean room standard beltless operation.
Beltless Autoloader For Wafer Inspection
The dual arm design allows each wafer to be centred automatically without delaying transfer.
Transfer speed is variable from two seconds upwards with automatic sequencing or user programming by logic touch controls.
Another breakthrough on the AL1-BL is a self diagnostic programme and comprehensive manual that reduces down time.
On stage vacuum control for remote rotation is available if required.
The AL1-BL may be used with any IC inspection microscope.
Amongst scientific instruments the microscope in particular is in use across almost all disciplines from life science to electronics and at all levels from routine inspection to research.
Covering this huge variety of requirements, Olympus has probably the world's largest range of instruments and by necessity draws on the knowledge and expertise of companies and individuals in the various fields.
Here we look at some of our experts in the UK and other supporting roles we provide.
Inside View
When the name is Robert Wishart Laboratory Services, the answer is a great deal.
1990 sees the name shorten to the punchier Wishart Scientific though the scope of the Ballyclare based business continues to expand.
What's In A Name
Wishart Scientific are agents for Olympus microscopes in Northern Ireland and have expanded in personnel from two to twelve in five years.
They now look after a range of laboratory products as well as Olympus microscopes they can advise on many other of your laboratory requirements.
The electronics industry, perhaps more than any other, often requires adapted or custom built equipment to meet specialised needs.
Microscopes For Electronics
In the early 1970s Ian Hunter and John Harrington saw a niche in the market and an opportunity to do things their way.
After starting in Ian's hallway, Hunter Equipment Sales Limited now has its own freehold premises and a turnover in excess of £1m, selling specialised microscopes and other visual inspection equipment.
As agents for Olympus microscopes HESL specialise in adapting instruments to customers' specific situations and their experience is invaluable.
Though recent instruments like the new SZ zoom stereos are designed to be readily fitted to a range of different equipment there has been increasing demand in recent years for custom equipment and his has led to customer specific modular configurations for individual projects.
Matching components and putting them together with specialist custom fittings enables HESL to serve the inspection needs of a variety of industries and extremely competitively.
Transferring the image from a microscope via a television system has many attractions from simplifying group discussion to providing the basis for image analysis.
Early television cameras were large and the image of poor quality, but much progress has been made in recent years.
The sheer variety of current systems is phenomenal and it is a full time job just keeping pace with developments.
It was with this in mind that Ray Varney started Optivision in 1982.
TV Star
Based in Osset near Leeds, Optivision are agents for Olympus microscopes in North East England.
Allied to this is their specialisation: interfacing TV systems with microscopes.
If a proprietary adapter is not available for a particular combination, Optivision will often be able to make one.
Full colour TV cameras are now available that are smaller than a packet of Polos whilst the definition of monitors is better than ever.
Current video printers can produce a paper image approaching the quality of a photographic print and are improving all the time.
Originally named the Laboratory Equipment Corporation LECO is based in St Joseph, Michigan, USA and started life by developing and introducing the first volumetric carbon determinator for the iron and steel industry.
A pioneer in the field of instrumentation for the materials sector, the company now has offices and manufacturing bases throughout the world.
Material Matters
LECO Instruments (UK) Ltd is based in Hazel Grove near Stockport in Cheshire employing forty people in manufacturing and distribution.
Their wealth of experience in so many areas of materials science and manufacture enables them to advise on almost all aspects of laboratory requirements including the Olympus materials microscope range.
Choosing the right instrument for the task at hand is certainly a critical decision yet the hardware is only part of the equation.
Service back up or product support can make all the difference.
Users of clinical analysers are well aware of the need for fast efficient maintenance.
However, this area is sometimes  overlooked by microscope users as Kevin Flynn who runs the microscope product support team explains:
The Importance of Product Support
"Many people think of product support as being about repairs yet regular servicing is just as vital.
Our product support team can also ensure that microscopes are properly installed and the user fully familiarised with its operation.
Regular cleaning and servicing will then keep the instrument performing to its full potential.
A regular service contract is not expensive when compared to the cost of modern instruments and can provide great peace of mind.
We are also on hand to give advice on how to get the best from the instrument and on new developments.
 "If you do not have an existing service agreement with Olympus it is certainly worth looking at the options available — whatever type of instrument is in use." 
Mikroskopie Magazine
Much as technology seems to gather pace with the development of more and more sophisticated equipment so do the methods employed by the many users.
Exchange of information on techniques is as important as knowledge of new instruments or accessories.
Mikroskopie is a magazine published by Olympus in Europe for microscope users.
Three issues each year cover a wide variety of topics from all over Europe and the magazine provides an invaluable forum for the exchange of experiences.
Copies are available from Olympus headquarters in London.