

Oh for the patience of a Saint and All the Time in the World
 "I'd really like to mail a follow-up letter to all the people who sent bought more than £50 worth within 3 weeks of sending out the last brochure." 
"No problem: there's our 20,000 index cards and plenty of envelopes.
Good luck!"
That's the sort of conversation you have if you haven't got a database manager like Southdata's SUPERFILE running on computer.
If you had SUPERFILE you could not only produce MailSorted address labels for all those people, but you could do much subtler selections as well— all in a few minutes and at the press of a few keys.
Furthermore, MailSort, the Post Office's new bulk mailing rebate scheme which will come into full use in the Summer of '89, is bringing computerisation to the direct marketing industry because it just isn't practical to sort mail by hand into thousands of individual postcodes.
This is forcing people to equip themselves with computers in a hurry.
This is not an easy business.
There appears to be a bewildering array of choices of software and hardware.
However, things are not as bad as they seem.
The hardware choice is actually simple: standard IBM AT clones from several dozen different manufacturers are now powerful enough to handle mailing lists up to several hundred thousand addresses.
The software is more crucial.
Right at the start, you have a fundamental choice: general purpose Database Manager, or purpose built mailing system?
Each has its pros and cons.
The purpose built mailing system will generally be easier to get started.
It will come with what may well seem a comprehensive range of facilities.
You just have to get your addresses into it and you're away.
The problems come later, when you discover that there is a definite correlation between sales and your customer's hat sizes.
You want to alter your data so that you can record and select on hat size — but, alas, the authors of the mailing package hadn't thought of that one.
You can't do it.
What a shame.
The general purpose database manager like SUPERFILE, needs a bit of work to configure it to your own particular needs.
Since we offer training as part of our technical support contract, this work can easily be done by any office worker who is used to, say, word processing on a PC.
(If you like we will happily contract to set it up with you.)
But once that is done, you have a vastly more powerful and flexible system at your disposal.
If it is a free format, database manager like SUPERFILE, you can easily change your data to include hat size, foot size and nose size if you want.
You can select addresses from any information you have about the person; you can include comments and notes and, as a perfectly natural progression, a SUPERFILE mailing list grows into a customer database as people take up your tempting offers.
We have sold nearly 4,000 copies of our SUPERFILE database manager since 1982.
It runs under MS-DOS and LANs, Xenix and VMS and has available a comprehensive range of extra packages.