

Issue 1, 1991
Save almost £500 on a complete 386SX Package Six High-Spec PC Systems New in this issue Windows 3.0 and Mouse Free with every 386 and 486 system New 486 Machine wins PCW Award Novell Networks — complete, and ready to run Plus Printers, software, accessories — at discount prices
Everything New From CompuAdd
You may have noticed that this latest issue of The CompuAdd Catalogue has a new look.
We've developed a new design to make your selection of CompuAdd PC systems, peripherals and accessories all the easier.
Simply flick through, check the index on the side of each page, and select from the bold category headings.
The design isn't the only thing that's new.
This issue sees the introduction of six new CompuAdd PCs — ranging from one of the world's most compact 286 notebook PCs, to a 486 which has just won Personal Computer World's award for Best Power User System.
Just look for the red sashes.
More news?
You may have seen in the press that we're including free Microsoft Windows 3.0 and mouse with every 386 and 486 we offer.
Our strategic association with Microsoft translates into no extra cost to you — and access to the most capable, user-friendly PC interface available.
Most significant news of all is that we've just won the highly respected Dataquest Customer Satisfaction Poll against competition from the other best manufacturing names in the industry.
So if you really had any doubts about buying PCs direct, now's the time to forget them!
Ken Jacobson Managing Director
Our customers have always told us we offer a superb service.
Now, the world's leading impartial computer industry report — produced by Dataquest — has confirmed it, by placing us as the Overall Leaders for Customer Satisfaction in their annual user poll.
Compuadd: Winner of the Dataquest Customer Satisfaction Poll!
Users also voted us number one in the Overall Quality, Commitment To Customers and Value/Price categories.
Since the poll also included names like IBM, Compaq, Hewlett Packard and Apple, it's testimony to just how many users are coming to realise the benefits of buying their PCs direct from us.
The news came at the same time as Personal Computer World's first annual awards — where the judges voted our 486-based PC the Best Power-User System (see page 7).
User satisfaction, quality, value, technology.
Can you think of any better reasons to buy direct from CompuAdd?
During the first year, if you encounter a problem with your CompuAdd 200, 300, or 400 Series desktop or deskside system which can't be resolved by our Telephone Technical Support Staff, we provide On-Site Service in most parts of the country within the next business day.
The CompuAdd Undertaking
1.
On-Site Service — FREE for twelve months
All hardware shown in this catalogue is covered, excluding consumables and custom networking.
If you're at all dissatisfied, simply return your order within 30 days of purchase for a refund of the unit price.
Just ring for an authorisation number so we can process your refund as quickly as possible.
2. 30-Day Money-Back Undertaking
Ring (0800) 373113 between 9.00am and 5.30pm, Monday to Friday, and our Technical Support Staff will talk you through any hardware or software difficulty.
3.
FREE Hotline Support — for life!
Systems
The Package Deal of 1991
386SX PC, Printer, Windows 3.0, Applications Software, and More.
From under £1600!
CompuAdd's prices already offer you the best value in the business.
Now, there's an opportunity to save almost a further £500 — and to save it on a system you actually specify yourself…
The SX Solutions Package.
It includes a 386 SX PC, Windows 3.0 and MS-DOS 4.01 ready-loaded, a mouse, laser-quality printer plus your choice of applications software.
Provided we have your order by the end of March, whatever configuration you choose, you save almost £500!
Make these tough times work for you; check the deal, and ring your order through today.
The SX Solutions Package is focused on CompuAdd's advanced 316s 386SX/16 MHz PC, and a high-performance Hewlett Packard desktop printer.
The Package
You've the choice of a 40 MB, 80 MB or 110 MB hard disk, and the choice of monographics display or colour VGA display.
Whichever version you choose, your 316s comes ready-loaded with DOS 4.01 and 2 MB RAM (double the normal RAM, and expandable to 4 MB), plus a mouse.
You also receive a Hewlett Packard DeskJet 500 printer and printer cable — the latest model from this leading manufacturer of desktop printers.
And that's not all.
Software included starts with Microsoft Windows 3.0 — the revolutionary new graphical environment which supports a wide range of high-capability applications packages.
To run Windows 3.0 CompuAdd also includes a choice of Microsoft packages: Excel for Windows, the powerful, new-generation spreadsheet which takes over where Lotus 1-2-3 leaves off; Word for Windows, now challenging WordPerfect for the number one word-processing slot, with its ability to import graphics and manage text; and PowerPoint for Windows, for producing graphics-based slides, charts, overheads at new levels of professionalism.
Try matching a system of this flexibility, and this value, anywhere else.
You'll find that CompuAdd's unmatched PC manufacturing capability, plus our strategic relationship with Microsoft adds up to an offer that's unbeatable!
NB Offer closes on 31 March 1991.
A CompuAdd best-seller, the 316s is the choice for users who want to open up all the advanced capability of 32-bit applications.
Its 386SX microprocessor, running at a fast 16 MHz makes light of the workload, and runs the latest software packages such as Windows 3.0.
And naturally, it's also fully compatible with all your existing 286 and XT applications.
The CompuAdd 316s. 386 Power at Yesterday's 286 Prices.
The 316s is packaged in CompuAdd's low-profile systems unit.
Because of its innovative motherboard design, there's still room for five expansion slots, and another 3 MB of RAM in addition to the 1 MB supplied as standard.
O-wait state memory and fast IDE hard disk makes data access exceptionally fast, and built-in parallel and serial ports makes printer and peripheral compatibility easy.
If you're aiming to upgrade from your existing 286 machine, there couldn't be a better choice.
The new CompuAdd 320sc combines high performance with a low-profile system unit, and allows you to run 32-bit applications at the fastest SX speed — 20 MHz.
We've further enhanced speed by adding 32K of CompuAdd engineered cache memory.
This automatically selects and stores the most frequently used data, allowing the system to access it faster still.
The outcome must be the fastest SX available.
New CompuAdd 320sc.
The Cache-injected, High-Power SX.
1 MB RAM comes as standard on the 320sc, and is expandable to 4 B on the motherboard — with up to 32 MB available through optional memory cards.
A VGA card is also built into the motherboard.
To cope with future demands, the 320sc has a built-in dual IDE hard drive interface, a dual floppy drive controller, a parallel port and two serial ports.
An Intel 80387 co-processor socket is fitted for any numeric-intensive application.
And despite the unit's compact dimensions, there's still plenty of room for expansion, with five slots.
Naturally, the CompuAdd 320sc exploits all the multi-tasking capability of the 386SX chip — and fully supports MS-DOS, OS/2, SCO XENIX and UNIX, as well as Novell operating systems.
New CompuAdd 316sl Laptop.
386 Power — Wherever the Action Is.
The CompuAdd 316sl packs all the computing power of the 386SX chip into a convenient laptop configuration — at a price well below that of competitive models.
Inside its compact yet robust case, you'll find full desktop performance: 32-bit processing capability, 2 MB of RAM, a fast, 28 millisecond 40 MB hard drive, and a 3.5″ 1.44 MB floppy drive.
All in a package that measures just 12.7″ x 12.4″ x 2.4″.
The 316sl provides top performance in MS-DOS, OS/2, XENIX and Novell environments.
The clarity of the superb 8″ x 6″ 16-greyscale VGA sidelit display is easy on the eye, whatever the conditions.
To view in colour, just plug your monitor into the external VGA video port — also fully compatible with all pre-VGA standards.
You can even connect a 5.25″ diskette drive to the external drive port.
And free power-management software extends battery life.
It adds up to all the portable power you could need — at a price that's uniquely CompuAdd.
Forget electronic diaries and organisers — now you can carry real 286 MS-DOS computing power, with full memory and hard disk storage, wherever you go.
No larger than a desk diary, the CompuAdd Companion weighs a remarkable 4.4 pounds — yet has all the performance and functionality of a full-sized 286 PC.
New CompuAdd Companion 286 Power — in a Notebook!
Check stock levels in the warehouse…draw up reports during a client meeting…modify spreadsheets on site…communicate with your PC network.
Back at your desk, the Companion fits seamlessly with your full-size PC for the last work in time-saving efficiency.
The CompuAdd Companion provides the power and speed of the 80C286 microprocessor, running at 12 MHz, with 1 MB DRAM expandable to 3 MB, a 20 MB hard drive and a big 8″ x 6″ 16-greyscale VGA sidelit display that's clear and easy to read.
Performance options are added via built-in serial, parallel and numeric keypad ports.
Fully AT-compatible, the CompuAdd Companion comes with MS-DOS and Lap-Link software, built-in rechargeable battery pack and AC adaptor.
The new CompuAdd 333 system offers the sheer power of 386DX processing at 33 MHz — the highest speed in its class.
New CompuAdd 333t and 333d.
The full potential of 386 speed.
And because applications differ, we design it in two configurations.
There's a standard desktop design (333d) and a deskside unit (333t) with no less than nine disk drive bays, and hard disk options up to 1260 MB — making it the ultimate file-server.
Whichever you choose, the 333 effortlessly handles memory-intensive applications such as CAD/CAM, Database Management, DTP, Multi-tasking and Networks.
Seven expansion slots let you expand up to 16 MB RAM, add a fax board, fit a modem.
Two hot slots provide space to add a HardCache/ESDI controller for a 15% increase in data transfer rate, and a Hi-Rez VGA card for even faster screen update speed.
And of course, the 333 provides full MS-DOS, OS/2, SCO UNIX/XENIX and Novell compatibility.
The CompuAdd 325 offers an excellent price/performance combination.
It moves through your applications at a faster-than-average 25 MHz, making it ideal for a wide variety of heavy number-crunching, CAD and DTP applications.
Its enormous full-profile expansion capability (eight expansion slots) and large-capacity hard disk options (up to 630 MB) also make it a highly popular choice as a file-server for larger PC networks.
CompuAdd 325.
The ultimate 386 middleweight.
High speed, high power, high storage, high upgrade potential — the CompuADd 325 offers them all.
And all at an exceptional price.
When designed our 486 PC, we made no compromises.
New CompuAdd 425.
Affordable 486 Computing — Today.
The CompuAdd 425 runs at a fast 25 MHz.
It packs all its power into a compact, low-profile configuration — occupying 30% less desk space than comparable 486 systems.
Yet the unique CompuAdd design means there's still room for five expansion slots — even with its built-in VGA 1024 card, ready to take you all the way to Hi-Rez screen displays.
Memory? 4 MB comes fitted, expandable to 8 MB on the motherboard, or 16 MB on the system bus.
A powerful built-in floating point unit (FPU) and ROM shadowing into fast DRAM enhances throughput in heavy number-crunching and RAM-intensive applications.
And superior Phoenix BIOS provides full MS-DOS, OS/2, SCO UNIX/XENIX and Novell compatibility.
The CompuAdd 425 is specifically designed to make short work of the most demanding Spreadsheet, Database, Desk-Top Publishing, CAD/CAM/CAE, and Scientific applications.
With plenty of power in hand to act as a technical workstation, it also provides the flexibility to run all the usual 286 and 386 PC software.
CompuAdd technology combines with our direct-sales philosophy to give you access to tomorrow's generation of personal computing — at prices that are simply remarkable.
And all in a package that's the most compact in existence — anywhere.
At CompuAdd, we've streamlined the whole process of network selection, installation and support.
Now, a complete PC network, fully configured and tested, is only a telephone call away.
CompuAdd Network Packages: Industry-Standard Solutions — Ready to Run
CompuAdd Network Solutions combine Ethernet hardware, Novell software and CompuAdd's own PCs as file-servers and terminals.
The result is an industry-standard PC network built to perform — and not to a price (although, as you'd expect, our buy-direct prices are highly competitive).
We've even streamlined the selection process…1.
Start with the number of users — up to four, or up to eight.
2.
Choose the file-server that suits your needs — the CompuAdd 316s, 320s, 325, or 333t. 3.
Select your user terminals — the CompuAdd 810, 212, or 316s.
Both the 212 and 316s are available as diskless workstations for security and control (212w and 316sw).
The Simple Route to CompuAdd Network Selection
Whichever options you choose, each unit comes ready-loaded with industry-standard Ethernet network software, RAM and network cards, along with cable and terminators — all ready to run.
Of course, every network we despatch is exhaustively tested as a complete system before it leaves us.
And when it reaches you, it's backed by in-depth network hardware support — which includes on-site maintenance.
User training and a network recovery service are also available.
When you buy a network from CompuAdd, you're buying quality, security, compatibility — and value.
Based around the proven XT-compatible V20 processor, the low-profile CompuAdd 810 runs at up to 10 MHz (the speed of many AT units), offering far more power than the original IBM PC/XT.
CompuAdd 810.
The XT-class that offers more
What's more, the footprint of its low-profile systems unit measures 30% less than many other comparable machines.
At last, professional performance is placed within the reach of small businesses, students, and serious hobbyists.
And with no sacrifices in MS-DOS and Novell network compatibility.
The 810 is remarkable value — especially when you consider the unit's compact dimensions, workhorse robustness, and industry-standard 102-key keyboard.
Room for growth is unmatched for a machine of this size: a remarkable three full-size and two half-size expansion slots.
All on top of CompuAdd's acclaimed lifetime hardware support facilities.
In all, it's a price/performance combination that can only be achieved by buying direct — from CompuAdd.
Fully IBM AT-compatible, the CompuAdd 212 satisfies the software speed and power requirements of OS/2 and XENIX, as well as MS-DOS.
It's also an ideal choice as a high-power network terminal — and like all CompuAdd PCs fully compatible with Novell software.
CompuAdd 212.
Now — you can afford 286 power
And it offers it all in a low-profile systems cabinet which is 30% smaller than comparable machines — yet designed by CompuAdd 212 provides the power and expandability to handle everything from word-processing and spreadsheets to network applications and presentation graphics.
The CompuAdd 212 comes complete with 102-key keyboard, high-capacity hard disk, 5.25″ 1.2 MB or 3.5″ 1.44 MB floppy drive, floppy/hard disk controller — as well a MS-DOS 4.01.
New employee joined recently?
Influx of temps, and no machines for them to use?
Need to start computing at home?
Present of a lifetime for a student?
CompuAdd Starter Packages
At CompuAdd, we've learnt that many of our customers want a complete quality computing system — to start computing and printing, straight from the box.
Which is why we offer CompuAdd Starter Packages.
Everything, but everything, you need: hardware, operating and applications software, dot matrix printer, even paper, cable and floppies.
You'll appreciate the convenience of a complete computing system.
And the cost savings that result — which come on top of the remarkable savings you make through buying director from CompuAdd.
You've the choice of systems based around CompuAdd's much-acclaimed IBM AT- or XT- compatible PCs.
High-resolution 12″ monitors come as standard, and you've the option of a VGA colour monitor, if you prefer.
Software includes MS-DOS and GW Basic operating software, and Microsoft Works — the complete integrated applications suite, which includes word processing, database and spreadsheet applications.
Naturally, comprehensive manuals are included.
The high-quality Brother printers offer draft and NLQ speeds, proportional spacing and tractor feed.
With cable, floppies and paper all included, you've everything you need to load, boot up and run — straight from the box.