

* Based on a family of 4 using 200 gallons of hot water per week via a direct cylinder, changing from Domestic General Tariff to full Economy 7 water heating.
Yes, you can reduce the annual cost of your hot water by at least a third, if you switch to Economy 7.
Because Economy 7 makes electric water heating very cheap —much cheaper than on the Domestic General Tariff.
How much you save will depend upon the size of your family.
But save you will — within two weeks of placing your order!
SEE BACK PAGE FOR POST-FREE COUPON.
START SAVING WITHIN 14 DAYS OF ORDER
You can still run a Storage Heater for less than 70p per week! *
Buy now pay February '89
Starts 30th August Cash or credit.
Subject to status.
Written quotations available.
Offers valid until withdrawn.
Typical APR 36%
For the average family, Eastern Electricity prices are the cheapest in the country! #
* Based on unit costs spread over the whole year.
Based on an annual consumption of 3300 day units per year on Domestic Economy 7 tariff — effective from 1st April 1988.
(Night unit charge 2.07p, day unit charge 5.61p and standing charge 84p per week.)
Heat that extension the easy way!
Extending your living-space into a loft or conservatory?
Converting the garage to a workshop, studio or games room!
Good idea — but extensions can cause heating problems.
Slim, trim, attractive modern storage heaters are the best way to solve that problem, and to reduce the risk of condensation.
There are no pipes, no flues, no mess, no fuss.
Most important of all, there's no attempting to push your existing system beyond its designed capacity.
So choose electric storage heating and save time, bother, and expense.
OR…
Build up a total heating system room by room
Interested?
USE THE POST-FREE COUPON OVERLEAF.
Total Heating
Forget fuel deliveries, dust, dirt, smells, noise, fetching, carrying, tending the boiler…
Get a new electric boiler and forget it — all of it!
An electric boiler will run your existing hot water radiator system without those problems which make some other boilers such a hassle.
To say nothing of saving up to 45% on the running costs.
Fill in the coupon for a FREE survey.
Economy 7.