

REKINDLE AN AGE OF ELEGANCE
Here they are!
The finest selection of Living Flame fires and surrounds you will find anywhere.
Whatever you choice of fire, whatever the decor of your room —you can be sure to find something that's just right for you…
…with a wide variety of trims, finishes, colours, textures and materials.
The most difficult part will be deciding which to choose.
CLASSIC DESIGNS
A new fire and surround will form the centrepiece of your living room — a cosy, cheery focal point around which your family and friends will be happy to gather.
Make a point to visit your local British Gas Eastern showroom soon.
Remember, fires, hearths and surrounds are all made for each other.
That's why you should really select them together.
HERE'S WHERE TO FIND OUT MORE
And don't forget to pick up our latest Living Flame Fires Collection brochure.
After all, the more you know, the more you'll warm to British Gas Eastern.
There's never been a better time to invest in a new Living Flame gas fire, hearth and surround.
INTEREST FREE CREDIT 12 MONTHS ASK FOR DETAILS
Order your new fire now with our easy payment terms (APR 30%) and if you settle the full cash price within 12 months, you'll have absolutely no interest to pay.
This offer can't last for long, so hurry to your local British Gas Eastern showroom while it's still on.
From the elegant beaten brass surround with its decorative overlay, to the classically simple black hood, brass inlaid grate and fireguard — the Valor Edwardian speaks eloquently of good taste.
It's pictures here with the Harewood surround that features a solid white marble back panel and hearth.
VALOR EDWARDIAN
Fits easily into your lifestyle.
Traditional fender and cast iron canopy in a choice of two trim finishes: black or brass.
The Cannon Live-Fire is shown here with the Alderley surround available in solid mahogany or satin white hardwood.
CANNON LIVE-FIRE
Let these classical good looks grace your fireplace.
With its cast iron painted case, delightful Victorian style brass finish and realistic ceramic fibre "coals" , the Main Masquerade goes beautifully with the "Classic" fire surround, available in a choice of four marble colours.
MAIN MASQUERADE
Make the Midas the warm heart of your living room.
Available in either eye-pleasing matt black or stunning textured bronze.
The graceful brass plated trimmings and finials are complemented here by the solid pine Osborne surround.
GRATEGLOW MIDAS