

Now you can have the very latest in ELECTRICAL TECHNOLOGY to safeguard your home against possible hazards and accidents plus a complete check on your existing installation.
We will carry out a free survey of your electrical installations and visually check the condition of your wiring.
We will then provide an estimate and advise you how to increase your protection by fitting the latest in high sensitivity circuit breakers which will trip automatically providing you with increased protection against shock and fire.
For added safety, we will fit miniature circuit breakers to provide reliable and easily operated protection when using any electrical equipment.
And remember, all complete rewires carry a 10 year guarantee.
Free Survey
All customers who accept our estimates for complete rewires will have the option to purchase a security light at just £9.95, which represents a saving of over £50 on the normal retail price.
This detects any approaching heat source such as people or cars and automatically turns on, welcoming friends and deterring intruders.
Security Light for only £9.95
To arrange for a free survey fill in the post-free coupon on the back page or contact your local Eastern Electricity office.
CONTRACT ELECTRIC Your local installation experts.
It's new…
It's revolutionary…
Total Heating With Central Control!
We've taken Total Heating, that unique blend of storage heaters, panel heaters and other space-saving electric heaters plus electric water heating and added a totally new dimension.
A dimension that gives you a more effective heating system that's cheaper to run — Total Heating with Central Control.
Now you can have different temperatures in every part of your home when you want them.
It's simplicity itself to operate and unlike gas, oil or solid fuel installations, Total Heating with Central Control causes the minimum of fuss and mess when it's installed.
There's no complicated system of motorised controlled valves — just state of the art technology.
And you can control more than the heating, SECURITY LIGHTING, many WASHING MACHINES, DISHWASHERS AND TUMBLE DRYERS can all be programmed.
So, next time you take a holiday, your home will have a new dimension of safety.
Different parts of the lighting system can come on at different times.
Radios will play at different times, all making your home more secure and more "lived in" .
Even better, the day before you come back, the heating and water heating will turn itself on.
So you come home to a nice warm, brightly lit home with plenty of piping hot water to soak-away the dust of travel.
Total Heating packages with Central Control start from around £1500 for a well-insulated 2-bedroomed flat.
There's a Total Heating system with Central Control to suit every sort of home, from a one-bedroom flat to a four-bedroom family house.
Find out more about the benefits of Total Heating running on Economy 7, less than half price electricity with all the advantages of Central Control.
FREE 3 year warranty on any Creda or Unidare storage heater
Lashings of hot water — at two thirds the cost!
Water heating on Economy 7 is very cheap.
If you use electricity to heat your water using the Domestic General Tariff and you install full Economy 7 Water Heating, you can have lashings of hot water at two thirds the cost or even less.
An average family of 4 can save up to £80 a year* thanks to full Economy 7 water heating using less than half price electricity.
Find out more, fill in the coupon on this page.
* Based on a family of 4 using 200 gallons a week via a direct cylinder.