

Star Prize Yamaha "Big Bear" ATV plus Logic sprayer.
Two 2nd prizes Warwick high performance power washer.
Three 3rd prizes Reflolux glucosinolate tester.
Four 4th prizes Makita "Cut off" machine.
Five 5th prizes Hydromotion grain spear.
Five 6th prizes CompAir 4″ Angle Grinder.
Five 7th prizes CompAir Pistol Drill.
Five 8th prizes CompAir Ratchet Wrench.
Ten 9th prizes Fairgrade Flowmeter.
Ten 10th prizes Fairweigh Hectolitre Weight Tester.
Plus 50 Runners up prizes of 30 Lurmark nozzles
New Arelon WDG The No 1 choice for grass weed control
Hoegrass The No 1 choice for autumn wild-oat control
decis The No 1 choice for BYDV control
Hoechst
In each of the three sections there are three statements relating to the key autumn products — Arelon WDG, Hoegrass and Decis.
Using your skill and judgement, place the three statements in each section in order of importance.
For example if you feel that "Easy pack disposal" is the key benefit of the new Arelon WDG formulation place a1 in the box opposite and so on.
When you have completed all three sections move on to the tie breaker.
Then fill in your name, address and farm details and send it to the address below together with 3 Hoechst leaf symbols from either Arelon WDG, Hoegrass or Decis cartons or any mix of those products.
(NB There is one leaf symbol per carton of Arelon WDG and Decis and two leaf symbols per Hoegrass carton).
1989 Hoechst Farmer Competition
See how easy it is to enter.
The winners will be those who in the opinion of the Judges, have answered the questions correctly and supplied the most appropriate tie-breaker.
1 Place the key benefits of the Arelon WDG formulation in order of importance…a Pack is quick to open b Pack is easy to dispose of c Container does not need shaking or washing out
Qualifying Questions
2 Number in order of importance why you feel wild-oats need to be controlled in the autumn with Hoegrass…a Early control reduced yield loss b It is a cost-effective treatment c Wild-oats affect grain quality
3 In order of importance BYDV control needs autumn treatment with Decis because…a The virus affects bushel/hectolitre weights b The virus reduced yield c Spring control is too late
In no more than ten words, express what you think is the major advantage of mixing Arelon WDG and Hoegrass…
Tie breaker
1 The 1989 Hoechst Farmer Competition is open to all qualifying bonafide farmers and growers resident in the UK aged 18 years and over.
Rules of Entry
2 All entries must be in ballpoint pen and on an official entry form.
3 Responsibility will not be accepted for any lost, delayed or damaged entries.
4 More than one entry may be submitted provided each is made on the official entry form.
5 No cash alternative will be offered.
6 Hoechst UK Ltd reserve the right to substitute prizes with similar goods of equal or superior value subject to availability.
7 The Judges decision in all matters is final and binding.
No correspondence will be entered into.
8 By entering the competition, a competitor agrees to be bound by the conditions of entry.
All entry instructions form part of the rules.
9 The winners will be notified by telephone or by post week ending Friday 15th December 1989.
10 A full list of winners will be published in the agricultural press.
11 No entrant can win more than one prize.
12 Copies of this entry form are also available from Hoechst UK Ltd, Agriculture Division.
THE CLOSING DATE FOR RECEIPT OF ENTRIES IS FRIDAY 8TH DECEMBER 1989.
ENTRIES RECEIVED AFTER THIS DATE WILL NOT BE ELIGIBLE.
PROOF OF POSTING CANNOT BE ACCEPTED AS PROOF OF RECEIPT.