

TESCO
And now we Offer You the Choice…
Phosphates are a group of chemicals that are essential to life.
As any keen gardener will know, plants need phosphorus (found in the form of phosphates) to encourage a good root system and healthy growth.
However, if too much phosphorus gets into lakes and rivers it can encourage excessive growth of the microscopic plant life, called algae, and other water plants.
Phosphates and the Water Supply
If there is excessive growth of algae in lakes and rivers it can create an almost solid green mat across the surface of the water.
This blocks out the sun-light that the plants need in order to survive.
The plants die and oxygen is used up as they decompose.
Eventually there is not enough oxygen in the water to support life, and, to all intents and purposes, the stretch of water dies.
This process is known as EUTROPHICATION and has been observed in several places in the UK in the past.
Growth of Algae
Phosphates are used in detergents, fertilisers and many other manufactured products.
They can find their way into waterways by a number of routes — mainly via those sewage systems which are not equipped to remove them in the treatment process.
Phosphates can also be released into lakes and rivers from industrial waste and effluents and from the soil if there is overuse of fertilisers.
Detergents and Fertilisers
The phosphates used in detergents and cleaning products are useful because they condition the water to reduce scum, help to keep the water alkaline for proper cleaning and break up the dirt on fabrics to prevent it settling back.
However, all of these properties can be achieved by the use of other chemicals, although perhaps not quite so economically in every case.
Although the proportion of phosphates in sewage that comes from detergents and cleaning materials is quite low, switching to phosphate-free products can help.
At Tesco we have introduced several phosphate-free products (and plan to introduce more) that you can use as more environment-friendly alternatives.
See the back of this leaflet for the current range.
Whether they are chemical or organic, all fertilisers should be handled with care.
Use them only in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or advice from a reliable source.
Using more than is necessary will not make the plants grow better and might even damage them as well as the rest of the environment.
Also, if you have a water-course, such as a ditch or a brook, in or near your garden, be careful not to let fertiliser get into it.
What Can We Do?
Use Phosphate-free detergents and cleaning materials
Be careful with garden fertilisers
Remember every little bit helps!