

TESCO
AND NOW WE OFFER YOU THE CHOICE…
In 1988, Britain consumed over 9 million tons of paper.
Most of this was "new" paper from trees — over 100 million of them.
Although more trees were planted than were chopped down, this high consumption causes several problems:
PAPER & THE ENVIRONMENT
Just under 2/3 of our domestic waste is made up of paper and cardboard.
Most of the 6 million tonnes of paper that we throw away in this country every year has to be buried in holes in the ground.
Not only are we rapidly filling up these refuse sites but the disposal and site maintenance is also costing us a lot of money — all from our rates!
Additionally, this waste is a potential source of pollution when it degrades, releasing undesirable chemicals into the soil and air.
Excessive Waste
The production of new paper from raw wood pulp consumes vast amounts of energy, the production of which in itself causes environmental pollution and adds to the Greenhouse Effect.
High Energy Usage
Paper production involves a number of chemicals, the disposal of which can cause environmental problems.
A big offender is chlorine gas used for bleaching wood pulp.
Some organic chlorine waste products (dioxins) are very toxic and difficult to break down and so when they are released into the sea and rivers they tend to build up causing local pollution.
Chemical Pollution
For every tree which is chopped down, up to 6 more are planted in its place.
The trouble is that these new trees tend to be specially developed strains which are often alien to the areas in which they are planted.
What is more, they are planted at high density — equivalent to about 20 on an average sized modern suburban building plot — and sometimes in places where trees should not grow at all.
All this has resulted in the loss of traditional countryside and valuable wildlife habitats.
Loss of Traditional Countryside
We can cut down on paper production and waste by, wherever possible, using re-cycled paper instead.
The greater the demand for re-cycled paper, the lower the production and the wastage of new paper.
Energy usage for the manufacture of re-cycled paper is 40% less than that of "new" paper.
At Tesco you can buy 100% re-cycled paper products (see the list on the back of the leaflet and look out for the special symbol on packs).
We are also using more and more re-cycled paper in the packaging of Tesco products and for the leaflets and signs we produce.
What Can WE Do?
As most of the pulp used to produce soft tissue products comes from North American and Scandinavia, we can save on imports as well.
We can also save more paper for re-cycling.
For some years at Tesco, we have been collecting the boxes in which our products are delivered to stores and some of the paper that we use in our offices for re-cycling.
We hope soon to introduce "paper banks" at some of our larger stores to allow you to save your paper waste for re-cycling.
Meanwhile, why not find out if your local council or a local charity has a paper collection scheme?
In cases where it is preferable to use new paper, such as coffee filters and sanitary products look for paper which has not been bleached with chlorine gas.
Remember, every little helps!