

TESCO
AND NOW WE OFFER YOU THE CHOICE…
The Environmental Issue
Every year, Britain buries or burns about £750 million worth of recyclable material, and pays almost the same again for doing so.
Not content with that, we then spend about another £1 billion to replace what we've thrown away.
That is the cost, in money terms, of not recycling but there are other costs as well.
Recycling Makes Sense
Most of what we throw away goes into holes in the ground.
Although waste disposal sites are well controlled, there is an ever present risk of pollution.
Many people are now worried about the dangers of the by-products from decomposing waste soaking into the ground and getting into rivers and lakes.
Pollution
On top of that, when things decompose, they give off gases such as methane and carbon dioxide which add to the Greenhouse Effect.
Biodegradability is not necessarily environment friendly!
The burning of waste is another thing which adds to the Greenhouse Effect and can create other forms of atmospheric pollution, such as toxic dioxins and acid rain.
Then there's even more pollution caused by burning the fuels needed to generate the energy to make new products.
If recycled materials were used, far less energy would be needed which means less pollution.
We all know how unsightly piles of litter look and how they ruin the appearance of our towns, beaches and countryside.
What is often forgotten is that it is us who have to pay to have it cleared up.
In the country and even in towns, it is an enormous danger to people and animals alike.
Hundreds of accidents to children and thousands of deaths of animals are caused every year by thoughtlessly discarded waste.
Litter
A lot of what we throw away has been made from raw materials which are not renewable.
That is to say, once we have used them all up and thrown them away, there won't be any more — ever.
Waste of resources
Then there's the waste of energy, most of which comes from coal, gas or oil which are also non-renewable resources.
It takes twenty times as much energy to make new  aluminium as it does to melt down recycled aluminium, four times as much energy to make new steel as recycled, almost twice as much to create new paper and half as much again to make new glass.
Every tonne of glass which is recycled saves 30 gallons of oil and we threw away 1,750,000 tonnes of glass last year!
Glass, metals, paper, plastics, textiles, used motor oil, wood — all of these things are recyclable or re-usable.
In fact, eighty per cent of what we throw away could have been used again: that means that, out of every five dustbins of "rubbish" , four contain valuable recyclable materials.
What can be Recycled
Over one hundred Tesco stores have bottle banks to collect glass for recycling and we are introducing paper banks as fast as we can.
We have also started to introduce can or aluminium collection centres and are experimenting with collecting plastics.
You can start to help by finding out what facilities are available in your local Tesco and joining the thousands of people who regularly use them.
What Can We Do?
Many local councils and voluntary groups also run recycling schemes.
You may find that your local environmental group publishes a list of what is being collected for recycling in your area.
Perhaps you could like to start your own recycling group to benefit a local charity or school.
If you need any help or advice, write to Waste Watch, 26 Bedford Square, London, WC1 3HU and they will send you an information pack.
To help you to identify what can be recycled, many Tesco products are clearly labelled with the distinctive Tesco Cares "recyclable" logo and the name of the material from which it is made.
Please do not forget that bottle banks can be used to save jars as well and that most sites have different banks for coloured and clear glass.
Please keep them separate if you can.
Tesco is also looking at other ways to encourage recycling.
Many of our stores collect the cardboard from packing cases and we have started to collect the plastic wrappings in which many products are delivered.
A lot of our leaflets, posters and so on, are produced on recycled material or in packaging made from recycled paper stationery in our offices.
We also sell products made from recycled material or in packaging made from recycled material and are planning to do a lot more.
Look for the special logos.
If you are at work or school, why not try to persuade your boss or teacher to investigate the idea of saving waste paper and packaging for recycling?
Apart from anything else, it's cheaper to do that than paying somebody to take it away!
You could also try to persuade them to use recycled stationery.
As you can see, there are dozens of things that we can do.
Remember, every little bit helps!