

Foreword by the Principal
The University of Edinburgh has a distinguished tradition of research and postgraduate study in many fields.
This was emphasised by the University's excellent performance in the recent Research Assessment Exercise.
Of the University's total population of about 16,000 students, over 3,500 are engaged in postgraduate work.
This prospectus describes the rich selection of courses on offer: over 160 taught postgraduate programmes, and over 120 different academic subjects for degrees by research.
Apart from the facilities available in individual departments, excellent support for postgraduate study is provided by the Library — one of the largest University libraries in the UK — and in computing by the largest campus network in Britain.
The main aim of this Prospectus is to help you choose which of the many courses is most suitable for your needs.
Each department, centre, or faculty is described so that its particular academic strengths are identified.
Besides describing the academic opportunities, information is also provided on a range of other matters important to students: fees and other costs, accommodation, the University Health Service, and other matters.
We are conscious that overseas students may be unfamiliar with many aspects of British life and its university system, so a section of the Prospectus is devoted to their needs.
A particular advantage of studying in Scotland is that most of its universities are within convenient travelling distance of each other, so that it is easy to extend the range of academic contacts to include other Scottish Universities.
The reputation of Edinburgh as a beautiful city is well known.
It is also very much of an ideal size — not so large as to be overwhelming, yet large enough to sustain a wide variety of cultural enjoyment in the Arts, Music and Drama.
Indeed, the Edinburgh International Festival, which lasts for three weeks in the summer, attracts visitors as well as artists and performers from all over the world.
In terms of travel, not only is Edinburgh conveniently situated for road and rail travel to other parts of Britain and Europe, but the roads north give rapid and easy access to the dramatic scenery of the Scottish Highlands.
Because the international reputation of the University is firmly based on its achievement in research and the advancement of knowledge, it is particularly anxious to welcome postgraduates, many of whom will follow careers to keep alive the great traditions of scholarship.
If you need more information, please do not hesitate to enquire further, either from individual academic departments or from the list of offices and other services listed at the end of this Prospectus.
THE UNIVERSITY AND CITY OF EDINBURGH
The City of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland, is one of Europe's most handsome cities.
The beauty of its setting and its predominantly stone buildings, allied with its intellectual traditions, have justly earned it the title of ‘Athens of the North’.
The city lies on rising ground, from the sea on the north side to hills on the south.
The Old Town was developed from the 11th century, originally within defensive walls, around the rock on whose peak is situated the famed Edinburgh Castle.
From the late 18th century, the city expanded to the north through a planned series of fine neo-classical streets and squares, which make up the New Town.
Further expansion followed in the 19th & 20th centuries, and Edinburgh retains a rich architectural heritage within what is still a compact city of some 500,000 people.
It is also a city of fine gardens, and open spaces including Holyrood Park — with the twin peaks of Arthur's Seat and Salisbury Crags — one of the largest city centre natural parks in Europe, and Princes Street Gardens, between the Old and New Towns.
Although Scotland has been part of the United Kingdom for nearly three hundred years, it has never lost its identity as a separate nation, and Edinburgh has remained the centre of its government, church and law, which itself can provide an incentive to study in the capital.
To prospective students the city offers a rich mix of academic, social and allied facilities — libraries, museums and art galleries, theatres and cinemas.
Visitors also know Edinburgh as Britain's Festival City, with the international Arts, Science, Film, TV, Jazz and Folk Festivals, among others.
For the world of business, Edinburgh is a leading European financial and commercial centre, with a particularly important place in banking and insurance.
The strength of its educational and scientific provision has also helped central Scotland to develop the new ‘knowledge-based industries’ of Silicon Glen.
Edinburgh has excellent communications to other parts of Scotland — and easy access to coastline, lochs (lakes), mountains and countryside with ready-made opportunities for open-air sports and recreation.
There are regular air services from Edinburgh Airport to London and other centres in the UK and an increasing number of direct international flights from both Edinburgh and Glasgow (some 80km distant).
There are fast rail services to all major cities and cheap bus services to all parts of the UK.
Edinburgh is a capital city for postgraduate study.
The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh is known as ‘The University in the City’ because its buildings are located within and across the capital whose name it bears, rather than in a single campus outwith the city limits.
Those who become members of the University also become citizens of Edinburgh, able to take advantage of both university and city life.
Founded in 1583, the University has a distinguished tradition of learning and of innovation, including examples in the Arts (Edinburgh established the first Chair of English Literature in Britain), in the Sciences (with the UK's first Chair of Agriculture and latterly the first Chair and Department of Artificial Intelligence) and, of course, in Medicine and the other professions.
Among those who have studied at the University in past centuries have been James Boswell and Oliver Goldsmith, Charles Darwin and James Clerk Maxwell, Joseph Lister and James Simpson, Walter Scott, Robert Louis Stevenson and Arthur Conan Doyle.
But however distinguished its history, Edinburgh very much sees itself as a University of the 1990s committed to research and teaching covering the hi-tech disciplines of the future, as well as disciplines rooted in the past.
The University is one of the largest academic institutions in Britain and places a particular emphasis on postgraduate studies, with some 3,500 research and taught course graduate students, as well as 12,500 at  undergraduate level.
It offers courses and programmes in virtually all areas of advanced study, organised through eight Faculties and over 120 departments, with a teaching and research staff of some 2,400.
The University is based on three main sites (see maps on pages 140 to 142).
Around George Square is the central precinct, including Old College — which once housed the entire University, on the site where the University began — now the home of the Law Faculty, the Art Gallery and the central offices.
Also around George Square, in a mixture of new and historic buildings, are the Faculties of Arts, Music and Social Sciences, the Medical School and the main Students' Association buildings.
Two miles to the south is the King's Buildings Science campus containing virtually all the departments of the Faculty of Science and Engineering, including Agriculture.
Halfway between King's Buildings and the city centre are the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine's Summerhall buildings.
Seven miles to the south are the Veterinary Field Station, University Farms and the Bush Research estate (designated as the focus for the UK's first ‘Technopole’ or Research & Development ‘Science City’).
The Faculty of Divinity is located in the heart of the Old Town, just below the Castle, looking out across Princes Street gardens.
The University's main residential precinct, Pollock Halls, is on a magnificent site on the edge of Holyrood Park, adjacent to the Commonwealth Swimming Pool, and some 20 minutes walk from the science or central areas.
The other main residential complex is adjacent to the Castle.
If you are interested in other sources of information about the University, you can consult the Commonwealth Universities Year Book or The World of Learning .
Postgraduate Study at The University of Edinburgh
The University of Edinburgh is a major postgraduate teaching and research centre in both a British and international context.
Its qualifications are known and valued across the world.
The range of studies it has on offer, its teaching and research facilities, complemented by those available in the locality, and the international standing of its work, together offer unparalleled opportunities to the postgraduate student.
The University acts as a magnet not only for a wide range of able students from across the UK, but world-wide.
Over one third of its 2,000 full-time postgraduates are drawn from over 100 different countries.
In the 1989–92 UK-wide assessment of the quality of academic research output, the University of Edinburgh emerged as Scotland's leading research university, and in the top ten research universities in the whole of Britain.
Its research reputation is also strongly reflected in its success in attracting substantial external support, placing it in the top handful of British research universities.
Around 20% — some £36 million — of Edinburgh's total annual income is generated from research grants and contracts awarded by the UK Research Councils, Government Departments, Foundations, Industry and Commerce and, increasingly, through the research programmes of the European Commission.
One reason for its success is that Edinburgh, unlike many other universities, maintains a strong and creative tradition of practical co-operation across departments and subjects, as well as being able to offer excellence within specialisms.
In recent years, the reality of the University's achievements in multidisciplinary research has been acknowledged in a variety of ways, for example through the establishment in the University of two new international standard Interdisciplinary Research Centres (IRCs): the Agriculture and Food Research Council's Genome Research IRC and the Economic and Social Research Council's Human Communications IRC.
These have helped to augment an already substantial range of associated or independent research institutes in and around the University's precincts.
Their work is often closely linked to the academic work of University departments (see list of Associated Institutions p.11).
The Royal Observatory Edinburgh, for example, is located on Blackford Hill next to the King's Buildings science campus.
A laboratory of the Science & Engineering Research Council, the Observatory also accommodates the University's Department of Astronomy and acts as a control centre for major telescope facilities in Australia and Hawaii.
The British Geological Survey is housed on the KB campus.
To the potential postgraduate student, the University is thus able to offer quality, variety and interdisciplinarity, as well as advanced specialisms in particular subjects, within a rich and rewarding setting.
The University Library
Edinburgh University Library is one of the largest university libraries in the UK.
Its founding collection, Clement Litill's Library, was deposited by bequest with the Toun and Kirk of Edinburgh in 1580, and thus pre-dates by three years the founding of the College which was to become the University of Edinburgh.
The present University Library is rich in rare books and manuscripts as well as being well stocked with modern books, periodicals, maps, and machine-readable sources available on CD-ROM and via the on-line networks.
It comprises the Main Library (Arts, Social Sciences and general subjects as well as Special Collections) and a number of separate Faculty Libraries which are among the most comprehensive in the UK in their subject areas: these include the Erskine Medical, Europa, Law, New College (theology), Reid Music, Science, and Veterinary Libraries, all of which are fully accessible to all members of the University.
A single on-line catalogue of the Library 
system is constantly being updated and is available on-line across the University's own computer network as well as via JANET and the national and international networks; the Main Library's older guard-book catalogue, which also contains many entries for material in the Faculty Libraries, is available on microfiche.
As well as having access to the University Library, postgraduate students have ready access to the National Library of Scotland, the Scottish Record Office, the Edinburgh City Libraries and a wide range of other academic, special and public libraries in Edinburgh and Central Scotland.
Outside London, nowhere in the UK is as well served by research libraries as the University of Edinburgh.
Computing Facilities
The University of Edinburgh benefits from the largest campus computing network in Britain, which is constantly being upgraded to provide students and staff with state of the art facilities.
There are many opportunities to learn or enhance computing skills.
The existence at Edinburgh of a range of computer-based disciplines — many of which enjoy worldwide reputations — has a spin-off effect across Faculties, giving wide access to a highly sophisticated level of computing potential.
In particular the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre is one of the leading organisations in Europe dedicated to developing the uses of high performance computing in academia, industry and commerce.
Facilities available 
include large parallel processors from AMT, Meiko and Thinking Machines Corporation.
All these machines are available across the network.
The University's Information System Strategy produces a much more distributed computing environment.
There has been a big investment in a high-speed fibre optic network, which permits very high speeds of communication not formerly feasible.
This network, known as EdLAN, is an FDDI backbone cable linking the King's Buildings, George Square and Old College sites.
Departments' ethernets are linked to this backbone through electronic networking switches (routers).
The main operating configurations are now Unix based on two large Sequent Symmetry systems with a VMS service supported on a DEC VAX system.
The University has also invested heavily in microcomputer laboratories, which have been established in most parts of the campus.
They are available for classes or for individual study, and have a selection of equipment, principally IBM compatible and Apple Macintosh.
All are linked to the network.
Commercial Links
UnivEd Technologies Limited is the one-stop entry to the University of Edinburgh's core industrial liaison activities.
Set up by the University in 1984, UnivEd is the point of access for clients from industry, commerce and government seeking to tap Edinburgh's resources of expertise and equipment.
As the University's commercial arm, UnivEd not only makes a major contribution to the University's finances, but also enhances Edinburgh's position as an international centre of excellence in teaching and research.
The company's remit is wide: negotiation of research and development contracts in collaboration with clients and staff; drawing up of consultancy agreements, matching staff expertise to client specifications; provision of both standard and customised training courses either in-house or on-campus, designed to meet the client's needs; negotiation of all EC contracts on behalf of the University.
At the Technology Transfer Centre on the King's Buildings site, a joint venture by the University and Edinburgh District Council, campus companies, set up by UnivEd, allow staff to progress individual projects through to commercial application with industrial partners.
UnivEd is also acting on behalf of the University in the creation of the Edinburgh Technopole.
This ‘science city’, sited at the University's Bush Estate to the south of the city, aims to put Edinburgh at the forefront of technology transfer by bringing the world's finest R&D and training to its doorstep.
University Terms
The University year begins in October.
It is divided into three teaching terms each ten weeks long, with a short vacation of three weeks at Christmas and another of four weeks at Easter.
The teaching session ends in late June.
The coursework for taught postgraduate degrees is generally confined to the teaching terms; study for research degrees is undertaken throughout the year.
Study for the dissertation for postgraduate degrees is normally undertaken during the summer vacation.
The provisional dates for the next two academic years are:
1994–95
Autumn Term 10th October 1994–16th December 1994
Spring Term 9th January 1995–17th March 1995
Summer Term 17th April 1995–23rd June 1995
and 1995–96
Autumn Term 9th October 1995–15th December 1995
Spring Term 8th January 1996–15th March 1996
Summer Term 16th April 1996–21st June 1996
Graduation
Degrees are conferred at Graduation Ceremonies.
Eight ceremonies are held during the year, six in July and two in November.
STRUCTURE AND LEVELS OF POSTGRADUATE STUDY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH
The University offers excellent opportunities for further study to those who already have a first degree or equivalent qualifications.
It confers a wide range of research-based and taught postgraduate degrees and diplomas.
Some are awarded after supervised individual research presented in a thesis.
Others are awarded on the basis of coursework with examinations and a dissertation at the end of a taught course extending over one or two years.
Research Degrees
Doctor of Philosophy by thesis (PhD)
Candidates for the degree of PhD pursue a research project, under the continuous guidance of a supervisor who is a member of the University staff, or is on the staff of one of the research units or institutions associated with the University, for a period of not less than 36 months if studying full-time, or 48 months if part-time.
The outcome of the research is embodied in a thesis written by the candidate, and the doctorate is awarded if the thesis is of sufficient standard and it is judged that the research has made a definite contribution to knowledge.
The PhD degree may be awarded for work done in any department of the University.
(A list of departments and Associated Institutions appears on page 15 and page 11.
Information about departments' main research interests is given in faculty and departmental profiles, from page 31 to page 117.)
Candidates are registered in the first instance as supervised postgraduate students.
In most cases, this initial period will count towards the minimum period of study for the degree.
During this time, attention will be given to the student acquiring the specialist background relevant to the projected research, and to developing the skills appropriate to research in that field.
This can require attendance at postgraduate courses, and perhaps some Masters degree coursework in the same field.
Those who do not make satisfactory progress may be required to discontinue their studies after this initial period.
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) or Master of Philosophy (MPhil) by composition
In the Faculty of Music the PhD and MPhil are also offered on the basis of musical composition.
Master of Letters (MLitt) or Master of Philosophy (MPhil) by thesis
Candidates for the degree of MLitt (Faculty of Arts) or MPhil (other Faculties) by thesis pursue a research project under broadly the same conditions as those applying to PhD candidates, except that the minimum period of study is usually not less than 24 months full-time or 36 months part-time.
Master of Science (MSc by Research)
The University offers the degree of MSc by Research in the Faculties of Arts, Science and Engineering and Social Sciences.
Programmes of study are tailored to an individual candidate's requirements and may comprise either research training and a thesis or portfolio of projects; or a programme of research training, assignments and a dissertation.
The minimum period of study is normally 12 months full-time.
Code of Practice on Supervision
Supervision for research degrees is undertaken according to the University's Code of Practice.
The code is reviewed at regular intervals.
Taught Degrees
Master's Degrees lasting two years
Master of Letters (MLitt), in the Faculty of Arts;Master of Philosophy (MPhil), in other Faculties;Master of Landscape Architecture (MLA) and Master of Social Work (MSW) in the Faculty of Social Sciences.
These degrees are generally of 21–24 months' duration by full-time study, 36 months full-time for the MPhil in Clinical Psychology.
This usually comprises coursework on the basis of a formal curriculum consisting of lectures and practical work.
This leads to formal examinations, followed by the writing of a thesis or dissertation upon satisfactory completion of which the degree is awarded.
Master's Degrees lasting one year
Master of Science (MSc);Master of Business Administration (MBA);Master of Education (MEd);Master of Laws (LLM);Master of Music (MMus);Master of Theology (MTh)
The University offers a wide range of courses of study leading to these Master's degrees.
(An alphabetical list of Master's degree and diploma courses by title appears on page 12.
Summaries of course contents appear on page 118.)
The courses comprise two principal elements, coursework with examinations chosen to suit the circumstances and practice of the discipline and department concerned, followed by independent work which is normally written up as a dissertation.
Courses are generally of 12 months' duration by full-time study.
Some courses are also offered on a part-time basis over 24–36 months.
Many Master's degree courses are paired with ones for Diplomas which have coursework and examinations in common with the degree.
Where a Master's degree course is paired with one for a Diploma, students are registered concurrently for both qualifications.
A candidate who does not do well enough in the written examination for the Master's degree, but who otherwise attains a satisfactory standard, may be awarded the Diploma.
The University also offers Master's degrees by research lasting 12 months.
Programmes are tailored to an individual student's requirements and includes training in research skills (see page 9).
Diplomas lasting 9 months or more
Some departments offer courses leading to the award of a Diploma.
Most courses are of 9 months' duration, beginning in October, but some extend to one or two years.
Courses are assessed by examination according to the department's requirements.
Some Diplomas also require submission of a dissertation.
Transfer between Degree Courses
Transfers between degree courses are permitted in some circumstances, eg from the MPhil or MLitt to the PhD, or from the MSc or the Diploma to MPhil or PhD.
When a student makes such a transfer, the time devoted to the one degree would normally be counted as time spent towards the other.
Non-Graduating Supervised Postgraduate study
Some departments offer opportunities for supervised study that need not necessarily be undertaken as study for a degree or other qualification.
Enquiries should be addressed to the appropriate department or to the Postgraduate Secretary of the Faculty concerned.
Postgraduate students are encouraged to take language courses from the wide range available on a non-graduating basis.
Professional Training in Medicine
Those who are qualified in Medicine and who are seeking further professional training rather than studies for a postgraduate degree should write to the Postgraduate Dean at the Lister Postgraduate Institute, Hill Square, Edinburgh EH8 9DR.
The Lister Postgraduate Institute organises courses of postgraduate training in association with the University, and the Edinburgh Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons.
These courses do not lead to qualifications awarded by the University, but they do help candidates for professional qualifications, such as the Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCPEd) and for the Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons (FRCSEd).
The Board also offers short specialised courses.
These cover a variety of subjects including Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Accident and Emergency Medicine, Anaesthetics, and Family Planning.
The Postgraduate Dean in the Faculty of Medicine is available to give advice about further courses and clinical training.
Associated Institutions
The following research units and scientific institutes are formally associated with the University by virtue of their contribution to its academic activities.
Some make their facilities available to postgraduate students.
Agriculture & Food Research Council Roslin Institute
Agriculture & Food Research Council and Medical Research Council Neuropathogenesis Unit
Medical Research Council Brain Metabolism Unit
Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit
Medical Research Council Reproductive Biology Unit
British Geological Survey
Edinburgh and South-East Scotland Regional Blood Transfusion Service
Forestry Commission Northern Research Station
Institute of Occupational Medicine
Macaulay Land Use Research Institute
Moredun Research Institute
National Galleries of Scotland
Natural Environmental Research Council Institute of Terrestrial Ecology
Research Unit in Health and Behavioural Change
Royal Botanic Garden
Royal Museum of Scotland
Royal Observatory Edinburgh
Scottish Agricultural College Edinburgh
Scottish Agricultural Science Agency
Scottish Agricultural Statistics Service
Scottish Council for Research in Education
Scottish Crop Research Institute
Scottish Health Education Group
Scottish Health Service Common Services Agency, Information and Statistical Division
Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service
Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Centre
Wolfson Microelectronics Ltd
APPLICATION AND ADMISSION
All candidates for admission to a taught postgraduate course should have a first degree in an appropriate subject, or a qualification or experience which is acceptable as equivalent.
The usual qualification required for admission to study for a research degree and for some taught postgraduate courses is a first degree with an excellent or very good classification (first or upper second class honours in the UK).
Before making a formal application, candidates are strongly advised to write to the department in which they hope to study in order to obtain advice about their proposed study.
This is particularly important for those interested in research, since they must ensure that the department has the facilities and the expert supervision that will be necessary.
It is helpful for the candidate and department to identify in advance any special conditions that the department may decide should apply in the proposed candidate's area of study.
Applications must be made on the standard form which is available from departments, Faculty Postgraduate Offices, the International Office, or from the Secretary to the University.
For contact persons in departments, see the section on departmental profiles.
Other addresses for enquiries are on page 139.
Applications for admission should be submitted as early as possible in the session prior to that in which admission is sought and should not be delayed because the applicant is awaiting examination results or the outcome of applications for scholarships or for admission to other institutions.
The application should be submitted through the department in which the candidate wishes to study (except for the Faculty of Arts, Faculty of Law and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine where applications should be sent to the Faculty Postgraduate Office).
Documentary evidence of qualifications should be submitted with the application; if this is not possible, it should be submitted as soon as possible afterwards.
If entry is sought in October, the application should be submitted, if at all possible, by 31st March.
If the department approves the application, it will recommend the candidate's admission to the Faculty Postgraduate Studies Committee.
Letters of admission are issued by the Committee.
Candidates who are admitted to study for the PhD, MLitt or MPhil are registered first under the designation of ‘supervised postgraduate student’.
This registration is normally for a period of twelve months and during this time the student will begin work for the research project.
If progress during this initial period is satisfactory, the student is then registered for the appropriate degree, e.g. PhD.
The time that the candidate has been registered as a supervised postgraduate student will normally count towards the period of study prescribed for the degree.
Students with Special Needs
The University welcomes enquiries from intending applicants with motor handicap, sensory impairment or other disability.
Applicants with any disability are strongly advised to contact the Adviser to Students with Special Needs early and when possible at least a year before making formal application for entry to the University.
Enquiries should be sent to The Secretary, Committee for Students with Special Needs, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh EH8 9YL.
Telephone 031 650 5760.
A new booklet Guidance for Students with Special Needs is currently available from the above address.
FINANCIAL MATTERS
There are certain fees and other research costs which have to be paid in full by each postgraduate student at the beginning of each academic year, in October, or, for research students who begin study at another time of year, on the anniversary of the start of their studies.
Fees vary from degree to degree and from subject to subject.
Before you will be accepted you must provide evidence of satisfactory financial support to cover your fees, research costs and living expenses throughout the likely period of your postgraduate studies.
Documentary evidence, such as a letter from a bank, must be sent with your application form, or as soon after as possible.
If you have been awarded a grant or scholarship, send a copy of the letter of the award, or arrange for the body providing the award to write to the University giving details.
If you have applied for a grant or scholarship and are awaiting the outcome, give the name and address of the body to whom application has been made, and the amount and period applied for.
Departments are often prepared to give advice on possible sources of grants or scholarships.
Note for Students of Medicine
All postgraduate students in the Faculty of Medicine, whatever their course of study, who are, or are likely to be involved with patients must hold full or limited registration with the General Medical Council and must also be professionally insured.
Advice about eligibility for registration with the Council may be obtained from the General Medical Council.
Students from outside the UK should write to the Overseas Registration Division of the GMC, Gosfield Street, London WIP 8BP.
Awards
Science-based departments are able to apply to Research Councils for studentships on behalf of some suitably qualified applicants: alternatively, they may be able to offer financial support from an industrial source.
The Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) runs competitions for research studentships and advanced course studentships.
Some studentships for studies in the Humanities are awarded through the Scottish Office Education Department (SOED) or the British Academy.
All applications for Research Council, SOED or British Academy Studentships must be made by or through departments, but normally only those students who are UK citizens domiciled within Great Britain are eligible.
For some awards candidates who are nationals of a member state of the EC and are resident in Great Britain may also be eligible.
All students, home, EC and overseas, may apply for the small number of Edinburgh University Postgraduate studentships awarded each year, if they are graduates with First or Upper Second Class honours degrees (or equivalent) from recognised universities who propose to undertake postgraduate research under supervision (PhD, MLitt or MPhil).
University  Studentship application forms are available on request from the Postgraduate Section of the appropriate Faculty Office (see page 139 for addresses).
The closing date is 30 April.
Candidates liable to pay the Overseas Fee, who apply for a University Studentship, are required to apply also for an Overseas Research Student (ORS) award.
Application forms are available from the Postgraduate Section of the appropriate Faculty Office (see page 139 for addresses).
The University offers a limited number of awards for the MSc by Research to UK and EC applicants, but does not offer awards for taught postgraduate courses (e.g. MSc or Diploma).
Postgraduate Teaching Awards
A small number of teaching assistantships and teaching supplements are available annually in some Faculties.
Candidates will normally be expected to have some postgraduate or teaching experience, although training will be provided by the University's Centre for Teaching, Learning and Assessment.
For further information of the availability of these awards, you should contact the Postgraduate Section of the Faculty to which you are applying.
Annual Fee
An Annual Fee is due each year on enrolment.
This covers matriculation, tuition and one diet of examinations including examination of a postgraduate thesis or dissertation.
It also includes the subscription to the Students' Association, athletic clubs and other facilities.
The Annual Fee payable by full-time students from Britain and other EC countries is (generally) £2,260 for 1993–94.
Details of fees payable by overseas students are given in the section Overseas Students (page 21).
Research Costs
The University does not undertake to pay for special materials, equipment, etc. required by a student in the course of research.
Before embarking on a research project, you must ensure that you have sufficient resources at your disposal to complete it successfully.
The annual sum which you might be asked to pay depends on the degree for which you are studying or the topic of your research.
Accepted students will be informed in admission letters of the amount required, which is payable on enrolment.
Fieldwork Costs
Registered postgraduate students may be required to provide a contribution to fieldwork costs, in addition to the fees and research costs set out above.
Accepted students will be informed in admission letters of the maximum amount required, which may be payable on enrolment.
Preparation of Thesis
The student is responsible for paying for the typing and binding of the thesis: this can cost £350 or more for typing services.
OVERSEAS STUDENTS
There are international students in every Faculty, almost in every department.
They make a major contribution to the life of the University, providing it with a breadth of outlook, experience and sympathy which is greatly valued.
Many overseas students come to study the languages, history, culture and traditions of this country.
Some come to study other societies.
But all, like the home students, come primarily to pursue their disciplines to an advanced level, using the special resources available here in supervision and research.
Students from outside the UK who have particular enquiries about postgraduate study are invited to write to: The Director, Dr Tom Barron, International Office, 57 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU.
Finance, Awards and Fees
When considering coming to this country to study, be sure that you have sufficient finance.
You will not be permitted to take up employment in order to help support yourself.
Most overseas students have a limitation on employment stamped into their passports when they land which forbids their taking a job while here.
Students from countries within the European Community are free to take up employment during vacations but unemployment is high in the United Kingdom and there are few jobs vacant.
The cost of living in Britain is high and a single student grant is not adequate for the maintenance of a wife or husband.
It will be difficult for a wife or husband to find employment in Britain, even with professional qualifications.
If you have a family, you should have organised suitable long-term accommodation before bringing them with you to Edinburgh.
Estimate of General Expenses
Costs other than tuition fees are likely to vary depending on where you live.
Below are realistic estimates of costs for full-board accommodation in University-controlled Halls of Residence and the private sector in an attempt to provide a realistic assessment of what you may incur in each of these accommodation sectors.
The figures are for a single person for the session 1993–94.
Basic Living Costs
For each week you are resident in Edinburgh you should allow yourself the following minimum sums of money to cover your expenses.
(1) Halls of Residence
Per week
Room and Board £60
Lunches
(weekdays only) £12
Personal Expenditure £26
(laundry, toiletries, telephones, clothes,
limited entertainment)
Travel £8
Total £106 per week
(2) Private Sector
Per week
Flat rent £40
Lunches £17
Food £23
Bills £8
(heat & light etc.)
Personal Expenditure £26
Travel £8
Total £122 per week
Students will also need approximately £70 each year for books.
Students from hot countries should include an additional amount to cover the costs of purchasing warm clothing in the first year of their studies.
A sum of £200–240 is recommended for this purpose.
Police Registration for non EC students is £30 (All Non Commonwealth students — other than EC Nationals — over the age of 16 who have been admitted to the UK for a period longer than 6 months are required to register with the police.)
Costs for travel outside Edinburgh should also be taken account of when drawing up a budget.
Example A: A single postgraduate student from a hot country should allow approximately £6,000 in living costs for a twelve-month study period at the University of Edinburgh if staying in University Halls of Residence.
Example B: A single postgraduate student, not from a hot country, should allow approximately £4,600 in living costs for a nine-month study period at the University of Edinburgh if accommodated in the private sector.
It should be stressed that these figures are all approximate and vary according to your personal lifestyle.
Awards for Overseas Students
The UK Government offers Overseas Research Student(ORS) awards annually to provide for partial remission of fees to overseas postgraduate students of outstanding merit and research potential who are studying for research degrees.
The awards are tenable at UK Universities and Colleges, including Edinburgh, which usually receives about 50 new awards each session.
Details of these awards and application forms are available on request from the Postgraduate Section of the appropriate Faculty Office (see page 139 for addresses).
The closing date is 30 April.
A small number of Edinburgh University Postgraduate studentships are awarded each year to graduates with First or Upper Second Class Honours degrees (or equivalent) from recognised universities who propose to undertake postgraduate research under supervision (PhD, MLitt, MPhil).
University Studentships are tenable in all Faculties except Medicine.
Students liable to pay the higher (overseas) rate of fee must apply concurrently for an award under the ORS Awards Scheme.
Studentship application forms are available on request from the Secretary to the University.
The closing date is 30 April.
No University awards are available for taught postgraduate courses (e.g. MSc or Diploma).
Definition of Fee Status
The following definition of Overseas Students applies for fee-paying purposes:
1.
In accordance with The Education (Fees and Awards) Regulations 1983 (as amended), higher (overseas) levels of fee are payable by students who do not have a relevant connection with the UK, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
2.
In order to establish this relevant connection two elements are required, as follows:
(a) the student has been ordinarily resident in the UK and Islands throughout the three-year period preceding 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the  beginning of the first term of his/her course; AND
(b) the student has not been resident therein, during any part of that three-year period, wholly or mainly for the purpose of receiving full-time education.
Note that both conditions (a) and (b) must be satisfied in order that the student may establish the relevant connection .
It should be noted that special fee rates apply to students from the Channel Islands and Isle of Man.
3.
There are certain categories of excepted students who, although they do not have a relevant connection with the UK and Islands, are not liable to pay the overseas rates of fee.
These include:
(a) a student who is a national of a member state of the European Community*, or who is the son or daughter of such a national, if —
(i) the student has been ordinarily resident in the EC throughout the three-year period preceding 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the beginning of the first term of his/her course; AND
(ii) he/she has not been resident therein, during any part of that three-year period, wholly or mainly for the purpose of receiving full-time education.
(b) a student whose failure to satisfy the three-year UK residence requirement outlined above arises only because the student, or the student's spouse or parent, was temporarily employed outside the UK.
(c) a student who is a national of a member state of the European Community, or who is the son or daughter of such a national, whose failure to satisfy the three-year EC residence requirement outlined above arises only because the student, or the student's spouse or parent, was temporarily employed outside the EC.
(d) certain recently-arrived immigrants who are formally settled (in terms of the Immigration Act 1971, as amended) in the UK by 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the beginning of the first term of their course; and certain refugees or persons of similar status.
Applicants who consider that this exception may apply to them should seek detailed advice by writing to the Registry.
Further details regarding the definition and exceptions can be provided on request to the Registry, The University of Edinburgh, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh EH8 9YL, or reference made to the Regulations referred to above.
*Currently:
Belgium; Denmark (excluding the Faroe Islands and Greenland); France (including the overseas departments of Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana and Reunion, but excluding other French Overseas Territories); Germany; Greece; the Republic of Ireland; Italy; Luxembourg; the Netherlands; Portugal (including the Azores and Madeira but excluding Macao); Spain (including the Balearic Islands, the Canaries, Cueta and Melilla); and the United Kingdom with Gibraltar.
(Andorra, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City State are not part of the Community.)
Fees
The fees charged to overseas students are set for each degree at a level which reflects the full cost of tuition for that degree, and are not directly comparable with the reduced and standardised fees charged to students from the United Kingdom and European Community countries.
The annual fees can change markedly from year to year and so the figures which follow, for the session 1993–94, must be used only as an indication of the minimum likely to apply in later sessions.
They are:
Faculties of Arts, Divinity, Law, Music £5,750
Faculty of Social Sciences, generally £5,750
MBA/Diploma in Business Administration £6,750
Faculty of Science & Engineering, generally £7,560 
Faculty of Medicine:
Pre- and para-clinical courses £7,560
Clinical courses £13,750
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine:
Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine:
MSc/Diploma in Tropical Animal Production & Health, Tropical Veterinary Medicine,
and Tropical Veterinary Science £8,950
Pre- and para-clinical courses £7,560
Advanced Certificate in English Studies: Details are available from The Secretary, Institute for Applied Language Studies, 21 Hill Place, Edinburgh EH8 9DP.
All applicants are advised, when offered a place, of the fees to be charged.
A Table of Fees giving fuller details can be obtained from the Registry on request.
In addition to the fees set out above, you may be required to pay annual contributions towards the cost of your work.
See Financial Matters (page 17) section for further information.
You must make your own arrangements to ensure sufficient support.
You will be asked to confirm the details of the funds available to you if and when a firm offer of a place is made.
It must be emphasised that you cannot expect any financial support from the University.
Although the University will do its best to avoid increases in fees, it cannot guarantee that fees will be maintained at the same level for the duration of your course.
Note
Certain courses involve expenditure (for example, on instruments, research costs, field study, preparation of thesis) which is additional to that detailed here.
You should consider carefully the costs which relate to the course which you have chosen, and make allowance for any further funds required.
The department to which you are applying can advise you on these extra costs.
Payment of Fees
The University does not issue accounts to individual students for tuition fees.
It is the student's responsibility to arrange for payment in full, on or before enrolment, although arrangements exist to allow self-funding students to pay in termly instalments (see below).
If your fees are to be paid direct to the University by your home institution, Government or other sponsoring agency, the University will submit an invoice to that body.
You must however provide, on enrolment at the start of your course, written confirmation from the body concerned that it will be responsible for your fees.
Tuition Fees must be paid in pounds sterling.
As it can take a considerable time to effect the transfer of overseas funds to the University accounts, you are  strongly advised to make arrangements well in advance.
The University will accept direct transfer to its bank account, provided that you have asked your bank to initiate the transfer before 15 September.
The University's bank and account numbers are Bank of Scotland, 32A Chambers, Street Edinburgh EH1 lJB: Sort Code No 80-02-24, Account No 00919680 (please ask your bank to quote reference ‘7740 101’).
The University will confirm receipt on request to the Registry, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh EH8 9YL, United Kingdom.
Alternatively, payment may be made at the time of enrolment by personal cheque or bank draft drawn on a UK bank (see section on Banking below).
Self-funding students attending the University for the full session are permitted to pay their fees in termly instalments.
At least one third of the annual amount due must be paid on enrolment in October and the balance in two equal instalments (preferably by post-dated cheques, alternatively by bank standing order) by the end of the first week of the second and third terms respectively.
A service charge of 3.75 per cent of the amount outstanding after the advertised enrolment period is payable in full with the first instalment.
These arrangements can be made at the time of enrolment, without advance notice, provided that you have opened a bank account in the UK and (for post-dated cheques) have a cheque book.
Banking
You are recommended to open a British bank account as soon as possible, preferably before your arrival.
Most banks offer two types of account, namely interest-bearing deposit accounts (sometimes requiring notice of withdrawal) and current accounts (cheque or checking accounts) with immediate access.
Many people have both.
If you wish to open an account before you leave your home country, you should write to the head office of one of the four main Scottish banks (see below).
You should make it clear that you will be a student at the University of Edinburgh and ask for an account to be opened at a convenient branch.
If you are joining the Faculties of Science and Engineering or Veterinary Medicine, ask for an account to be opened at a branch near, respectively, the King's Buildings or Summerhall.
As an alternative to placing your account with a bank, you may do so at a building society, many of which offer similar services.
Personal cheques drawn on overseas banks are generally difficult to negotiate in the UK and, even if accepted, it may be many weeks before the funds can be drawn.
It is suggested that, to have money available on your arrival, funds are remitted to your account-holding bank in the UK by inter-bank transfer prior to your departure.
Alternatively you may bring travellers cheques with you.
A certified cheque, cashier's cheque or bank draft are quite acceptable although there could be a delay of up to a week before these funds can be used.
Visa and Access (Mastercard, Eurocard), are widely accepted throughout the UK although not by the University.
The main Edinburgh offices of the four major Scottish banks are:
Clydesdale Bank PLC, Chief Office, 29 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2YN
Bank of Scotland, Head Office, The Mound, Edinburgh EH2 2EL
Royal Bank of Scotland, 42 St Andrew Square, Edinburgh EH2 2YE
TSB Scotland, Henry Duncan House, 120 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 4TS.
English Courses
If your first language is not English, you will be required to provide documentary evidence, in the form of good results from an IELTS, TOEFL or other approved test, of your competence in written and spoken English.
Courses are held at the Institute for Applied Language Studies during the summer for overseas students whose University studies start in October.
They provide a thorough preparation for postgraduate study programmes and are of 3, 6, 9 and 13 weeks' duration.
Overseas students requiring a longer course in English can register for the intensive language courses lasting from October to June each year.
These include an Academic Study option specially planned for overseas students.
During the academic year, the Institute runs special programmes, free of charge, on behalf of the University, for postgraduate students registered for a degree who need help with improving their English.
Topics include listening to lectures, effective reading, discussion skills, writing assignments and examination answers.
Details of the courses offered may be obtained by writing to: The Secretary, Institute for Applied Language Studies, 21 Hill Place, Edinburgh EH8 9DP, telephone 031 650 6200, fax.
031 667 5927.
Medical Treatment
The British National Health Service provides free urgent medical care for all residents of European Community countries and a few other countries with whom the UK has reciprocal medical agreements.
Other students from outside the UK attending a British university for a course lasting over six months are entitled to free care for any medical condition which may arise during their stay in the UK.
Students attending shorter university courses, i.e. less than six months, will normally receive free care for minor illnesses (i.e. those which can be dealt with in general practice) but, to cover any necessary hospital care, they must arrange medical insurance through the University, which will pay for this insurance.
The families and dependants of students on such short-term courses are not covered by the National Health Service and private medical insurance should be arranged.
The Edinburgh University Health Service provides comprehensive general practice care under the National Health Service for all eligible students who choose to register with the service.
ACCOMMODATION AND OTHER UNIVERSITY SERVICES
Accommodation
The Allocations Office of Residential and Conference Services provides information and advice to Edinburgh University students on matters concerned with accommodation and deals with applications for all types of accommodation.
University Policy on Student Residential Accommodation
The University guarantees a place in University Halls, Student Houses or Flats to all new postgraduates coming to Edinburgh from countries outside the European Community, provided that applicants can fulfil ALL of the following conditions:
The application for accommodation (Form AF1) must have reached the Allocations Office by 30th September.
Applicants must be commencing their study at the start of session in October and be studying at Edinburgh for the whole of the academic year.
All other categories of postgraduate, including those from EC countries and those who arrive during the course of the session, will receive assistance in finding suitable accommodation: we regret that we cannot, however, guarantee University accommodation in such cases.
Couples & Families : The University regrets that the above guarantee only applies to single students, and not to those who will be bringing their partners or children with them.
In all cases, we reserve the right to use our discretion in offering students any particular style or type of accommodation.
Application
Those who receive an offer of a place at the University should receive an accommodation booklet and the associated application form (AF1) with the offer letter.
Further information or an AF1 form may be obtained from the Allocations Office.
All prospective students, including those who hold only conditional offers, should apply for accommodation as early as possible.
The deadline for the guarantee of University accommodation (see previous section University Policy on Student Residential Accommodation ) is 30th September.
Those seeking accommodation in person can consult members of the staff by appointment between 9.30 am–12.15 pm and 2.00 pm–4.15 pm on any weekday.
Please telephone (031 650 4669) for an appointment in advance.
Types of Accommodation
Edinburgh is known as ‘The University in the City’ and this description is clearly reflected in the great variety of types of accommodation available to Edinburgh University students and in its situation, with most students living in accommodation which is an integral part of the city.
The accommodation available to postgraduate students at Edinburgh can be divided into several main types.
(i) Halls of Residence
There are two main Halls of Residence.
Pollock Halls houses 1,794 students in 10 separate halls.
There are 150 single rooms for postgraduates, available on either a full-board (breakfast and evening meal seven days a week, plus lunch at weekends) or a self-catering basis.
The halls are traditional in nature: students have study bedrooms and eat in the main dining-hall, or, if on a self-catering basis, share a kitchen with a small group of other students.
Mylne's Court provides accommodation for 60 postgraduates among its 220 places.
The majority of rooms are shared by two students, and applications from new postgraduates unwilling to share are less likely to be successful.
Accommodation is available at Mylne's Court on either a full-board or a self-catering basis.
There is also a small number of self-contained flats for couples available at Mylne's Court.
(ii) Student Houses
An opportunity to live in a smaller community is afforded by the University's 18 warden-supervised Student Houses.
These self-catering units range in size from 10 to 62 students.
Some of the 150 or so places for new postgraduate students are in shared rooms.
(iii) University Flats
The University has a substantial number of self-contained furnished flats for letting to small groups of students.
Some 1,200 places in this more independent type of accommodation are let to new first-year students with at least 220 of these places being available to new postgraduates.
All rooms for postgraduates in these self-catering apartments are single.
Each flat houses from four to ten students: applicants must, therefore, be prepared to live in a small group with individuals they have never met before, and to take a share of responsibility for the running of the flat and general household and financial matters.
(iv) Lodgings
The Allocations Office operates a register of approved lodgings (accommodation in private houses).
All such lodgings are inspected by Allocations Office Staff and are regularly revisited to ensure that the correct standards are being maintained.
Lodgings accommodation is available on both a self-catering basis (known as a ‘bedsit’) and also (in some cases) with breakfast and possibly an evening meal provided.
Points to note
None of the full-board Halls of Residence caters for special diets of any type.
At Pollock Halls, the full-board menu includes some vegetarian dishes, though these might not suit the needs of all vegetarians.
Students with religious or other reasons for following a special diet are strongly advised to apply for one of the self-catering accommodation options.
Accommodation for couples is available in twin rooms in Student Houses, and at Mylne's Court.
Some lodgings, usually self-catering, are available to couples.
A few self-contained University flats are also available to couples, though there is considerable competition for such flats from students already at University.
(Postgraduates wishing to apply for flats suitable for couples should complete and return form AF6, obtainable from the Allocations Office).
Particular difficulties with regard to finding suitable accommodation at the right price, have been experienced by married students arriving with their families.
Married students are strongly recommended, in the first instance, to come to Edinburgh on their own and to send for their partner and family once they have secured suitable accommodation.
In some cases, this can take some considerable time.
Cost of Accommodation
The approximate charge for the majority of places in University Halls of Residence is likely to be around £63 per week.
This charge includes accommodation, heating and all meals except weekday lunches.
The charge for residence in self-catering blocks and Student Houses are likely to be around £40 per week.
Charges in lodgings vary considerably.
The charge for a single room with bed and breakfast and evening meal is likely to be approximately £60 per week; and from £40 per week for a single room with cooking facilities provided.
Charges for shared rooms are generally slightly lower.
Heating is normally charged separately, often by coin meter.
The rents charged in privately-rented furnished flats vary widely depending on the size, furnishings and locality.
Very few flats — even for two persons — are likely to be available for less than £300 per month.
Single students sharing a University-controlled flat will be paying approximately £40 per week, exclusive of the cost of heating, lighting, telephone, food etc..
In flats with central heating, rent includes the cost of heating and is about £3.00 per week higher.
The above figures are only estimates and should not be taken as firm indicators.
Student Advisory and Counselling Service
The Student Advisory and Counselling Service provides help for students with personal problems which may or may not be related to study.
The aims of counselling are to help students to share their difficulties, whether emotional, academic or involving relationships, and to find a better resolution.
The service is confidential.
The counsellors are available to see students every weekday from 9.30 am to 4.30 pm at 7 Buccleuch Place (first flat), and two mornings a week at the King's Buildings Union,(first floor, through the Careers Library).
A student can get in touch with the Counselling Service by phoning or calling in to either office; telephone 031 650 4170, or at King's Buildings on 031 650 5773.
The service is closed on Wednesday lunchtime between 1 pm and pm.
Special arrangements can be made for disabled students.
Careers Service
The University's Careers Service offers guidance and job-seeking facilities for postgraduates in any year of study.
It can help with advice and information on permanent and temporary employment, on further study, professional training, work overseas and voluntary work.
For some postgraduates, their chosen course or research specialism may form a natural stepping-stone into a subsequent career.
For others this may not be the case and they may find that they need to devote considerable time to career planning.
Individual postgraduate students may discuss their ideas and plans with a Careers Adviser and are welcome to attend the wide range of talks, information fairs and recruitment events offered by the Service annually.
The main office is at 33 Buccleuch Place and there is also an office in the King's Buildings Union.
Both offices have Careers Libraries containing information about jobs, employers, vacancies and further study opportunities including funding arrangements.
Postgraduate students are welcome to call at the Service at any time during their course and are encouraged to take advantage of the facilities offered as early as possible.
The University Health Service
The Service consists of six general practitioners who provide comprehensive medical care under the National Health Service for all members of the Edinburgh University community and their dependants who choose to register with the practice.
The practice is situated in the Richard Verney Health Centre in the Student Centre in Bristo Square and provides, in addition to the usual primary care medical services, nursing services, physiotherapy, psychiatric clinics, ophthalmology, contraceptive, antenatal and child welfare clinics.
The Centre also includes a pharmacy.
The University Chaplaincy
The Chaplain to the University is glad to be of assistance in any matter both to students and staff and can be contacted through the Chaplaincy or at home.
The Chaplaincy Centre is a place of meeting, informally over coffee during the day, and for a wide range of student groups who use the building regularly.
It provides opportunities to worship, a focus for community and friendship, a chance to exchange ideas, pursue concerns and ask questions.
There is a varied programme of regular and occasional events and good working links with the various Christian and community groups in the University and with the honorary chaplains — Anglican, Baptist, Congregational, Methodist, Orthodox, Roman Catholic and International.
The Chaplaincy Centre is part of the Student Centre Complex in Bristo Square — telephone number 031 650 2595/6.
Non-Christian Faiths and Ethnic Groupings
As a capital city whose population includes, among students and more generally, a wide variety of religious, national and ethnic groups, Edinburgh can offer ethnically-based social facilities and opportunities for meetings for several forms of non-Christian religious observance.
The University's International Office is glad to provide the relevant information to any students and their families from such backgrounds who wish to establish such local contacts.
Art in the University
In the Talbot Rice Gallery, Old College, the University has two galleries: one in the former University Museum, a fine neo-classical room, houses the Torrie Collection of old master paintings and bronzes; the other is adjacent and is a spacious modern gallery for changing exhibitions and is one of the leading venues for contemporary art in Scotland.
There is usually a different exhibition every month or six weeks and they cover a wide range of subjects: contemporary and historical exhibitions of painting, sculpture, photography, tapestry and other crafts.
Music in the University
Each session a series of concerts is given, normally in the Reid Concert Hall.
There are a number of piano studios in Alison House, some of which are available on a booking rota to students of all faculties who require facilities for instrumental practice.
There are ample opportunities for those who wish to take part in music-making.There are also fine collections of keyboard and other historical musical instruments maintained by the Faculty of Music.
Student Services
Students' Association
Every student is a member of Edinburgh University Students' Association (EUSA) and, in addition, all fully matriculated postgraduates have access to the special facility of the Postgraduate & Mature Students' House described later.
All students are encouraged to make full use of the union facilities and also to use the Students' Representative Council (SRC).
Each year in May and October there are elections for posts within the Association, including many postgraduate posts on the SRC and the Postgraduate & Mature Students' House.
The Students' Association occupies several buildings which offer extensive facilities: bar and catering facilities, shops, library and study facilities, debating hall, discos, showers, video games, meeting rooms, a laundry service, record library, travel centre, fax service, photo machine, photocopying services and welfare advice.
Also, there are approximately 130 societies — covering every conceivable area from Poohsticks to Politics.
The Students' Association also runs a drop-in advice centre called The Advice Place at 35 Buccleuch Street.
It is open from 10.00am to 4.00pm Monday, Wednesday, Friday and 11.00am to 2.00pm Tuesday, Thursday and is run by two staff and trained student volunteers.
There is also a service at the Science & Engineering campus with opening times displayed.
If you wish to know more about the Students' Association facilities, then please telephone 031 650 2656.
Overseas Students Hospitality Scheme
The University operates a Hospitality Scheme for overseas students.
Students are invited to visit a local home.
Information is circulated annually to all overseas students.
Hosts are volunteers, drawn from University staff and the wider Edinburgh public.
Details of the Scheme and its operation can be obtained from: The International Office, 57 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU.
Postgraduate & Mature Students' House
Kitchen, showers, TV lounges, laundry, billiards and study rooms are open all day throughout the year.
Newspapers, periodicals, and coffee are available in the Reading Room.
The newly refurbished bar is the social centre of the House — the perfect spot to meet friends and colleagues.
It plays host to an array of events; from weekly activities such as quiz nights and live music on Friday, to special parties and celebrations.
If you want further information simply come to the second floor Committee Office between 11am and 4pm, Monday to Friday.
The House is located at 22–24 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LN, telephone 031 650 4016.
Spouses of Overseas Students
Students who are accompanied by their wives are invited to inform the International Office on their arrival.
The University Women's Club takes a special interest in overseas students' wives and families.
Advice and assistance are offered, with coffee mornings and other meetings arranged.
For further information please contact: The International Office, 57 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU.
Edinburgh Travel Service
EUSA runs travel shops in South Clerk Street (near Pollock Halls), Bristo Square and Rose Street (near Princes Street).
The travel shops sell all types of holiday and travel tickets.
They also accept all major credit cards.
The Edinburgh Travel Centre (ETC) can also provide certain concessions for students, e.g. ISIC cards, which can be bought; production of these cards will allow a student discount wherever applicable.
The ETC has been successfully established for several years and is very well equipped to provide all travel needs at the most competitive prices.
Sport and Physical Recreation
The Physical Education Department and Edinburgh University Sports Union combine to provide a comprehensive physical recreation service.
Edinburgh is one of the most active and successful sporting universities in Britain and offers an unrivalled choice of sports and activities.
The main facilities are the Sports Centre at The Pleasance, the playing fields at Peffermill and a field centre on Loch Tay, Perthshire.
Facilities at the Sports Centre include a sports hall, ten squash courts, circuit and weight training rooms, a combat salle, archery and rifle ranges, boxing and table tennis studios.
It is open seven days a week throughout the year.
A Fitness Assessment and Sports Injuries Centre was opened in 1989 and these services are available to the University and to the wider community.
The playing fields at Peffermill are within easy reach of the main University areas.
Grass pitches and a floodlit synthetic grass pitch provide the training and competitive arenas for association and rugby football, cricket, hockey, lacrosse and shinty.
Other facilities at Peffermill include floodlit outdoor tennis courts, golf practice facilities and a Clubhouse.
Firbush Point Field Centre is situated 80 miles from Edinburgh on the south shore of Loch Tay.
This superbly appointed centre provides a residential base for outdoor activities and field studies and is used throughout the year.
Instructional courses are available (weekends in term and longer courses during  vacations).
The centre is well equipped for sailing, canoeing, mountaineering and skiing.
The Sports Union organises competitive sport within the University and co-ordinates the work of some 50 constituent sports clubs.
It organises a large intra-mural programme in 18 different sports and engages over 30 coaches.
The sports clubs, the intra-mural sections and the Department of Physical Education present their programmes for the year at the Annual Sports Fair, held at the beginning of October.
Day Nursery
The University Day Nursery is a centre where children are cared for while their parents are engaged in studies or other University duties.
Children are not accepted from families where one parent is at home .
The nursery is open Monday to Friday from 8.45 am to 5.00 pm throughout the year except over the Christmas and New Year period and on public holidays.
Lunch and snacks are provided.
The nursery is situated at 79 and 81 Dalkeith Road and is registered for 18 children aged from 6 weeks to 2 years and for 30 children aged from 2 to 5 years old.
The nursery is run by trained staff under the supervision of the matron.
University staff members pay a full-time rate of £110 per week for children under the age of 2 and £90 per week for children over 2.
Full-time fees for students are calculated according to total parental income.
There is a minimum student rate of £40 per week full-time.
Applications should be made before June for the new session commencing in October.
Forms are available from The Secretary, Day Nursery, 79 Dalkeith Road, Edinburgh EH16 5AL, telephone 031 667 9584.
Car Parking
All parking on University grounds is by permit only.
Students wishing to make use of parking facilities should apply to the Parking Office, Old College, and complete the application form.
The annual parking fees are as follows: Central Area use: £35.35; Peripheral Area (King's Buildings and Veterinary Field Station): £13.50; Disabled: no charge.
There is at the moment a greater demand than available parking places and applicants may be placed on a waiting list for a time.
It should be noted that parking without a permit attracts a Day Charge of £5.85 (Central) or £5.30 (KB, VFS).
Such Day Charges are due to be settled when they are incurred.
FACULTY OF ARTS
The Faculty of Arts is not only one of the largest Faculties in the University but one of the largest in the country and, as such, offers a stimulating and challenging environment in which to study.
The large size of the Faculty allows unparalleled opportunities for postgraduate study and the diversity and breadth of interest is represented by the twenty-one departments that make up the Faculty of Arts.
The range of disciplines includes not only philosophy and history but a broad spread of modern European languages and literature.
The languages of Asia are also represented, with specialists in Arabic, Persian, Chinese and Japanese.
The classical languages are studied through Latin, Greek and Sanskrit and the study of language itself in its theoretical aspects is undertaken in Linguistics and Applied Linguistics.
Culture in its wider senses is investigated in Archaeology, Philosophy the History of Art, and Scottish Studies.
Although organised on a departmental basis, postgraduate study within the Faculty is not confined to disciplinary boundaries.
Indeed the Faculty encourages interdisciplinary activity and recognises that much innovative work has derived from the intellectual stimulus of multidisciplinary study.
This crosses not only departmental boundaries but also extends to collaboration with other Faculties, notably Social Sciences, Science and Engineering, Divinity, and Law.
About 200 academic members of staff work within the Faculty and are actively involved in teaching and research.
There are approximately 380 postgraduate students, including both students taking postgraduate taught courses and those studying for research degrees.
The Faculty's commitment to excellence is evidenced by the outstanding research record of many of its staff and departments and has been recognised by the receipt of research funding from many external bodies.
Contained within the Faculty are several research institutes.
These include the Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR), which was founded in 1984 for collaborative research with departments in the Faculty of Science and Engineering into human/computer interaction through speech.
The CSTR was the home of the UK Alvey Large-Scale Demonstrator Project in automatic recognition of continuous speech (1984–91) and since 1984, CSTR has earned over £11 million in research contracts from national and international government and industry sources.
Other recently established research centres are the Centre for the Study of the Languages of Scotland and the Centre for Japanese Studies.
The Faculty also houses the internationally famous Institute for the Advanced Studies in the Humanities.
The School of Scottish Studies, a research centre founded in 1951 to collect and study materials on the traditional culture of Scotland, plays a unique role in the preservation of Scotland's cultural heritage.
No other institution in Britain has such a body of expertise in the study of oral tradition, not only of Scotland, but of many other cultures in Europe and beyond.
At present a number of research projects are being undertaken within the school including the editing of the Greig-Duncan Folk Song Collection, a collection of 3,000 texts and tunes of traditional songs from North-East Scotland.
Research projects are also being undertaken in many other departments, for instance the Carlyle letters project in the Department of English Literature, and a number of departments such as Archaeology and Celtic have received significant external funding in order to carry out important projects.
The Faculty's commitment to research has recently been strengthened further by new appointments to seven Chairs.
These have attracted scholars of international reputation.
The Faculty itself has an international profile, attracting both students and visiting academics from all over the world, giving it a truly cosmopolitan feel.
The quality of teaching and research in the Faculty of Arts is underpinned by the excellent research facilities that are available.
A number of departments have their own specialist libraries and archives and all postgraduate students, whether novices or more advanced, are given the opportunity to learn or improve their computing skills.
The Department of  English Literature has also recently established a graduate school.
The University boasts the largest University library in Britain with over two million printed books and in Edinburgh students are well served by the National Library of Scotland, a copyright library entitled to receive a copy of every book published in the United Kingdom.
Other relevant institutions in Edinburgh are the Scottish Record Office, the Scottish Ethnological Archive in Edinburgh and the collections of the National Museums and Galleries of Scotland.
Edinburgh, has long been established as a cultural and artistic centre and, with its museums, galleries, learned societies and other institutions, makes the Faculty of Arts at Edinburgh University an unrivalled choice for postgraduate study.
The Faculty of Arts offers the following postgraduate degrees: Ph.D., M.Litt., M.Sc.
by coursework and MSc.
by Research.
Much effort has been made to provide maximum flexibility in the registration for these degrees.
A number of taught degrees are offered on a part-time basis.
It is also possible for research students to transfer from one degree to another research degree of a higher standing.
All students attend a computer familiarisation course offering an introduction to word processing.
A wide range of hardware and software options are available.
New students are contacted during the summer and given details of courses and of the induction process.
On arrival in Edinburgh, they are provided with a pack of relevant information.
There is a one-day familiarisation course during which they are introduced to their supervisors, other staff members and postgraduates already on the course.
Further details and application forms for postgraduate study are available from the Administrative Officer (Postgraduate), Faculty of Arts, University of Edinburgh, David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX.
Telephone: 031 650 3578/3574.
Applied Linguistics
Head of Department: Mr Anthony P.R.
Howatt
Postgraduate contact: Mrs Sylvia Motherwell
Address: 14 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LN.
Telephone: 031 650 3864
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 34 research; 39 taught
Edinburgh was the first university outside the United States to develop a post-experience course in applied linguistics.
Originally launched as a diploma in 1957, the MSc in Applied Linguistics has since grown into one of the most comprehensive Master's programmes of its kind in the country taught by the department with the close collaboration of the Institute for Applied Language Studies (IALS), which is part of the department with a specialist interest in practical language pedagogy.
After completing a core course in foundation subjects in general and applied linguistics, MSc students put together a personal programme of options chosen from a set of more than 25 courses ranging from highly practical topics like language teaching methodology, language testing, teacher education etc. to theoretical and descriptive studies such as second language acquisition, socio/psycho-linguistics, pedagogical descriptions and literary stylistics.
Although English as a foreign/second language is a primary concern of many students, applied linguistic work in languages other than English is given every encouragement.
Among the major research interests of members of staff of the department and IALS are second language acquisition with specific reference to recent developments in linguistic and psycholinguistic theory, language testing (including computer-assisted techniques), literary stylistics (in particular the discourse of prose fiction), pedagogical grammar, the sociolinguistics of bilingualism, the history of language teaching, English for specific purposes (particularly medical English) and language teaching materials (e.g. for extensive reading in English as a second/foreign language).
Contributions have appeared in journals such as Applied Linguistics (edited from the department 1985–90), English Language Teaching Journal, and Studies in Second Language Acquisition.
In recent years Applied Linguistics at Edinburgh has been closely involved in the organisation of international seminars and conferences.
For example, IALS mounted a major seminar in honour of the late S.Pit Corder in 1984, and local applied linguists have made substantial contributions to conferences such as those organised annually by TESOL Scotland.
Department's programme has attracted support from major sponsoring agencies such as the British Council, the Association of Commonwealth Universities and the ESRC.
Post-MSc working scholarships are offered to selected students by IALS.
Variety is also a feature of the research topics selected by students working for higher degrees (MLitt and PhD).
In the past year, for instance, doctoral candidates have successfully completed theses on the acquisition of English as a foreign language by speakers of German, the teaching of advanced writing skills in English for specific purposes, and the stylistics of narrative fiction.
This rich range of choice derives in part from the breadth of experience available in the department and IALS but also from close co-operation with other centres such as the Department of Linguistics, access to whose laboratory resources may be arranged.
Other co-operative initiatives include, for instance, joint courses and joint supervision arrangements.
Institute for Applied Language Studies
Director of Institute: Eric H. Glendinning
Address: 21 Hill Place, Edinburgh EH8 9DP
Telephone: 031 650 6200
Fax: 031 667 5927
Staff numbers: 30 full-time; 1 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 2 taught
The Institute for Applied Language Studies is a research and development centre for language teaching within the Department of Applied Linguistics.
Staff contribute to the postgraduate work of the department, but the main work of IALS is in the teaching of language courses, teacher education and research into aspects of language learning and teaching.
IALS staff have produced a wide range of published teaching materials and share responsibility with the Department for Edinburgh Working Papers in Applied Linguistics.
Ongoing research and development projects related to EFL include: attitudes to literature, conditionals in medical discourse, developing the Medical English corpus, peer observation, development of self-access materials for Legal English, validation of TEAM (Test of English at Matriculation), Japanese learners, extensive reading and testing.
Current research and development work in the Modern Languages section includes: materials analysis from the perspective of genre, and learners' perceptions of learning strategies.
The Institute offers facilities for computer-assisted learning, as well as a self-access centre, library and teachers' resource centre.
Celtic
Head of Department: Professor W. Gillies
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3622
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 3 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 12 research
The Department of Celtic has a strong tradition of postgraduate research and supervises postgraduate work in all the main branches of Celtic Studies.
Edinburgh's library facilities and archival resources are excellent in most areas, and research strengths in related departments enable interdisciplinary research proposals to be accepted where appropriate supervision can be arranged.
Both PhD and MLitt research programmes are available; taught postgraduate courses with specialisms in Celtic Studies (medieval) and Gaelic Studies (modern) are available at MLitt and MSc/Diploma levels.
While possession of a good Honours Degree in Celtic (or Irish or Welsh) is a normal prerequisite for the research degrees, candidates with an equivalent qualification in a related field may apply.
The taught degrees include options suitable for candidates who do not have previous experience of the Celtic languages.
Areas of particular interest to current staff members which are also well served in terms of research facilities include (i) the history and development of the Celtic languages and literatures, and (ii) all aspects of Scottish Gaelic studies.
Prospective students at all levels are encouraged to make early contact with the department with a view to establishing the suitability of their qualifications and proposed area of research.
Classics
Head of Department: Dr W.S.M. Nicoll
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 4679
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 11 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 10 research; 73 taught
Major research interests include: Homer; Greek lyric poetry including Pindar; Greek and Latin historiography and biography; Greek drama; Greek philosophy; Latin poetry; Medieval Latin, especially poetry; Classical philology; Greek and Roman history, especially fifth and fourth century BC Greek history and the development of Roman imperialism; early Greek archaeology; Greek sculpture; Roman funerary customs; art and mythology; women in classical antiquity.
Access to computer text-files available.
East Asian Studies
Head of Department: Professor Bonnie S. McDougall
Address: 8 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Telephone: 031 650 4227/4229
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 6 research
The Department of East Asian Studies was set up in 1967.
The research and teaching interests of the staff are focused on traditional and modern Chinese language, literature, philosophy, religion, history and art, and postgraduate students are encouraged to pursue a broad range of topics in these and related fields.
The performing arts (including cinema) receive particular attention, as also contemporary Chinese literature and the development of popular fiction from medieval times to the present.
The University's Main Library houses some 55,000 Chinese-language books and periodicals, also an impressive selection of Western-language books on East Asia.
A small Class Library is available at all times to our postgraduate students, who will also be able to refer to East Asian materials in Western languages in the National Library of Scotland and Edinburgh Central Library.
Computer equipment for postgraduate use is also available in the department and in the Main Library.
The department is currently expanding its postgraduate programme to promote the quality of supervision, development of research skills and achievement of scholarly excellence.
During the first year of studies leading towards the MLitt and PhD, students will be assisted by induction courses, such as introductions to the Library's East Asian and other collections and, where appropriate, courses in sinological method.
The department is currently developing a one-year MSc programme as an introduction to postgraduate study.
The department actively promotes research seminars for students and staff, teaching opportunities for advanced students, opportunities for research in East Asia, formal and informal contact with other persons and institutions in Edinburgh with East Asian interests, and visits from distinguished scholars from other parts of the UK and abroad, reflecting the international contacts and reputations of the permanent staff.
English Language
Head of Department: Professor Charles Jones
Postgraduate Convener: Dr Heinz J. Giegerich
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3593
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 8 full-time academic; 1 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 5 research
The Department of English Language has an outstanding international reputation in many areas of English Language research and can, in consequence, offer expert supervision at an advanced level across a wide range of study in the subject area.
Candidates are particularly welcome to apply for PhD supervision in the following areas:
The Syntax of Present Day English: all aspects of this subject are catered for, although the department has special expertise in X-bar, Relational and Dependency models for syntactic/semantic representations of the English language.
The Phonology of Present Day English: areas of special expertise in the department exist in the fields of Dependency and Metrical models of phonological representation for English as well as in the theory of Lexical Phonology, although most aspects of the subject can be treated.
Historical English Linguistics: the syntax, phonology, lexis of all historical periods of English can be catered for, although there is special expertise available for Old, Middle, and early Modern English advanced study.
The English Language in Scotland: supervision is available for both historical and present day topics in the grammar of Scots.
The unrivalled holdings of the University Library and National Library in this area make the study of this subject at Edinburgh especially attractive.
The Language of Literary Texts: advanced study is available in Stylistics in relation to English (including Scottish) Literature at all periods.
English Literature
Head of Department: Professor Ian Donaldson
Director of Postgraduate School: Professor Ian Campbell
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 4284 (Professor Ian Campbell)
Fax: 031 650 6536
Staff Numbers: 20
Postgraduate Numbers: 60
The research and teaching interests of the Department of English Literature and its Postgraduate School are varied and challenging from Medieval Studies to Postmodernism and from traditional literary scholarship to contemporary literary theory, and were marked in 1992 by the award of the highest possible ranking in the national research selectivity exercise.
The School aims to encourage the best work in both traditional and more avant-garde areas of study.
It has specialists and can provide supervision in the following fields: Medieval and Renaissance Literature (including Drama), Eighteenth-Century Literature, Romanticism, Victorian Literature, the 1890s, Modernist Literature, Twentieth-Century English Fiction, Modern Drama, Post-1945 British Poetry, Postmodernist Literature, Women's Writing, Fantasy and Science Fiction, Theory of Comedy, Theory of Modernism, Contemporary Critical Theory, Feminist Criticism, Drama and Music, Scottish Literature, Comparative Scottish and European Studies, Nineteenth and Twentieth Century American Literature, Canadian Literature, Biography, Textual Bibliography.
Scottish Literature is one of the principal strengths of the School.
Dr Cairns Craig is the general editor of the four volume History of Scottish Literature (Aberdeen University Press, 1987–88) and other work on Scottish topics includes Dr Murray Pittock's The Invention of Scotland: The Stuart Myth and the Scottish Identity (Routledge, 1992).
The School teaches an MSc in ‘Scottish Fiction 1814–1940’, and several of its staff members are actively researching Scottish literature of the field, including Professor R.D.S. Jack who is conducting a major revaluation of J.M.Barrie.
Editions produced by members of the School include Dr Jonquil Bevan's Oxford English Texts edition of Izaak Walton's The Complete Angler (1983), Dr Aidan Day's edition (with Professor Christopher Ricks) of facsimiles of Tennyson manuscripts,The Tennyson Archive (30 volumes, Garland, 1987–92), Professor Ian Donaldson's Oxford Authors edition of Ben Jonson (1985), Professor K.J. Fielding's, Professor Ian Campbell's and Ms A. Christianson's Duke-Edinburgh edition of the Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle (volumes 19–21, 1993), and Dr Michael Phillips' edition of William Blake: ‘An Island in the Moon ’(Cambridge University Press, 1987).
Critical studies published by members of the School include Professor Jack's Patterns of Divine Comedy.
A Study of Medieval English Drama (Cambridge University Press, 1989), Dr Colin Manlove's Christian Fantasy: From 1200 to the Present (Macmillan, 1992) and Mr Randall Stevenson's Modernist Fiction.
An Introduction (Harvester, 1992).
The School's interests in Modernism and Literary Theory are wide-ranging and are reflected in its highly successful MSc in ‘Modernism, Gender and Writing’ which attracts a lively student body from many different countries.
In addition to the outstanding holdings of the National Library there are also special resources in the University Library such as the Ramage Collection, a collection of post-1945 British Poetry which is actively being expanded.
The School gives strong support to its postgraduate students, who are given the opportunity to gain teaching experience in the department and who also run their own regular seminars to which scholars from other universities are invited as guest speakers.
There is full computer familiarisation for postgraduates and there are excellent computer facilities.
The School is an  international body whose past and present members include nationals from all over the globe.
This cross-fertilization of cultures and backgrounds provides an exciting forum for the testing and formulation of new ideas.
Fine Art
Head of Department: Professor E.C.Ferenie
Postgraduate contact: Professor R. Hillenbrand
Address: 19 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LD
Telephone: 031 650 4124
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 11 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 12 research
The department offers supervision and teaching over a wide area of the history of art and architecture.
These areas include the following: Islamic art to c.1500; Western medieval art; medieval architecture; art and architecture in 14th to 17th-century Italy; painting and sculpture in Northern Europe c.1250–c.1500; the Northern baroque; Scottish art of 18th and 19th centuries; 20th -century art in Europe America; Chinese art; the history of conservation.
In addition to supervising research degrees the department also offers one-year taught postgraduate MSc courses in Art and Ritual, Islamic Art and by Research (see page128).
Edinburgh is an excellent centre in which to carry out research in the history of art.
Postgraduates can benefit greatly from the presence of the national galleries and museums with their major collections and from the important holdings of art historical literature in the University Library, the National Library of Scotland and in the gallery and museum libraries.
French
Head of Department: Professor J.P.
Renwick
Address: 60 George Square Edinburgh EH8 9JU
Telephone: 031 650 8420/21
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 13 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 4 research
The department offers supervision for PhD or MLitt, full-time or part-time in any area of French cultural studies, including literary and linguistic studies from the Middle Ages to the present; Francophone studies in Africa and Canada; cinema; contemporary politics and institutions.
Instruction and supervision are given for the MSc French Studies, in Medieval and Renaissance Studies, and the department also collaborates in the MSc programmes in Comparative Literature European Film Studies and Medieval Languages.
The department has two terminal rooms with micros dedicated for postgraduate use.
It houses the centre for Belgian French Cultural Studies and has particular strength in the study of poetry of all periods, supported by the Ramage Bequest collection of French and English poetry housed in the University Library.
In addition to other excellent resources Edinburgh houses the National Library of Scotland and the Institut Franais d'Ecosse.
Recent departmental initiatives include collaborative works on The Rhetoric of the French Revolution, The Editor and the Text and Poetry in France 
German
Head of Department: Professor Dietrich Scheunemann
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3635
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 7 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 7 research
The Department of German encourages research work particularly in the modern field.
Postgraduate students who are currently undertaking research in the department are working in the following areas: Modern German Literature and Film, ‘Wiener Moderne’, GDR Literature and Society.
The department's postgraduate work is also closely interlinked with the MSc programme in Comparative Literature offered within the Faculty of Arts; interdisciplinary topics and the study of Anglo-German literary relations therefore also enjoy the benefit of special expertise and promotion.
Recent publications by members of the department in the areas mentioned include: Professor Dietrich Scheunemann: ‘Fiktionen — auch aus dokumentarischem Material.
Geschichte in Literatur und Film seit den sechziger Jahre ’, in: Geschichte als Literatur, ed.
H. Eggert et al.
Stuttgart 1990;The Art of Montage in Theatre and Film.
Observations on Eisenstein and Brecht , in: Avant Garde, vol. 5/6, USSR 1991.
Dr A.W.
Barker:Peter Altenberg: Sein Einfluss auf die Literatur von Musil bis Kafka in: Literatur und Kritik, Jan./Feb. 1990;Aus einem Skizzenbuch.
Five Unpublished Sketches by Peter Altenberg .
in: Vienna 1900.
From Altenberg to Wittgenstein,.
eds.
Edward Timms & Ritchie Robertson.
Edinburgh University Press 1990.
Dr. Karin McPherson: Introduction to:The Fourth Dimension.
Interviews with Christa Wolf .
London and New York, l988.
Dr. P.H. Gaskill: ‘Ossian’ at home and abroad , in: Strathclyde Modern Language Studies 8, 1988;Dies ist die Zeit der Koenige nicht mehr: Hoelderlin and Republicanism , in: Strathclyde Modern Language Studies.
The French Revolution: German Responses (Special Issue 1991).
Conference Proceedings: Neue Ansichten.
The Reception of Romanticism in the Literature of the GDR .
Edited by Howard Gaskill, Karin McPherson and Andrew Barker.
Editions Rodopi B.V., Amsterdam 1990.
Hispanic Studies
Head of Department: Professor Edwin Williamson
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3674
Fax: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic
The department offers supervision in the major areas of Spanish, Spanish American and Portuguese literary and cultural studies.
Members of staff have research interests in the following fields — Medieval: Modern literary theory as applied to medieval texts; mythology and fantasy; oral literature; questions of transmission and textual criticism.
Golden Age: Ideology and cultural history; Cervantes and the development of fiction; political and social ideas in the comedia; poetry, especially Garcilaso and Góngora.
Modern Peninsular: Galdós and the Realist novel; the Generation of 1898, especially Antonio Machado and Unamuno; Post-Civil War Novel, especially Cela and Delibes; 20th-century poetry; post-modernism; women's literature and feminist theory.
Latin-American: Fiction of the Boom and Post-Boom; 20th-century poetry; women's fiction; cultural history, especially issues relating to identity and modernity, patriarchy, ‘civilization and barbarism’.
Portuguese: 19th- and 20th-century fiction, especially Camilo Castelo Branco, Eça de Queiroz, José Saramago; modern poetry, especially Fernando Pessoa.
The department has a distinguished record in Cervantes studies, the picaresque, and in the Golden-Age theatre.
Publications in this field have included  A.A. Parker, The Allegorical Drama of Calderon; Literature and the Delinquent; E.C.
Riley, Cervantes's Theory of the Novel; Edwin Williamson, The Half-Way House of Fiction: ‘Don Quixote’ and Arthurian Romance; Jennifer Lowe, Cervantes: ‘La gitanilla’and ‘La ilustre fregona’.
For many years it has enjoyed an outstanding reputation in Latin American studies, and recent publications in this area include Edwin Williamson,The Penguin History of Latin America .
The department offers a one-year M.Sc.
by Research and a taught M.Sc.
in Hispanic Studies, both of which may lead to research for the Ph.D.
It is also interested in comparative and interdisciplinary projects, and regularly organises symposia and research seminars.
In recent years, symposia have been held on Vargas Llosa; José Donoso; Juan Goytisolo; ‘Cervantes in the 20th Century’; ‘Ferdinand & Isabella and the Catholic Monarchy’.
History
Head of Department: Professor H.T. Dickinson
Postgraduate contact: Mr Anthony Goodman
Address: William Robertson Building, 50 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JY
Telephone: 031 650 3755
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 25 full-time academic; 2 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 31 research; 4 taught
In pre-modern history, the research interests of the staff lie in Byzantine history and in the social, political, religious and cultural history of Europe from the fall of Rome to the Renaissance (with particular emphasis on England, Italy and the Iberian Peninsula).
In modern British history, there are particular interests in social history and popular politics from the 17th to the 19th centuries; and in the intellectual history of the 17th and 18th centuries;(including the Scottish Enlightenment), social policy in the late 19th and 20th centuries, and international relations in the 20th century.
In modern European history, specialities include Venice (16th–17th centuries); France (19th–20th centuries); Germany (19th–20th centuries); international relations (20th century); and literature and history in modern Ireland.
American history from the seventeenth century to the present day is extensively researched and taught.
So is the history of some other non-European areas — African history; the history of the British Empire and Commonwealth (particularly Australia), modern India, China and Japan.
Ph.D.
and M.Litt. theses are supervised either entirely by members of the department or, where appropriate, jointly with the staff of another department (e.g. Ecclesiastical History, Economic & Social History, Scottish History, Centre of African Studies, Centre of Canadian Studies).
Some computer facilities are available in the Department.
Seminar programmes — Denys Hay Research Seminar in Medieval and Renaissance History; Modern History Research Seminar.
Related research seminar programmes by Centre of African Studies, Centre of Canadian Studies and North American Studies Programme.
The department organises occasional conferences, e.g. current annual conference on Medieval and Renaissance Cities.
Postgraduate brochure available.
Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies
Head of Department: Professor Yasir Suleiman
Address: 7–8 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW.
Telephone; 031 650 4182
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 5 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 14 research
The department offers postgraduate supervision (M.Litt. and Ph.D.) in the following areas: Arabic Linguistics; Teaching Arabic as a Foreign Language; Classical, Medieval and Modern Arabic Literature; Islamic History; Islamic Religion and Law; Shi'ism; Sufism; Persian History and Literature; and Islam in  South-East Asia.
The Department also offers an MSc.
taught course in the Practice (Arabic-English-Arabic) and Theory of Translation, in conjunction with the Departments of English Language and Linguistics.
Opportunities for research in translation at higher levels are also available.
The University has a good library and computing facilities and, as a major centre in its field in the United Kingdom, is very active in the field of Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies nationally and internationally.
Italian
Head of Department: Professor Lino Pertile
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX.
Telephone: 031 650 3645
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 3 research
Current postgraduate research being conducted on narratological innovation in the late 19th-century Italian novel, 20th-century poetry, and on the Resistance novel.
Staff research interests cover Dante and Medieval Literary Tradition; Boccaccio and the early Italian narrative; C.E. Gadda; Italian Cinema; 20th-century women's history; 20th-century poetry and narrative.
the department also contributes teaching and supervision for the MSc in Comparative and General Literature.
The department runs an active international research seminar, in conjunction with the Istituto italiano di cultura, and invites speakers at all levels from postgraduate to emeritus professor, from the UK, Italy, Australia, Canada and the USA.
Members of staff are on the editorial boards of major journals and publications in the Italian field.
We welcome applications for supervised postgraduate research in most areas of Italian Studies, and particularly in Medieval and Nineteenth/Twentieth-Century Literature, and Twentieth-Century Women's History.
Linguistics
Head of Department: Dr R. Cann
Postgraduate contact: Ethel Jack
Address: Adam Ferguson Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL.
Telephone: 031 650 3960
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 8 full-time academic; 6 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 34 research; 10 taught; 3 non-graduating
Edinburgh has long been one of the pre-eminent centres of linguistics in Britain.
Among the major research interests represented within the department are generative syntax and formal semantics (in particular developments stemming from Government and Binding theory and Montague Grammar); experimental phonetics and phonology (with special emphasis on prosody and the phonology/phonetics interface); psycholinguistics and natural language processing (in particular problems of word recognition and the structure of dialogues); evolutionary origins of language; the relation between spoken and written language; and speech technology (especially linguistic aspects of text-to-speech conversion and automatic speech recognition for specialised applications).
The department is a participant in the Human Communication Research Centre, an Interdisciplinary Research Centre funded by the ESRC.
Within the past five years departmental publications have appeared in such journals as Language, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Journal of Linguistics, Cognition, and Phonology.
In addition to the department itself, there are several other departments and research centres in the University with which we maintain active links.
These include the Centre for Cognitive Science, the Departments of Applied Linguistics, English Language, and Artificial Intelligence, the Human Communication Research Centre, and the Centre for Speech Technology Research.
There are a number of  regular joint workshops and seminars.
Facilities and equipment are shared in many cases, and PhD students in Linguistics have access to joint supervision.
Edinburgh is a frequent venue for major international conferences and workshops on linguistics-related topics, such as laboratory phonology (1989); situation theory (1990); speaker characterisation (1990); and discourse interpretation (1991).
The department has a well-equipped laboratory for instrumental phonetic and computational research.
The departmental computing capability is based on network of SUN Unix machines, which supports such facilities as real time speech input/output, signal processing, high-level languages for computational linguistics, and high-resolution colour graphics.
The departmental network is linked to the University's mainframe computer services for statistical analysis packages and similar services.
Phonetic instrumentation includes a Kay 7800 digital Sonagraph and facilities for airflow measurement, electro-palatgraphy and laryngography.
The laboratory has a fully equipped recording studio, and houses facilities for running psycholinguistic experiments on spoken and written language (gating, visual decision, cross-modal priming, etc.).
The department's postgraduate students come from a wide range of academic backgrounds and from many different countries.
A variety of departmental activities (Common Room, weekly Linguistic Circle, annual Postgraduate Conference, occasional staff-student lunches) provide an opportunity for staff and students to meet informally.
Research supervision is given considerable weight in assigning staff teaching responsibilities.
Some postgraduate studentships are available, funded by SERC, ESRC, and the Joint Initiative in Cognitive Science and HCI.
For further information you are invited to write for the departmental brochure.
Philosophy
Head of Department: William Charlton
Postgraduate contact: Dr V. Hope or for MSc in Ancient Philosophy Dr T Scaltsas
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3660/3661
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 12 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 16 research; 7 taught
Edinburgh University's Philosophy Department is one of the largest in the UK, with a latest research rating of 4.
The department has expertise over a wide range of philosophical subjects, ranging from aesthetics to philosophy of science, philosophy of language and logic to moral philosophy, philosophy of mind to legal and political philosophy, and modern continental philosophy to the philosophy of religion.
The department is also strong in the history of philosophy, having a long tradition of scholarship in Ancient Philosophy, the Philosophy of the Scottish Enlightenment, and in Kantian and post-Kantian philosophy.
Never a department to succumb to philosophical fashions, it continues to represent a wide variety of philosophical positions and approaches.
In the past four years at least nine books have been produced by members of the department, including Stephen Priest's The British Empiricists (Penguin 1990) and Theories of the Mind (Penguin 1991), Geoffrey Madell's Mind and Materialism (Edinburgh University Press 1988), Vincent Hope's Virtue by Consensus: The Moral Philosophy of Hutcheson, Hume and Adam Smith (Oxford University Press, 1989), Vinit Haksar's Indivisible Selves and Moral Practice (Edinburgh University Press, 1991), and William Charlton's Philosophy and Christian Belief (Sheed and Ward, 1988) and The Analytic Ambition (Basil Blackwell, 1991).
Among other publications from the department are: Professor R.W. Hepburn's  Wonder and Other Essays Professor Peter Jones' Philosophy and the Novel and Professor T.L.S. Sprigge's Theories of Existence /Its members also publish in a wide range of British, American and Continental philosophical journals.
In addition to its research activities the department plays host to many visiting scholars and speakers.
Its most recent Nature of Knowledge lectures have been given by Thomas Nagel, Hilary Putnam and Bernard Williams.
And it organises a continuous stream of philosophical conferences.
As a centre of philosophical activity, Edinburgh remains at the forefront in the British Isles, and many of its postgraduates have gone on to pursue academic careers around the world.
Russian (in the Department of German)
Head of Department: Professor Dietrich Scheunemann
Russian Postgraduate contact: Michael G. Falchikov
Address: David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JX
Telephone: 031 650 3671
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 2 full-time academic
Russian presently provides supervision on literary, linguistic and combined literary/linguistic topics.
The research interests of staff cover l9th and 20th century Russian literature, comparative linguistics, and literary theory.
Over the last five years, Ph.D.
theses have been successfully submitted on 19th and 20th century literature, history, history of art and comparative literature topics.
Postgraduate work in Russian is also interlinked with the MSc programme in Comparative and General Literature; supervision on interdisciplinary topics can be arranged.
A brochure is available, on request to the above address.
Sanskrit
Head of Department: Dr John Brockington
Address: 7 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW
Telephone: 031 650 4174/4175/4182
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 2 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 2 research
The research interests of the members of staff include the Sanskrit epics (Mahabharata and Ramayana) and Puranas, other pre-classical Sanskrit literature, Sanskrit literature and literary theory, Jain Prakrit, the origins of Vaisnavism, Theravada Buddhism and Jainism.
Supervision in these and related areas can be provided.
The department also serves as the base for the Centre for South Asian Studies.
Recent publications include (in addition to numerous articles in several journals): J.L. Brockington,Righteous Rama: the Evolution of an Epic (O.U.P., Delhi, 1985) and Hinduism and Christianity (Themes in Comparative Religion, Macmillan, 1992), Paul Dundas,The Sattasai and its Commentators (Pubblicazioni di Indologica Taurinensia 17, Torino, 1985) and The Jains (Library of Religious Beliefs and Practices, Routledge, 1992)
Scandinavian Studies
Head of Department: Peter Graves
Address: 18 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LN
Telephone: 031 650 4026
Fax.
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate students: 1 research
The department was established in 1987.
The major research interests of the staff are: 19th-century Scandinavian literature; 20th-century Scandinavian literature; history of the Scandinavian languages; Scandinavian dialects; Scandinavian place-names; Old Norse studies.
The department has a strong record of  publication and excellent links with Scandinavian universities, with other U.K. departments and with the Edinburgh-based cultural institutions, eg the Danish Institute and the Norwegian Consulate.
Library resources are good, particularly in the case of Swedish, and the National Library of Scotland has a good Scandinavian collection.
In the past session the department has organised the following conferences and seminars: ‘Minority Languages — the Scandinavian Experience’ and ‘Scottish and Scandinavian Emigration to North America’.
The department acts as host to 6–8 visiting speakers from Scandinavia annually and functions as an informal centre for Scandinavian exchange students (both undergraduate and postgraduate) resident in Edinburgh.
School of Scottish Studies
Head of Department: Professor Alexander Fenton
Postgraduate contact: Donald A. McDonald
Address: 27–29 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9LD
Telephone: 031 650 4167
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 8 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 18 research
The School of Scottish Studies incorporates the Scottish Place-Name Survey, the Linguistic Survey of Scotland and the Institute for Historical Dialectology.
It is a research institute for interdisciplinary work on Scottish subjects.
It is particularly concerned (i) with the recording and study of Scottish traditional culture and society, and (ii) with the compilation of written and recorded-sound archives for the dialects of Gaelic and of Lowland Scots (and also the varieties of Scottish English) and for place-names.
Under (i), research and field collection covers primarily the following subjects: traditional tales, songs and music, social organisation, material culture, custom and belief, and place-names.
Both oral and written sources are employed, with a strong emphasis on the oral tradition of both Gaelic and Scots-speaking areas.
Under (ii), dialect atlases are in preparation and the three volumes of the Scots section have been published.
Two Linguistic Survey Monographs and a Bibliography for Scottish Linguistic Studies have been published.
Research facilities include an archive of some 10,000 hours of tape and disc recordings (including videotape) made throughout Scotland; a small manuscript collection and an extensive library; and a photographic and film archive illustrating customs, crafts and material culture.
The School houses specialist collections: the John Levy Archive, mainly of religious, court and peasant music of oriental countries; the Will Forret Archive, consisting of over 2,000 commercial discs of popular and traditional music, mostly Scottish, and several hundred cassette recordings.
A computerised index has been prepared for these and other donations of commercial and ‘folk’ recordings.
A number of tape collections of oral history material from communities in Scotland provides valuable source material for research.
The School offers supervision for candidates for the degrees of MLitt or PhD and other registered postgraduate students.
Limited facilities for advice and consultation are available to other bona-fide researchers.
The School publishes the journal Scottish Studies (1957–), the magazine Tocher (excerpts from the Archives), and a disc and cassette series entitled Scottish Tradition .
Scottish History
Head of Department: Professor M. Lynch
Address: 17 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LN
Telephone: 031 650 4030
Fax.: 031 650 6536
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic; 2 part-time academic; 2 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 15 research
The department supervises research in most areas of Scottish history from the Dark Ages to the present day.
Teaching is provided for palaeography and document analysis, otherwise work for the M.Litt. and Ph.D.
is carried on by private study under supervision.
The department runs both a research and a postgraduate seminar, with guest speakers and opportunities for postgraduate students to present their work.
The department has particular strengths in the Celtic element in Scottish history, the Highlands, the sixteenth century, the Reformation, urban history and the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Publications by members of staff include major studies of early Dalriada, Robert I (Robert the Bruce), the reign of Mary, Queen of Scots and the relations between Scotland and England, as well as general histories of the medieval, early modern and modern periods.
Centre for Speech Technology Research
Head of Department: Professor Mervyn Jack
Address: 80 South Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1HN
Telephone: 031 650 2784
Fax.: 031 226 2730
Staff numbers: 2 full-time academic; 30 research
Postgraduate numbers: 10 research
The Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR) was founded in 1984 as a collaborative research institute for speech-based work on the human/computer interface.
Recognised internationally as a centre of excellence in speech technology research, it has been awarded over £11m in research contracts from national and international industrial and government sources.
It participates in a wide range of international projects, working with companies in Europe, the United States and Japan.
CSTR actively collaborates with the Departments of Artificial Intelligence, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Linguistics and its research has focused chiefly on automatic speech recognition, systems for generating speech from text, and speaker recognition and verification.
Medical and clinical aspects of speech are another focus, as is computer-aided teaching of foreign-language pronunciation.
The long-term goal is to develop systems that support two-way conversational communication between human users and computers.
Applications to study in CSTR for research degrees in speech technology, speech science and phonetics are warmly welcomed.
Research students are part of a very active research community with extensive up-to-date computing facilities in a rapidly-growing area of Information Technology.
Visiting post-doctoral scientists are frequently attached to the Centre.
Candidates should have a good Honours degree, or its equivalent, in a relevant subject-area such as engineering, psychology, linguistics, phonetics or speech science.
FACULTY OF DIVINITY
The Faculty of Divinity has its home in New College on the Mound, close to Edinburgh's majestic Castle and overlooking its New Town.
It offers an impressive teaching faculty, and at the same time a small college atmosphere.
It is a research centre of international standing, has gained high rating in national research selectivity surveys, and attracts students from all over the world, including some 150 postgraduate students.
Both teaching faculty andstudent body are multi-denominational.
At the same time New College retains its historic links with the Church of Scotland and the Reformed tradition.
One-year Masters' programmes and research supervision are provided within its five departments: Hebrew and Old Testament; New Testament; Ecclesiastical History; Christian Ethics and Practical Theology; and Theology and Religious Studies; and also within its Centre for the Study of Christianity in the Non-Western World.
The Faculty is also home to interdisciplinary centres for Religious Studies and for Theology and Public Issues.
The departmental profiles that follow sketch the research interests of their members.
Further detail on these interests may be had on application to the departments.
(The Head of Department is normally also the postgraduate contact.)
Beyond the taught courses there are lively seminar programmes within and between departments, where students gain experience in the presentation of research papers, and regular conferences.
There is also some opportunity to conduct tutorials with undergraduates.
Close co-operation is fostered between the departments and centres within the Faculty, and also between these and many departments in the wider University, especially in the Faculties of Arts, Medicine, and Social Sciences.
The material facilities for research and senior study are excellent.
New College Library boasts the largest theological collection of books and papers under one roof in the United Kingdom.
The National Library of Scotland is within five minutes' walk, and the Main Library of the University not much further.
Then the Faculty's computing facilities, including word-processing capabilities in all the languages taught and many of those native to the student body, are the envy of many in the University and beyond.
Students are encouraged to use this equipment to produce their essays and dissertations.
There is a growing collection of texts available for consultation on a mainframe data base, including the whole of the Hebrew and Greek Bibles.
All degrees in the Faculty may be studied full-time or part-time.
However, candidates from overseas are not normally allowed to enrol for part-time study.
The programmes for the MTh (Master of Theology) and related Diploma and for the MSc (Master of Science) comprise taught courses, assessed normally by essays rather than by formal examinations, followed by the preparation of a short dissertation of some 15,000 words for MTh/MSc or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma.
For these, 12 months full-time study (from October) is normally required, or alternatively 24 or 36 months part-time study.
Exceptionally, the inter-departmental MTh in Theology and Ministry requires only 6 months normal residence in Edinburgh, and may be completed by 12 months part-time study elsewhere.
This MTh programme is geared particularly to ministers and other professionals who can devote sabbatical leave to 6 months' resident study.
The curriculum allows a wide choice of special interests and provides for the dissertation to be completed at home if appropriate.
The person to contact is Professor S.J. Brown, Convener of the Continuing Education Committee, at the address below.
The research degrees of MPhil (Master of Philosophy) and PhD (Doctor of Philosophy) are awarded on the basis of written thesis only.
However, research students are often advised to follow some courses, especially during their probationary period of registration as supervised postgraduate student.
Each candidate has two supervisors; and the normal minimum periods of supervised research are 24  months for the MPhil (36 months part-time) and 36 months for the PhD (48 months part-time).
There is a short induction course each October into research methods and facilities.
Associate Dean (Post-Graduate): Dr D.A.
Templeton
Postgraduate Secretary: Linda Stupart
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh, EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Centre for the Study of Christianity in the Non-Western World
Head of Department: Professor A.F.Walls
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 2 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 38 research; 6 taught
The Centre (originally established in the University of Aberdeen and transferred to the University of Edinburgh in 1986) is concerned with the study of the Christian faith in its full world context.
In particular its studies relate to Christian history, thought and life in Africa, Asia, Latin Amerindian and Caribbean America, and the Pacific; to the nature and history of Christian mission and the interactions of Christian faith with culture and with other faiths and world-views.
The Centre's research and documentation collections provide special resources.
Arrangements are possible in appropriate cases for joint supervision with otherdepartments in the Faculty of Divinity and with departments elsewhere in the University concerned with non-Western cultures.
Christian Ethics and Practical Theology
Head of Department: Professor Duncan B. Forrester
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic; 3 part-time academic; 1 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 27 research; 47 taught
Departmental research interests include Social and Political Ethics; Biblical Ethics; Theology and Public Policy; Medical Ethics; Church and Society; Ministry and Pastoral Studies; Liturgy and Worship; Mission; Communication with special reference to the mass media; Development.
The department has a Centre for Theology and Public Issues which has a programme of conferences, publications, and research studies.
Currently it is engaged in studies in security and peacemaking, Christian attitude to AIDS, finance and ethics, and social vision.
The Media and Theological Education project is funded by the Jerusalem Trust.
New Masters' courses have recently been inaugurated, in Theology and Development, in the Theology and Ethics of Communication, and in Ministry.
Ecclesiastical History
Head of Department: Professor Stewart J. Brown
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 17 research; 2 taught
The department emphasises the history of Christianity in its social, political and cultural context.
Areas of specialisation include: early Church history, especially in North Africa; Christianity in Scotland since the Reformation; the Reformation; Christianity in Britain and Ireland since 1690; the Churches and industrial society in Western Europe and North America; the problems of Christianity and Race in the nineteenth century; Christian missions in Africa and East Asia.
The department benefits from the excellent research libraries in Edinburgh, especially New College Library and the National Library of Scotland.
A member of the University's Board of Historical Studies, the department has close relations with other history-related departments, especially in the Faculty of Arts.
The department runs a research seminar, with guest speakers and opportunities for postgraduate students to present their work.
Staff and postgraduates participate in an annual Scottish universities' conference in ecclesiastical history.
Hebrew and Old Testament Studies
Head of Department: Dr Peter Hayman
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 13 research; 1 taught
The department supervises research into the exegesis and the textual and literary criticism of the Hebrew Bible, the archaeology and history of ancient Israel, and Old Testament theology, ethics and hermeneutics.
Other areas in which research is encouraged include the religions and mythologies of ancient Canaan, Egypt and Mesopotamia; the Septuagint and the Apocrypha; the Aramaic background to the New Testament; the Syriac-speaking Church; the origins of Judaism; Rabbinic Judaism; and Jewish mysticism.
The department maintains close relations with the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem.
Study tours to the Holy Land, to learn Modern Hebrew or to visit museums and sites of interest, are encouraged.
Emphasis is laid on improving and acquiring language skills, and all postgraduates are required to attend a senior course in Hebrew texts in their first year and during their course to learn at least one of the following languages: Postbiblical Hebrew, Akkadian, Ugaritic, Phoenician, Aramaic, Syriac.
New Testament Language, Literature and Theology
Head of Department: Professor John O'Neill
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 3 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 10 research; 1 taught
The members of the department follow three distinct approaches to the New Testament, with continuous interchange of ideas in weekly seminars and readings of Greek literature contemporary with the New Testament.
The professor radically challenges the critical consensus on the Synoptic Problem, the origins of Christology, and the nature of the Pauline corpus.
One lecturer defends the critical consensus and seeks to show the importance of the Hellenistic setting of the New Testament.
Other lecturers emphasise the New Testament as literature and the response of the reader.
Other areas of expertise: Jewish literature contemporary with the New Testament in Greek and Latin; canonical and non-canonical sayings of Jesus; the problem of New Testament theology; the death of Christ; Gospel and Epistles of John; Epistle to the Hebrews; textual criticism; history of interpretation; stylometry.
Departmental guide How we supervise your study available.
Theology and Religious Studies
Head of Department: Professor Alastair A. Kee
Address: Faculty of Divinity, The University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX
Telephone: 031 225 8400
Fax.: 031 220 0952
Staff numbers: 7 full-time academic;
Postgraduate numbers: 26 research; 1 taught
The department offers opportunities for postgraduate study in all areas of systematic theology from the Patristic to the Mediaeval era; from the Reformation to modern times; in philosophical theology, from the pre-Socratics to the encounter with modern humanist systems; in comparative religion and the history and phenomenology of religions, and in such specialised topics as theology and ecology; feminist theology; theology and imagination; theology in the post-modern world; theology of world religions; Celtic Christianity; ecumenical theology; and theology, ideology and culture (representing some prominent research interests of current members of staff).
The department retains a particular strength in the theology of the Reformed tradition, but both staff and student body are quite ecumenical in composition.
In the philosophical theology and religious studies parts of its remit the department maintains close co-operative links with the Centre for the Study of Christianity in the Non-Western World and with many departments in the Faculties of Arts and Social Sciences, such as Philosophy, Sanskrit, Sociology, Celtic.
Such interdisciplinary co-operation in teaching and supervision is particularly valuable, as indeed is the international composition of the graduate student body.
FACULTY OF LAW
Associate Dean (Postgraduate Studies): Dr. N. Walker
Postgraduate Secretary: Mrs. L. Paterson
Address: Faculty of Law, The University of Edinburgh, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh, EH8 9YL
Telephone: 031 650 2010
Fax.: 031 662 4902
Staff numbers: 40
Postgraduate numbers: 62 research; 179 taught
The Faculty of Law in the University of Edinburgh is an ideal place to pursue the postgraduate study of law.
It is one of the largest law faculties in the United Kingdom, and is one of the very few to be recognised by the Universities Funding Council as a Grade 5 (‘international excellence’) centre of research.
The Faculty has the advantage of being located in the centre of the Scottish legal system with its own distinctive legal traditions, one of which is an historic openness to influences both from the civilian systems of Europe and the Anglo-American common law.
The Faculty is one of the oldest in the University and has long been the home of many outstanding legal scholars and practitioners.
Today it possesses a distinguished staff, many with international reputations, closely involved in postgraduate education and the advancement of legal knowledge.
The Faculty offers opportunities to study and conduct research in most branches of law and legal scholarship.
Courses and supervision are provided in all the main areas of private, public, comparative and international law, with more focused offerings in commercial law, international economic law, legal history, European law, constitutional law and in human rights and civil liberties.
In addition there are well-developed opportunities for interdisciplinary study particularly in the areas of European Institutions and Government, in Legal Theory, Criminology, and Socio-legal studies.
The Faculty has also begun to develop new expertise in law and information technology.
Current research in the Faculty has the diversity of approach and subject matter as befits a major, innovative law faculty.
Recent publications include work on mental health legislation, property law, law and medical ethics, the poll-tax, international law, legal theory, sexual history evidence, the sociology of crime and punishment, European law, and political and constitutional questions.
Currently there are approximately 230 postgraduate students registered in the Faculty.
About 50% of these are studying for the Diploma in Legal Practice and 50% pursuing the LL.M., M.Sc., M.Phil.
and Ph.D.
The student body is cosmopolitan, including individuals from all continents.
The Faculty is able to provide supervision for the M.Phil.
and Ph.D.
degrees.
These degrees are awarded solely on the submission of a thesis composed by the candidate; the minimum period of full-time study for the M.Phil.
is 24 months and the Ph.D.
36 months.
Those who wish to apply for admission to these degrees should possess at least an upper second class honours degree or its equivalent and may well have a Masters' degree.
Applicants should submit a short research proposal on their chosen topic.
While the Faculty encourages all those interested in these research degrees to apply, it will only accept as research students those who wish to work in an area in which the Faculty can provide supervision and has basic materials.
For this reason, the Faculty advises all those interested in applying for admission to the M.Phil.
and/or Ph.D.
to contact the Associate Dean (Postgraduate Studies) in the first place.
The objective is to make sure that the needs of individual students can be met by arranging for the research to be directed by experienced members of staff actively interested in the chosen topic who will be the supervisors.
The Faculty is able to register well-qualified applicants for its LL.M., and M.Sc.
degrees.
It can also register applicants for two Diplomas: the Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies and the separate Diploma in Legal Practice.
The latter is a nine-month course normally undertaken only by those intending to enter    the legal profession in Scotland.
The Faculty also welcomes applications from those who wish to study on a non-graduating basis, including those applying through the ERASMUS scheme.
The LL.M. and M.Sc.
are course-based degrees lasting for twelve months, beginning in October of each year.
These degrees are composed of two elements, the first consisting of seminar instruction in three courses extending over two or three terms, the second of the writing of a dissertation on a topic approved by the Faculty.
The LL.M. and M.Sc.
curricula are very flexible and allow students to follow a course of study that appeals to their own interests.
The normal entrance requirement to these degrees is a good honours degree or its equivalent in law or a related discipline in the humanities or social sciences.
(For further details of these degrees and additional entrance requirements see following pages.)
The Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies is closely tied to the LL.M. and M.Sc., although it can stand as an independent qualification when it consists of study and examination in three courses selected from the LL.M or M.Sc.
curricula.
This Diploma course lasts for nine months (October–July).
It is possible to register part-time for the LL.M. and the M.Sc.
(24 months) and for the M.Phil.
(36 months minimum) and Ph.D.
(48 months minimum).
Supporting facilities for postgraduate education are good and we aim continually to improve them.
Within the Faculty building, the Old College, there are two libraries; the Law Library and the Europa Library.
The Law Library is one of the largest law libraries in the U.K. and the Europa Library has the distinct advantage of being a European documentation centre.
Students have access to these libraries, and also to the University Library, the National Library of Scotland and to Register House which contains the national records of Scotland and thus is an invaluable resource for legal scholarship.
The Law Library also houses Lexis, which is a computer-based information retrieval system.
The Faculty has established its own computer network and provides facilities for students to wordprocess their work.
Arrangements can be made to provide basic and more advanced tuition in the use of computers in legal and social research.
The Faculty is recognised by all the major United Kingdom funding bodies, including the Scottish Office Education Department, the British Academy and the Economic and Social Research Council, for both taught course and research awards.
The Faculty has a number of scholarships which are used mostly to support research students.
Overseas candidates can apply for these scholarships but must also apply for an ORS award.
There are a number of University Scholarships as well and those interested in applying for them should inform the Faculty and write to the Secretary to the University.
As with the Faculty scholarships, overseas students will be expected to apply for an ORS award.
The interests of the Faculty's departments are not mutually exclusive, and care is taken to provide a closely integrated environment for postgraduate study.
There are close links with the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences and Divinity.
Two of the Faculty's departments, the Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law and the Europa Institute, are constituted as inter-Faculty Centres.
These close links mean that the Faculty has a strong interdisciplinary emphasis, which recognises both the value of traditional legal scholarship and the importance of studying law in broader social and theoretical perspectives.
Further general information, can be obtained by writing to Mrs. L. Paterson, Postgraduate Secretary, Faculty of Law, University of Edinburgh, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh, EH8 9YL.
Public Law
Head of Department: Professor C. Munro
The Department of Constitutional and Administrative Law provides teaching and supervision in all the principal fields of public law, including constitutional law and government, administrative law, human rights and civil liberties, welfare law, housing law and health law, environmental law, media law, police studies, and the legislative process.
While the British constitution is the primary focus, members of the department have always valued comparative approaches to the subject matter.
There is close co-operation with other departments in the Faculty, so that research which involves international or European law, or other branches of law, or which has theoretical dimensions, may also be pursued.
The research interests of members of staff are wide within this spectrum.
Mr. W. Finnie is a prominent writer on civil liberties, including police powers, public order, emergency laws, and the European Convention on Human Rights generally, and is also interested in health service law and anti-discrimination laws.
Mr. C. M. G. Himsworth writes widely on housing law, local government law, planning and environmental law, judicial review, and administrative law generally.
Professor C. R. Munro's principal interests lie in constitutional theory, law and politics, media law, criminal law and procedure and civil liberties, especially freedom of expression and freedom of religion.
Dr N. Walker's research embraces police studies, legislation, public law theory and legal theory generally, human rights, welfare law and local government law.
In recent years members of the department have been engaged in research on anti-discrimination law, commissioned by the Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights in Northern Ireland, and Professor Munro has acted as a consultant to the European Parliament, while Mr Walker is participating in a project on the Policing Implications of European Co-operation, funded by the E.S.R.C.
and the Jean Monnet Foundation
Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law
Director: Dr P. Young
The Centre offers a range of postgraduate studies including 12-month taught courses leading to the M.Sc.
or LL.M. degrees, and two- or three-year research degrees leading to the M.Phil.
or the Ph.D.
The MSc is recognised by the Economic and Social Research Council for courses in both criminology and law and society.
The MSc has been given research rating and priority weighting, which assists students in gaining scholarships from the E.S.R.C.
Current work in the Centre covers a wide area and emphasises inter-disciplinary study and theoretically informed research.
The Centre has well-established European and North American connections and has a strong interest in comparative study in all areas of its work.
Centre staff engage in criminological and penological research, including that based upon empirical enquiries; the sociological and historical analysis of law, deviance and punishment, medical jurisprudence, studies in sexuality and gender, the philosophy of law and studies in legal reasoning, including the relationship between law and language.
Postgraduate taught courses include-Social Inquiry: Method and Philosophy; Punishment, Justice and Control; Crime, Law and State; Medical Jurisprudence; Contemporary Issues in Legal Theory; and Sociology of Law.
In addition to the full-time staff, the Centre has direct and regular links with those involved in related teaching and research in other departments and faculties.
The Centre provides a regular inter-disciplinary staff/student discussion seminar programme.
The excellent environment for research is further enhanced by research workshops and conferences.
Europa Institute
Director: Professor W. Paterson
The Institute offers two taught LL.M. and M.Sc.
courses in the law of the European Communities.
It is expanding its teaching interests into other, interdisciplinary fields of Community study.
It has a particular interest in German law and politics and Germany's place and influence within the Community.
Students may pursue research degrees in the Institute addressing the law, politics or related social aspects of Community or wider European affairs.
Both teaching and research are supported by the Institute's specialist library.
Public International Law
Head of Department: Dr W.C. Gilmore
The Department of Public International Law has teaching and research interests in, and offers supervision relating to, a wide range of areas in Public International Law, and in particular International Economic Law.
For LL.M. and M.Sc.
in Legal Studies, two courses are offered.
International Economic Law and Current Developments in International Law.
International Economic Law deals with principles and organisation of world trade, international monetary system, foreign investment, World Bank Group, and includes examination of current developments, e.g. Uruguay Round.
Current Developments in International Law focuses on selected areas including state responsibility, international settlement of disputes, use of force, law of the sea, and international humanitarian law.
The current research interests of the members of the staff include International Economic Law, Legal regulation of international economic transactions, e.g. International Codes of Conducts for Transnational Corporations and Transfer of Technology, patterns of international regulation in international legal system, regional integration, international regulation of narcotic drugs, law of the sea, human rights, international humanitarian law.
Private Law
Head of Department: Professor J. Murray
The Department of Private Law is the largest department in the Faculty.
It is responsible for teaching and research in the traditional areas of private law, persons (including family law), property (including succession and trusts) and obligations (including contract, delict and unjustified enrichment).
In addition, the department has responsibility for Commercial Law (including Company Law and the law relating to financial services), Labour Law, Social Security, Taxation, International Private Law (Conflict of Laws), Agricultural Law, Criminal Law, and Evidence  (civil and criminal).
Members of the department also have expertise in Scottish and European legal history, in civil and criminal procedure, in Roman Law and Canon Law, in commercial arbitration and in sources of law and the institutions of the legal system.
Although the primary expertise of members of the department lies in the law and the legal system of Scotland, substantial areas of that law (particularly commercial law, company law, labour law, social security, taxation and financial services law) are very similar to the law of England.
Most members of the department also have knowledge of and interests in legal systems other than that of Scotland (including English, American and Commonwealth law and the laws of various continental European countries).
The department is accordingly a highly suitable base for postgraduate students seeking to pursue research or advanced study in comparative law.
Legal Practice Unit
Director: Alan J. Barr
The main responsibilities of the Unit lie in the organisation and teaching of the Diploma in Legal Practice.
In contributing to the preparation of graduates for entry to the legal profession the Unit plays a crucial role in the maintenance of high standards of practical legal knowledge.
Research interests include the legal profession, methods of practical teaching of law, taxation, and wills and succession.
LL.M. and M.Sc.
(Legal Studies) Degrees The Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies 
(i) Additional Entrance Requirements
The Faculty will normally only register for the LL.M. degree those candidates who possess a prior degree in law although there are exceptional circumstances in which it will vary this requirement.
Those candidates who do not possess a prior degree in law will normally be registered for the M.Sc.
in Legal Studies.
(ii) Curriculum Structure
Each candidate must select three courses from the list of available courses.
A small number of courses may have prerequisites for admission; candidates should consult the Faculty's postgraduate prospectus for advice as to any such requirements.
(This prospectus may be obtained from the Faculty Postgraduate Office).
It is possible for a candidate for either the LL.M. or M.Sc.
to take one course or in exceptional cases two courses from the list available for the other degrees.
There are some other restrictions affecting the choice of courses: the normal curriculum for a student registered for the M.Sc.
in the Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law includes the course Social Inquiry: Method and Philosophy.
There are special procedures for admission to the two courses offered by the Europa Institute.
These courses will normally only be available to students who apply to do both such courses.
(iii) Assessment
The normal means of assessment for the taught courses is written essay and in some cases an oral examination as well.
Candidates have to satisfy the examiners that they have reached a sufficiently high standard in all assessable essays before being permitted to continue to the dissertation.
Those who are not permitted to so continue may be eligible for the award of the Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies.
Law: LL.M. (12 months full-time 24 months part-time)
Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies (9 months full-time).
See taught course entry: Law.
List of Courses (for LL.M or Diploma):
Department of Public Law —
Comparative Public Law
European Human Rights Law
Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law —
Contemporary Issues in Legal Theory;
The Sociology of Law 
Sociology of Law: Gender, Sexuality and Law
Europa Institute —
The Institutions of the European Communities;
The Economic and Commercial Law of the Common Market
Department of Public International Law —
Current Developments in International Law;
International Economic Law
Department of Private Law —
Issues in Commercial Law;
Issues in Company Law;
International Commercial Arbitration;
Contemporary Developments in International Private Law;
Criminal Law and Criminal Justice;
Issues in Family Law;
Scottish Legal History;
Issues in Labour Law;
Evidence, Procedure and Pleading;
Roman Law A: A digest or related title;
Roman Law B: non-classical Roman Law;
Comparative Law A: a topic in the law of two modern systems;
Comparative Law B: the historical foundation of European Law;
Legal Studies MSc (12 months full-time 24 months part-time)
Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies (9 months full-time)
See taught course entry: Legal Studies.
List of Courses (for MSc or Diploma):
Europa Institute —
The Institutions of the European Communities;
The Economic and Commercial Law of the Common Market
Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law —
Crime, Law and State;
Punishment, Justice and Control;
Social Inquiry: Method and Philosophy;
Medical Jurisprudence
Department of Private Law —
Criminal Law and Criminal Justice
N.B. While every effort is made to teach each of the courses listed as available for the taught postgraduate degrees in the Faculty of Law there are circumstances in which this may not prove possible.
It is important that you indicate on your application form those courses you wish to study.
FACULTY OF MUSIC
Head of Department: Dr C. D. S. Field
Postgraduate Contact: Dr Raymond J. Monelle; Cynthia E. B. Cole
Address: Alison House, 12 Nicolson Square, Edinburgh EH8 9DF
Telephone: 031 650 2422
Staff numbers: 9 full-time academic; 2 part-time academic;
Postgraduate numbers: 20 research; 10 taught
Aspects of postgraduate study in which the Faculty is particularly strong are Composition, Organology, and certain historical and theoretical areas of musical scholarship.
The degrees of PhD and MPhil are offered for composition.
For each degree the requirement will be submission of a portfolio of compositions.
In the case of the PhD, a supervised course lasting three years in the case of full-time students, the portfolio should normally include one major work, the performance of which would occupy an entire evening: for example, an opera.
For the MPhil the portfolio should include one work suitable to form the major item in a concert programme, like a symphony or concerto; this course normally lasts for two years.
There is no requirement for an additional written thesis or set of commentaries on the works submitted.
The Reid Professor of Music, Nigel Osborne, is an established composer of international repute.
Edward Harper, Reader in Music, is also a prominent composer whose music has been widely performed and recorded.
The Faculty has close relations with several professional performing bodies, in particular the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
In the field of musical scholarship, the PhD and MPhil are offered on the basis of research theses of the usual type.
Particular strengths are History of Musical Instruments (the University possesses two outstanding collections of historical instruments), Opera, Music theory, Electronic and Computer Music (there is a well-equipped electronic studio), Performance Practice.
Members of the staff have published important works in the field of Italian opera; the history of the harpsichord; semiotics of music.
They have also prepared scholarly editions for the complete critical editions of Handel, Lully, and for Musica Britannica.
Postgraduate degrees are not offered for performance, and the Faculty has no facilities for the teaching of performance.
However, advanced tuition is available in Edinburgh on a private basis for most instruments.
Music MMus/Diploma
See Taught Courses: Music (p. 130).
The degree and diploma are offered in two formats, either as specialised qualifications based on one major and one minor course, in which case the degree and diploma are awarded in the specialisation of the major course; or as less specialised qualifications, based on three minor courses.
Major courses are as follows —
Composition
The student's own work is developed and guided in individual tutorials and seminars.
There are no stylistic preferences; all contemporary styles are encouraged, including electro-acoustic music.
History of Instruments
History of Instruments I
Aspects of the history of the organ, harpsichord, clavichord and early piano; the development, design, construction, specification and action of different instruments; the relationship between instruments' capabilities and the music written for them.
History of Instruments II
Aspects of the history of string, wind and percussion instruments from ancient times to the present day, with particular regard to instruments of Western art music.
The development, design, manufacture and fitting-up of different instruments; playing technique, social background and musical use.
Musicology
Musicology I
Bibliography, data-bases, uses of the computer; general history of notation from c.1300, including twentieth-century notation; transcription of music from 1450 onwards, including some simple tablatures; basic principles of editing; manuscript studies; palaeography, basic archival study.
Musicology II
More specialised history of notation; transcription of black notation, more complex white notation and tablatures; advanced editing and stemmatics; iconography; advanced archival study.
Theory and Analysis
Theory
Philosophical, critical and semiotic theory of music, including practical exercises in criticism.
Analysis
Schenkerian analysis; pitch-class set theory; semiotic and other traditions of analysis; computer analysis, including a course in elementary computer-programming.
Minor Courses —
Analysis See above under Theory and Analysis.
Computer Sound Synthesis The composition and  performance of music by computer, including an introduction to digital synthesis and signal processing as a compositional tool.
Counterpoint including Fugue The study (through written exercises) of contrapuntal techniques with emphasis on sixteenth- and eighteenth-century styles.
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century examples may also be included where appropriate.
History of Instruments I See above under History of Instruments.
History of Instruments II See above under History of Instruments.
Music in the Community A practical introduction to the use of creative music in the community.
Work placements are arranged in areas such as education, mental health care, and the training of adults with learning difficulties.
Music since 1945 A survey of the principal technical and aesthetic trends in music to the present day, including electro-acoustic music.
Musicology I See above under Musicology.
Musicology II See above under Musicology.
Orchestration A study (through written exercises and analysis) of scoring for a variety of instrumental forces, culminating with the modern orchestra.
There are also exercises involving the technique of making piano reductions of orchestral scores.
Students would normally have completed an undergraduate course in orchestration.
Performance Practice A general course towards an understanding of what is involved in the performance of music primarily in the period c.1550–1800; notational problems, contemporary theory, organological questions, personal interpretations.
Though relevant to the performer, this is an academic course examined through written work.
Theory See above under Theory and Analysis.
FACULTY OF SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
Postgraduate Secretary: Doris Gordon
Address: West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JY
Telephone: 031 650 5766
Fax.: 031 650 5738
Science and Engineering is the largest of the eight Faculties in the University both in terms of student and staff numbers and in the size of its research budget.
No other university in Britain has a single faculty combining the interests of science and engineering which is as large as that at Edinburgh.
This permits opportunities for specialised or interdisciplinary research which are outstanding.
The academic disciplines within the Faculty can be divided into three general areas, i.e. Physical Sciences and Mathematics, containing the Departments of Astronomy, Chemistry, Geology & Geophysics, Mathematics and Statistics, Meteorology, and Physics; Engineering and Information Technology, for the Departments of Artificial Intelligence, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Cognitive Science, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering; and Biological Sciences, which includes the Institutes of Ecology and Resource Management, of Cell Animal and Population Biology, and of Cell and Molecular Biology.
All of the departments of the Faculty, except Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science, are located on the King's Buildings campus three kilometres south of the original site of the University.
Over the past sixty years the buildings housing the scientific laboratories and teaching classrooms have been built up and the population of students and staff has grown until there are now nearly one thousand registered postgraduate students and over one thousand academic, research and support staff.
The King's Buildings is also the base of the Edinburgh University Computing Service which provides the University community with very powerful computing services, whilst separately offering computing services for the universities of central Scotland on a network basis.
There are a number of specialised research organisations and centres set up within the Faculty or in conjunction with other organisations, in which advanced research can be conducted with access to very specialised facilities.
These include the Centre for Genome Research, run in conjunction with the Agriculture and Food Research Council (AFRC); the Human Communications Research Centre, supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC); the Centre for Molecular Recognition, supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC); the Centre for Speech Technology, run in conjunction with the Faculty of Arts; the Laboratory for the Foundations of Computer Science, supported by SERC; the Centre for Parasite Biology, with Medical Research Council (MRC) support; the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre, supported by the Department of Trade and Industry and SERC; and the Edinburgh Microfabrication Facility, an SERC silicon chip research and fabrication unit.
There are also research organisations sited either on the King's Buildings campus or in and around Edinburgh with which the Faculty has very close working relations.
These include the British Geological Survey, the Royal Observatory for Scotland, Institute of Grassland and Animal Production, AFRC Roslin Institute, Moredun Research Institute, Royal Botanic Garden, Scottish Agricultural College, Forestry Commission Northern Research Station, Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Scottish Centre for Agricultural Engineering, Human Genetics Unit.
Research projects under joint supervision can be arranged between the University and all of these Associated Institutions.
The great strength of the Faculty is in fundamental research into areas of applicable science and the projects conducted by staff in the Faculty receive an outstanding measure of financial support from Government Research Councils and charitable trusts.
Indeed, the Universities Funding Council recently awarded top grade research ratings to our Departments of Artificial Intelligence, Cell & Molecular Biology, Cognitive Science, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and Geology & Geophysics.
In addition to research degrees (PhD and MPhil), which can be undertaken in all departments, the Faculty offers a number of specialist one-year MSc Degrees and Diplomas, some of which are especially relevant to development in Third World countries.
There are also opportunities to study on a non-graduating basis should the type of training and study required demand this.
Artificial Intelligence
Head of Department: Professor Jim Howe
Postgraduate contact: Judith Gordon
Address: Forrest Hill, Edinburgh EH1 2QL
Telephone: 031 650 3094
Fax.: 031 225 9370
Staff numbers: 14 full-time academic; 24 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 50 research; 50 taught
Established in 1966, the department is the leading European centre for basic research and teaching in Artificial Intelligence.
It is complemented by the Artificial Intelligence Applications Institute, established in 1984, which offers training courses for industry and commerce and undertakes development work in Knowledge Based Systems for clients in the UK and overseas.
The department collaborates closely with the Centre for Cognitive Science and the Centre for Speech Technology Research.
Also, it co-sponsors the ESRC-funded Interdisciplinary Research Centre on Human Communication.
The department has a vigorous research programme.
There are four main areas of work, automated reasoning, intelligent robotics, knowledge based systems and speech and language processing.
Within each area, there are a number of externally funded projects.
Some of them are concerned with the automating of complex tasks, such as constructing and verifying logic programs, assembling objects from parts, recognising objects in scenes, navigating an unmanned vehicle through a cluttered environment, interpreting utterances.
Others focus on problems associated with the construction of systems with which users can interact to get assistance and advice, such as tools for design support, authoring aids, programming tools and learning environments.
The department's work has been given top ratings in both UGC/UFC research reviews.
For over 25 years the department has been pioneering AI teaching.
Many of its 100 or so Ph.D graduates hold senior posts in academia and industry, both in the UK and overseas.
More than 200 students from home and abroad have graduated from its Master's course in Knowledge Based Systems which began in 1983.
Within the KBS course, students can specialise in one of four areas: Foundations of AI, Expert Systems, Intelligent Robotics and Natural Language Processing.
The department has excellent facilities, located in two buildings near to the centre of the city.
They include a first-class AI library and well-appointed mechanical and electronic workshops which support a range of specialised laboratories for research and teaching purposes.
Computing facilities centre on networks of powerful scientific workstations, offering AI programming languages and tools.
Each year the department publishes a postgraduate prospectus which contains full details of the degree courses offered, brief information about research work, lists of staff members and lists of students and their projects.
It can be obtained by contacting the department's Admissions Secretary.
Astronomy
Head of Department: Dr Peter W. J. L. Brand
Address: Department of Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ
Telephone: 031 668 8356
Fax.: 031 668 8264
Staff numbers: 5 full-time academic; 5 full-time research; 1 full-time research support
Postgraduate numbers: 19 research
The department is closely linked with the Royal Observatory with which it shares accommodation and world class research facilities.
Observatory research scientists jointly supervise PhD students.
The range of research topics is correspondingly great, the major areas being Cosmology (particularly Galaxy Formation), Star Formation, and Instrument and Telescope Technology.
Stellar evolution, the structure and evolution of galaxies, and the violent activity in the nuclei of galaxies are also studied.
Research in the department involves the use of computing facilities and telescopes funded by the Science and Engineering Research Council, who also fund the research posts held in the department.
The PhD degree includes teaching through ‘kamikaze’ seminars, covering the basics of astrophysics and providing a broad understanding of astronomy.
Because of the national and international status of the Observatory, many seminars are given by visiting scientists on a wide range of subjects.
This all provides an exciting and creative research environment with which to interact.
Further information about the PhD course is available in booklets from the department.
Division of Biological Sciences
Head of Division: Professor John E. Dale
Address: Crew Building, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JN
Telephone: 031 650 5525
Fax.: 031 650 6556
Staff numbers: 79 full-time academic; 8 part-time academic; 109 full-time research
The Division of Biological Sciences came into being in October 1990 with the merger of the Departments of Agriculture, Botany, Forestry and Natural Resources, Genetics, Microbiology, Molecular Biology, and Zoology.
The Division is sub-divided into three units, the Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology, the Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Ecology and Resource Management (see individual entries below).
The interests of the Institutes overlap and informal sub-groupings operating across Institutes include the Centre for Developmental Biology, the Centre for Parasite Biology and the Centre for Plant Sciences.
The Division is part of the Faculty of Science and Engineering and is located at the King's Buildings.
Biological research has a long and distinguished tradition in the University and the excellence of research within the Division is recognised nationally and internationally.
Research is well supported by grants and contracts from Research Councils, a wide range of charitable foundations, the European Community and industry.
The annual income from these sources is in excess of £5m.
A brochure describing research activities of the Division in detail is available.
Centre for Genome Research
Director: Professor Richard Lathe
Postgraduate contact: Dr Linda Mullins
Address: King's Buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JQ
Telephone: 031 650 5890
Fax: 031 667 0164
Postgraduate numbers: 9 research
The CGR, an Interdisciplinary Research Centre, was established in 1989 under an agreement between the Agricultural and Food Research Council and the University.
The Centre, part of the Division of Biological Sciences of the Faculty of Science and Engineering, undertakes a core programme of research applying genome technology to problems of medical, agricultural and fundamental interest.
In addition, the Centre provides a centralised resource of expertise and technology for collaborative research with academic and industrial researchers in Britain and abroad.
The Centre comprises a modern transgenic facility with full laboratory amenities for molecular biology, stem cell manipulation (gene targeting), cell culture and mammalian genetics as well as a grade 3 containment suite.
The Centre has its own library and conference rooms and has access to services for oligonucleotide and peptide synthesis and microsequencing as well as to powerful computer and database services.
Although the CGR has no formal commitment to undergraduate teaching the CGR accepts students studying towards higher degrees.
In the past year the CGR has developed a number of new applications of transgenic and genome technology which focus on a small number of areas of interest.
Hypertension research: The CGR has developed a number of new hypertensive rat lines and these are being analysed by non-invasive telemetry recording of blood pressure.
New gene combinations are being incorporated into the rat germline with a view to dissecting the hypertensive phenotype and these animals will prove invaluable in the elaboration of new therapies for hypertension.
Endocrinology: Researchers have also been studying how thyroxine-deficient mouse model has been produced using transgenic ablation.
Thyroxine and GH responsive genes are beingcharacterised in the new model and in GH-deficient dwarf mice in order to gain an insight into the mechanisms governing sexual dimorphic liver gene expression.
Embryology and Differentiation: The CGR's focus here is the understanding of the cellular and genetic mechanisms underlying germ layer formation in the early mouse embryo.
Chimeras derived from embryonal stem cells chimeras have been used to determine the cell autonomy of an early developmental mutation, Brachury (T).
We are also constructing cDNA libraries from early embryonic tissues and have developed a wholemount in situ hybridisation technique for localising RNA in the mouse embryo.
Further studies are directed towards the understanding of the role which the stem cell control factor DIA/LIF plays in the normal embryo.
Neurogenetics: We have shown that the transcription factors controlling housekeeping gene expression are different in different tissue types and have identified novel binding sites in neuronal tissues.
As part of a larger programme into understanding cognitive function through transgenic animals we are characterising transcripts whose expression is restricted to different subregions of the brain.
Funding.
The CGR receives core-funding from the AFRC with additional contributions from, among others, the Human Frontiers Science Programme, the Medical Research Council, the Wellcome Trust, the US National Institute of Health, and the Cancer Research Campaign.
Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology
Head of Institute: Professor William G. Hill
Postgraduate contact: Dr Alun H. Maddy
Address: Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology, Ashworth Laboratories, The King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JT
Telephone: 031 650 5455
Fax.: 031 667 3210
Postgraduate numbers: 67 research; 6 taught
The activities of this Institute cover the broad central ground of biology within the Division of Biological Sciences: how the cellular and other components of a single organism develop and function together and evolve.
The areas of research cover immunology, parasitology, insect biology, developmental biology, ecology, animal behaviour, animal breeding and population genetics.
Collaborative research is an important feature of the Institute and is undertaken within the Division and with other institutions in the Edinburgh area including the AFRC Roslin Institute, the MRC Unit of Human Genetics, and departments of the University's Faculties of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine.
There are substantial collaborations with the Centre for Genome Research, for example in the modification of genes known to be important in the development of the immune system.
Immunobiology research is primarily related to investigations of normal and neoplastic differentiation of lymphocytes and several areas of immuno-parasitology.
The laboratories have extensive tissue culture facilities and there is a flow cytometric unit equipped with both analytical and cell sorting instruments.
Much of the work on parasite biology is focused on the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum but extends to other species notably nematode parasites of medical and veterinary importance and Theileria annulata , a parasite of cattle.
The malaria group has facilities for culturing the parasite and for containment of infected mosquitoes, and the University is a WHO Collaborative Centre for research in malaria.
Studies are being made of the population biology and molecular genetics of the parasite world-wide with emphasis on variation in antigens and in genes responsible for response of the parasite to drugs.
The Institute has facilities for work with pathogenic viruses and for genetic manipulation.
The Edinburgh Centre for HIV Research is part of the Institute.
Research in HIV has yielded an extensive set of nucleotide sequences from a group of haemophiliac patients infected by the same batch of Factor VIII.
The aim here is to quantify and explain the rapid sequence changes seen in the genome of this virus.
Many groups within the Institute study insects, investigating related aspects of their development, physiology, reproduction and behaviour.
Developmental studies include work on factors which operate on early segmentation, the development of patterns on butterfly wings and work on the control and growth of Drosophila.
Others work on photoreception, photoperiodism and the circadian rhythm.
Research in animal ecology and behaviour ranges from the analysis of a local river population of dippers to the study of the effect of damaged rain forests on the survival of bird species in an African island population, and analysis of the feeding behaviour of the lowland gorilla and its interaction with other fruit-eating species.
Work is being undertaken on the feeding behaviour of ungulates and how feed quality affects optimum body size, a topic of both ecological and agricultural importance.
In the area of population genetics, theoretical and experimental work is aimed at the process of evolution, natural and artificial selection.
The genetic basis of quantitative genetic variation is being investigated at the molecular genetic and population level.
Studies are also being undertaken on the trade off between life history strategies.
Work is being initiated in collaboration  between parasite biologists and population geneticists on parasite evolution.
Edinburgh is the UK centre for animal breeding research.
Studies include analysis of the genetics of growth using laboratory animals and of quantitative production traits in livestock.
Optimal methods for statistical analysis of data and design of breeding programmes are investigated using extensive microcomputing facilities and specialised programs.
Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology
Head of Institute: Dr David J. Finnegan
Postgraduate contact: Professor I. W. Sutherland
Address: Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, Darwin Building, The King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JU
Telephone: 031 650 5366
Fax: 031 667 3870
Postgraduate numbers: 95 research; 5 taught
The core of the Institute's research is described by its title but it also contains strong research groups working on plant and fungal physiology, biochemistry and taxonomy.
The Institute is well equipped for plant, animal and microbial cell culture and has greenhouses, growth rooms and growth chambers for plant propagation.
Members of the Institute have ready access to the communal Edinburgh facilities for oligonucleotide synthesis (OSWEL), protein characterisation and sequencing (WELMET) and peptide synthesis.
A large building extension will be ready for occupation by 1996.
There are strong collaborative links with groups outside the Institute and, in several cases, these involve joint research grants or studentships.
The Institute is part of the SERC-funded Molecular Recognition Centre, together with the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry.
Much of the research within the Institute involves the application of molecular and recombinant DNA techniques to a wide variety of systems.
These include the investigation of protein-nucleic acid interactions associated with the recognition of specific targets by restriction and modification enzymes, the activities of proteins involved in recombination and the processing of pre-messenger RNA by spliceosomes.
Other studies are elucidating the genetic organisation of the E. coli chromosome and the effects of DNA methylation on the structure and function of chromosomes in higher eukaryotes.
Work on gene expression ranges from analysis of sigma subunits of E. coli RNA polymerases to studies of the regulation of genes encoding glyoxylate enzymes in plants, and the targeting of proteins to organelles.
Several groups are investigating the molecular control of development.
This work includes analysis of fruiting body formation in fungi, the role of calcium in signal transduction in plants, the genetic and biochemical control of bacterial and yeast cell cycles, and the control of gene expression during sex determination in Drosophila .
Other areas of interests are bacterial physiology, DNA replication in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum , mechanisms of DNA transposition and the application of protein sequence analysis to questions concerning protein evolution.
This fundamental work complements more applied research directed at medical and biotechnological problems.
The applications include work aimed at finding out how vaccines can be prepared against viruses such as those causing hepatitis and AIDS and against protozoan parasites like those causing malaria, and the use of gene targeting in embryonic stem cells to produce models for studying genes associated with human diseases.
Other groups are investigating the biotechnology of bacterial polysaccharides, the production of secondary metabolites in plant cells in culture, the structure and function of cell walls of higher plants, and the biological control of plant diseases and higher plant systematics.
The Institute includes the Biocomputing Research Unit, established with the support of the Darwin Trust.
The Unit develops the application of high performance computers such as Distributed Array Processors and transputer arrays to problems in molecular biology including problems of sequence comparison and database searching.
The Faculty Electron Microscope Facility is also housed in the Institute and provides a service for all research workers.
It is well provided with Scanning Electron Microscope facilities and has a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope.
Institute of Ecology and Resource Management
Head of Institute: Professor Colin T. Whittemore
Postgraduate contact: Dr W. Spoor — Agricultural Sciences & Resource Economics; Professor J. Grace — Forestry, Natural Resources & Ecological Sciences
Address: Institute of Ecology and Resource Management The School of Agriculture Building The King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JG
Telephone: 031 667 1041
Fax.: 031 667 2601
Postgraduate numbers: 76 research; 85 taught
This Institute aims to extend knowledge through education and research in its constituent Schools of Agriculture, Ecological Sciences, Forestry, and Resource Economics.
It aims to use scientific method to understand the fundamental processes of biology, agriculture, the environment and economics and to apply this understanding to the sustainable management of the world's biological resources, including the provision of food, fibre, energy and natural products, for the benefit of man while at the same time developing methods to limit, control or eliminate conflicts of interest between the welfare of mankind and the well-being of animals, plants and the environment.
This requires an interdisciplinary approach and the Institute has an holistic view of land, plant and animal management.
The Institute has a wide range of specialised research facilities including glasshouses, growth rooms and chambers, an environmental wind tunnel, animal metabolism and animal behaviour facilities, an animal surgery, facilities for carcass and meat evaluation, and provision for the individual feeding and care of animals.
The Institute possesses a wide range of data logging, micro- and mini-computing equipment and has access to the computing facilities of the Edinburgh University Computing Service and to national and international networks.
Members of the Institute have the use of extensive field experimental grounds.
The farms of the Edinburgh School of Agriculture extend to 1,200 hectares embracing hill, upland and lowland and there is a comprehensive range of plot, field and farm scale facilities that are fully equipped for large animal and crop plant experimentation.
Ecological and forestry studies are conducted on sites throughout Scotland while local forest areas are used for detailed experimental work.
Basic research includes studies of environmental biology, ecological genetics, mammalian reproduction and the physiology and chemistry of plants, animals and soils.
A major focus is the Edinburgh University Biosphere Atmosphere Programme, directed toward understanding fluxes of carbon dioxide on vegetation.
Strategic research investigates computer modelling techniques, geographic information systems, rural development, farm planning, micro-meteorology, atmospheric pollution and climate change, the control of diseases and pests, the biology of weeds, tree improvement, plant growth and development, the quality of agricultural products, animal welfare and behaviour, and the improvement of plants and animals by genetic selection and manipulation.
Much of this work results in prediction and simulation models and computer assisted biological modelling is an important element of research within the Institute.
Programmes of applied research study agroforestry, forest economics and management, conservation and vegetation management and systems for the production  of milk, meat, eggs and animal fibre.
Other groups are studying rural development opportunities, farm forestry and other environmentally sensitive farming practices, the economics of low input and organic farming systems, the optimal utilisation of agricultural investment and the creation of expert systems to aid in decision-making for the management of the natural and farmed environment.
Many of the Institute's research programmes are pursued in close association with the Scottish Agricultural College and other groups within and outside the University.
There are close links with the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, the Forestry Commission, Scottish Natural Heritage, the Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine, the Institute for Animal Physiology and Genetics, the Centre for Agricultural Engineering, the Scottish Crops Research Institute and the Animal Moredun Research Institute.
Many of these organisations are within a few minutes of the King's Buildings.
Chemical Engineering
Head of Department and Postgraduate contact: Dr Colin Pritchard
Address: Department of Chemical Engineering, Kings' Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JL
Telephone: 031 650 4854
Fax.: 031 650 6551
Staff numbers: 9 full-time academic; 2 part-time academic; 12 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 20 research
The department enjoys the advantages of being a compact and friendly department of about one hundred and fifty undergraduate students, whilst belonging to a large Faculty of Science and Engineering.
We are housed in a modern, purpose-designed building, with extensive teaching and research laboratories and computing facilities.
The work of the department emphasises the science base of Engineering, and the relevance of this to today's industry and the development of new technology and processes.
The research activities of the department are very wide, encompassing most areas of chemical engineering.
They include a major programme in computer-aided process engineering, with substantial support (about £2m) from SERC and industry; catalysis and related noncatalytic gas-solid reactions; new systems for refrigeration, heat pumping and energy recovery; solids processing, and gas-solid transport systems; bioreactors for the culture of mammalian hybridoma cells in the production of monoclonal antibodies; membrane ultrafiltration and downstream separations, hydrodynamic and mass and heat transport effects in biological fluids; flow visualisation and velocimetry techniques and process applications of robots, vision systems and robot technology.
The department has recently received industrial funding for a new lectureship in Safety Engineering, and is developing research activity in process safety and environmental topics.
Most of these areas of research have direct industrial support.
Several other University departments:(mechanical engineering, physics, mathematics, computer  science and microbiology) are involved in joint programmes.
Each of these disciplines is currently represented in our postgraduate body and applications are invited from graduates of these disciplines as well as of Chemical Engineering.
There are active links with other institutions in Europe, providing the opportunity for research collaboration and exchanges.
Chemistry
Head of Department: Professor David W. H. Rankin
Postgraduate contact: Dr T. Brown
Address: Department of Chemistry, Kings Buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JJ
Telephone: 031 650 4792
Fax: 031 650 4743
Staff numbers: 30 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 22 full-time research; 4 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 100 research; 3 taught
Chemistry in Edinburgh was originally associated with Medicine, the first Professor, James Crawford, being appointed to a Chair of Chemistry and Medicine in 1713.
Nowadays, the Chemistry Department is amongst the largest in the country, with an international reputation for research in many fields.
As befits its size, the department is very well equipped with a wide range of modern instrumentation and provides excellent facilities and a stimulating environment for postgraduate research.
Facilities are available for ESR, atomic absorption, and NMR spectroscopy (including the UK high-field service for Chemistry and Biology); mass spectrometry (high resolution magnetic sector, GCMS, and TOF instruments); structural determination of single crystals and powders by X-ray diffraction (4 diffractometers), and of volatile compounds by gas-phase electron diffraction.
The department is also extensively equipped for preparative electrosynthesis and electrochemical studies, with the associated electroanalytical and spectroelectrochemical techniques, and for both analytical and preparative GC and HPLC.
A wide range of pulsed laser instrumentation (Nd:YAG, excimer, CO2, dye lasers, etc.) is available, used for spectroscopic and analytical studies, as well as investigations in photo- and atmospheric chemistry and the dynamics of elementary gas-phase reactions.
Extensive facilities for evaluation of catalytic activity include Auger electron spectroscopy and diffuse reflectance and transmission Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.
The department is also extremely well equipped for modern biological chemistry, possessing several DNA and peptide synthesizers as well as equipment for rapid protein and DNA separations and for stopped-flow enzyme kinetics.
Excellent computing facilities are available to the department which are widely exploited in ab initio quantum calculations on the properties of molecules, and for the modelling of chemical dynamics via trajectory calculations.
Students may undertake full-time supervised research leading to the award of a Ph.D (3 years) or M.Phil.
(2 years).
The department also offers a Diploma course in Environmental Chemistry (see page 125).
Approximately 35 studentships (including SERC quota and CASE quota awards as well as industrially-funded awards) are available annually for research in many areas of Organic, Inorganic, Physical and Environmental Chemistry as well as Chemical Physics.
Particular research strengths of the department include: analytical chemistry, bio-inorganic chemistry, bio-organic chemistry, catalysis, cluster chemistry, electrochemistry, environmental chemistry, electron diffraction, heterocyclic chemistry, laser spectroscopy, medicinal chemistry, NMR spectroscopy, organic synthesis, organometallic and co-ordination chemistry, quantum chemistry, reaction dynamics, structural chemistry, surface chemistry, synthetic inorganic chemistry, X-ray crystallography, zeolites.
All these research areas receive support from industrial and government sources.
There are also active collaborations with other institutions in Europe and the USA, offering the opportunity for research visits and exchanges.
Applicants for these studentships should generally hold or expect to obtain a First or Upper Second Class Honours Degree or its equivalent in Chemistry or a related subject.
Civil Engineering and Building Science
Head of Department: Professor J. Michael Rotter
Postgraduate contact: Dr John Morgan
Address: The King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JL
Telephone: 031 650 5719
Fax.: 031 667 9238
Staff numbers: 13 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 3 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 24 research
The department undertakes highly focused research addressing the current needs of industry.
Current collaborative research and close contacts exist with many other universities in Britain, USA, Canada, Australia, PR China, Germany, France, Italy, Denmark, and Austria.
The department has 10 laboratories for Structural Testing, Concrete Technology, Hydraulics, Geotechnical Engineering, Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel Studies, Stress Analysis, Computing, Non-destructive Testing, Pollution Control, and Fire Safety Engineering.
Current research funding comes from a wide variety of sources including SERC, EC, HSE, DTI, and industry.
Postgraduate students usually join one of the five research teams in Structural behaviour and design, Computer modelling of structures and soils, Geotechnical engineering and non-destructive testing, Environmental engineering, and Fire safety engineering.
The department's research programmes are:
Structural Behaviour and Design: Structures in steel, aluminium, concrete and masonry:special projects in tanks and silos, masonry and concrete walls, shell structures.
Computer Modelling of Structures and Soils: Finite element analysis applied to plate and shell structures, geotechnical problems and dry granular solids storage silos.
Geometric and material non-linearity in steel, concrete, masonry and bulk solids.
The use of parallel processing in finite element analysis.
Geotechnical Engineering and Non-Destructive Testing: Vehicle-soil interaction in construction, soil-structure interaction, innovative techniques for bulk solids testing, acoustic signals and impulse radar to find defects in construction and hidden subterranean features.
Environmental Engineering: Water treatment in developing countries, pollution control, coastal erosion, local environmental effects of wind, tree growth and strength prediction.
Fire Safety Engineering: Ignition, growth and spread of fire, smoke movement and control, escape route design, application of fire engineering principles in architectural design.
A brochure with further information is available from the department.
Centre for Cognitive Science
Head of Department: Dr Elisabet Engdahl
Postgraduate contact: Dr Paul Schweizer
Address: 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Telephone: 031 650 4667
Fax.: 031 650 4587
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic; 9 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 18 taught; 30 research; 2 non-graduating
The Centre for Cognitive Science (CCS), the only institution in Britain devoted exclusively to research and postgraduate teaching in Cognitive Science, offers a programme of postgraduate studies centred on the study of language and the cognitive processes involved.
Through its intensive training programme, the Centre aims to produce well-trained scholars to undertake research on outstanding problems in this rapidly developing field.
The programme leads to the degrees of PhD, MPhil and MSc.
The Centre's lecturers  and research fellows work with over 40 postgraduates in a rich and varied intellectual and social environment, in co-operation with the Departments of Artificial Intelligence, Computer Science, Linguistics, Philosophy, and Psychology and the Human Communication Research Centre.
Regular interdisciplinary research workshops, in which students actively participate, focus on current problems in cognitive science; speakers of international repute visit the department regularly.
Research projects, many of them collaborative with other European centres of excellence, have been funded by ESRC, SERC, ESPRIT and BRAIN in such areas as natural language understanding and computational neuroscience.
CCS is also co-ordinating node for ELSNET, the European Network in Language and Speech.
A departmental handbook is available from the above address.
Computer Science
Head of Department: Professor Roland Ibbett
Postgraduate contact: Eleanor Kerse
Taught Course contact: Mr D.K. Arvind
Address: James Clerk Maxwell Building, King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ
Telephone: 031 650 5156 (PhD), 031 650 5129 (MSc)
Fax: 031 667 7209
Staff numbers: 29 full-time academic; 27 full-time research; 2 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 70 research; 52 taught
The Department of Computer Science has an international reputation for the quality of its research, receiving top rating in the 1986 UGC and the 1989, 1992 UFC research selectivity exercises.
There are active groups working in computational complexity, graphics, parallel and distributed systems, theory of computation and VLSI design using both formal and informal methods.
Research in computational theory and its applications is carried out within the Laboratory for the Foundations of Computer Science.
The main areas of interest are proof engineering, languages and programming, concurrency and communication, specification and formal development of systems and semantics.
Much of the research in parallel computing is carried out within the Research Division of the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre which is investigating those fundamental aspects of parallel computing which can lead to the development of new and improved systems and user support tools.
The department also runs a taught MSc course, of which more details can be found in the Taught Courses section.
A separate handbook, outlining course components may be obtained from the department.
Electrical Engineering
Head of Department: Professor Alan Owen
Postgraduate contact: Professor John M. Robertson
Address: King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JL
Telephone: 031 650 5574
Fax.: 031 650 6554
Staff numbers: 32 full-time academic, 3 part-time academics, 31 full-time research
Postgraduate registrations: 76, 59 full-time; 17 part-time
The department has an active programme of research which covers all sectors of Electronics and Electrical Engineering.
In the three published surveys of research performance, the department has been given the top (grade 5) rating.
Excellent experimental facilities exist for CAD, fabrication, and assessment of integrated circuits.
In addition there is an extensive computer resource within the department, linked to the campus network.
Total research income for the department is around £1.5m pa from a wide variety of sources.
Many research projects are carried out in collaboration with other universities and companies (both local and international).
CASE projects are used wherever possible.
The main research groupings are: Materials and Devices, Semiconductor Technology, Signals and Systems, Integrated Systems, Energy Systems
A research brochure and details of available projects are available on request.
Geology and Geophysics
Head of Department: Professor Ian Parsons
Postgraduate contact: Helena Jack
Address: Department of Geology and Geophysics, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JW
Telephone: 031 650 4843
Fax: 031 668 3184
Staff numbers: 35 full-time academic; 34 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 64 research
The department carries out research in five principal areas of Earth Science: Igneous, metamorphic and experimental petrology; Tectonics and Earth history; Marine and Quaternary geology, including global climatic change; Geophysics; Petroleum Geoscience.
It has close links with other University departments, with the British Geological Survey, which is on the same site, with Heriot-Watt University, with the Petroleum Science and Technology Institute, and with the Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Centre at East Kilbride.
The department houses the NERC National Geophysical Equipment Pool, the NERC Edinburgh Ion Probe Centre and a UFC Electron Probe Centre.
Postgraduate activity is organised into a Graduate School, which acts as a focus for research student affairs.
Principal Research Areas: Igneous, metamorphic and experimental petrology: A major unifying theme of this group is the interpretation of chemical and textural features of rocks at the inter- and intra-crystal scale, to provide insights into large scale processes.
The group operates state-of-the-art microbeam and bulk analytical facilities, together with a full range of high pressure-high temperature equipment, with applications ranging from processes deep in the upper mantle to reactions in petroleum reservoirs.
Its field activities span every continent and include many outstanding regions for the study of magmatism and metamorphism.
Fields of activity include: Melt formation and extraction in mantle and crust; magma generation and magma chamber processes; fluid-rock interactions in igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary environments; P-T-t paths of rocks and minerals; experimental determination of phase equilibria and physical properties.
Tectonics and Earth history: The group's main aims are to use geological and geophysical observations from ancient and active rift and plate-boundary areas on land and in the oceans to deduce the effects of fundamental processes of plate creation, interaction and deformation.
Fields of activity include: Basement evolution; rift basins; passive margins; palaeoceanography; evolution of foreland basins and active margins; orogenic collapse basins; microplate dynamics.
Marine and Quaternary Geology: This group is concerned with the study of fundamental physical, chemical and biological processes which enable Quaternary climatic and environmental changes and their causes to be inferred on timescales of a million years to less than one year.
The group is an international focus for Quaternary research and comprises a well-balanced combination of academic staff, research fellows and research students.
It is a major user of NERC research vessels and is actively involved in a number of national and international programmes.
Particular fields include: Environmental change recorded in lakes and in ocean basins; the role of ice sheets in environmental and climatic change; uptake of pollutants by reef-forming organisms; studies of waste disposal and pollution.
Geophysics: The group has a diversity of geophysical research interests, unique in the U.K., which makes possible problem-orientated research incorporating a range of methods, for example, to examine the structure of the Earth's crust.
Many topics, such as fluid-rock interactions, fracture mechanics, palaeomagnetic field directions and computer simulation of fault growth link directly with other areas of Earth science.
Current fields include: Earthquake and exploration seismology; rock fracture mechanics; geodetic microgravimetry, including absolute gravimetry; natural electromagnetic induction and electrical conductivity; experimental isostasy and mantle rheology; gravity, magnetic and electromagnetic surveying methods; geomagnetism; palaeomagnetism and environmental magnetism; marine geophysics.
Petroleum Geoscience: This group draws on expertise from all the above groups and includes substantial financial input from industry, the Petroleum Science and Technology Institute and the European Community.
The group's goals are to understand the factors influencing the origin, development and character of hydrocarbon reservoirs, and to develop and apply techniques to improve the location and characterisation of reservoirs.
Projects range in scale from basin-wide to intergranular; they include seismic, electromagnetic, borehole and outcrop data collection and analysis, laboratory measurements of fluid-rock interactions, and heavy computer usage for data-processing and simulations.
A detailed departmental brochure is available on request.
Mathematics and Statistics
Head of Department: Professor David Parker
Address: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ
Telephone: 031 650 5061
Fax: 031 650 6553
Staff numbers: 35 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 7 full-time research
Postgraduate students: 30 research; 8 taught
The department offers research supervision for MPhil and PhD degrees in the following areas: Analysis (operator theory, spectral theory, potential theory, partial differential equations); Algebra (groups, rings, commutative algebra); Topology and Geometry (algebraic topology, differential geometry) Probability Theory (stochastic differential equations, Markovn processes, applications to geometry); Coding Theory (switching, computational number theory); Applied Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems; Modelling; Fluid Mechanics (water waves, hydrodynamics of off-shore structures); Nonlinear Waves (elasticity and optics); Mathematical Physics (twistor theory quantum field theory and integrable systems); Stellar Dynamics; Parallel Optimisation; Mathematical Education; Image Analysis (including automated recognition of human chromosomes and abnormal cervical smears); Statistical Evaluation of Evidence; Statistical Expert Systems; Analysis of Directional Data; and statistical applications in agriculture, medicine, epidemiology, forensic science.
Joint supervision with other departments can be arranged for appropriate research projects.
There is a regular programme of postgraduate lectures and seminars in analysis, algebra, topology, probability, statistics and applied mathematics.
There are also meetings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society, the North British Functional Analysis Seminar, the North British Differential Equations Seminar, the North British Probability Seminar, the Scottish Algebra Seminar and the Scottish Topology  Group.
There are close links with statisticians in the Scottish Agricultural Statistics Service, the Faculties of Medicine and Social Science, the Government Statistical Service in the Scottish Office and numerous other departments and research institutes.
There are normally several senior mathematicians visiting the department from overseas.
Excellent computing facilities ranging from micros and Sun workstations to mainframe parallel computing are available.
A departmental brochure is available.
Mechanical Engineering
Head of Department: Dr G.M. Alder
Postgraduate contact: Professor S.H.
Salter
Address: King's Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ
Telephone: 031 650 5683/4
Fax.: 031 667 3677
Staff numbers: 10 full-time academic; 2 part-time academic; 8 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 10 research
The department has research interests in: Dynamics; Fluid Mechanics; Wave Power; Electrochemical, laser and ultrasonic machining and related processes; Process planning for manufacturing; Robotics and Mechatronics; Biomechanics.
The department has strong links with the Scottish Centre for Agricultural Engineering.
Research funding is provided by many sources, among which the largest are SERC, ESPRIT, Wolfson Foundation, British Gas and Ford Motor Company.
Departmental resources include wave tanks, wind tunnels, experimental internal combustion engines, particle image velocimetry instrumentation, laser doppler anemometry equipment, CAD software, production simulation and planning software, industrial robots and special purpose machine tools.
Further information is available in the departmental brochure.
Meteorology
Head of Department: Dr Bob Harwood
Postgraduate contact: Dr Keith Weston
Address: Department of Meteorology, James Clerk Maxwell Building, King's Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ
Telephone: 031 650 5101
Fax: 031 662 4269
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic; 10 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 10 research; 9 taught
The department's main research interests are in the fields of remote sensing from satellites, the large-scale dynamics of the troposphere and stratosphere, in the analyses of pollution episodes and the development of computer-aided learning in meteorolgy.
In remote sensing research the department is part of a consortium, led from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which is developing techniques for measuring trace gases in the atmosphere by measuring emitted microwave radiation.
The department's role concerns the understanding of the radiative transfer processes and devising techniques to infer 3-dimensional fields of these trace gases.
A second area of remote sensing research, combined with numerical modelling involves work on techniques to incorporate satellite altimeter data into ocean circulation models, including that being developed by the UK Meteorological Office for weather and climate.
Studies of large-scale dynamics are undertaken in association with groups from other UK universities using both simple and state-of-the-art computer models.
Work on acid rain and tropospheric ozone episodes is undertaken in collaboration with the nearby Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, using data from the UK network of monitoring sites.
The department has an academic link with the Nanjing Institute of Meteorology in China.
Excellent facilities are available for the study of these topics, including sophisticated computer systems within the department, links to other University computers and to super computers at other UK sites.
Physics
Head of Department: Professor Alan C. Shotter
Postgraduate contact: Professor G. Stuart Pawley
Address: Department of Physics, James Clerk Maxwell Building, King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ
Telephone: 031 650 5300
Fax.: 031 662 4712
Staff numbers: 29 full-time academic; 25 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 64 research; 2 taught
The Department of Physics is housed in the modern and spacious James Clerk Maxwell Building on the King's Building's site south of the city centre.
The department offers a postgraduate Diploma in Physics, consisting of advanced course work as well as postgraduate research for MPhil and PhD degrees.
The research activities of the department are very broad, ranging from understanding the properties of the newly discovered Z° boson to applied research into the design of wind turbines.
The department has well-equipped laboratory facilities and houses the most advanced parallel computers as well as conducting research at national and international institutions.
Current research interests include x-ray, neutron- and light-scattering studies of structural phase transitions under conditions of variable temperature and pressure; the structure of surfaces and interfaces as well as the structure and dynamics of colloidal suspensions.
Work in such areas is complemented by computer simulation of condensed matter simulations and studies of universality near critical points.
Research in theory and computation encompasses quantum field theories of elementary particles, neural networks and quantum chromodynamics.
Experimental research is conducted at LEP (CEPN) using the ALEPH detector as well as in nuclear physics into nuclear fission, heavy ion fusion and photon-induced reactions.
Thermoluminescence dating and environmental radiation monitoring is also pursued within the nuclear physics group.
Applied research involves development of liquid-crystal spatial light modulators as well as studies of water wave dynamics, wind energy, acoustics, etc.
All of these areas of research receive financial support from industry or government sources.
There are active collaborations with other institutions in Europe and further afield, offering the opportunity for research visits and exchanges.
Further details can be found in our departmental information sheets available from Professor Stuart Pawley.
FACULTY OF SOCIAL SCIENCES
Associate Dean (Postgraduate): Professor Anthony P. Cohen
Postgraduate Secretary: Jean Grier
Address: 55 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU
Telephone: 031 650 4084
Fax.: 031 650 6512
The Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Edinburgh is a large but welcoming and intellectually stimulating community which takes seriously the education and welfare of graduate students.
The Faculty embraces an unusually wide range of departments.
This grouping of disciplines provides a broad and fertile context for study in social science.
A strong emphasis is laid on interdisciplinary activity.
This crosses not only departmental boundaries within the Faculty, but also extends to related areas in other Faculties, notably Arts (history, philosophy and linguistics), Divinity (theology, christianity in the non-western world), Law (criminology and jurisprudence), and Science (geology, biological and environmental sciences, and artificial intelligence).
Some 250 staff are involved in undergraduate and postgraduate teaching and research.
There is a large academic research staff, and there are approximately 270 postgraduate students who are studying for research degrees, with some 700 on postgraduate courses.
The Faculty has an extremely high level of research activity, and is one of the largest recipients in Britain of ESRC and other Research Council funds.
The Research Centre for Social Sciences was established in 1984 both to carry out research and to support research throughout the Faculty.
It assists the collaboration of different departments in major projects.
The high level of research interest and activity to be found in the Faculty could not exist without excellent research facilities.
Access to computing and to the various archives and library facilities is crucial for researchers.
Edinburgh is superbly supported in both respects.
These factors, taken together with the attractions of Edinburgh as a city and the University as a large, intellectually lively and well-supported institution, make the Faculty of Social Sciences an exciting and satisfying place in which to conduct research.
The Faculty offers opportunities for full- and part-time study leading to the award of a range of postgraduate degrees and diplomas.
Research postgraduates are registered as ‘supervised postgraduate students’ in the first instance.
Transfer to MPhil or PhD candidature is made on the recommendation of the supervisors and the head of department at the end of the first year.
The ‘supervised postgraduate’ year is then counted towards the registration period required for the PhD and MPhil.
The PhD degree involves the candidate in supervised research for a period usually of 36 months full-time, or 48 months part-time.
The candidate submits a thesis for examination which is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge.
In some departments, the MPhil degree involves coursework as well as supervised research; in others, it is based only on research work.
The degree is awarded on the basis of written examinations and/or the presentation of a satisfactory thesis.
One-year Master's Degrees and Diplomas are available.
These one-year degrees are awarded on the basis of written examination after nine months' coursework and the submission and examination of a dissertation.
Diplomas are awarded to candidates who reach a satisfactory standard in written examinations following nine months of coursework.
The Faculty also offers a range of vocational courses taken over one or two years in subjects such as Architecture (DipArch), Education (MEd), Landscape Architecture (MLA), Nursing Studies (MSc) and Social Work (MSW).
The Faculty runs courses and seminars in methods of Social Research.
All research students are required to take the courses in research methods and skills which  are specified by their departments.
These have recently been redesigned in accordance with ESRC guidelines.
In addition, the Faculty offers a wide-ranging programme of training in social science research techniques, which is co-ordinated by the Research Centre for Social Sciences.
The courses are arranged on a modular basis, each lasting for one term.
They can be divided into three broad categories: 1.
General: including research design; epistemology and philosophy of the social sciences and various ‘study skills’(writing; ethical issues in research; audio-visual techniques; language-learning).
2.
Quantitative data exploration and analysis.
3.
Specialist techniques: ethnographic and qualitative methods; survey techniques; computing.
In addition, there are seminars on various research issues, and a research workshop which meets in the third term.
The entire programme is flexible, is continually kept under review, and is responsive to student demand.
Accounting and Business Method
Head of Department: Mr F. Mitchell
Address: William Robertson Building, 50 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JY
Telephone: 031 650 8335/6
Fax.: 031 668 3053
Staff numbers: 9 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 3 research full-time, 2 research part-time
The Department of Accounting and Business Method's provision for postgraduates concentrates on the supervision of PhD and MPhil students.
Staff research interests lie in the areas of auditing, accountability issues including social accounting, accounting history, managerial accounting and public sector.
The department hosts the Institute of Public Sector Accounting Research.
Recent postgraduate research includes managerial auditing, the application of games theory to auditing, local authority accounting and managerial decision support systems.
Doctoral and masters applications are invited in any area which matches the above staff interests.
Centre of African Studies
Director: Professor Kenneth King
Address: Adam Ferguson Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL
Telephone: 031 650 3878
Fax.: 031 650 6535
Postgraduate numbers: 9 taught
The Centre of African Studies in Edinburgh has always maintained a focus on the whole of Africa, and has not concentrated on a particular region — such as West or Southern.
The courses in its MSc/Diploma in African Studies draw selectively on the African expertise of many members of the University's staff.
No less than 100 members have had substantial contact through research, teaching and consultancy with Africa.
However, the disciplines which have been particularly important to these courses almost since the foundation of the Centre in 1962 have been History, Politics, Social Anthropology, and Education.
These disciplines have been joined by many others from different fields, from Law to Business Studies, to Social Administration, to Gender Studies, to Forestry, Religious Studies and Natural Resources.
Since 1991, ERASMUS links with the Universities of Leiden and Crete allow Edinburgh-based students to spend up to three months abroad, on options such as Politics of the Horn of Africa, and Culture and Development in Africa.
Both the city and the University have superb resources for the study of Africa.
The National Library of Scotland has major collections relating to Africa, especially through the Church of Scotland's mission papers.
The University Library has built up over the years one of the finest collections of African studies in higher education.
Through the Standing Committee on  Library Materials on Africa, the library additionally has an obligation to maintain collections on Zambia and Malawi.
The Centre organises weekly seminars and holds an annual international conference.
Its publications include the conference proceedings and a series of occasional papers.
Archaeology
Head of Department: Professor Trevor Harding
Address: 19 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ
Telephone: 031 650 4134
Fax.: 031 662 0772
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic; 10 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 20 research
Specialist supervision is available over a wide spectrum of periods (from palaeolithic to the early historic) and a broad range of regions (from Scotland, across Europe, including central and eastern Europe, to the Mediterranean and the Middle East).
The department staff are engaged in a series of major field research projects which generate varied research opportunities for postgraduate students.
Currently there are excavation and survey-based projects in different parts of Scotland, central France, Bohemia, Romania, Cyprus, Turkey and Syria.
The main foci of research in the department are landscape archaeology, analytical work on materials and artefacts, environmental archaeology, underwater archaeology and archaeological resource management.
The department benefits greatly from close relations with national archaeological agencies also based in Edinburgh, such as Historic Scotland, the National Museums of Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland.
Opportunities for joint supervision with members of staff from these bodies are available when suitable candidates with appropriate research topics present themselves.
The department is actively developing a programme of MSc degrees to provide both a grounding in research methodology and the opportunity to develop research competence in particular fields.
Architecture
Head of Department: Mr Andrew Gilmour
Postgraduate contact: Professor Barrie Wilson (MPhil/PhD) or Dr John Byrom (MLA)
Address: 20 Chambers Street, Edinburgh EH1 1JZ
Telephone: 031 650 2334
Fax.: 031 667 7938
Staff numbers: 17 full-time academic; 30 part-time academic; 7 full-time research; 2 part-time research
Postgraduate students: 25 research; 24 taught; 2 non-graduating; 1 Diploma
Research supervision for the degrees of PhD and MPhil is available in the following fields: computer-aided architectural design; environmental, climatic and energy-conscious design; history and theory of architecture; landscape architecture; structures, materials and construction.
Supervision in the area of computer-aided architectural design is offered within the department's research unit EdCAAD whose work focuses upon generalised logic modelling and interpretation of expressions in words and drawings linked with allied fields of artificial intelligence and cognitive science.
Research on the history and theory of Western architecture is co-ordinated within the Centre for Architectural History and Theory and may be linked to conservation or to issues in contemporary design.
There is also a substantial research programme on the traditional architectures of different parts of the world and on the problems of transition to modern forms.
The department is one of only four in the UK offering a taught Masters degree in Landscape Architecture, and it supports a large programme of postgraduate research.
Present studies, based in Europe, the Americas, the Middle East, Africa and Asia, include recreation patterns in Islamic and Western communities, development pressures on urban and rural areas, and visitor impact on cultural sites.
Expertise and support are available for studies in architectural technology (environment, energy, structures and construction).
Particular interests lie in masonry structures, light-weight steel building systems, cladding, energy management and auditing, and energy awareness.
Prospective students are encouraged to make an initial proposal of their research work at the time of application.
This will help the department to judge whether suitable supervision is available.
An annual journal,Edinburgh Architectural Research , presents the research interests of the department.
Business Studies
Head of Department: Professor John A. Dawson
Postgraduate contact: Professor John A. Dawson
Address: William Robertson Building, 50 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JY
Telephone: 031 650 3827
Fax.: 031 668 5053
Staff numbers: 28 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 3 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 19 research; 412 taught; 1 non-graduating
Founded in 1918, this was the first Department of Business Studies to be established in a British university.
Its staff members come from a variety of disciplines.
They have wide-ranging research interests and practical experience maintaining strong links with industrial and other organisations through consultancy and research.
There is an active and interdisciplinary research programme, funded by major grants from the ESRC, SERC and from industrial and other organisations.
In addition to its undergraduate teaching, the department offers full- and part-time MBA programmes, as well as MPhil and PhD degrees.
The aim of the MBA Programmes is to enable students to become more effective in the business world.
Programmes are designed to provide an integrated understanding of the essential aspects of management, and to allow students to develop specialist knowledge in particular areas through their choice of options and dissertation project.
Doctoral studies and research training are undertaken in areas of finance, operations research, marketing, human resource management and corporate strategy.
The research interests of staff reflect the international and integrative nature of research in management topics.
Brochure available on request.
Centre of Canadian Studies
Director: Dr Ged Martin
Address: 21 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LD
Telephone: 031 650 4128
Fax.: 031 662 0053
Staff numbers: 2 full-time academic
The Centre of Canadian Studies welcomes postgraduate students, registered in any department, who may have an interest in Canada.
Although the Centre does not formally teach postgraduate students itself, it has an active programme of seminars and teaching and provides a Canadian dimension to research in a wide range of disciplines.
The Centre is regarded as the premier institute for the study of Canada in Britain.
Edinburgh is very well endowed with library resources for associated research.
Economic and Social History
Head of Department: Professor Michael Anderson
Postgraduate contact: Dr Michael Palairet
Address: William Robertson Building, 50 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JY
Telephone: 031 650 3843
Fax.: 031 668 3053
Staff numbers: 12 full-time academic; 3 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 15 research
This is one of the largest Economic and Social History Departments in the United Kingdom.
It received the highest possible grading in the 1992 UFC research selectivity  exercise.
All members of staff are very actively committed to research.
The size of the department and the diversity of interests among its staff allow it to offer a wide range of supervision, not only in modern and medieval British economic, social, demographic and business history, but also on South Asia, the Caribbean, Russia and contemporary South-Eastern Europe.
Many staff have interests in the application of social science theories and methods in historical research.
There is particular expertise in computing applications, especially those using large data sets.
In this environment, many students undertake work of an interdisciplinary nature.
Joint supervision is regularly arranged with staff from related departments, for example: Economics, Sociology, Geography, Politics, History, and Criminology.
Postgraduate students in the department have ready access to an exceptionally wide range of library, archive and other research resources.
These include diverse and powerful computing facilities, with excellent mainframe database and mapping software supplementing the department's microcomputing provision.
In the University Library, open-shelf access to nineteenth and twentieth-century British Parliamentary Papers greatly facilitates research on a range of British topics in this period.
Among the diverse local archives, the presence in Edinburgh of the General Register Office, with access to nineteenth century vital registers as well as census enumeration books, encourages work on the demography of Scotland in the period 1855–1939.
The Registers of Sasines, when combined with sequestration and other records in the Scottish Record Office, offer a range of unexploited opportunities for research on property structures and social structures.
Research accommodation for graduate students (with its own computing equipment) is provided.
Further information is available from Dr Palairet.
Economics
Head of Department: Professor Brian Main
Postgraduate contact: Professor George Evans
Address: William Robertson Building, 55 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JY
Telephone: 031 650 8361
Fax: 031 668 3053
Staff numbers: 10 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 1 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 3 research
The department offers a relatively wide range of specialisms for prospective research students.
Much of its research is oriented towards applied work in areas such as Labour Economics, Industrial Organisation, Macroeconomics and Economic and Econometric Methodology.
The department also has expertise in general areas of economic theory such as Rational Expectations and Learning models, Bargaining and Comparative Economic Systems.
There are excellent computing facilities available and the intimate nature of the department, combined with the research orientation of its staff members, provides an excellent atmosphere for research students.
There are links with other departments in the University, including the Centre for Educational Sociology, Politics, Statistics, African Studies, and Social Policy and Social Work, which allows students with interests covering more than one discipline to find expertise, support and supervision.
Students pursuing MPhil or PhD degrees in the department will be given the opportunity of attending postgraduate MSc courses taught as part of the Scottish Doctoral Programme (a collaborative venture involving all eight Scottish universities and based at Glasgow, where the MSc component is taught).
These courses cover the core areas of Microeconomics, Macroeconomics, as well as specialisms such as Labour, Industrial Planning and Natural Resource Economics.
Applicants for postgraduate study should have a thorough grounding in economics, preferably at  the Master's level.
Students without that background should apply directly to the Scottish Doctoral Programme at Glasgow where, on successful completion of the one-year MSc, they would be allowed to progress to PhD research at Edinburgh.
The normal period of study for the Scottish Doctoral Programme is three years.
Education
Head of Department: Professor Noel Entwistle
Postgraduate contacts: Dr Gari Donn (MSc in Education); Mr David Alexander (MSc Community Education); Professor Kenneth King (MPhil/PhD)
Address: 10 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9JT
Telephone: 031 650 4325
Fax: 031 667 4335
Staff numbers: 8 full-time academic; 13 research
Postgraduate students: 11 research; 131 taught; 4 non-graduating
The Department of Education is the longest established in the United Kingdom.
Over the years it has developed an international reputation in research on student learning strategies, critical analysis of adult basic and overseas education, and in educational philosophy and policy.
More recent research developments in the department have embraced the application of information technology to the handicapped, policy research on the integration of pupils with special educational needs, computer-based learning, and comparative analysis of educational reform and policy implementation.
All members of the department are actively committed to research, on the basis of which the department was recently given a top research rating by the Universities Funding Council.
There are three associated research and development units: The CALL Centre (Communication Aids for Language and Learning); the Centre for Research on Learning and Instruction; and the Godfrey Thomson Unit.
One staff member is also associated with the leadership of the University's Centre of African Studies.
The taught courses in the department attract postgraduate students from Scotland, the United Kingdom more generally, continental Europe, and other parts of both the industrialised and developing world.
Thus, the MSc in Education is not only seen as a regular part of the national system of educational in-service education in Scotland, but it has a strong international appeal.
Similarly, the MSc/Diploma in Community Education has built up a reputation within the UK but is also strongly supported by agencies funding students from overseas.
The MSc in Nursing and Education, jointly taught in the Departments of Education and Nursing Studies, attracts students from the UK and overseas.
Members of staff play leadership roles in professional associations, research consortia, and advisory bodies both within the UK, within Europe more generally, and internationally.
Linkage roles with other European research centres and universities have been growing apace, both through ERASMUS and other schemes.
The staff is frequently consulted by national bodies in the UK, as well as by international organisations, the UN family, World Bank, etc.
Taught postgraduate and higher degree students profit from a very wide range of national and international contacts in the department.
There is a regular seminar programme, and easy access to professional bodies and institutions concerned with formal and non-formal education.
Centre for Environment and Human Settlements — Edinburgh School of Environmental Design
Director: John Leonard
Address: Department of Town and Country Planning, Heriot-Watt University/Edinburgh College of Art, Lauriston Place, Edinburgh EH3 9DF
Telephone: 031 229 9311
Fax.: 031 229 0089
The Centre was established within the Department of Town and Country Planning at Heriot-Watt University/Edinburgh College of Art in 1988 under the provisions for the Edinburgh School of Environmental Design (The University of Edinburgh/Heriot-Watt University/Edinburgh College of Art) in order to continue the work of the University of Edinburgh's former Programme for Planning Studies (Developing Countries).
The Centre provides postgraduate teaching and research facilities for planners in the fields of settlements, shelter and environmental planning in less developed and rapidly urbanising countries.
It welcomes suitably qualified graduates who aim to work in these fields, whether in the preparation of policy advice, in the design, analysis and management of development plans, programmes or projects, or in academic teaching or research.
Programmes of study are offered leading to Diploma, to the Degree of Master of Urban and Regional Planning, or to the research degrees of MPhil and PhD of Heriot-Watt University.
Geography
Head of Department: Professor Susan Smith
Postgraduate contact: Dr Peter Furley (Ph.D/ M.Phil/Dip.) or Mr B.M. Gittings (MSc. /Dip. in G.I.S.)
Address: Drummond Street, Edinburgh EH8 9XP
Telephone: 031 650 2624
Fax.: 031 556 0544
Staff numbers: 17 full-time academic; 3 part-time academic; 17 full-time research
Postgraduate Student Numbers: 58 research; 38 taught; 1 non-graduating
Major research groupings:(1) GIS and RS including spatial searching on large databases, software development, applied research and parallel processing,(2) Geomorphology and Soils, including research on ice sheets, tectonics and geomorphology and soil-vegetation relationships in the humid tropics,(3) Geography of Social and Economic Change, including problems of restructuring and the dynamics of change in both the developed and the developing world.
Research projects have been funded by Research Councils (NERC, ESRC, SERC), government departments (ODA), charitable trusts, the EC, numerous companies and institutions.
Current research includes (i) gender and gentrification, health and housing, race and racism, and the restructuring of the coal, cotton and timber industries;(ii) glaciological work in Patagonia, macrogeomorphological research in Africa, tephrochronology and archaeology, mangrove forest biogeography and conservation in Central America, forest nutrition and land development in Amazonia;(iii) parallel processing and GIS, and developments associated with the Regional Research Laboratory.
Research training is structured.
In addition to departmental seminars, there are courses in research methodology and practice and regular meetings with a review board to assess progress.
There is open access to undergraduate and postgraduate courses as well as reciprocal facilities in Science and Social Science departments.
Departmental facilities are excellent in the fields of computing, remote sensing and laboratory analysis.
The GIS laboratories are based on a VAX-Cluster consisting of Multiprocessor VAX 6340, a Micro-VAX, VAX stations and a network of UNIX work-stations and PC's running software such as ORACLE, ARC/INFO, Intergraph's microstation and Laser-Scan's Horizon, and language compilers such as C and ADA.
The RS facilities include a GEMSTONE 35 workstation and an 80386 PC running ERDAS.
Topographic science is serviced by a PG2 photogrammetric plotter providing a computer-based analogue workstation.
Fully equipped laboratories analyse soil, plant and rock materials and maintain close co-operation with other specialised facilities.
Additional features assisting research include a departmental publication series (printed in the very well-equipped Reprographics Section), an extensive publication record of books and articles, vigorous participation in and organisation of national and international conferences, helped by numerous overseas contacts and scientific exchanges.
Further details are available in the departmental postgraduate research brochure.
Graduate School in Social Sciences
Director: Dr Ruth M. Jonathan
Address: 55 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU
Telephone: 031 650 4085
Fax.: 031 650 6512
Established in 1993, the School is responsible for co-ordinating postgraduate research training, and for the multidisciplinary postgraduate taught-course degrees in the Faculty of Social Sciences.
The Graduate School organises the cross-disciplinary courses which have been approved by the ESRC under their research training programme.
These include quantitative and qualititative methods, philosophical and epistemological issues, and research design; and a range of research skills and techniques, ranging from a Writing Workshop to instruction in the use of bibliographic data bases and in audio-visual techniques.
The School administers the Social Science MSc/Diploma programmes (see page 135), all of which share core courses.
It advises postgraduate students on courses offered in other departments and faculties which they may be able to incorporate into their own degree programmes.
It also co-ordinates the Doctoral Programme of Social and Economic Research on Technology.
The School runs a multi-disciplinary seminar series for postgraduates, and provides the opportunity for contact among students from all of the Faculty's departments.
Nursing Studies
Head of Department: Dr Kath.M.
Melia
Postgraduate contacts: Dr Dorothy A. Whyte; Miss Rosemary I. Weir
Address: Adam Ferguson Building, 40 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL
Telephone: 031 650 3889
Fax.: 031 650 6512
Staff numbers: 13 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 32 research; 52 taught
The Department of Nursing Studies was established in the University of Edinburgh in 1956; its graduates hold posts in health services in the UK and throughout the world.
Clinical and research interests include psychiatric, paediatric and adult nursing; midwifery; community nursing and health education.
The department has a strong research base reflecting commitment to clinical nursing and the utilisation of research.
Particular research interests in the department include the sociology and history of nursing, theory development, family nursing, social change, transcultural nursing, ethical issues in nursing, professional stress, nursing education and management.
Recent research projects have been funded by government bodies (SOHHD), charitable sources and other health-related institutions.
There is a strong interest in qualitative research, although a variety of other methodological approaches are utilised.
Links with other departments allow interdisciplinary support and supervision where nursing interests extend across disciplines.
An annual study day on topical issues in nursing is organised by the alumni of the department and departmental staff collaborate frequently with other professional and academic groups to mount conferences at national and international level.
Politics
Head of Department: Chris Allen
Postgraduate contact: Departmental Secretary
Address: 31 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9JT
Telephone: 031 650 4253
Fax: 031 650 6512
Staff numbers: 15 full-time academic; 1 part-time academic; 1 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 14 research; 13 taught
The department, established in 1963, is one of the most active in the United Kingdom.
The staff come from varied intellectual backgrounds — including political science, history, economics and philosophy — and are involved in most of the main specialisms in the discipline.
Research and supervision in the department focus on: political theory, with particular reference to Hegel, Marx, critical theory, utopian thought, and liberalism; British politics and government, especially the party system, Scottish politics, women's politics, and industrial relations; electoral systems and voting behaviour; the political systems of European states, the United States, the Soviet Union, CIS and Africa; international relations, the European Community, and international policing; state organisation and theory; policy-making and public administration; education policy; the politics of new technology; official secrecy and personal privacy.
The department has close links with the Europa Institute, the Centre of African Studies, the Unit for the Study of Government in Scotland, the Centre for Educational Sociology, and the Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law.
Joint supervision with other departments is easily arranged.
The international and interdisciplinary background of the department's postgraduate students provides the basis of a lively community.
Recent students have come from the United States, Canada, Uganda, Nigeria, Iran, Ireland, Spain, Mexico, Greece, and Germany, as well as Britain.
Word-processing and computing facilities on microcomputers and on  terminals linked to the University's mainframe computer are available in the department, and office space is usually provided.
Wherever possible, postgraduate students are integrated into the teaching activity of the department to provide experience (and money).
The department provides most of the teaching for the European and International Politics stream of the MSc/Diploma in Social Sciences.
Psychology
Head of Department: Professor Robert Grieve
Postgraduate contact: Professor Robert Morris
Address:7 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ
Telephone: 031 650 3443
Fax: 031 650 6512
Staff numbers: 16 full-time academic; 4 part-time academic; 14 full-time research; 2 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 30 research; 19 taught
The department has gained an international reputation in several areas of psychological research, notably developmental, perception and motor control, cognitive and the psychology of intelligence.
There are research links with Paediatric Neurology, Neuropsychology, Psychiatry, Linguistics, Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science.
The department has excellent computer and video facilities which service laboratories designed for research with normal and handicapped infants, children and adults.
Areas of investigation include visual and auditory perception; athletic, musical and other motor skills; language and cognition; inter-personal communication; social interaction; individual differences.
For research with young children the department has a specially equipped Day Nursery.
In general, postgraduate studies within the department are based solely upon research; students may, however, if they wish, take a taught course within the Centre for Cognitive Science in their first year, before proceeding to research.
Departmental postgraduate brochure is available from above address.
(See page 121 for M.Phil in Clinical Psychology)
Science Studies Unit
Director: Dr David Bloor
Postgraduate contact: Carole Tansley
Address: 18–21 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LN
Telephone: 031 650 4256
Fax.: 031 650 6512
Staff numbers: 4 full-time academic
Postgraduate numbers: 3 research
The Unit is based within the Department of Sociology and its staff and students are at the same time members of the department.
The Unit is recognised as an important centre for sociological research in the sciences, particularly the natural sciences, but it is interdisciplinary in character and also provides an appropriate location for historical and philosophical research in this area.
Work for the degree of MPhil and PhD may be undertaken in the Unit as well as in the main department.
Social Anthropology
Head of Department: Professor Anthony Cohen
Postgraduate contact: Dr Judith Okely
Address: Adam Ferguson Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL
Telephone: 031 650 3932
Fax.: 031 650 3945
Staff numbers: 10 full-time academic; 2 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 25 research; 6 taught; 1 non-graduating
Edinburgh has one of Britain's largest and longest established Departments of Social Anthropology.
It has a distinctive tradition of expertise in the study both of non-industrialised and industrialised societies.
Current members of staff have research interests and experience in East, West, Central and Southern Africa, South Asia, the Caribbean, Amazonian South America, Canada, Northern and Southern Europe and Scandinavia.
It is the leading centre for anthropological studies of Scotland and, more generally, of the British Isles.
Recent postgraduate research has been conducted in all of these areas and elsewhere.
Active links are being developed with major research centres in Europe.
The theoretical interests of the department cover all the major fields of contemporary social and cultural anthropology, with particular emphases on identity and ethnicity, gender, kinship, religion, ritual and symbolism, language, literature, complex organisations, and development studies.
The department's strength in the latter is reflected in its advisory association with the Overseas Development Administration, and in links with a variety of other development agencies.
Research students are admitted initially as supervised postgraduates and take a course of study tailored to their individual needs and experience.
They follow a programme of training in anthropological research methods, study skills and the language(s) appropriate to their field of research.
In addition, they receive individual supervision in the preparation of their intended research projects.
Towards the end of the first year, students who have made satisfactory progress are transferred to M.Phil or Ph.D.
candidature, for both of which further periods of study will be prescribed.
The department also offers a programme of taught courses leading to the Diploma and M.Sc.
in Social Anthropology.
The department contributes to the programme of courses offered by the Faculty of Social Sciences in different aspects of research methods training.
Social Policy and Social Work
Head of Department: Professor Adrian Sinfield
Postgraduate contact: Dr Ian Dey (Social Policy); Dr Chris Clark (Social Work)
Address: Adam Ferguson Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL
Telephone: 031 650 3923
Fax.: 031 650 3919
Staff numbers: 19 academic; 12 research
Postgraduate numbers: 30 research; 80 taught
The department is one of the largest of its kind in the United Kingdom and offers a full range of courses and postgraduate research.There are courses leading to professional and post-qualifying qualifications in social work; taught Master's degrees in policy studies (full-time) and social and public policy (part-time).
The department is also a major centre for research in social policy and social work.
Its flourishing research activity is now based in the department's Edinburgh Centre for Social Welfare Research.
There is an active programme of postgraduate research for full-time and part-time students, from UK and overseas.
The department is recognised by the Economic and Social Research Council for full-time, part-time and taught studentships.
Large enough to be able to offer supervision in most areas of social policy and social work, the department's commitment to research creates a very congenial environment for research students who will encounter a wide range of substantive interests and methodological expertise.
All MPhil and PhD students normally have two supervisors and it is common for one of these to come from outside the department.
Excellent opportunities exist for joint supervision as the department has close links with other departments in the Faculties of Social Sciences and Law, the Research Unit in Health and Behavioural Change, the Alcohol Research Group, and the Department of Housing and Planning at Heriot-Watt University.
All students have access to specialist courses in research methods run by the Faculty of Social Sciences.
The overall completion rate is very high.
A departmental brochure is available.
Research Centre for Social Sciences
Head of Department: Professor Frank Bechhofer
Postgraduate contact: Dr Wendy Faulkner
Address: 56 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU
Telephone: 031 650 4069
Fax.: 031 650 6512
Staff numbers: 3 full-time academic; 4 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 9 research; 7 taught
The Centre was established in 1984 to support Faculty members in developing research projects and to house large-scale multi-disciplinary research projects.
Current research includes projects funded under the ESRC Programme on Information and Communication Technologies (PICT), projects on social structure in Scotland, and the ESRC Regional Research Laboratory.
The Centre's research interests in the technology studies field include the generation of advanced information technologies (ITs); the implementation of complex IT systems in industry; technological collaboration in innovation; and gender and technology.
Specific technologies under investigation include advanced software, microprocessors, computer-aided production management, electronic data interchange and biotechnology.
Funding for this work comes from the ESRC Programme on Information and Communication Technologies (PICT), and from the ESRC — SERC Joint Committee.
The Centre is actively publishing in this area and produces a Working Papers Series (publications list available).
Researchers collaborate with members of the University's Computer Science Department, with neighbouring institutions and with other centres in the PICT network.
The Centre also has strong links with the industry and policy community in the field.
Sociology
Head of Department: Professor Colin Bell
Postgraduate contact: Dr John Orr
Address: 18 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LN
Telephone: 031 650 4001
Fax.: 031 650 3989
Staff numbers: 15 full-time academic; 5 full-time research; 2 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 13 research
The Sociology Department, which now includes the Science Studies Unit, has a high, and broadly-based, reputation for the quality of its research and publications.
It was rated ‘5’ in the recent research assessment exercise and is fully recognised by the ESRC for studentships.
It has regularly attracted research studentships of various kinds, and provides a stimulating research environment.
There is a wide range of research activity in the department using considerable diversity of perspectives and methods.
The integration of theoretical and empirical issues, and historically based research are, however, distinctive features of sociology at this University.
Applications are particularly welcome  from students wishing to research the following areas: the sociology of science and technology, the sociology of culture and knowledge, urban and rural sociology, social theory, gender and family, work and stratification, Scottish society and politics, race relations and south Asian studies.
Both the degrees offered in the department — the MPhil and the PhD — are awarded on the basis of research.
Centre for South Asian Studies
Convener: Dr John Brockington
Address: Department of Sanskrit, 7 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Telephone: 031 650 4174
Fax.: 031 662 0772
The establishment of the Centre for South Asian Studies in 1989 represented a further move to co-ordinate activities relating to South Asia at Edinburgh.
There is in the University an appreciable number of staff interested in the area, but located in a number of different departments and faculties, and the Centre is intended to serve as a focus for their activities.
Edinburgh has long had a tradition of study of South Asia and also possesses comparatively rich library and archive resources in the University Library (including New College Library), the School of Scottish Studies, the National Library of Scotland and the National Record Office.
The aims of the Centre are to provide teaching and research on any aspect of South Asia within the University of Edinburgh and to encourage interest in the area among the community at large.
It holds a regular series of seminars at which reports are presented on research currently in progress.
The Centre aims to encourage interdisciplinary research, as well as promoting research based around the existing interests of the staff most closely concerned with the activities of the Centre.
The research interests and departmental affiliations of those particularly connected with the Centre are as follows:
Professor R. E. Asher (Linguistics): Dravidian linguistics; 19th- and 20th-century Tamil and Malayalam literature; Dr C. Bates (History) political, social and economic history of colonial India; Dr J. L. Brockington (Sanskrit): history of Hinduism (especially Vaishnavism); Dr J. B. Byrom (Architecture): gardens and landscaping in South Asia, especially the Sigiriya complex; Mr P. Dundas (Sanskrit): Buddhism and Jainism; Professor D. Forrester (Christian Ethics): Christianity and caste; modern South Indian politics; Mr N. Fraser (Social Policy and Social Work): policies on development in Kerala; the impact of Gulf migration on Kerala; Dr A. Good (Social Anthropology): family, religion and technology in South Asia; Dr Patricia Jeffery (Sociology): women and development; child-bearing; social structure in N India; Dr R. Jeffery (Sociology): health and health policy in India and Pakistan; social demography; N Indian agrarian structure and social change; Dr J. Spencer (Social Anthropology): modern Sri Lankan society and religion; Dr G. Thomson (Education): teacher training projects in Pakistan; Dr N. Thin (Social Anthropology): ritual, religion and development in India.
FACULTY OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
Convener, Faculty Postgraduate Committee: Dr J. E. Phillips
Postgraduate Secretary: Yvonne Jordan
Address: Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1QH
Telephone: 031 650 6134
Fax.: 031 668 4341
The Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies is the continuation within the University of Edinburgh of the Edinburgh Veterinary School founded by William Dick in 1823.
The Faculty is made up of four departments which are housed on two sites.
The Department of Preclinical Veterinary Sciences and parts of the Department of Veterinary Pathology and Veterinary Clinical Studies (including the Small Animal Practice) are based at Summerhall lying close to the University's Arts and Social Sciences campus and to the Medical School, and about a mile from the Faculty of Science and Engineering campus at the King's Buildings.
The remainder of Veterinary Pathology and Veterinary Clinical Studies (including the Large Animal Practice) and the Department of Tropical Animal Health (housed in the Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine) are located at the Veterinary Field Station at Easter Bush, some 7 miles south of Summerhall.
Though the youngest of the eight Faculties in the University, the reputation of the school stands high throughout the world.
Postgraduate students from many countries make use of the excellent facilities both for training for research degrees and for taught courses (MPhil/MSc/Diploma) currently available.
Close contacts with nearby research institutes (such as the Moredun Research Institute) give excellent opportunities for co-operation in research fields.
The school can offer registration for study for research degrees to candidates based at associated institutions.
Preclinical Veterinary Sciences
Head of Department: Professor Arthur W. Duggan
Postgraduate contact: Dr Richard J. Martin
Address: Preclinical Veterinary Sciences, R(D)SVS, Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1QJ
Telephone: 031 650 6100
Fax.: 031 662 0790
Staff numbers: 16 full-time academic; 3 part-time academic; 12 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 7 research; 1 taught
The range of research work carried out in the department is wide and reflects its multidisciplinary character.
Some areas covered are: biochemical studies into protein-lipid interactions in biological membranes; the nature of cytochrome c; electrophysiology of striate cortex; electrophysiology of fertilisation; electrophysiology and pharmacology of antiparasitic agents; neuropeptide function in the spinal cord; pain and analgesia in animals; physiology of the enteric nervous system; sensory and reflex mechanisms in the sheep vomero-nasal apparatus; central mechanisms of duodenal-gastric control in sheep; structure and function of equine and porcine hoof horn; the anatomy and physiology of the foetus and neonate; combined structural and functional studies in the mammalian spinal cord; histochemistry and physiology of neurones in trigeminal and spinal ganglia.
The research is supported by grants from many external sources, e.g. research councils, charitable trusts, equine establishments, pharmaceutical companies.
Excellent facilities are available which allow experimental work to be pursued at the cellular and molecular as well as at the whole animal level; modern equipment and computing facilities are backed up with excellent mechanical and electronic workshops, photographic and graphic facilities, and technical support is available.
Collaborative links exist with other university departments, with associated institutions and with overseas universities.
The department has an international reputation for its research and has a regular programme of seminars given by invited speakers.
Postgraduate  : students are expected to participate in the seminars and are encouraged to attend scientific meetings to present the results of the research projects and meet experts in their fields of study.
A departmental booklet describing research projects is available on request.
Tropical Animal Health
Head of Department: Professor Morley M. H. Sewell
Postgraduate contact: Dr Tony J. Smith
Address: Easter Bush, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG
Telephone:031 445 2001
Fax.: 031 445 5099
Staff numbers: 6 full-time academic; 16 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 19 research; 43 taught; 2 non-graduating
The Department of Tropical Animal Health housed in the Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine is situated in the University's Veterinary Field Station at Easter Bush, located approximately 11 kilometres from the city centre.
It contains laboratories for Helminthology, Virology, Entomology, Bacteriology, Protozoology and Animal Production.
The accommodation for experimental animals consists of a 10-room small animal block for rodents, and a series of covered yards, loose boxes, isolation and environmental rooms suitable for larger domestic animals.
Excellent facilities exist for research on animals used for work purposes.
A small herd of exotic draught animals is kept.
Research projects on many topics are carried out at the CTVM, overseas, and elsewhere in the Edinburgh area and students and staff present their work at weekly seminars.
Many students have in the past worked with research workers at local Institutes, including the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, Moredun Research Instituite, and Institute of Animal Physiology & Genetics.
The CTVM also has links at present with research projects in Nepal, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania, Peru, Mexico, Malawi and Indonesia and CTVM staff are based permanently in the last two projects.
Research in the department is directed towards animal health and livestock production problems of developing countries in the tropics and subtropics.
The areas of interest in animal health at the CTVM are trypanosomiasis; tick-borne or tick-associated diseases — theileriosis, dermatophilosis, rickettsioses including heartwater infection; microbiology — particularly bovine tuberculosis and diagnostic virology; helminthosis — cestode zoonoses and trematodes.
Research on livestock production problems in the tropics is concerned primarily with draught animal power.
The CTVM has its own library and reading room, which is part of the University Library, and students have ready access to the extensive range of library facilities including a research database on CD-ROM which is located at the CTVM.
The documentation division of the Centre publishes a quarterly journal Tropical Animal Health and Production .
The Centre also houses a microcomputer laboratory.
Veterinary Pathology
Head of Department: Professor Ian McConnell
Postgraduate contact: Dr David Sargan
Address: The University of Edinburgh, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1QH and Easter Bush, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG
Telephone: 031 650 6167
Fax.: 031 650 6511
Staff numbers: 12 full-time academic; 15 full-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 24 research; 1 non-graduating
The department has major research activities in the pathological sciences and has closely co-ordinated research interests in Immunology, Molecular Biology, Virology and Microbiology, both in veterinary species (especially the sheep, pig, cat and dog) and as applied to human medicine.
The department also has extensive and state of the art facilities for modern investigations and diagnostic veterinary pathology.
Research projects  include studies of the ovine immune system through cannulation of lymphatics and at the cellular level; persistent viruses (especially animal lentiviruses) in relation to the immune system; mucosal immunity in the sheep and pig and of enteric pathogens; feline cellular immunology and canine tumour markers.
Research is supported by the AFRC, the Wellcome Trust, the MRC and others.
Research expenditure is about £550,000 per annum and there are 30–40 research publications per annum.
The department is on two sites: in central Edinburgh close to the Medical and Science Faculties; and at the nearby Veterinary Field Station with access to a large animal hospital and large animal accommodation.
We are exceptionally well equipped for research — equipment includes a fluorescence activated cell sorter (FACS), a peptide synthesiser and excellent facilities for tissue culture, molecular biology and bio-computing as well as extensive animal accommodation.
The department maintains close collaborative contacts within Veterinary, Medical and Science Departments and Research Institutes in Edinburgh and elsewhere.
Students are encouraged to present their data at scientific meetings both in Britain and abroad and are expected to contribute to a lively programme of intra-departmental seminars and journal clubs.
There is a departmental study week on Loch Tay once a year.
A departmental profile is available on request.
Veterinary Clinical Studies
Head of Department: Professor Richard E.W. Halliwell
Address: The University of Edinburgh, R(D)SVS, Veterinary Field Station, Easter Bush, Roslin, Midlothian, EH25 9RG
Telephone: 031 445 2001
Fax.: 031 445 5728
Staff numbers: 30 full-time academic; 4 part-time academic; 3 full-time research; 1 part-time research
Postgraduate numbers: 13 research
The department welcomes applications from graduates, particularly those with a veterinary degree, to undertake postgraduate studies in the veterinary clinical sciences, or basic sciences that relate to clinical disciplines.
Current areas in the department include nutrition, aspects of welfare and the effects of stress, cardiology, respiratory medicine of all species, small animal gastroenterology, equine dysautonomia (grass sickness), allergic skin disease, endocrinology, epidemiology, orthopaedics, anaesthesia, molecular genetics of canine retinal diseases, immunity to nematode parasites, the role of proteases and their inhibitors in allergic diseases, equine and bovine reproduction and herd health.
The department has collaborative research programmes with the Department of Preclinical Veterinary Sciences and Veterinary Pathology in the School of Veterinary Medicine, with a number of departments in the School of Medicine and the School of Agriculture and also with the Moredun Research Institute, and the Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics of the AFRC.
This enables students to undertake part of their work in other departments or institutes if deemed appropriate.
The department offers Demonstratorships in many of the clinical disciplines which permit study for the MPhil degree.
Veterinary postgraduate studies for the PhD degree have been funded by the Wellcome Trust, the AFRC and the Horserace Betting Levy Board.
Occasionally four-year Wellcome Fellowships are also available.
The department can assist with applications for funding from these and other sources.
TAUGHT COURSES
Nearly all of the taught postgraduate courses below are offered on a basis of full-time study.
Certain of these may, alternatively, be studied on part-time basis.
A more limited number of courses are available by part-time study only.
Courses for the MLitt, MLA, MPhil and MSW are generally of 21–24 months full-time duration.
Those for the MSc, MBA, LLM, MMus, MEd and MTH are generally of 12 months full-time duration (and may be offered on a part-time basis over 24–36 months).
Most Diploma courses are of 9 months full-time duration, but some extend to one or two years.
(Where no explicit reference is made, below, to a course being available on a part-time basis, those interested are advised to consult the department concerned .)
Please contact the relevant department or Faculty for further information.
Advanced Certificate English Studies
(6 mth FT)
ACES is a full-time taught two-term course (October to March) for overseas undergraduates specialising in English Language and Literature and for graduates in and teachers of these subjects.
The course comprises work on Literary Studies, Register Studies and the Communicative Grammar of Modern English.
An optional translation component for native speakers of French, German, Italian or Spanish is offered if student numbers and staffing permit.
Language Improvement work is built into these components.
The course is assessed by means of project work and a written examination.
Contact:Institute for Applied Language Studies (see page 35).
Higher Advanced Certificate in English Studies
(9 mth FT)
ACES is a full-time three-term course (October to June) for overseas undergraduates specialising in English language and literature and for graduates in and teachers of these subjects.
In the first two terms it is a taught course identical in content to the Advanced Certificate in English Studies (see above).
In the third term, students undertake supervised individual project work leading to extended essays on any two of the six course components.
The course is assessed by two extended essays, four essays and a written exam.
Contact:Institute for Applied Language Studies (see page 35)
African Studies
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
The two courses offered provide an interdisciplinary introduction, useful for subsequent postgraduate study and for those seeking skills for further career advancement.
Students follow one of four programmes, consisting of core courses with full and half courses.
Core courses:Africa: Political and Social Development and Africa: Economy and Environment .
Full courses are offered in history, anthropology, education, and politics; half courses cover a wide range of subjects, developmental and technical subjects.
Assessment by coursework and, for the MSc, a dissertation.
The Centre for African Studies organises weekly seminars and holds an annual international conference.
Contact:Centre of African Studies (see page 101).
Ancient Philosophy
MSc (12 mth FT)
Offers intensive graduate training in Ancient Philosophy.
Teaching is in tutorials.
Students take three options (from eight).
Assessment: two essays for each option, plus a dissertation.
Sufficient knowledge of Ancient Greek is required to enable students to comprehend philosophical texts in the original.
Students not satisfying this requirement take ‘Greek for Philosophers’ as one of their options.
This is examined by a translation paper.
Students should have at least an Upper Second Class Honours degree or equivalent either in Philosophy or in another subject where there is evidence of the student's aptitude for studies in philosophy.
Contact:Department of Philosophy or Classics (see page 43 or 36).
Animal Breeding
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course is intended for graduates in any of the Biological Sciences, Veterinary Medicine or Agriculture and is designed to provide the required knowledge to direct animal breeding programmes or to undertake  research on problems related to animal breeding.
The course of lectures and tutorials covers a range of subjects including applied statistics, computing, basic and molecular genetics, population and quantitative genetics, animal breeding theory, growth and development, reproductive and environmental physiology of farm animals and livestock improvement.
Examination is by intermittent assessment and written and oral examinations and, for the MSc, a dissertation.
Contact:Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology (see page 88).
Animal Science for Development
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9mth FT)
Provides an understanding and appreciation of quantitative methods to integrate animal biology into predictive systems to estimate animal performance.
Regulatory mechanisms governing the responses of animals to nutrients, energy and environmental challenge will be covered, leading to an understanding of the biological and financial frameworks for decision-making on the design of animal production systems.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Animal Production Systems and Prediction & Control of Animal Performance are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Impact Analysis, Innovation & Extension, Computer Applications, Management of Sustainable Development.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general courses available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Applied Animal Behaviour and Animal Welfare:
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course is suitable for those seeking a research career in animal welfare as well as those involved in animal welfare inspectorates, or in the framing of relevant legislation.
The course covers a range of subjects including animal behaviour, neural basis of behaviour, behavioural problems and their treatment in companion animals, motivation, statistics/computing, pain and analgesia in animals, environmental health and welfare, and animal cognition.
The section on animal welfare includes its assessment, philosophy and legislation.
It is possible for applicants to register as non-graduating students and attend the animal welfare section, which lasts from 8–10 weeks from April to June.
Examination is by continuous assessment and written and oral examinations, and, for the MSc, a dissertation.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Applied Linguistics
MLitt (24 mth FT)
For first nine months MLitt candidates follow same coursework programme as MSc/Diploma with continuation to MLitt conditional on above-average attainment.
Candidates are required to to complete a course in research methodology in their second year.
Final assessment by thesis.
Contact:Department of Applied Linguistics (see page 34).
Applied Linguistics
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT, 21 mth PT)
Designed primarily for experienced professionals with considerable experience of language teaching or some other relevant field, but also suitable for those with a strong research interest in an applied linguistic topic.
The course comprises coursework (nine months for MSc and Diploma) followed by a dissertation (three months, MSc only).
Coursework:(i) Term 1: core course in foundation subjects: general, descriptive and applied linguistic studies);(ii) Terms 2 & 3: personal choice of eight option courses chosen from a list of more than 25 including second language acquisition, pedagogical grammar, literary stylistics, ELT methodology, and language testing.
Coursework assessment is by examination, covering core course, and project work (options).
Contact:Department of Applied Linguistics (see page 34).
Architecture
Diploma (21 mth FT)
Two-year full-time course open to holders of a three-year degree in architecture with a good portfolio and a period of practical training.
The curriculum includes courses on Building Technology, Urban Design, Building Economics and Building Contracts; a dissertation on a topic of architectural history or theory is included in the first year.
Students entering the Diploma are encouraged to develop their architectural skills in the context of the city through group and individual design projects.
In the first year, local and national cities are studied, and in the second year a major European city provides the framework for individual design projects, and this is used to demonstrate competence over the full range of architectural design.
Contact:Department of Architecture (see page 102).
Biology
Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course permits students with a general qualification in biology at degree level to undertake further study in specific areas of biological science up to a standard roughly equivalent to a specialised Honours degree.
Candidates shall attend such courses, or parts of courses, and complete such special exercises in individual laboratory or field work as the head of department concerned prescribes.
Contact:Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology (see page 88).
Business Administration Programmes
The aim of these courses is to help students become more effective in the business world.
They are designed to provide an integrated understanding of the essential aspects of management, and to allow students to develop specialist knowledge in particular areas through their choice of options and dissertation project.
Students are encouraged to participate actively in courses by means of case study and role-playing exercises.
An exchange of ideas between the academic and business communities is encouraged by inviting senior managers to discuss the applicability and limitations of the concepts introduced in the courses.
Master of Business Administration
MBA/Diploma (12 mth FT)
In the autumn term students take core courses introducing key concepts in economics, finance, accounting, organisational behaviour, marketing, operations research and statistics, law and business policy.
All students take a strategic management course in the spring and summer terms and in addition have a free choice of four out of a range of options.
Lectures and case studies are supplemented by a business game and a consultancy exercise with local organisations.
Funding: Scottish Education Department awards are available to Scottish residents.
Oppenheim Scholarships are available to students born in Scotland.
The MBA is completed, subject to satisfactory performance in the June examinations, by a dissertation written between July and September.
Contact:Edinburgh University Management School 7 Bristo Square, Edinburgh EH8 9AL. 031 650 8066.
Business Administration
MBA/Diploma (30 mth PT)
This is one of the largest part-time MBA programmes in the UK.
The programme (taught by evening study) begins in January and lasts for two and a half years.
Each term students take two courses, each course being taught in a weekly two-and-a-half-hour session.
There are four core courses: organisational behaviour, business markets, management information systems and statistics, and financial reporting and decision-making.
After passing these, students take a further three required courses, and choose nine others from a wide range of around 36 options.
A dissertation is also required for the Master's degree.
Contact:Edinburgh University Management School, 7 Bristo Square, Edinburgh EH8 9AL.
Telephone 031 650 8065.
Celtic Studies
MLitt (24 mth FT) /MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Formal and informal instruction in a range of options (literary, linguistic and historical) in Medieval and Modern Celtic Studies and in Scottish Gaelic Studies.
All candidates required to attend courses on Bibliography and Research Methods.
Examinations: Degree of MLitt awarded by thesis and written examination; MSc by written examination followed by dissertation; Diploma by written examination and/or project as appropriate.
Contact:Department of Celtic (see page 35).
Christianity in the Non-Western World:
MTh (12 mth FT) /MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
The course provides opportunity for:(i) graduates from  African, Asian, and Pacific backgrounds to undertake advanced study of Christianity directly related to their own setting;(ii) persons who have worked, or who expect to work, in cross-cultural situations to examine the religious context in which they operate, or to reflect constructively on their experience;(iii) prospective candidates for research involving cross-cultural or inter-religious study who do not have specialised training in these fields, to bridge the gap between previous academic study and the new material.
The course is modular in structure with a number of options.
Its components include Christian history in Africa, Asia, the Americas, the Pacific (allowing for concentration on particular areas); Christian thought in non-Western culture; the missionary movement from the West; Christianity and primal religions.
Study is by lectures, seminars and tutorials.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma
Contact:The Centre for the Study of Christianity in the Non-Western World (see page 49).
Classical Archaeology
MLitt (24 mth FT)
Courses prescribed by Head of Department in first year, and thesis in second.
Examinations on courses at end of first year.
Contact:Department of Classics (see page 36).
Classical Archaeology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Aims to provide intensive grounding in Classical Archaeology.
Examination (four papers) and (for MSc) dissertation.
Taught by lectures and tutorials.
A reading knowledge of at least one foreign European language, ancient or modern, is essential.
Contact:Department of Classics (see page 36).
Classics
MLitt (24 mth FT)
Provides for directed study and dissertation in any of the main fields of classical study.
Examination (two papers) and dissertation.
Taught by lectures and tutorials.
At least an upper Second Class degree (or equivalent) in Classics or a related discipline.
Contact:Department of Classics (see page 36).
Classics
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Aims to broaden the range of classical subjects and provide grounding in methods and techniques of research.
Examination (three papers) and (for MSc) dissertation.
Taught by lectures and tutorials.
At least an upper Second Class degree (or equivalent) in Classics or a related discipline is required.
Contact:Department of Classics (see page 36).
Clinical Oncology
MSc (24 mth PT) /Diploma (24 mth PT)
A two-year part-time course intended for medical graduates interested in medical and radiation oncology.
Systematic instruction given by lectures and tutorials in the relevant basic sciences of biology, physics, statistics, pathology and pharmacology and in the principles and practice of clinical oncology.
Supervised clinical training is provided in cytotoxic drug treatment and radiation therapy.
Assessment is by written essay examinations, clinical examinations and for the MSc dissertation.
Paid clinical appointments may be available.
Contact:Department of Clinical Oncology (see page 67).
Clinical Psychology
MPhil (36 mth FT)
This course covers theoretical aspects of clinical psychology, practical experience in a variety of clinical settings, and research training.
It provides a professional qualification in clinical psychology for NHS employment.
Examination by written papers, oral clinical assessment and thesis.
NHS funding should be available for approximately 8 UK applicants per year.
Further information and application through the Clearing House for Postgraduate Courses in Clinical Psychology, University of Leeds, 15 Hyde Terrace, Leeds, LS2 9LT.
Applicants must have an Honours degree in Psychology and some relevant experience.
Contact:Department of Psychology (see page 109).
Cognitive Science and Natural Language
MSc/Diploma (12 mth FT)
The programme is designed to help students acquire a secure knowledge of the principles and formal techniques in four of the relevant disciplines: computational linguistics, cognitive psychology, logic and formal semantics and theoretical linguistics.
All students attend two one-term modules in each of the four subjects, and a number of interdisciplinary seminars.
Specific topics covered include: text comprehension, memory, speech perception, human sentence processing, cognitive modelling, neural nets, parsing algorithms, categorial grammars, the mental lexicon and lexical access, linguistic universals and parametric variation, unification and constraint-based grammars, tense and modal logic, type theory, post-Montague semantics, partial logics, and Prolog programming.
In May candidates sit written examinations based on material drawn from the course; they must also show a basic facility to program in Prolog, for which there is an appropriate introductory course.
Successful candidates then go on to work on an MSc dissertation, or are recommended for registration for a PhD or MPhil.
UK and EC students following the MSc and PhD courses are eligible for studentships made available by ESRC, SERC and the Tri-Council Initiative in Cognitive Science/HCI.
Contact:Centre for Cognitive Science (see page 93).
Community Education
Diploma (9 mth FT, 20 mth PT) /MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT)
Core courses in Interpersonal and Learning Skills, Learning and Teaching in Community Education, Principles and Practice in Community and Adult Education, Practitioner Research and Professional Development, and Critical Perspectives on Social and Educational Policy.
Normally one elective from Theories and Techniques of Counselling, Community Education in Developing Countries, Special Needs in Community Education, Educational Policy and Planning in Developing Countries.
Two supervised fieldwork placements are integral components of the course.
The course is taught by seminars, small groupwork and workshops and is assessed by coursework, fieldwork placement reports, examination and, for the MSc, by dissertation.
The duration of the course is: Diploma (9 months FT, 20 months PT) and MSc (12 months FT, 24 months PT).
There is selective support from SOED and some local authorities.
Overseas candidates may apply for financial support to the British Council and other bodies.
Contact:Department of Education (see page 105).
Community Health
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT, 21 mth PT)
Primarily intended for medical practitioners specialising in community medicine but also caters for appropriate non-medical graduates.
Contents covers epidemiology; medical statistics and computing; environmental health; demography; medical sociology; health education; health economics; planning; and management of health services.
Contact:Department of Public Health Sciences (see page 76).
Comparative and General Literature
MSc (12 mth FT)
The programme, run by the Board of Studies in Asian and Modern European Languages, aims to study literature in a manner free from rigid adherence to national and linguistic boundaries.
An adequate knowledge of at least one major European language in addition to English is required.
Obligatory course on Theory and Methods of Literary Study plus two options from Fantasy Literature; Fiction and Popular Culture; Literature and Politics in the 20th Century; Myth, Legend and Literature; Scotland and Germany: Literary Relations.
Assessment is by essays (on options), written examination (on Theory and Methods course) and dissertation.
Contact:Faculty of Arts (see page 32).
Computer Science
MSc (12 months FT; 24–36 months PT)
Intended for students with first degrees in mathematical/scientific subjects who wish to specialise in one of several areas of Computer Science.
Seven months of taught course work with examinations, followed by a five-month project.
Students choose one of three themes: Computer Systems Engineering; Parallel Computer Computer Systems or Theoretical Computer Science.
The choice of theme determines a subset of the eight taught modules taken.
Other modules may be chosen from a large pool, including the other themes and from the MSc in Knowledge Based Systems, described on p 128.
The complete  set should be chosen to form a coherent body of knowledge and, similarly, the project choice should complement the student's principal theme and module selection.
The MSc is awarded on the basis of performance in both examinations and project work.
Students who do not satisfy the standard required for the award of the MSc may be awarded a compensatory Diploma.
The course is approved by the SERC and a number of advance course studentships, covering fees and living expenses, are available each year.
The department can also normally provide similar levels of funding via the High Technology National Training (HTNT) Scheme.
Contact:MSc Admissions, Department of Computer Science (see page 94).
Crop Technology
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides expertise in crop technology through science applications and production technology.
The course extends into post-harvest processing, storage and marketing of crop products and deals with the financial and socio-economic consequences of production strategies.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology and Resource Management described in general on this page.
Course modules in Crop Production Systems and Crop Protection are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Innovation & Extension, Management of Sustainable Resources, Crop Storage, Soil Conservation & Management.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Cultural Resource Management
M.Sc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
An introduction to the cultural resources of the British Isles (in particular archaeological sites and architectural monuments) and the problems of their conservation, preservation, recording, investigation and identification, together with the ethical and public responsibilities for those working in this area.
Contact:Department of Fine Art (see page 39).
Ecclesiastical History
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
Intended primarily for students with a background in either history or theology.
Students explore the history of Christianity in its social, political and cultural context, and focus on one of the following areas: the early Church; the Reformation; Christianity in Scotland since the Reformation; the Churches in nineteenth-century Britain and Ireland; Christianity, race and slavery in the nineteenth century.
Teaching is by seminars and tutorials.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma
Contact:Department of Ecclesiastical History (see page 50).
Ecological Economics
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides an understanding of the theory of natural resource economics and focuses on the application of economic theory and ethical through to current environmental problems.
An awareness of the multi-dimensional nature of environmental problems and possible solution will be emphasised.
Applications of environmental economics will be covered.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course moduels in Resource Economics, Environmental Economics, and Ecological Ethics are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Land Use/Environment Interactions, Nutrient Cycles: Biosphere/Atmosphere Interactions, Impact Analysis, Project Analysis.
The remaining module may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Ecology & Resource Management
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
There are ten separate degree streams offered on a modular basis: Resource Management, Tree Improvement, Education in Forestry & Natural Resources, Human Ecology, Extension for Rural Development, Crop Technology, Animal Science for Development, Technology in Rural Development, Environmental Protection & Management, and Ecological Economics.
Modules essential to one named degree may be taken as optional within other degrees.
The exam diet assesses 6 modules, through intermittent project work, written and oral examinations, and, for the MSc, a dissertation.
Modules currently available include those listed below, but not all of these may necessarily be available every year: Fundamentals of Management, Human Resources Management, Fundamentals of Tree Improvement, Breeding Strategies & Programme Development, Forestry Curriculum & Syllabus, Training Course Design, Management & Evaluation, Principles of Human Ecology, Management of Sustainable Development, Ecological Ethics & Education, Crop Production Systems, Crop Protection, Innovation & Extension, Farming Systems Research, Animal Production Systems, Prediction & Control of Animal Performance, Management of Rural Machinery, Cultivation Methodology, Land Use/Environment Interactions, Nutrient Cycles: Biosphere/Atmosphere Interactions, Resource Economics, Ecological Ethics, Environmental Economics, Agroforestry, Project Analysis, Watershed Management, Rural Development, Forest Protection Vegetation Management, Irrigation Systems & Water Use, Research Methodology, Multi-Purpose Tree (MPT) Improvement, Understanding Student Learning, Trainer-Training: Methodology, Techniques & Models, Crop Storage Technology, Forest Management, Impact Analysis, Computer Applications, Countryside Management, Management of Biological Reserves, Geographic Information Systems, Women in Development, Tropical Silviculture, Clonal Forestry, Education in Developing Countries, Adult Education, Soil Conservation & Management.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Economics — Scottish Doctoral Programme
MSc (12 mth FT)
This course is usually taken by students in the first year of their University of Edinburgh Doctoral programme.
The one-year MSc covers the core areas of Microeconomics, Macroeconomics and Econometrics, together with a number of electives in areas such as Environmental, Labour, Industrial, Development, International and Monetary Economics and Applied Econometrics.
Specialist teachers on the course are drawn from all eight participating Scottish universities giving a high level of expert tuition.
Assessment is by written examination and dissertation.
UK students may apply for ESRC studentships.
Enquiries to Department of Political Economy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ for further information and an application form.
Education
MEd (12 mth FT, 24–48 mth PT)
Six units to be taken from a wide range of choices, plus a dissertation.
The units include student and classroom learning, curriculum content and context, adult education, administration and planning, counselling, research evidence, social and political philosophy, cognitive and emotional development, educational innovation, and international perspectives on education and training.
The course is taught by seminars, workshops and groupwork, and assessed by coursework, project assignments, and a dissertation.
There is selective support from Lothian Regional Council for local teachers; others should apply to local authorities; or overseas candidates to the British Council and other bodies.
Contact:Department of Education (see page 105).
Education in Forestry & Natural Resources
MSc (12 mth FT) Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides expertise in specialist branches of forestry and other natural resource disciplines, and awareness of recent developments in those fields.
Further provides for development of curricula and evaluation of courses in forestry and related natural resources, and provides training in modern and innovative approaches to teaching.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology and Resource Management described in general on page 123.
Course modules in Forestry Curriculum & Syllabus and Training Course Design Management & Evaluation are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Trainer-Training, Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, Education in Developing Countries, and Adult Education.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
English Language Teaching (ACELT)
Advanced Certificate (10 wks FT)
ACELT offers an overview of current practice in English Language Teaching and the underlying theory.
It aims to improve teacher effectiveness and emphasises the development of language skills and awareness through the co-operative exploration of teaching/learning problems.
The nucleus of the course is a set of eight modules concerned with the language skills (eg speaking, listening) and language systems (eg grammar, vocabulary).
This one-term course is intended for practising UK and overseas teachers with two years' experience and good English.
It is assessed on the basis of written assignments.
A distance learning version is in preparation.
Contact:Institute for Applied Language Studies (see page 35).
English Literature
MSc (12 mth FT)
All MSc candidates required, unless specifically exempted, to complete a course on bibliography and textual criticism.
Two MScs:(i) Modernism, Gender and Writing (ii) Scottish Fiction 1814–1940.
Contact:Professor Ian Campbell, Department of English Literature (see page 38).
Environmental Chemistry
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides postgraduate training in fundamental and applied aspects of the origins, fate and behaviour of chemical species in aquatic, atmospheric, terrestrial and biotic media.
The course is intended for students proficient in undergraduate chemistry wishing to specialise as environmental chemists and for those wishing to extend and apply their chemical education to the principals and practices of environmental control.
Instruction and project work (terms 1–2) in following areas: atmospheric chemistry; aquatic chemistry; chemistry of the terrestrial environment; environmental biochemistry; chemical processes for pollution control, environmental toxicology and health.
Within key areas, students receive instruction in various topics including: atmospheric pollution; global change; sedimentary chemistry; aquatic radiochemistry; structural geochemistry; contamination of the soil environment; pesticide chemistry; food chemistry; industrial pollution control; hazardous waste disposal; environmental sampling and monitoring; heavy elements; chemical carcinogens; environmental modelling and environmental toxicology.
Term 3: research project and preparation of dissertation.
Minimum entry qualification is an Honours degree in Chemistry or its approved equivalent.
Contact:Dr Simon J.T. Pollard, Department of Chemistry (see page 92).
Environmental Health
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT, 21 mth PT)
This course is intended primarily for Environmental Health Officers who wish to broaden the scientific basis of their work.
It will be offered in conjunction with the Department of Environmental Health, Edinburgh District Council and has been designed in collaboration with the Royal Environmental Health Institute for Scotland.
The course is appropriate for persons concerned with Environmental Health in either developed or developing countries.
The aim is to improve the scientific basis of investigation and management in the practice of environmental health and to equip participants with the strategic skills to assess and advise on the control of the risks to health from the environment.
Contact:Department of Public Health Sciences (see page 76).
Environmental Protection & Management
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides an understanding of some of the major processes responsible for environmental degradation by loss or deterioration of land, air or water resources, and further aims to develop expertise in the design and implementation of programmes of environment protection and management.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Land Use/Environmental Interactions and Nutrient Cycles: Biosphere/Atmosphere Interactions are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Soil Conservation Management, Management of Sustainable Development, Resource Economics, Environmental Economics.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Ethics
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
This programme is taught jointly by the Christian Ethics and Practical Theology Department, with the Hebrew and Old Testament, and New Testament Departments, and comprises a study of Biblical and Theological Ethics.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000 word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma
Contact:Department of Christian Ethics and Practical Theology (see page 49).
European Film Studies
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9mth FT)
The course is designed to combine the intensive study of film theory and criticism with the extensive analysis of specific instances drawn from different European national cinemas.
The course on theory and criticism will run for two terms and covers the major theories and methods of film practice from Eisenstein's articles on montage to contemporary pronouncements on auteur cinema.
In addition to this course students will take two one-term options selected from the following list: Early European Cinema; From Eisenstein to Renoir; Italian Cinema; Neo-realism and its Modulations; French Cinema; The Nouvelle Vague and Contemporary Trends; The New German Cinema; Concepts and Film Style.
Assessment is by essays (on options), by written examination (on film Theory and Criticism) and a dissertation of not more than 15,000 words.
Contact:Faculty of Arts (see page 32)
Extension for Rural Development
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides an understanding of the processes of change in rural development and the role of extension within that change, combined with expertise in crop and animal production systems.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Innovation & Extension and Farming Systems Research are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Animal Production Systems, Crop Production Systems, Crop Protection, Soil Conservation & Management.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Genetics
Diploma (9 mth FT, 24 mth PT)
A course adapted to individual needs enabling students with Honours degrees in suitable biological subjects to enter the field of genetics.
Courses may cover general, quantitative and developmental aspects of the subjects and includes lectures, seminars and laboratory work.
Contact:Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology (see page 88).
Geographical Information Systems
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Is composed of a set of courses structured to allow maximum flexibility.
The base courses cover GIS principles, including relational database methods and elements of spatial analysis.
Supporting option courses include areas such as: GIS software and systems; software engineering; GIS algorithms; parallel processing; advanced computer cartography and graphics; remote sensing applications; natural resource assessment; photogrammetry and digital terrain modelling; public policy and decision-making; locational and simulation  modelling.
The course is taught by lectures, demonstrations, practicals and independent projects; and assessed by coursework, examination and individual research project (Diploma) or dissertation (MSc).
Approximately 12 awards available for UK students in 1992–3.
Contact:Department of Geography (see page 106).
Geography
Diploma (9 mth FT)
The Diploma is awarded on the successful completion of a period of study which comprises coursework and a dissertation.
Candidates shall normally attend two option courses offered within the Department of Geography.
By arrangement, one course outside the department can be substituted for one option.
Attendance at other courses may be required or permitted in particular cases.
Candidates are required to present a dissertation of between 8,000 and 12,000 words on an approved topic.
Contact:Department of Geography (see page 106).
German Studies
MSc (12 mth FT)(Diploma 9mth)
The course is designed to enable students who have taken a first degree in German to increase their knowledge of modern German literature and to extend their competence to the medium of film.
Candidates are required to attend a 2-term course on Theory and Methods of Literary Study or Theory and Criticism and two l-term courses on a topic of their choice.
Options currently available include Viennese Modernism, Modern German Fiction, Contemporary Women Writers and Literature and Film in the Weimar Republic; New German Cinema.
In addition to this, candidates are required to submit a dissertation on a topic The course has been developed with a view to preparing students for proceeding to research work in their field, or seeking employment in cultural institutions or the media.
Contact:Department of German (see page 40).
Health Promotion and Health Education
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT, 21 mth PT)
Intended for people who work in health education and health promotion, or work in other fields but wish to develop their expertise in this subject.
Content covers health promotion theory and practice; medical sociology; epidemiology; communication skills; economics, research methods; social policy; educational psychology.
Contact:Department of Public Health Sciences (see page 76).
Health Sciences
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT, 21 mth PT)
The course is designed to provide members of the professions allied to medicine with the scientific skills, knowledge and their appliction to relevant clinical practice in their field in order to be better able to evaluate their effectiveness of their contributions to health care services.
The aim is to provide students with the ability to analyse and evaluate selected topics which are related to the analysis of human performance.
This will be achieved by developing abilities to analyse critically the work of the professions allied to medicine by being able to understand the way in which the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions, as well as those designed to prevent disease and promote health, are evaluated.
Candidates will normally be expected to be members of the professions allied to medicine.
Contact:Department of Public Health Sciences (see page 76).
Hebrew and Old Testament Studies
MSc (12 mth FT) MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
MTh students who have no previous knowledge of Hebrew do a special one-year course which brings them up to the level necessary for research in Old Testament Studies.
All other students take a course in advanced texts from the Hebrew Bible.
In their other two courses and in their dissertation they specialise in one of the following areas: Hebrew language; Old Testament studies; Canaanite mythology; Jewish studies.
Languages taught include Hebrew (classical and post-biblical), Akkadian, Ugaritic, Phoenician, Aramaic and Syriac.
Courses are assessed by essays, or by written examination; and a 15,000-word dissertation is presented in September.
Instruction in the use of computers is available.
Contact:Department of Hebrew and Old Testament Studies (see page 50).
Hispanic Studies
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9mth FT)
This degree course has been designed to provide opportunities for advanced study in key areas of Spanish, Spanish-American and Portuguese literature and culture.
Individual courses reflect some of the research interests of staff but, where appropriate, one option may be replaced by a supervised reading course.
In addition to the core course in Theory and Methods of Literary Study, students would normally select two one-term options.
Assessment is by essay, written examination and a dissertation.
Contact:department of Hispanic Studies see page 40)
History
MLitt (24 mth FT, 36 mth PT)
Awarded on presentation of a thesis and performance at an oral examination.
The thesis, on an agreed topic not exceeding 60,000 words, may be either a piece of original research or a critical survey of advanced knowledge in a particular field.
Continuous study under the supervision of a primary and a secondary supervisor, for the period of study.
Applicants are registered in the first instance as supervised postgraduate students; this initial period will count towards the minimum period of study for the degree.
Contact:Department of History (see page 41).
History
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9mth FT, 18mth PT)
Assessed by two three-hour written examinations and a dissertation (15,000–20,000 words).
A course on one of the following topics: The Reign of Richard II; An Introduction to the Intellectual History of the Scottish Enlightenment; American Espionage, 1898–1981; Canada, Britain and the Atlantic World, 1815–1880; Cultural and Intellectual Aspects of Early Twentieth Century China 1900–1937.
Taught by one supervisor by regular tutorial instruction; essays and reports required during autumn and spring terms.
Contact:Department of History (see page 41).
History of Art — Art and Ritual church, liturgy, architecture, furniture and decoration
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course is intended as an introduction to research within the field of Christian art and architecture of the Middle Ages and Renaissance studied in the context of Christian belief and practice.
Candidates should have at least a good Second Class Honours degree (or the equivalent).
Students take two special subjects and an introduction to research methods.
On the successful completion of these courses students will proceed to write a dissertation.
This course can lead on to research degrees in the history of art.
Contact:Department of Fine Art (see page 39).
History of Art — Studies in Islamic Art
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
The programme of study is intended to provide an intensive grounding in aspects of the History of Islamic Art for candidates with at least a good Second Class Honours degree (or the equivalent) in an appropriate subject.
Various themes will be covered in the course, such as Art of Iran, Royal Iconography in Medieval Islamic Art, Islam and Art, and Islamic Painting.
Contact:Department of Fine Art (see page 39).
Human Ecology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Develops understanding — practical, quantitative, theoretical, philosophical — about the way human activities interconnect with the environment, and how this relates to local and global issues in the contemporary world.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Principles of Human Ecology, Management of Sustainable Resources, and Ecological Ethics & Education are considered essential.
Three further modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (page 90).
Information Technology — Knowledge Based Systems
MSc (12 mth FT, 24–36 mth PT/Diploma (9 mth FT)
Conversion course training graduates to become active practitioners in area of Knowledge Based Systems.
Organised into four themes, Foundations of Artificial Intelligence, Expert Systems, Intelligent Robotics, and Natural Language Processing.
Each theme comprises eight modules, some of which are compulsory and some optional, taken over period October-March.
Each module involves 18  hours of lectures, plus additional practical and tutorial sessions.
From May-September, each student undertakes a major practical project, individually or collaboratively.
Assessment: Each module is examined by a 90-minute written examination at the end of April.
The practical project is examined by written dissertation.
Students must pass both components.
A student who does not pass at MSc level the written examinations in April may be registered for the Diploma.
Funding: The course is approved by SERC and receives an annual allocation of advanced course studentships.
These cover fees and living expenses of UK students.
Students from EC countries are eligible for these awards, which are restricted to fees only.
No support is available for overseas students.
Entry Requirements: Besides a First or Second Class Honours degree or its equivalent, applicants should have had some prior programming experience.
Contact:Department of Artificial Intelligence (see page 85).
Landscape Architecture
MLA (21 mth FT, 33 mth PT)
A course for those suitably qualified in other disciplines and wishing to train as landscape designers.
Course qualification gives exemption from the final examination of the (UK) Landscape Institute.
Applicants require a good Honours degree (or equivalent) in an approved discipline, normally either from a design-based discipline such as architecture, civil engineering or planning, or one based on the biological sciences, and a year's appropriate professional experience since graduating.
Students take six units covering Landscape Design, Management and Science.
Coursework and project assessment, written examinations and dissertation.
Contact:Department of Architecture (see page 102).
Landscape Design
Diploma (9 mth FT)
The Diploma is a non-vocational qualification for those wishing to undertake supervised study on selected aspects of the Theory and Practice of Landscape Design.
Candidates should have a degree in Landscape Architecture or a closely related discipline.
The Diploma is awarded on successful completion of prescribed coursework, which may include studio design projects, essays, practical surveys, case studies or other approved projects.
Coursework, prescribed by the head of department, will be specifically related to the individual needs of candidates.
Contact:Department of Architecture (see page 102).
Law
LLM (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies (9 mth FT)
The LL.M. provides advanced study in all the main areas of private, public, comparative and international law, with more focused offerings in commercial law including international commercial arbitration, international economic law, European law, legal history, constitutional law, human rights and civil liberties, legal theory and sociology of law.
The curriculum is composed of three courses taught on a seminar basis and a dissertation.
Assessment is by written essays and dissertation and (where required) an oral examination.
The Diploma normally awarded after nine months on basis of satisfactory performance in three courses.
Admission requirement: normally a good Honours degree (or equivalent) in Law.
Contact:Faculty of Law (see page 54).
Legal Studies
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) Diploma in Advanced Legal Studies (9 mth FT)
The M.Sc.
offers advanced interdisciplinary study in European Law and European Institutions, Criminology, the Sociology of Punishment and Control, Methodology and Medical Jurisprudence.
The curriculum is composed of three courses taught on a seminar basis and a dissertation.
Assessment is by written essays and dissertation plus (where required) an oral examination.
The Diploma is normally awarded after nine months on basis of satisfactory performance in three courses.
Admissions requirements: normally a good Honours degree (or its equivalent) in law or a related discipline in the humanities or social sciences.
Contact:Faculty of Law (see page 54).
Master of Business Administration
see Business Administration Programmes 
Mathematical Education
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Joint course with Department of Education, intended for those who already have some teaching experience.
The course gives experience in curriculum innovation, development of learning materials, and evaluation.
Four lecture courses assessed on course work; two curriculum development exercises.
For MSc only, a six-month project examined by dissertation.
Contact:Department of Mathematics and Statistics (see page 96).
Mathematics of Nonlinear Models
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Joint course with Heriot-Watt University.
Introduction to nonlinear problems with emphasis on practical modelling, illustrative examples from pure and applied science, and use of computers.
Four core courses (analysis, probability, ordinary and partial differential equations), with written examination; three optional courses (e.g. Nonlinear waves and solitons, Bifurcation and chaos, Numerical methods for PDEs, etc), with oral examination.
For MSc only, a project assessed by dissertation.
Some SERC studentships are available.
Entrance requirement: First or Second Class Honours in mathematics, or another science with substantial mathematical content.
Contact:Department of Mathematics and Statistics (see page 96).
Medical Radiodiagnosis
Diploma (24 mth)
The course is designed for training in Diagnostic Radiology.
Topics covered include Physics, Radiography, Radiographic Anatomy, Clinical Radiological Interpretation and Diagnostic and Interventional Techniques.
It is suitable for those beginning training in Radiology or with limited initial experience.
The examination is in two parts, Part I after nine months (written paper, MCQ, and X-ray film viewing and viva), Part II at the end of the second year (written paper, practical, X-ray film reporting and viva).
The course lasts for two years and is a combination of taught lectures, tutorials and practical experience.
Subjects covered can include: Radiation physics; radiology; pathology of neoplasia treatable by radiotherapy with particular reference to malignant disease; clinical and radiographic examination of patients; clinical oncology; assessment for radical treatment; principles and practice of radiotherapy; chemotherapy; statistical analysis.Candidates must have appropriate registration with the General Medical Council and should preferably have at least two years' clinical experience since obtaining their Medical Degree.
Contact:Department of Medical Radiology (see page 71).
Modern European and Latin American Literatures
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9mth FT)
The course is designed to enable students who have taken a first degree in more than one European or Latin American language to extend their knowledge of European and/or Latin American literatures through a range of optional courses.
All students will follow a core course on Theory and Methods of Literary Study which extends over two terms and is designed to familiarise students with the major theoretical and practical approaches to the study of literature.
Assessment is by essays, written examinations and a dissertation.
Contact:Faculty of Arts (see page 32)
Music
MMus (12 mth FT, 24–36 mth PT/
Diploma (9 mth FT, 21–33 mth PT)
Candidates are required to select either one major and one minor course, or three minor courses.
These are then studied concurrently for one year (or two-three years part-time).
Each course is separately examined by coursework and/or written examination; candidates may also be called for a viva voce examination.
The Diploma is awarded on the basis of this assessment.
Candidates who achieve the required standard in coursework and written examinations proceed to the submission for the MMus.
The submission must be related to the candidate's Major Course, or, if three Minor Courses are taken, to one of these courses.
The submission shall consist of either a dissertation of about 10,000 words or the study of a musical document (about 5,000 words plus an edition of the document).
In the case of Composition, the submission shall consist of a portfolio of compositions.
Please see Faculty of Music entry.
Contact:Faculty of Music (see page 80).
Neuroscience
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
A course for BSc Science, Medical, Dental and Veterinary graduates.
It runs throughout the year with teaching contributed by six participating departments; organised into a series of modules, each lasting 5 weeks, of which five must be undertaken.
Each module consists of a combination of formal lectures, seminars, practical and mini-projects at the discretion of the module organiser.
The written examination (July), consists of two written papers each three hours.
MSc candidates also complete a dissertation during the Summer vacation which is presented for examination in September.
This must be an independent piece of research work by each student.
One or two studentships are usually available.
Contact:Faculty of Veterinary Medicine (see page 114).
New Testament Language, Literature and Theology
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
Designed for two types of students.
(1) Students with a theological degree, including New Testament Greek, who wish to specialiSe in New Testament by exploring one or more area in depth.
Ideal for those considering doing research who need a greater knowledge of Greek or (if not native English speakers) who need to learn to write technical exegetical arguments in good English.
Coursework is directed towards the dissertation and is normally assessed by four essays on two or three of the following four areas: the beginnings of Christianity; contemporary New Testament theology; historical, philosophical and philological questions relating to the language and text of the New Testament; the New Testament as literature.
(2) Students with a theological degree without Greek or, in exceptional cases, students with a good degree in a subject other than theology who have read widely and deeply in theology, who wish to learn New Testament Greek.
Coursework is an accelerated course in New Testament Greek to an advanced level with an examination in June, two exegeses on selected New Testament texts, a possible further two essays on one of the range of subjects mentioned in (1) above, and an exegetically and linguistically based dissertation on a New Testament passage of central interest to the candidate.
All students receive personal supervision of the dissertation and attend lectures, colloquies and seminars in their chosen fields of study.
There is an honours, postgraduate and ministers' Seminar, and there are regular Greek readings from literature contemporary with the New Testament with the staff and other postgraduate students.
Dissertations are discussed together at a day conference in the spring.
Contact:Department of New Testament (see page 51).
Nursing and Education
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 or 36 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Designed to meet the needs for advanced study of nurses and members of related health care disciplines who are already interested and experienced in education.
Students have the opportunity to select areas of study which are of personal and professional interest; to study in-depth issues relevant to the theory and practice of nursing and education and to participate in a stimulating exchange of ideas across cultural and disciplinary boundaries.
Students take two core units: Issues and Trends in Nursing and Health Care and Philosophical Issues in Education and Health Care.
Further options are taken from Nursing Studies, and two units from the MSc in Education programme.
Assessment is by coursework; dissertation work is carried out and supervised on the basis of individual interests.
Entrants normally require a first degree but non-graduate aplicants who give evidence of equivalent academic capability are also considered.
Applicants should normally hold a teaching qualification.
Offered jointly by the Departments of Education and Nursing Studies.
Contact:Department of Nursing Studies (see page 108).
Nursing and Health Studies
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 or 36 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
A flexible programme is offered to allow experienced, able nurses and other health care professionals to extend their knowledge of therapeutic care in nursing and related disciplines.
Students take two core units: Issues and Trends in Nursing and Health Care, and Research Methods, Elementary Statistical Theory and Computing; they then choose four further units from a range of options including Health Education, Dynamics of Group Behaviour, Families in Transition and additional clinical and management studies.
Assessment is mainly by coursework; a variety of teaching methods is used and participative learning is encouraged.
Application to practice and dissertation work are carried out and supervised on the basis of individual interests.
Entrants normally require a first degree but non-graduate applicants who give evidence of comparable academic capability are also considered.
Contact:Department of Nursing Studies (see page 104).
Pastoral Studies
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
Advanced work in pastoral studies, involving the study of the theology of pastoral care with supervised fieldwork, normally in a clinical setting, together with two options, usually from Church and society, Christian ethics, psychology of religion.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma.
Contact:Department of Christian Ethics and Practical Theology (see page 49).
Philosophy
M.Litt (24 mth FT)
Fundamentally an intermediate research degree in which students pursue supervised research.
However, the degree also has a taught component, as students must attend at least one postgraduate seminar every term over the two-year period of the degree, and are examined on their work in these courses.
Assessment is by thesis of between 20,000 and 30,000 words on a philosophical topic of the student's choice, and by written examination of three 3-hour papers.
One of these examines the areas covered in the seminars; the other two examine subjects which have particular reference to the individual candidate's thesis topic.
Contact:Department of Philosophy (see page 43).
Philosophy
MSc (12 mth FT)
Intended to provide an intensive grounding in Philosophy and to develop special areas of competence.
Taught by seminars and tutorials, the course lasts for 12 months.
Students study three areas of Philosophy, chosen from a wide range of options.
Assessment is by six essays (2 in each of the 3 courses chosen) and by dissertation.
Students must have at least an Upper Second Class Honours degree or equivalent either in Philosophy or in another subject where there is evidence that the student can convert successfully to the study of Philosophy.
Contact:Department of Philosophy (see page 43).
Physics
Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course is intended for students who wish to study in depth a branch of physics chosen from Atomic and Molecular Physics, Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics, Nuclear and High Energy Physics, Optical Physics or Theoretical Physics.
Students attend relevant lectures and perform associated experimental work in the Physics 4 laboratory and project work with a research group.
There is a written examination and an assessment of the laboratory or project work.
Contact:Department of Physics (see page 98).
Physics & Technology of Amorphous Electronic Materials
MSc (12 mth FT)
An inter-university course consisting of a programme of lecture, tutorial sessions and laboratory work, followed by a project on an experimental or theoretical topic.
The lecture programme, together with its associated tutorial and laboratory work is based entirely at one of the three participating universities, but for the project work students will join the institution at which the appropriate special facilities or expertise exist.
The lecture programme extends from October to April and consists of lecture courses, tutorials and laboratory work totalling approximately 260 hours.
There are two introductory courses (Review of topics in solid state physics; defects in Solids); folowed by core courses covering fundamental aspects of thin film electronic materials (eg Preparation and processing; Structure; Electronic properties; Optical properties; Magnetism; Thermal and vibrational properties; Microcrystalline and polycrystalline silicon) and also technological applications (eg Thin film transistors; Junction devices; Large area imaging applications; Microelectronic packaging).
Related laboratory experiments will also be provided to give students experience of some of the basic experimental techniques which are important in the study of amorphous materials.
Contact:Department of Electrical Engineering (see page 94).
Practice and Theory of Translation
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
The course aims to enhance practical skills and to provide an intellectual and philosophical perspective on the activity of translation.
The present course involves bilingual translation between English and Arabic or one of the Scandinavian languages.
(In future, other European and Asian languages will be available.)
Candidates must be graduates, normally with a good first degree, and having either considerable professional experience of translation or of another relevant professional field, or attested research interests in translation.
There are three terms of taught course work, from October to May, followed by a dissertation for MSc students, to be completed between May and mid-September.
The course consists of two broad strands, ‘Practical Translation’ and ‘Theoretical Perspectives on Translation’, pursued in parallel by all students.
These two strands have an approximately equal weight in terms of student workload and contribution to the overall assessment.
The Practical Translation strand consists of advanced exercises in translation, from and into the languages of specialiSation, designed to highlight theoretical aspects of translation discussed concurrently in the Theoretical Perspectives strand of the course.
The Theoretical Perspectives strand of the course consists of a Foundation course and set of Options, including Theories of Translation, Stylistics, Pragmatics, Discourse Analysis, Testing, English for Special Purposes, and Advanced English Usage.
Contact:Department of Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies (see page 41).
Principles and Practice of Taxonomy
MSc (12mth FT) /Diploma (9mth FT)
Aims to bridge traditional and modern approaches and equip biologists, conservationists and ecologists with a high level of skill in pure and applied taxonomy and a wide knowledge of biodiversity and its investigation.
The course combines instruction in the function, management and funding of taxonomic collections and institutes.
Currently the course is restricted to work with plants and fungi and is run in partnership with the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh.
Teaching is by lectures, seminars, workshops and practical work.
Assessment is by coursework, written examinations and (for MSc) dissertation.
Contact:Institute of Ecology and Resource Management (page 90).
Psychiatry
MPhil (36 mth PT) /Diploma (24 mth PT)
The course is for medical graduates and provides postgraduate training in psychiatry.
It consists of coursework in a programme of lectures and seminars two afternoons per week, and also of in-service training.
This is a three-year course taking place over nine terms.
In the final year emphasis is on research and special options.
Clinical and basic science topics are covered in the first six terms.
The course is assessed by means of clinical and written examination at the end of the first year and by assessment of a thesis based upon a research project presented after the third year.
In addition it provides an appropriate preparation for the Membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.
The aims of the course are to make trainees familiar with established knowledge in the main areas of clinical psychiatry and in the biological and behavioural sciences relevant to psychiatry, and to provide an understanding of the scientific method and the nature of scientific hypotheses, and to encourage trainees to put these principles into practice by conducting research under supervision.
Students who can only participate in the course for two years may sit the Diploma in Psychiatry in the sixth term.
A brochure describing the course in detail is available.
Contact:Department of Psychiatry (see page 76).
Religious Studies
MSc (12 mth FT)
Study is within two areas which are co-ordinated by and largely taught within the Department of Theology and Religious Studies; Celtic Christianity; Religions and Ideologies.
Candidates choosing Religions and Ideologies follow two specialised courses.
Those choosing Celtic Christianity are encouraged to study a Celtic language.
Teaching is by seminars.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma
Contact:Department of Theology and Religious Studies (see page 52).
Remote Sensing and Image Processing Technology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Aims at understanding of the physical, mathematical and technological aspects of image processing and of remote sounding from satellites.
A limited number of studentships available to UK students and on a fees only basis to EC applicants.
In first six months students take eight modules, four of which must be Remote Sensing 1 and 2, Image Processing 1 and 2.
Other modules chosen from those offered in MSc courses in Information Technology and Geographical Information Systems.
Written examinations in April, followed by six months dissertation, based on project work.
Entry Requirements: Honours degree, or equivalent, in a physical, engineering or mathematical science.
Contact:Department of Meteorology (see page 97).
Reproductive Biology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
The course will be structured around 11 modules occupying 17 weeks of formal teaching consisting of lectures, tutorials and practicals.
Class examinations will be held during the week before Christmas.
Formal teaching will continue for a further 8 weeks, with degree/diploma examinations held before Easter.
MSc candidates will undertake 12 weeks of supervised research submitting a dissertation in early September.
Diploma students will complete a more restricted project in June.
Student performance will be judged on the basis of degree examination results, thesis and continuous assessment, following current University regulations.
Contact:Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology (see page 73).
Resource Management
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides for the effective management of natural resources for forestry, agriculture, wildlife conservation, rural development, watershed management and other related purposes.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Techniques of Resource Management and Human Resource Management are considered essential.
Four further modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology and Resource Management (see page 90).
Scottish Studies
MLitt (21 mth FT, 33 mth PT)
Normally intended for Honours graduates in an appropriate subject who wish to study one or a combination of two of the following subjects in a Scottish context: traditional tales and songs; ethnomusicology; social life and history; custom and belief; material culture; place-names.
Coursework is by assessment and thesis.
Contact: School of Scottish Studies (see page 45).
Seed Technology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Covers the principles and practices of seed multiplication necessary to ensure a regular supply of quality seed to farmers: includes seed industry development, structure and management; seed production, processing, storage and marketing; quality control and trials procedures.
Emphasis on seed programmes in developing countries.
Supported by four applied science courses covering the biology, entomology and pathology of seeds, and plant breeding.
Coursework assessment, examination (three written papers) and dissertation.
Contact: Institute of Ecology and Resource Management (see page 90).
Social and Economic Research on Technology
Doctoral Programme
This programme provides an opportunity to conduct in-depth social science research into the complex forces shaping modern technology.
The research centre provides specialist coursework, in parallel with that provided Faculty-wide on research method and design.
These courses give a solid conceptual grounding in the study of technological change — introducing major themes from economics, sociology, history and business management.
Existing research focuses on the generation and implementation of information technology, on gender and technology and on industrial innovation.
Students may be supervised from any department in the Social Sciences Faculty, enabling a variety of perspectives.
Contact:Graduate School in Social Sciences (see page 107).
Social and Public Policy
MSc (24 mth PT) /Diploma (21 mth PT)
This is designed for students who have experience of employment in the fields of social and public policy and wish to increase their understanding of the policy process.
Classes take place twice a week from 4.00pm to 6.00pm.
The first year has two core courses: Principles & Politics of Policy and Economics & Resourcing of Policy; and two options.
The second year has two further options, plus a dissertation for the MSc.
The course is taught by seminars and assessed by course work essays and written examinations and by dissertation for the MSc.
Contact: Department of Social Policy and Social Work (see page 110).
Social Anthropology
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
An introduction to major fields of study, and research methods, in social and cultural anthropology, based on six courses (four compulsory, two optional).
The course is taught by seminars and assessed by six extended essays and, for the MSc, a 15,000–20,000 word dissertation.
Duration of study is 9 months full-time (Diploma), 12 months full-time (MSc), and is available part-time over two years.
Candidates may apply for ESRC advanced coursework awards.
Contact:Department of Social Anthropology (see page 110).
Social Sciences
MSc (12 mth FT, 24 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
The programme offers interdisciplinary study in the social sciences with the opportunity to specialise in one of the following degree streams: European and International Politics; Gender in Society; Policy Studies; Scotland: Society and Politics; Social and Political Theory; Science and Technology Studies.
The programme is designed for recent graduates and those in mid-career.
In addition to two common core courses (Issues and Controversies in Social and Political theory, and The Philosophy and Epistemology of Social Science), students choose four courses offered for the various streams.
By special arrangement, students can take as one of their options a course offered in another stream of the MSc/Diploma, or in other degree programmes.
Assessment is by course papers and/or examination.
Students complete six courses for the Diploma.
For the MSc students must, in addition, write a dissertation.
European and International Politics
Relating theories to practice, the European and International Politics stream provides an advanced understanding of the politics and political institutions of the major European countries and of institutions such as those of the European Community.
It addresses issues and topics within the fields of comparative government and international relations, and provides scope for essay and dissertation work over a wide range of subjects and disciplines.
The stream will also be useful as a preliminary to degree work of a more intensive and independent kind.
It is well suited to the interests of students with a background in Political Science or related disciplines, and to those who wish, in particular, to gain greater familiarity with European Politics in an international perspective.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Gender in Society
The Gender in Society degree stream is concerned with the theory and politics of gender issues.
The compulsory element examines the relationship between feminist ideas, feminist practice, and theory and methodology in the social sciences.
Option courses are available which examine issues relating to gender and work, gender and development and gender and politics.
Feminist strategies and campaigns in these different fields are submitted to critical examination.
Comparative perspectives are emphasised throughout.
Gender in Society will be of interest to advanced level students wishing to study gender issues within a social science framework.
The course is of relevance to those concerned with the gender dimension of inequality in Western and Third World societies.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Policy Studies
In addition to the two common core courses of the MSc/Diploma in Social Sciences, students of this stream take two required courses (Principles and Politics of Policy, and Economics and Resourcing of Policy) and two options from among the following: Ageing and Social Policy; European Social Policy; Law and Public Policy; Management and Budgeting in the Public Sector; The Social Division of Welfare, Social Policy in Scotland and Social Research and Social Policy.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Scotland: Society & Politics
After nearly three hundred years within the British state, Scotland's constitutional position is in question as never before.
The courses in this stream provide a multi-disciplinary view of Scotland, its history, economy, society and political structure.
This integrated view of Scotland will appeal to those with occupational expertise in business, government and administration, teaching and social research, as well as those interested more generally in Scotland's affairs.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Social and Political Theory
The Social and Political Theory stream of the MSc/Diploma in Social Sciences explores the foundations of politics.
In other words, it is concerned with the examination of the principles and framework, if any, required to make politics possible.
The various course options look at this issue from a number of different points of view in order to discuss the social, legal and philosophical basis of political activity.
Some courses examine classical solutions to these problems from the history of social and political thought or draw on recent debates between contemporary political theorists.
0thers examine the bearing of these debates on more substantive topics such as affirmative action, just war, welfare rights, etc.
The course will appeal to advanced level students interested in pursuing conceptual issues about the nature and preconditions of politics.
Although no specific background is required, a qualification in or some knowledge of social, political or legal philosophy would be an advantage.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Science and Technology Studies
The Science and Technology Studies stream provides an opportunity for advanced study of the complex forces shaping modern technology.
Coursework gives a solid conceptual grounding introducing major themes from economics, sociology, history and business management.
Further options focus specifically on the information and communication technologies; the management of industrial innovation and the implementation of new technologies.
Contact:Faculty of Social Sciences (see page 100).
Social Work — Advanced Social Work Studies in Criminal Justice
Postqualifying: MSc (24mth PT) /Diploma
For experienced social workers and managers in the criminal justice field.
Applicants are normally graduates and most hold a professional social work qualification.
Participants specialise in practice or management.Examination is by continuous assessment and, for the MSc, a 15 000-word dissertation.
Contact:Department of Social Policy and Social Work (see page 110).
Social Work — Post-Qualifying Programme
by Individual Study (3–9 th FT, 9–24 mth PT)
This programme is offered to qualified and experienced social workers and social work managers who wish to carry out advanced study in project work or practice.
Each programme is individually designed around the interests and needs of the student.
Candidates must hold a professional qualification in social work.
Contact:Department of Social Policy and Social Work (see page 110).
Social Work Studies — Post-qualifying (Social Work Practice or Social Work Service Planning)
MSc (12 mth FT, 30 mth PT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
For experienced social workers with specialist practice interests or with responsibilities as front line managers in the social services.
Applicants are usually graduates and most hold a professional social work qualification with two years' work experience since qualifying.
Students specialise in social work practice or in social work service planning.
Examination is by continuous assessment and, for the MSc, a 15,000-word dissertation.
A small number of grants is available, or students may seek secondment by their employers.
Contact:Department of Social Policy and Social Work (see page 110).
Social Work
MSW (24 mth FT)
A two-year full-time professional training course leading to the degree of Master of Social Work and the Dip.SW awarded by the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work.
Applicants should normally be graduates with relevant experience in voluntary or paid work.
A general introduction to social work in the first year is followed in the second year by some specialisation in practice.
There are three practice placements.
Close contacts are maintained with local agencies.
The course is taught by study projects, lectures, seminars and practice placements and assessed by coursework essays, practice assessments and a dissertation.
Funding is available from CCETSW.
Contact:Department of Social Policy and Social Work (see page 110).
Speech and Language Processing
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
For students with a good undergraduate degree in linguistics, computer science, psychology, philosophy, or another related subject.
Lectures and practical work covering three main strands: Speech (acoustic and articulatory phonetics, phonology, signal processing), Language (morphology, syntax, semantics, with an emphasis on computational applications); and Infrastructure (computing, logic, automata theory, experimental design and statistics).
The strands merge in the study of complete systems (human and computer) that carry out various linguistic tasks.
At the end of the taught portion of the course, MSc candidates carry out a substantial project.
The taught portion of the course is assessed by four written assignments and the project by a dissertation (15–20,000 words).
SERC studentships available for UK residents.
Contact:Department of Linguistics (see page 42).
Systematic Theology
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
Two courses are chosen from: Philosophical and Apologetic Theology; Dogmatic Theology; Theology and Imagination; Theology, Ideology, and Culture; Celtic Christianity; Ecology and Christian Theology; Ecumenical Theology; Feminist Theology; Theology in the Post-Modern World; Marxism and Religion; Kingship and Religion; New Religious Movements; and Religions and their Political Expressions.
Teaching is by seminars.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma.
Contact:Department of Theology and Religous Studies (see page 52).
Technology in Rural Development
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides an awareness of the benefits and problems of mechanisation in the rural sector through labour substitution and high energy systems.
Machinery management strategies will be dealt with in relation to limited access to land, water, labour and/or capital.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management.
Course modules in Management of Rural Machinery and Cultivation Methodology are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from Irrigation Systems & Water Use, Crop Production Systems, Crop Protection, Crop Storage Technology.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90)
Theology and Development
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
Intended primarily for people who have been engaged in development projects around the world.
Detailed attention is given to theories of development and of liberation and to the implications for theology and the churches of involvement in development.
Study is by seminars.
Scholarships from Christian Aid and World Council of Churches are available.
Assessment for all coursework is by essays; followed by a 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma.
Contact:Department of Christian Ethics and Practical Theology (see page 49).
Theology and Ethics of Communication
MTh (12 mth FT) /Diploma (12 mth FT)
This course provides an opportunity for postgraduate study of the theological and ethical implications of communication, with particular reference to the media.
It is intended particularly for media professionals, clergy and others from the churches with a special interest in issues relating to communication, and those preparing to teach communication and media studies.
Practical involvement in media assessment and production is an integral part of the course.
Study is by seminars, tutorials and a major practical placement.
Assessment is by essays, projects and 15,000-word dissertation for the MTh or a major essay of not more than 10,000 words for the Diploma.
Contact:Department of Christian Ethics and Practical Theology (see page 49).
Tree Improvement
MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
This course provides the required knowledge and skills to plan and conduct improvement programmes for tree species.
Forms one of the postgraduate degree streams in Ecology & Resource Management described in general on page 124.
Course modules in Fundamentals of Tree Improvement and Breeding Strategies & Programme Development are considered essential.
Two further modules may be selected from: Clonal Forestry, Multipurpose Tree Improvement, Tropical Silviculture, Research Methodology.
The remaining two modules may be selected, with the approval of the Course Director, from amongst the general list available.
Contact:Institute of Ecology & Resource Management (see page 90).
Tropical Animal Production and Health
MPhil (24 mth FT) /MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Provides a comprehensive training in tropical animal production and health for livestock productionists, veterinarians, agriculturalists and associated professions.
The course aims to develop the technical knowledge and ability to make decisions about appropriate methods and strategies for livestock development.
The course develops communication (speaking and writing), computer, data handling and statistical analysis skills.
Assessment is by essay, examination (written and oral) and a dissertation.
The dissertation involves 3 months for the MSc, or 15 months research for the M.Phil.
Previous funding from British Council, ODA, FAO, ACU, private sources.
Contact:Faculty of Veterinary Medicine (see page 114).
Tropical Veterinary Medicine
MPhil (24 mth FT) /MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Aimed at field veterinarians at district, regional or headquarters level, veterinary college and training institute lecturers and veterinary project officers.
Major components include epidemiology, preventive veterinary medicine, computing for data analysis, logistics of disease control, veterinary economics project planning, public health, animal production and veterinary service management.
Assessment is by essay, examination (written and oral) and a dissertation.
The latter occupies 3 months for the MSc or 15 months research for the MPhil.
Previous funding from British Council, ODA, FAO, ACU, private sources.
Contact:Faculty of Veterinary Medicine (see page 114).
Tropical Veterinary Science:
MPhil (24 mth FT) /MSc (12 mth FT) /Diploma (9 mth FT)
Comprises lectures and laboratory work in laboratory diagnosis of disease in animals including poultry; organisation and management of tropical veterinary laboratories; epidemiology and control of the major diseases of animals including poultry in the tropics.
Assessment is by essay, examination (written and oral) and a dissertation.
The project occupies 3 months for the MSc or 15 months research for the MPhil.
Previous funding from British Council, ODA, FAO, ACU, private sources.
Contact:Faculty of Veterinary Medicine (see page 114).