

Foreword by the Principal
The University of Edinburgh has the particular advantage of offering almost the widest choice of subjects and combinations of subjects of any British university.
Further, the first two years are particularly flexible and structured to give reasonable opportunity for correcting mistaken choices.
The facilities such as laboratories, libraries and computing are excellent, and there is a highly professional Careers Service to advise students nearing the end of their course.
Student life is especially active with a very well-organised Students' Association, and modem sports and other facilities.
Edinburgh is one of the most beautiful cities in Europe, with its own vigorous and distinctive cultural life.
This prospectus is designed to help you to assess the practical possibilities for study at Edinburgh.
It tries to give, very concisely, essential information about the immense range of degree courses (over 250, including combinations of subjects) which we offer.
Many are vocationally-oriented courses of particular significance to the modern world, as the following few examples illustrate Business Studies combined with, for example, Law; Computer Science or Electronics combined with, for example , Physics or Artificial Intelligence.
Some are in a wide range of more traditional vocational subjects such as Divinity, Medicine, Law.
Last, but not least, we offer a range of subjects found in few other universities, such as Scottish Studies, Scandinavian Studies, Sanskrit.
We realise that this prospectus may not answer all your questions, or even that it contains so much information that it leaves you confused.
So please write or telephone about your problems — relevant addresses are listed at the back of the prospectus.
We are keenly aware that a University can seem a large and forbidding place to those on the outside.
Yet to those on the inside, the University is a warm and vibrant community that derives much benefit from drawing upon groups from a wide variety of backgrounds.
Because we encourage applications from all sources, we are well used to enquiries from those who may have no previous knowledge of universities.
So don't be hesitant about raising any questions you may have.
Best of all, why not come to the University and find out for yourself, on the spot, either at an Open Day or by arranging an individual visit.
When you read this prospectus, I urge you to keep as open a mind as possible about deciding which course to take.
There are so many subjects at university which you do not take at school.
The important thing is to choose the subjects you think you will most enjoy.
The variety of course combinations may seem bewildering at first sight, but they result from having a flexible system which tries to allow you to move to new subjects if you find them more attractive than the subjects which you first chose.
Most important of all, try to get as much information as you can about each of the universities you are considering, in order that you may make the most sensible choice to suit your own needs.
Naturally, I hope your choice will be Edinburgh.
If you are successful in your application, you will be assured of an enjoyable, rewarding and fully occupied life, whether in library, lecture room, laboratory or other activity.
Foreword by the Rector
Having decided to attend university the next great dilemma is to choose which one.
Your choice will not only have a profound effect on your future life but also you will have a profound effect on the future life of whichever institution you finally decide upon.
You will become an important part of a lively and challenging community which will always hold a special place in your life.
As you will no doubt have already discovered, this decision is not made easier as each university attempts to lure you through its portals with its glossy prospectus.
This prospectus is no different in its aims.
With it we attempt to give you an insight into the life of the university and hopefully assist you in your difficult choice.
The University of Edinburgh is one of the ancient universities of Scotland and as such has a long and fascinating history on which to build towards a dynamic future at the forefront of teaching and research.
The university enjoys a location which historically has ensured that it is an important part of the fabric of the city of Edinburgh and thus placed in Scotland's capital that it remains an important symbol for the nation's egalitarian spirit, its diverse cultural identity and true internationalism.
The city itself needs no introduction for its beauty, theatres, galleries and restaurants, pubs and annual Festivals, which assures it the reputation of a truly international city.
Should you decide to come here, I feel sure that you will discover for yourself the vibrant nature of the place.
In coming here you would most certainly be at the hub of cultural, educational, recreational and political life.
For those of you who feel the need to get away from it all, Edinburgh is uniquely placed to provide access to the untamed magnificence of the Highlands, a mere hop and a skip up the A9.
The university has an abundance of clubs which will enable you to take to the hills in good company.
The University of Edinburgh has a long and distinguished history and at a time of difficulty for the institutions of higher education throughout the country, Edinburgh is in a process of constantly reappraising and improving standards to meet the growing demands of a changing world.
There is determination to maintain strong links with other countries through a thriving International Office and as a result it plays a leading and responsible role in the global community.
I am very honoured as Rector to be associated with this great University and hope that during my period of office should you decide to come here, that I may be of assistance to you during that time.
Schools Liaison Service
Our aim in the Schools Liaison Service is to offer prospective students and their advisers — teachers, parents and careers officers — full and up-to-date information on all aspects of the University.
We are happy to advise on courses and degree structures, on entry requirements and admissions procedures, and on the extensive range of facilities offered by the University for both academic and extra-curricular activities.
Visiting the University
Visiting can play an important part in helping you decide on your choice of university, so we try to provide a number of opportunities for you to visit the University.
There is our annual Open Day in June, and a series of Departmental Visiting Days (as listed on the opposite page).
Details of these different opportunities are given below:
The annual University Open Day normally takes place in mid-June and is open to all-comers — prospective students of all ages, their relatives and friends; teachers and careers staff.
Departmental Visiting Days are divided into two groups which are intended for rather different purposes:
The pre-application visiting days are intended for students who want to find out more about the University to help them decide whether or not to apply.
On one of these dates,Wednesday 20 October , the Faculty of Science and Engineering is holding an Information Day, specifically for students wishing to visit departments at the science and engineering campus before finalising their application for a university place.
This same date has also been chosen by most departments across the University as a Departmental Visiting Day, so that you will be able to visit several departments, in more than one faculty, on the same day if you wish.
As these dates fall within the University teaching term it is important that you obtain details of visiting arrangements (times, locations etc) before you come and that you register your intention to attend with us .
Simply fill in the visit request form at the back of the prospectus and send it in to us in good time.
The post-application visiting days are designed specifically for students who have already received an offer of a place at Edinburgh and are normally by invitation only .
So if you have already decided to apply you are best to wait until this time to come to visit.
If you would like to visit the University we would urge you to try to come to one of the listed visiting days.
However, if the department or faculty you are interested in is not listed, or it is impossible for you to come on the given dates, then we will do our best to arrange an individual visit for you provided you give us plenty of advance notice .
However, it is not always possible to arrange visits to particular departments on particular days.
For some departments in the University visits can normally only be arranged on certain weekdays (typically Wednesday afternoons), and some faculties have preferred days for visits: Law (Friday afternoons); Medicine (Wednesday afternoons only); Music (Thursday afternoons).
To arrange a visit, or for further details of the pre-application visiting days, please send in the visit request form at the back of the prospectus.
Further Information
Supplementary information leaflets on most subjects taught in the University are available from us on request.
These and other publications about the University and its facilities are listed on the Request for Further Information form at the back of the prospectus.
If you are an Overseas student, please see the section on Coming to Edinburgh as an Overseas Student; and if you would like further advice or information please write to the International Office.
Addresses are given at the end of the prospectus .
Edinburgh — The City and the University
The City
Edinburgh is a capital city.
Its foundation as the capital of Scotland in the late eleventh century, and its development in the following centuries into a distinctive city crowded on a hill within a defensive wall can be traced through its buildings.
Bursting free from the encircling wall in the late seventeen hundreds, the city expanded first rapidly to the north in the extensive New Town of broad streets and remarkable buildings, before developing steadily, through another two centuries until now it covers the slope between sea and hills.
Although all but a small part of the encircling wall has gone, the older part of the city, with its narrow winding streets which witnessed so much of Scotland's history, is still clearly separate from the New Town, the two being surrounded by the Victorian and Edwardian developments.
A compact city of some 500,000 people, Edinburgh is built on a slope which rises gently from the sea, on the northern boundary, to the foot of a border of hills on the southern.
It is about 10 kilometres broad, and is surrounded by rich agricultural land.
The city's numerous places of interest and historical heritage include art galleries and concert halls; the Royal Museum of Scotland; the Royal Botanic Garden; the National Library of Scotland; the Palace of Holyroodhouse; Parliament House; St Giles' Cathedral; and Edinburgh Castle.
These indeed offer much to the student of serious culture.
Nor are the lighter pleasures lacking, for, within the city itself, abound a variety of golf courses, the Commonwealth Swimming Pool and Meadowbank Stadium.
Moreover, approximately 50 per cent of the city is open spaces — the Queen's Park, Arthur's Seat, and a variety of public parks — while the relatively small overall size permits ready access to the surrounding countryside.
Although Scotland has been a part of the United Kingdom for two and a half centuries, it has never lost its identity as a separate nation.
Edinburgh has remained the centre of its government, its church, and its law.
It has become a centre of business and commerce, with an important place in banking and insurance.
There is industry too, though this is not so evident.
The buildings in Edinburgh are typically Scottish.
It is the tradition to build tall, and to build in the local grey stone.
The oldest buildings erected in random stone, contrast finely with the elegant, imposing terraces of the New Town with their regular, dressed stone fronts.
The tradition is continued in much of the later development in the four-storied tenemented property of Victorian and Edwardian times.
From the breaking out from the confines of the medieval town, and for some two hundred years, the buildings were ranged along wide streets and around great gardens and parks.
This has given the present city its innumerable trees, its many green spaces, and its fine views and prospects.
Because it is the hub of so many activities, Edinburgh has excellent communications.
There is a nearby busy airport; fast rail services to major cities and cheap road services to all parts.
The University
The University of Edinburgh, although it has a long and distinguished history, is very much a university of the 1990s.
It offers a huge range of choice, from traditional academic disciplines to high tech degrees within a flexible degree structure which capitalises on the advantages of the broad-ranging Scottish approach to education.
The University of Edinburgh was founded over 400 years ago.
It is the sixth oldest in Great Britain and is presently one of the largest.
The last of the four ancient universities of Scotland to be established, Edinburgh owes its origin to the Town Council who provided the necessary finances, procured the site, where Old College now stands, and negotiated for the Royal Sanction.
The first students, in Arts and Divinity, were enrolled in 1583.
Among the many buildings of the University, some are of particular note.
The finest of all is Old College.
Today, it is the location of the Faculty of Law and of the Europa Institute, and is the centre of University administration; once it housed the whole University.
Within the building, which faces inwards to a quadrangle, there is the magnificent Playfair Library Hall on the south side and, in rooms recently redecorated in period style, the Talbot Rice Gallery on the west.
Close by, there is the McEwan Hall.
This impressive hall, of Victorian architecture with didactic embellishments, accommodates an assembly of two thousand two hundred — a truly dignified setting for graduations and other large-scale formal occasions.
Nearby is the Reid School of Music, which includes an excellent concert hall and contains the exceptionally fine Collection of Historical Musical Instruments.
St Cecilia's Hall, which stands in Niddry Street, has been meticulously restored and houses the renowned Russell Collection of Harpsichords and Spinets.
The Hall is regularly used for the instruction of music students and for concerts.
New College, standing at the top of the Mound overlooking Princes Street, is the seat of the Faculty of Divinity.
Several historic buildings around this area at the top of the High Street have been restored in recent years as student residences.
The building to the west of New College, and facing over Princes Street gardens, is Patrick Geddes Hall.
The building to the rear and on the High Street, known as Mylne's Court, is used as Salvesen Hall and Philip Henman Hall.
There are three main hubs of University activity firstly, the George Square area, secondly, The King's Buildings, and thirdly, the Pollock Halls of Residence.
The largest concentration of departments is found in the George Square/Old College area.
In George Square the original buildings dating from 1776 still stand on the west side, but elsewhere they are largely modem.
The David Hume Tower and the William Robertson and Adam Ferguson Buildings form the focus of the Faculties of Arts and Social Sciences.
Together with the University Library, they occupy the east and south sides.
In the north-eastern comer, the Appleton Tower houses some of the first-year teaching of the Faculty of Science, and ranged along the north side, the Hugh Robson Building, and others, accommodate certain Science departments which have common interests with Medicine.
The buildings of the Medical School stand just to the north of George Square.
The second complex is at The King's Buildings about three kilometres to the south of George Square.
Most of the Science & Engineering departments are on this site, Geology and Geophysics (in the Grant Institute and also the James Clerk Maxwell Building), the School of Biology and the School of Engineering, also a number of governmental scientific research institutes including the Scottish Agricultural College.
The Department of Chemistry was the first  building of the initial development — mid 1920s to 1930s; subsequent further expansion took place in the 1950s and 1960s.
The James Clerk Maxwell Building houses the Departments of Computer Science, Mathematics and Statistics, Meteorology, Physics, and the University's Computing Service.
It is one of the largest university buildings in Europe.
A third group of University buildings — equidistant from The King's Buildings and George Square — is the extensive Pollock Halls of Residence.
This presently comprises ten separate modern halls providing accommodation for around 1,800 students.
The University of Edinburgh is essentially a university within a city, unlike many British universities which operate in a large ‘single-campus’ area.
Today it is one of the largest unitary, non-collegiate universities in Britain offering not only first-class tuition in every principal subject but also an unsurpassed range of undergraduate courses — a cosmopolitan University in a cosmopolitan city.
Degrees
Students study for a degree in a faculty.
In general terms, each faculty offers an Ordinary or General degree, for which three years of study are required, and a number of degrees with honours for which four years of study are required.
However, there are exceptions to this general statement, and proper descriptions are given in the faculty sections.
Some of the University's degrees are specifically vocational and have an established core or have a clearly defined course of study; others are more open in their purpose and structure.
Vocational degrees are offered by the Faculties of Divinity, Law, Medicine, Music and Veterinary Medicine.
Non-vocational degrees are offered in the Faculties of Arts, Divinity, Social Sciences and Science & Engineering.
The general degrees are named the MA(General), the BSc (SocSc) and the BSc respectively, and the honours degrees are named the MA in Arts and in Social Sciences, and the BSc(Hons) in Science.
Vocational degrees are also offered in Social Sciences and Science & Engineering.
These are the MA(Architecture), the BCom and the BSc in Applied Sciences.
The structure of the degree in the Faculties last mentioned normally comprises two years of foundation courses followed either by finishing courses in the third year, for a general degree, or by two years of honours courses for an honours degree.
Normally courses in three subjects are taken in the first year and, commonly, these are followed by second courses in at least two of the subjects in the second year.
With this foundation a student usually  has a choice of two, or maybe three, subjects to pursue to degree standard, and can make that choice on the basis of experience.
The degree structure maintained at Edinburgh allows a student to leave decisions on the subjects to be followed and on the final degree to quite a late stage.
The flexibility of a structure which allows movement between degrees, and even between faculties, is a powerful attraction.
Joint honours degrees spanning two disciplines are also offered.
Usually both subjects are within the one faculty, but some span two, eg the BCom in Business Studies and Law, and the MA in Philosophy and Politics.
Some subjects, eg Psychology or Mathematics, can be studied for either the degree of BSc or the degree of MA.
All of the many degree courses offered at the University of Edinburgh are listed in the tables of the section ‘Degree Course Requirements’.
Teaching Methods
These vary from department to department, but, in general, formal lecturing is complemented by group tutorials and seminars and, in many scientific subjects, by laboratory and practical classes.
The University's highly developed computing infrastructure and body of experience is drawn upon for teaching in many areas, through computing laboratories, workshops and public access terminals.
Audio-visual methods are also utilised.
These include television teaching programmes, video-taped interviews and discussions, film strip programmes, and slides.
First-year students usually have three or four lectures in each subject per week plus a tutorial.
For some first-year subjects, the number in class can approach 300, but in subsequent courses the numbers are much smaller.
Initially, therefore, the tutor forms the link between the student and the course.
The lecture provides a guide to the subject-matter and sets out the foundations on which the student must build.
The tutorial provides the opportunity to develop themes or discuss problems usually on the basis of written work.
The success of the system depends on the student.
The number of hours spent in lectures, tutorials or practicals varies for each individual.
In some of the applied sciences the number of hours may be considerable while in an Arts course the formal teaching periods may be relatively few.
Normally, only a few hours will be spent each day at classes, and private study is the major element in the student's timetable.
The establishment of a working routine which uses this time to the greatest effect is the most important task of the new undergraduate.
ERASMUS and other International Exchanges
ERASMUS is the European Community Action Scheme for Mobility of University Students.
The aim of the scheme is to encourage students to take part of their degree course in a different member state of the European Community.
The University of Edinburgh has developed a network of connections to allow students in many areas of study to participate in ERASMUS exchange programmes.
In 1992/93, 32 exchanges are in operation (with every EC country and many EFTA countries), allowing up to 120 students to study in other European Universities.
There are ERASMUS possibilities in most faculties.
Exchange possibilities are not restricted to ERASMUS; currently a small number of Edinburgh students study in the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Georgetown University, Washington DC, Queen's University, Ontario and the University of California (restricted to students in the Faculty of Science & Engineering).
The University also operates an exchange scheme with the University of Helsinki, Finland.
For further information about international links, please write to the International Office (see page 158).
Scottish Credit Accumulation & Transfer Scheme (SCOTCAT)
The University has signed the SCOTCATAgreement which allows credit to be given towards academic awards to appropriate assessed learning.
Those applicants wishing to make use of this agreement, details of which should be available from their current institutions, should contact the appropriate Faculty at the University of Edinburgh as early as possible.
Enterprise Programme
Edinburgh received funding in 1989 as part of the Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative to assist students to prepare themselves for their future.
Enterprise Projects are currently running in departments throughout the University, developing the curriculum and teaching methods to assist students in acquiring skills so they graduate with a degree PLUS .
The PLUS skills are: planning and managing change, leading and motivating people, utilising resources and undertaking self-development.
Student Enterprise projects are also being funded, allowing groups of students to develop their own projects which develop these essential skills.
Methods of Assessment
Methods of assessment vary from department to department.
The traditional system of a class examination each term and a degree examination at end of session is still employed, but in most departments account is taken of work done in class.
Projects, dissertations, essays, and tutorial and practical work may all contribute to the final assessment.
In each course the method of assessment is set out at the beginning of the session.
Directors of Study
Each student entering the University is assigned to a Director of Studies who is a member of the teaching staff with special responsibility for providing information and guidance on choice of courses, and to help with academic or other problems as they arise.
The system provides two things in an effective way.
Firstly, it provides a formal channel which all students must use for the purposes of planning and progressing their studies; secondly, it provides each student with access to someone ready and willing to give help and advice about any matter which might affect his or her academic performance.
By far the majority of students spend their years at University with a minimum of uncertainty but when difficulties arise, the Director of Studies is there to help.
Computing
The University of Edinburgh and its staff and students have the benefit of one of the most extensive high-speed fibre-optic networks.
The network is constantly being upgraded to provide staff and students with state of the art facilities.
The University has invested heavily in networked microcomputer laboratories which include PCs, Mac and Unix workstations which are now established across most of the campus.
The existence at Edinburgh of a range of computer– based disciplines (many of which enjoy a worldwide reputation) has a spin-off effect across faculties.
There are many opportunities for students from all disciplines to enhance and make use of their computing skills while they are undergraduates.
University Library
Learning to use the University Library fully is central to every student's career.
The Main Library, situated in George Square, houses reference collections of periodicals, maps, statistics, government publications, special collections of rare books and manuscripts, and collections of multiple copies of textbooks for Arts, Social Sciences, and first-year Science courses as well as one of the largest open-access borrowing collections in the United Kingdom.
The Main Library collections are complemented by faculty libraries for Divinity, Law and the Europa Institute, Medicine, Music, Science, and Veterinary Medicine; all students may use and borrow from these libraries.
An extensive automation programme is creating a single catalogue of the contents of all sections of the University Library in machine-readable form, which can be consulted from any terminal on the University's academic computing network, as well as in the Library itself.
An automated borrowing system is also being introduced in one section of the Library after another.
Students may also freely use the extensive collections in the City Library, and those in their honours years may also use the National Library of Scotland.
Edinburgh is well endowed with other academic and special libraries, and students with particular needs can often use these by prior arrangement.
Crisis/Hardship Awards
The University has made available a number of Hardship awards for students facing particular financial difficulties during the course of their studies.
Awards are made in the form of grants, the level of which is based on financial need, and all matriculated students are eligible for application.
Students may apply at any time during the academic year.
In particular, a limited number of bursaries have been set aside for mature students.
Enquiries about the availability of these awards should be addressed in the first instance to the Secretary of the Bursaries Committee, Old College, South Bridge, EH8 9YL.
University Terms
The University year begins in October.
It is organised as three teaching terms each ten weeks long, with short vacations of three weeks at Christmas and four weeks at Easter.
The teaching session ends in late June once the degree examinations are over; and, for the undergraduate, the remainder of the year constitutes the long vacation.
The provisional dates of terms for 1994/95 are:
Autumn Term 10.10.94–16.12.94
Spring Term 9.1.95–17.3.95
Summer Term 17.4.95–23.6.95 
Service for Students
Accommodation
The Allocations Office of Residential and Conference Services provides information and advice to Edinburgh University students on matters concerned with accommodation and deals with applications for all types of accommodation.
University Policy on Student Residential Accommodation
The University guarantees a place in University Halls, Student Houses or flats to all new first year undergraduates who live outwith the boundary of the City of Edinburgh, provided that their application form has reached the Student Accommodation Service by 1st September and that UCAS has confirmed their academic place at the University of Edinburgh as UF by the same date.
In all cases, we reserve the right to use our discretion in offering students any particular style or type of accommodation.
Freshers applying after 1st September will receive assistance in finding suitable accommodation: we regret that we cannot guarantee University accommodation in such cases.
Application
Those who receive an offer of a place at the University should receive an accommodation booklet and the associated application form (AF1) with the offer letter.
Further information or an AF1 form may be obtained from the Allocations Office.
All prospective students including those who hold only conditional offers, or offers accepted on an ‘insurance’ basis, should apply for accommodation as early as possible .
The deadline for the guarantee of University accommodation (see previous section University Policy on Student Residential Accommodation ) is 1st September.
Those seeking accommodation can consult members of the staff by appointment between 9.30 am–12.15 pm and 2.00 pm–4.15 pm on any weekday, but please telephone (031 650 4669) for an appointment.
Types of Accommodation
University Controlled Accommodation.
Approximately 5500 students are accommodated in:
(i) traditional Halls where students have study/bedrooms and eat in the main dining-hall;
(ii) smaller Student Houses in which cooking facilities are provided; these accommodate 9 to 62 students and are situated in different parts of the city;
(iii) self-contained flats and houses for 1 to 6 students, including a limited number for married couples and families, situated in the main within a 1-mile radius of the University.
University Registered Accommodation.
The Allocations Office maintains a register of approved board lodgings and self-catering bedsits, all of which are inspected before inclusion in the register and visited subsequently to ensure that correct standards are being maintained.
Most lodgings and bedsits have single rooms but in some two students share a study/bedroom.
Unregistered Accommodation.
The Service also operates as an agency which puts students seeking rented accommodation in touch with owners of vacant accommodation.
In addition the Service provides information and advice on landlord/tenant problems.
Married Students and Families
Particular difficulties, with regard to finding suitable accommodation at the right price, have been experienced by married students and those with families.
Such students are strongly advised to come to Edinburgh on their own, in the first instance, and to send for their husbands or wives and families only when they have secured suitable accommodation.
In some cases, this can take considerable time.
Cost of Accommodation
The approximate charge for the majority of places in University Halls of Residence is likely to be around £64 per week.
This charge includes accommodation, heating and all meals except weekday lunches.
The charge for residence in self-catering Houses is likely to be around £40 per week.
Charges in lodgings vary considerably.
The charge for a single room with bed and breakfast and evening meal is likely to be approximately £58 per week; for a single room with bed and breakfast plus weekend meals £44 per week; and from £40 per week for a single room with cooking facilities provided.
Charges for shared rooms are generally slightly lower.
Heating is normally charged separately, often by coin meter.
The rents charged in privately-rented furnished flats vary widely depending on the size, furnishings and locality.
Very few flats — even for two persons — are likely to be available for less than £300 per month.
Single students sharing a University-controlled flat will be paying approximately £40 per week, exclusive of the cost of heating, lighting, telephone and food, etc.
In flats with central heating, rent includes the cost of heating and is about £2.50 per week higher.
The above figures are only estimates and should not be taken as firm indicators.
Accommodation is also available during our Easter and Summer Vacation periods for Parents and Students visiting Edinburgh.
There is the choice of either staying in one of the Halls of Residence where there are full Catering and Bar facilities available or in one of the many University Self-Catering Flats.
All the University Accommodation is ideally situated for the City Centre.
For further details contact: Commercial Operations Manager, Pollock Halls, 18 Holyrood Park Road, Edinburgh, EH1 6AY.
Telephone 031 667 1971.
Art and Music
In the Talbot Rice Gallery, Old College, the University has two art galleries.
One in the former University Museum, a large neo-classical room, houses the Torrie collection of old master paintings and bronzes.
The other is adjacent and is a spacious modern gallery for exhibitions.
There is usually a different exhibition every month or six weeks and they cover a wide range of subjects.
There have been contemporary and historical exhibitions of painting, sculpture, photography, tapestry and other crafts.
The Faculty of Music promotes a series of lunchtime concerts each session, normally in the Reid Concert Hall (admission free).
The faculty has studio facilities for instrumental practice, open to students of all faculties on a permit basis.
Further information will be found in the Music Faculty Section.
Careers
The University's Careers Service offers careers guidance and job placement facilities to all students at the University in all years of study.
It can help with advice and information on permanent and temporary employment, vacation work, postgraduate courses, professional training, work overseas, voluntary work, and so on.
The main office, and the Careers Library, are at 33 Buccleuch Place, EH8 9JT; there is a satellite office at King's Buildings.
Graduate Employment: is a Degree worth it?
For those contemplating a university course, graduation may seem a long way off — 1997 and beyond — and thoughts of what to do afterwards may understandably be equally distant.
However unfavourable the unemployment situation may be, most people would agree that a degree in any subject is a worthwhile investment in terms of the number of careers it opens up.
Choosing a career, however, involves time and effort, and it pays to start exploring the possibilities well before final year at University.
1997 and beyond
It is not possible to forecast in more than very general terms what the job opportunities will be in three or four years' time.
This means that you would be wise not to set your heart on one career but to keep options open, even if you are taking a vocational course.
Employment opportunities for graduates are constantly changing so you need to keep an eye on the situation throughout your time as a student.
Flexibility is the key to success and is especially important when the employment situation is difficult and changing rapidly.
Graduates enjoy greater job opportunities than those entering employment direct from school.
But this may only be a reality for those who are adaptable in what they are prepared to consider and where they are willing to go to do it.
‘Relevant’ Degrees
Some posts require specialist knowledge and a relevant degree (eg medicine, architecture) is essential.
However, more jobs than you probably realise are open to graduates no matter what they have studied.
Remember also that a vocational degree does not bind you to one particular field of employment.
Many civil engineering and law graduates, for instance, have chosen not to enter careers directly related to these subjects.
What employers look for
The subject of the degree is not always as significant in securing a job as you might think.
So what do employers look for in graduates?
In general, most employers would consider the following to be important:
a good academic record;
the ability to communicate effectively
(both verbally and on paper);
the ability to learn quickly;
an analytical and critical approach to problem solving;
the ability to handle and interpret figures;
involvement in outside interests and activities at university and elsewhere;
imaginative use of vacations, including doing vacation work.
The combination of intellectual abilities and personal qualities which employers seek can be developed not only through academic study but through wise use of leisure time and vacations.,
Making an early start
Contrary to popular belief, you do not have to know what you want to do for the Careers Service to be able to help you.
If you wait for inspiration it may be more difficult for the Careers Service to give constructive advice.
So take advantage, as early as possible, of the facilities offered, to assess your interests, abilities and aspirations and to relate these to the opportunities available.
Careers Information Booklets
There is a wealth of useful information in the different Information Booklets written by Careers Advisers and Careers Information Officers in universities and major colleges of higher education in consultation with employers of graduates.
They give details of what to expect of various opportunities open to you, and how to obtain further information on professional qualifications, future prospects, etc.
A list of titles can be obtained from Central Services Unit, Crawford House, Precinct Centre, Manchester M13 9ER (Tel. 061273 4233).
Chaplaincy
The Chaplain to the University works within the University in pursuing and promoting Christian ministry in all its facets.
His base is in the Chaplaincy Centre, where a welcome is offered to all students irrespective of religious or denominational allegiances and opportunities are provided to worship, make friends, exchange ideas, pursue concerns and ask questions.
The Chaplain is glad to be of assistance in any matter to students and staff and can be contacted through the Chaplaincy Centre during the day or at his home.
There are also honorary chaplains to Anglican, Baptist, Congregational, Methodist, Orthodox and Roman Catholic students, and to overseas students, with whom there are good working links.
The Chaplaincy offers a varied programme of events throughout the session including regular worship, lunchtime talks, discussion groups and informal gatherings.
Details are widely advertised and we hope that new members of the University will discover something of interest and visit the Chaplaincy Centre.
Non-Christian Faiths and Ethnic Groupings
As a capital city whose population includes among students and more generally, a wide variety of religious, national and ethnic groups, Edinburgh can offer ethnically-based social facilities and opportunities for meetings for several forms of non-christian religious observance.
The University's International Office is glad to provide the relevant information to any students and their families from such backgrounds who wish to establish such local contacts.
Continuing Education
Throughout the academic year, the University's Centre for Continuing Education runs a wide-ranging programme of part-time (day or evening) Open Studies courses in which any adult aged over 18 may enrol; around 5,000 members of the local community, as well as staff and students from different parts of the  university do so each year.
Full-time students may qualify for generous discounts on fees.
Subjects taught include Archaeology, Art, Architecture, Computing, Geography, History, Languages, Literature, Media Studies, Music, Personal Skills, Philosophy, Religion, Science, Social Science, Some classes lead to the award of Open Studies Certificates.
Other CCE activities include intensive language courses for beginners, Saturday Schools, study tours and summer schools.
Information is available from the Centre for Continuing Education, 11 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW.
Telephone 031 650 4400.
Counselling
The Student Advisory and Counselling Service provides help for students with personal problems, which may or may not be related to study.
The aims of counselling are to help students to share their difficulties, whether emotional, academic or involving relationships, and to find a better resolution.
The service is confidential.
The Counsellors are available to see students every weekday from 9.30am to 4.30pm at.
7 Buccleuch Place (first flat) and two mornings a week at the King's Buildings Union (first floor, through the Careers Library).
A student can get in touch with the Counselling Service by phoning or by calling in to either office.
King's Buildings 031 650 5733 or Buccleuch Place 031 650 4170.
The Buccleuch Place service is closed on Wednesday lunchtime between 1 and 2pm.
Special arrangements can be made for disabled students.
Grants, Fees and Money
Grants
The majority of British undergraduate students have their fees paid in full by a grant-giving body, and many also receive a cash grant.
This grant is intended for maintenance during the three terms and the vacations at Christmas and Easter, but also includes some provision for books, travel, clothes and the like.
The amount of the grant is influenced by the income of the parents who are expected, although not legally obliged, to make the assessed contribution.
It is important that every student makes a written application for an award to cover fees to the appropriate education authority within the period specified in the Awards Regulations.
This application should still be made even if, because of the student's and/or parents' income, it appears unlikely that there will be any assistance towards maintenance, because fees are payable in full by the grant-awarding body without regard to the income of student, parent or spouse.
Undergraduate students from the European Community may have their tuition fees paid if they meet certain eligibility conditions.
Details of these and of the procedure for application can be obtained from The Scottish Office Education Department (SOED), Awards Branch, Gyleview House, 3 Redheughs Rigg, South Gyle, Edinburgh EH12 9HH.
Telephone 031 566 8400.
Fees
All fees are subject to annual review and although the University will do its best to avoid large increases, it cannot guarantee that fees will be maintained at the same level for the duration of a student's course.
The University has no obligation to assist students with fees, except where these are paid as part of a scholarship or award made by the University.
There are two main categories of fees, one applying to home and EC students, and the other to overseas students.
Students from the Channel Islands and Isle of Man pay full cost fees, which are generally equivalent to those applicable to overseas students.
Overseas students should turn to the section ‘Coming to Edinburgh as an Overseas Student’.
The annual fee for first degree and certificate courses is due in October, in full, and includes tuition, matriculation, and one diet of examination.
For home/EC students, courses are allocated to one of three fee bands; at 1993–94 rates, these are as follows: £2,770 (courses with a substantial laboratory or workshop component); £4,985 (clinical phases of medical, and veterinary courses); £1,300 (other courses).
Self-financing UK/EC students pay a reduced fee (£755 in 1992–93).
The annual fee includes the subscription for student unions, athletic clubs, and other facilities.
Anyone wishing to have an up-to-date statement of the annual fee before accepting a place should write to the Registry.
General Outlays
Accommodation An allowance of about £42 weekly must be reserved for lodgings.
For fuller details of costs, see the section ‘Accommodation’.
Books, Materials and Equipment The standard maintenance allowance in grants includes a sum of about £246 for the purchase of books, equipment and materials.
Travel Students receiving an award from the SOED are eligible for travel expenses in excess of £60.
Students receiving grants from other authorities receive £125 in the grant to cover travel costs.
Other Expenses BMus students should be prepared for a cost of approximately £200 per annum per instrument for private tuition in the instrumental performance or singing studies which they are required to continue during their degree course.
Students taking degree courses involving field work (eg Architecture, Ecology, Geography, and Geology) can incur expenses of £200 plus, spread over the three, four or five years of the course, but can in most cases expect to receive some help from University funds in meeting these.
Student Finance
It is very difficult to survive on a student grant alone.
The maximum grant for students living away from home is £2200.
When the travel allowance of £60 and book allowance of £246 is deducted £894 is left to be divided between the 37 weeks of the academic year (3 terms plus short vacations).
This is £51.19 per week.
Most of this will be spent on accommodation.
Current full board in Halls of Residence is £53.90 per week.
There is also a £100 returnable deposit on halls.
For flats and houses, if we assume an average rent of approximately £35 per week, this means a student will have £16.19 per week for food, heating, clothing, insurance and entertainment etc.
What this means is that tight budgeting is essential.
The best way is to work out a weekly budget and avoid the temptation to splurge out at the beginning of term.
Remember there are costs such as repairs and laundry bills that students are not used to paying.
Student Loans under the Government's top-up loans scheme are available to full-time students on first degree courses who are under age 50 at the start of their course and satisfy the necessary UK residence requirement.
With some minor exceptions, the scheme does not extend to students from other countries of the European Community.
Loans are not means-tested and eligible students may borrow, each year, any amount up to the maximum for that year.
Loans, plus interest related to inflation rate and repayment period, are repayable after graduation.
In 1992/93 the maximum loan was £715 and this can be expected to increase in real terms in coming years; at the same time, the level of the maximum maintenance grant and parental contribution has been frozen at 1990/91 levels.
A brief guide to Student Loans is available from the Scottish Office Education Department (address above).
Many students automatically have overdrafts.
Bank loans are a possibility, often a necessity, but loans do need repayment with interest and charges.
It is best to shop around all the banks to see which gives you the best long-term deal rather than the biggest incentive to join.
Well-paid summer jobs are not always available and it is not always possible to clear hefty overdraft  payments before the start of the year.
Other sources of funding might be available to students who meet the criteria.
These are Crisis/Hardship Funds.
A small proportion of students will be eligible for state benefits.
Information leaflets on financial and other matters may be obtained from The Advice Place run by the Students' Association (see below).
Health
The University Health Service provides comprehensive medical care under the National Health Service for those students who wish to register as patients of the University Health Service practice.
The practice is situated in the Richard Verney Health Centre in the Student Centre in Bristo Square and provides, in addition to the usual primary care medical services, nursing services, physiotherapy, psychiatric clinics, ophthalmology, contraceptive, antenatal and child welfare clinics.
The Centre also includes a pharmacy.
Full-time overseas students who become ill after arrival in the UK may obtain National Health Service treatment without charge, provided that they are attending the University for 6 months or more.
Those who are here for less than 6 months may need to arrange medical insurance.
Parking
All parking on University grounds is by permit only.
Students wishing to make use of parking facilities should apply to the Parking Office, Old College, and complete the Application Form.
The parking fees are as follows: Central Area use £34pa, Peripheral Area (King's Buildings and Veterinary Field Station)only £13.
Disabled no charge.
There is at the moment a greater demand than available parking places and applicants may be placed on a waiting list for a time.
It should be noted that parking without a permit attracts a Day Charge of £5.50 (Central) or £5 (KB, VFS).
Such Day Charges are due to be settled when they are incurred and their collection is pursued vigorously.
Students' Association
From the moment you accept a place at the University of Edinburgh you begin to benefit from the extensive range of services provided by the Students' Association.
The Alternative Prospectus, Welfare, Overseas, Mature and Postgraduate Student handbooks are just part of the information service you receive from the Students' Association before arriving.
Once you are here, the largest Freshers' Week in Britain will give you the ideal introduction to all the academic and social aspects of university life.
This is just one of the many services that the University recognises is best run by the students.
All matriculated students automatically become members of the Students' Association which is governed by the student body and run by students elected annually from the membership.
The Students' Association is comprised of two main bodies: the Edinburgh University Union which provides an extensive range of amenities and social gathering places for members; and the Students' Representative Council.
Students' Representative Council
The Students' Representative Council (SRC) was founded in 1884 to give the students a right to a say in the running of student services at the University.
The SRC plays a vital role in university policy decisions.
Amongst other things it runs Freshers' Week, The Advice Place and Societies.
It also has a major say in academic provision, student welfare, accommodation and national education policy.
Edinburgh University Union
The Association occupies eight buildings, and operates facilities in six others.
The Association provides all on-campus catering and provides bars, games rooms, Union shops, libraries, theatres, photocopying facilities, TV rooms, showers, laundry facilities, snooker rooms and meeting rooms.
The entertainment programme in these buildings features debates, regular discos and a wide variety of live acts.
Teviot Row House is the oldest purpose-built student union in Britain, dating back to 1889.
It holds the most extensive services of all the Union Houses.
Housing the largest lighting rig in Scotland, it is also the largest nightclub in Edinburgh.
Societies Centre (The Pleasance) has numerous meeting rooms, a theatre, equipment pool, and the nicest bar in the Association with an open fire.
Chambers Street House is one of the last central bars open until 3.00am.
This House provides Rock and Mainstream club nights.
The Potterrow is centrally located next to the Association Offices.
It offers pool tables and games machines as well as the usual club nights and private party facilities available in all the Union Houses.
PAMS House is specifically for the use of Postgraduate and Mature students.
It is the only Union of its kind in Britain.
The lively and varied entertainments programme and excellent facilities are tailored to the needs of these students.
The Advice Place
This is a drop-in advice centre run by professional staff and student volunteers who are trained to deal with financial, educational and legal problems.
Advice is given on any student matter.
The Advice Place is located at 38 Buccleuch Street (031 650 2272), and at King's Buildings Centre.
Societies
The 158 or so student societies are funded by the Students' Association.
They cover an enormous range of religious, social, academic, political and cultural interests.
Edinburgh Travel Centre
The Students' Association operates the Edinburgh Travel Centre, which trades through three branches in the city.
The branches at Bristo Square, Rose Street and South Clerk Street offer the full range of scheduled flights, charter flights, package holidays, rail, bus and ferry services, as well as all the various student concessionary arrangements.
Edinburgh Travel Centre is the only travel company associated with the student body at the University of  Edinburgh, and all profits generated by the Edinburgh Travel Centre are used to improve the Students' Association's facilities.
Other Facilities
Students are automatically members of the Sports Union.
There is also the autonomous King's Buildings Union, through which dining and recreational facilities are available.
The latter's building contains a dining room, a coffee bar lounge, a licensed bar lounge, reading and writing rooms, a gymnasium, and badminton and squash courts.
Sport and Physical Recreation
The Physical Education Department and the University of Edinburgh Sports Union combine to provide a comprehensive service.
The Sports Union organises a considerable programme of competitive sport within the University and co-ordinates the work of some 49 constituent student sports clubs.
It organises a large intra-mural programme in 14 different sports and engages over 30 coaches to assist with club programmes.
The University of Edinburgh holds an established  position among the top sporting Universities in Britain.
In addition to inter-university sport many of the student clubs compete within national and open competitions.
Contact can be made with the clubs during the Sports Fair in Freshers' week or through the Sports Union office.
Many of the clubs cater for novices as well as for established performers.
The Physical Education department endeavours to provide a broadly based service for all students and staff within the University.
The Department's professional staff offer courses of instruction in a wide range of sports and a comprehensive programme of conditioning classes covering circuit training, exercise to music, weight training and flexibility.
A fitness assessment and advisory service and a sports injuries clinic are available to students and staff and to non-University personnel.
The Department operates a Sports Bursary Scheme offering an educational programme, conditioning, medical and other support services and financial assistance to selected outstanding sportsman and women studying at the university.
The Department administers the University's main sports facilities: the University Pollock Sports Centre in the Pleasance, the playing fields at Peffermill and the Firbush Point Field Centre.
The Sports Centre houses the administrative offices of the Physical Education department and includes a sports hall, a small hall, conditioning suites, 10 squash courts, a table tennis studio, a combat salle, a rifle and an archery range among its facilities.
Abundant opportunities exist for individual usage.
The Sports Centre is open seven days a week throughout the year.
The 25 acres of the Peffermill playing fields are within easy reach from the main areas of the University.
There are excellent grass pitches, a floodlit artificial grass pitch adjacent to the Clubhouse, tennis courts and golf teaching and practice facilities.
Firbush Point Field Centre is a modem, well-equipped residential outdoor centre located on the south shore of Loch Tay in Perthshire (80 miles from Edinburgh).
Firbush provides major opportunities for activity and instructional courses, principally in sailing, canoeing, ski-ing and mountaineering.
The Centre also caters for reading parties, small conferences and field studies.
University Reserve Forces Units
Three units of the Reserve Forces are attached to the University Section, Royal Naval Reserve; the Officers Training Corps, and the University Air Squadron.
The principal role of these units is to keep tomorrow's graduates in touch with the problems and methods of defence.
There is no obligation to take up a career in these Services.
Nevertheless, experience in a training unit does open up a wide range of career prospects, both in and out of the Services.
HMS Claverhouse at Granton is the Headquarters of Forth Division RNR.
Students generally join as Officer Candidates and receive initial training in seamanship and leadership.
Practical sea training is given at week-ends and during vacations on a River Class Mine-sweeper.
The Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt OTC is part of the Territorial Army.
Training is given in military skills, leadership, engineering, gunnery, driving and communications.
Those with previous piping or drumming experience can join the OTC Pipes and Drums.
In the summer vacation there is a two-week camp.
Training is paid at Army rates with a bounty for regular attendance.
The East Lowlands Universities Air Squadron offers 40 hours flying training at RAF Turnhouse in Bulldog aircraft, over a two-year engagement.
All flying is free and students receive travel and other expenses.
Squadron members also receive ground instruction one night a week during term time in aerodynamics, airmanship, meteorology and navigation.
Students attend a summer camp at another RAF station.
All three units offer a good social life, sporting activities, and the opportunity to visit operational Service Units at home and abroad.
Further information may be obtained from Commanding Officer, HMS Claverhouse, RNR Sea Training Centre, Granton Square, Edinburgh EHS 1HB (031 552 2109); Adjutant, Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt Universities OTC, 5 Forrest Hill, Edinburgh EHI 2QR (031 336 1761 Extension 4232); Commanding Officer, East Lowlands UAS, 16 Royal Terrace, Edinburgh EH7 5AB (031 557 0282).
University Settlement
The Settlement offers every kind of opportunity to give service to the community.
It includes the chance to become familiar with a very wide range of social and educational problems and is a useful source of information and practical experience for those who intend to work with people or whose work will, like that of an architect, planner or administrator, be concerned very much with people and the settings in which they live and work.
Students serve on committees with senior members of University staff and are encouraged to accept responsibility not only for work but also for the management of Settlement affairs.
Applying to Edinburgh
Full and Part Time Courses
Full-Time Courses
This section gives general guidance about applying to the University.
It is followed by a section on specific entry requirements and then by a section for each of our eight faculties giving a description of the courses offered and of any special arrangements which apply to a particular faculty.
UCAS SCHEME
All candidates who intend to study for any full-time first degree must apply through the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS) which for 1994 entry replaces UCCA/PCAS.
The UCAS handbook and application form can be obtained from your school or college.
If you are not at school or college, write after 1 June in the year preceding university entry to UCAS, PO Box 67, Cheltenham, Glos GLSO 3SF, for a handbook and application form using the tear-off sheet at the end of this prospectus.
The applicant's fee must be sent to UCAS with the completed application form.
There are detailed instructions on the back of the form.
When filling in the UCAS form you must list the institutions of your choice in code number order.
The UCAS code for this university is EDINB E56 and this should be entered clearly on the application form.
The opening date for the receipt by the UCAS office of applications for admission in October 1994 is 1 September 1993.
The last dates for the receipt of applications are: candidates including Oxford or Cambridge among their entries by 15 October 1993; candidates not including Oxford or Cambridge among their entries by 15 December 1993.
UCAS will forward applications received after 15 December and up to 26 May to the universities concerned for consideration at their discretion.
Applications received between 26 May and 20 July will be forwarded for ‘information only’.
No formal action can be taken on them through the UCAS scheme until after 25 July.
Candidates applying after 20 July will be treated as late applicants in the Clearing scheme which operates in September.
Applicants from outside the EC countries should consult the chapter ‘Coming to Edinburgh as an Overseas Student’.
INTERVIEWS
Interviews play no part in the selection procedure for the majority of the faculties at Edinburgh; decisions are made on the basis of the information submitted on the UCAS form.
However, applicants to the Faculties of Music and Veterinary Medicine can normally expect to be called for interview, while this may also happen in the case of applicants for degrees in Divinity and Nursing Studies (full details are given in the Faculty Sections).
TAKING A YEAR OUT — DEFERRED ENTRY
The University is sympathetic to applicants who wish to take a year out between leaving school and entering University and recognises the advantages that a well-planned year can offer students.
If you are taking a year out, you may apply for admission via UCAS in the normal way during that year.
If, however, you are considering applying during your last year at school for deferred entry, you are strongly advised to consult the faculty in which you intend to study.
Due to pressure on places the Faculties of Arts, Law, Medicine and Social Sciences are able to offer deferred entry to only a small proportion of applicants.
ENTRY FROM S5
The University generally welcomes applications from fifth year students and will make offers on the basis of Highers to be taken in fifth year.
However, in certain areas (namely Law, Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Nursing Studies) there is a minimum age for entry and for Law and Medicine offers are not normally made to S5 candidates.
(See Faculty Sections.)
MATURE STUDENTS
The University welcomes applications from mature students, those who would be 21 or over by 1 October of the year in which they begin their degree courses.
A prospectus for mature students which gives full details of entry requirements and other relevant information is available from the Registry.
Mature students are admitted to individual faculties with a wide range of qualifications depending on their background and experience.
Evidence of recent academic achievement is normally required.
This may take the form of recent passes at Higher grade in three subjects or at A-level in two subjects.
Alternative qualifications which are considered include Open University courses, access courses and diplomas from adult education colleges.
The University accepts students from a wide range of access courses, and has special links with those offered by Stevenson and Telford Colleges as well as by its own Centre for Continuing Education and Faculty of Divinity.
Further details are given in the prospectus for mature students.
An Exceptional Admissions Procedure is available in the Faculties of Arts, Divinity, Law, Music and Social Sciences.
This is designed for those applicants who may not necessarily possess any of the qualifications usually presented by mature students, but who show evidence of appropriate achievement either in a related professional field or through other types of intellectual endeavour.
Details may be obtained from the appropriate faculty.
The closing date for the receipt in Faculty Offices of completed Exceptional Admissions application forms is 1st March, but enquiry should be made well in advance; normally applicants must also apply through UCAS.
All mature students intending to apply are recommended to write as early as possible to the appropriate faculty for guidance, giving full details of their educational background and their experience in employment.
STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
The University welcomes enquiries from intending applicants with motor, sensory or other disability.
Provision has been made for wheelchair users, although not all buildings are accessible; special equipment and support services are available for those with particular needs.
The University will do its utmost to make any additional structural or organisational arrangement to enable students with special needs to attend their classes.
The University Welfare Services make special provision to assist students with special needs to find accommodation, to enable them to participate in all aspects of university life, and to give expert advice on career opportunities after graduation.
Specially modified accommodation for students in wheelchairs or with other disabilities is available at Pollock Halls and elsewhere.
Applicants are strongly advised to contact the Adviser to Students with Special Needs early and when possible even a year before making formal application for entry to the University through UCAS.
This will give the faculties and Directors of Studies a better opportunity to assess each individual applicant's situation and offer appropriate support and advice.
Enquiries should be sent to The Secretary, Liaison Committee for Students with Special Needs, c/o Faculty of Science & Engineering, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JY.
Part-time Courses
PART-TIME STUDY FOR FIRST DEGREES
Part-time degree study is offered in the Faculties of Arts, Divinity, Music and Social Sciences.
Degrees available by part-time study are:(General); Faculty of Divinity — BD, BD with honours, BA (Religious Studies) and MA (Religious Studies); Faculty of Music — BMus, BMus with honours; Faculty of Social Sciences — BSc (Social Science).
Part-time students take either one or two courses a year and attend the same daytime classes as full-time students.
The number of classes each week varies  from course to course, but is likely to average about four per course.
In addition, time must be set aside for matters such as reading, preparation, essay writing and revision for examinations.
A general degree which would require three years of full-time study should normally require no less than five years and no more than eight years of part-time study.
(For the BD the usual minimum time is six years and the maximum is nine.)
To maintain satisfactory progress, a part-time student has to pass at least one course each year.
Applicants must meet the normal University entry requirements, which are modified in the case of mature students (see section on Mature Students above).
Applications for part-time courses are not made through UCAS.
Candidates should contact the relevant Faculty Office to obtain an application form.
NON-GRADUATING STUDENTS
Students who wish to study at degree level, but who do not wish to work towards obtaining a degree, can be admitted as non-graduating or occasional students.
These students may attend one or more classes at the University, paying an appropriate proportion of the full annual fee.
Attendance as a non-graduating student cannot normally be counted towards a degree of this University.
If you wish to come to this University as a non-graduating student, you should apply early during the session preceding the one which you mean to attend.
If you are a student from the UK, you should contact the faculty concerned, specifying the classes which you wish to join.
You will be sent an application form and, as appropriate, advice on the availability of the classes which you have chosen.
Firm applications must be received by faculties by 31 March if possible.
Students from outside the UK should contact the International Office, which can supply a prospectus for non-graduating students and which deals with all applications from overseas.
Requirements for Entry to the University
General Entrance Requirement
A General Entrance Requirement for admission to all degree courses has been agreed by a number of Scottish universities.
To meet the requirement a wide variety of qualifications may be offered: applicants under 21 with UK school qualifications should offer a minimum of three SCE Higher grade passes or two GCE Advanced level passes.
Two AS level passes will be accepted in lieu of one A-level pass.
A pass in English will normally be required.
If this is not obtainable at Higher grade, A-level, or AS-level, a qualification in SCE Standard or Ordinary grade, GSCE, or certain other examinations will be acceptable.
Certain other qualifications may also be accepted in full or partial satisfaction of the General Entrance Requirement, e.g. SCOTVEC or BTEC Certificates or Diplomas (supplemented where appropriate by a pass in English), Open University credits, or satisfactory completion of a validated Access Course.
A large number of overseas and international qualifications, such as the International Baccalauréate or the Irish Leaving Certificate, are also accepted: a list of the overseas qualifications more commonly offered by applicants is to be found in the overseas section of this prospectus.
Mature applicants (i.e. those aged 21 or over by 1 October in the year of entry) are advised to consult the appropriate section of this prospectus for information on entrance requirements.
The University may waive the GER for applicants who offer non-standard qualifications: such applicants are recommended to consult the Associate Dean of the Faculty concerned before submitting an application.
Faculty and Course Entrance Requirements
The General Entrance Requirement, as described above, is to be regarded as a minimum.
In practice, more than this minimum is likely to be required for entry to the majority of the courses offered by the University, in order to ensure that those admitted to degree courses possess a sufficiently broad educational background and that they may reasonably be expected to benefit from a university education.
In addition, for entry to certain courses, passes in specific subjects are required.
Details of these requirements are given in the tables of Degree Course Requirements on the following pages.
Passes counting towards entrance requirements must be obtained at no more than two sittings of examinations.
Qualifications obtained some years previously are not automatically acceptable, and applicants are strongly advised to seek advice from the relevant faculty office before applying.
Mature applicants, overseas applicants, and those offering UK qualifications other than SCE or GCE passes should also seek advice from the relevant faculty office.
Practice varies from faculty to faculty: for example, mostfaculties will accept SCOTVEC modules when these are offered in combination with other school-leaving qualifications; some will make offers on the basis of Ordinary or Higher National Certificates or Diplomas for entry to the first year of study, while the Faculty of Science and Engineering will in appropriate circumstances consider such qualifications as a basis for entry to the second year.
Approved Subjects for University Entrance
The subjects listed opposite are those which may be counted towards the General Entrance Requirement.
A small number of other subjects offered by relatively few applicants (particularly in the areas of languages and mathematics) are also counted as approved subjects.
Not all of these subjects, however, may necessarily be acceptable as admission requirements for particular degree courses or particular faculties.
In addition, passes in subjects which contain a high proportion of common material (such as English Language and English Literature or Business Studies and Economics) will not be counted separately.
Advice on subjects not listed here, on the acceptability of any subject for particular courses, and on overlapping subjects may be obtained from Faculty Offices.
Degree Course Requirements
How to use the Tables
The tables on the following pages provide a complete list of degree courses offered by the University.
They are arranged by faculty with all the degrees offered by a particular faculty grouped together.
For easy reference, each faculty is identified by a different colour both here in the tables and in the later faculty sections.
At the beginning of the table for each faculty are any specific points to be noted or special entry conditions which apply in that faculty.
Further information about admissions to individual faculties as well as general course descriptions are contained in the later faculty sections.
It is important to consult these tables in conjunction with the later faculty sections and not to rely on the tables alone.
All applicants must satisfy the General Entrance Requirement as described in the preceding section, where a list of ‘approved subjects’ is also given.
Most faculties have certain additional requirements (Faculty Entrance Requirements) which all entrants must normally satisfy.
Details of these are listed at the head of the tables for individual faculties.
What the Tables contain
Reading from left to right the tables contain the following information:
the degree courses offered, followed by the UCAS code for each (for the expanded UCAS code, eg T900 Mod Langs or LL13 Econ/Sociol, please refer to the UCAS Handbook)
then entrance requirements for SCE candidates and GCE candidates separately: these include the normal minimum grades required for admission in terms of SCE Highers or GCE A-levels, and any specific subject qualifications required (such as Higher or A-level Physics for entry to degrees in Engineering).
Where O or S passes are listed in the requirements for entry to a particular faculty or to a specific course, these must normally be at grades 1, 2 or 3 for S grade, or grade C or better (7 or better from 1994) for O/GCSE.
However, for individual courses where O or S Mathematics is specifically required, only grades I and 2 at Standard Grade will be accepted.
The ‘normal minimum admission standards’ listed in these tables are for many areas of study a realistic indication of the grades likely to be required and applicants who hold these grades stand an excellent chance of being made an offer, eg for most degrees in the Faculty of Arts, the Faculty of Science and Engineering, and the less pressured areas in the Social Sciences such as Nursing Studies or Social Policy.
In other areas where competition for limited places is more acute, possession of the ‘normal minimum admission standards’ may not be enough to secure admission, eg in the Faculties of Law, Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, or in certain pressure areas in the Social Sciences such as Psychology.
Supplementary Entry Standard leaflets, giving up-to-date information for SCE and GCE candidates on the ‘probable going rates’ for admission in 1994, will be published in August 1993.
To obtain one of these, or further advice about admission standards, please contact the Schools Liaison Service or relevant faculty office (addresses are given in the section ‘For Further Information’).
Years of Study
In most cases, Ordinary or General degrees require three years of study and honours degrees require four years of study.
Exceptions to this general rule are identified in the tables.
The pattern is also distinctively different in the Faculty of Divinity (see the section on the Faculty of Divinity later in the prospectus).
It should also be noted that although candidates may be admitted initially as prospective students for honours, admission to the honours courses is not guaranteed at the outset but depends on performance in classes taken in the first two, or in some cases three, years.
Coming to Edinburgh as an Overseas Student
Overseas Applicants
The University of Edinburgh warmly welcomes students from abroad.
We currently have some 2,690 overseas students from around 100 countries studying alongside nearly 12,600 students from the UK.
We hope that this prospectus provides you with the information you need.
If, however, you have any difficulties or queries, please contact the International Office (the address can be found at the back of this prospectus).
You may also find information about the University of Edinburgh at your local British Council Office which you are welcome to contact.
Students who wish to join our undergraduate classes for one year of study only, should write to the International Office for a copy of the Study Abroad Guide.
Entrance Requirements
If your qualifications are not from the UK, or if you have studied in the UK for less than threee years by the start of the academic year for which you are applying, you are considered an overseas student for the purpose of entrance.
You should note that the definition of an overseas candidate for fee purposes is different (see the section on fees below).
Minimum Requirements
Each applicant is required to comply first with the General Entrance Requirement and then with the Degree Course Requirements.
These are defined in terms of UK qualifications in the relevant chapters of this prospectus.
Exact equivalents between UK qualifications and overseas qualifications can rarely be given, but the notes below give some idea of the recognition granted to some qualifications.
Each overseas application is considered individualIy and faculty offices can give guidance to potential applicants who are uncertain whether their qualifications are suitable.
Applicants should be aware that there is severe competition for admission to some courses.
In these cases the degree course requirements will be higher than for other courses.
You will have to satisfy the University of your command of English.
Any of the following tests would be regarded as suitable proof: Passes in the JMB Test in English (Overseas) at grade 3 or better up to June 1989, the JMB Test in English for Speakers of Other Languages from March 1990; the AEB Test in English for Educational Purposes at grade III or better in listening, reading and writing; the Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English at grade C or better; the Oxford-Arels Examination (Higher level) at Credit or Distinction level; the IELTS (British Council/University of Cambridge), with an average score of 6 or better and for each component a score of 5 or better; TOEFL with a score of 550 or better; the London GCE O level Syllabus B in English Language at grade C or better or in an approved SCE or GCE syllabus in English are acceptable for this purpose.
RECOGNISED QUALIFICATIONS*
European Baccalauréate, International Baccalauréate, Cambridge Overseas Examinations, An approved degree pass from a university recognised by the Scottish Universities Council on Entrance.
Australia Recognised matriculation certificate.
Austria Reifezeugnis or Maturazeugnis.
Belgium Certificat d'aptitude/ Bekwaamheidsdiploma.
Botswana Satisfactory completion of the first two years of a degree course at the University of Botswana and Swaziland.
Brunei Matriculation examination.
Canada High school graduation diploma (grade Xll, but grade Xlll in Ontario and DEC in Quebec).
Denmark Studentereksamen, Hojere handelseksamen Finland Ylioppilastutkintotodistus, Student-examensbetyg.
France Baccalaureat de l'enseignement du second degre, Baccalauréate de technicien.
Germany Reifezeugnis, Abitunentenzeugnis.
Hong Kong Certificate of Education, Higher Level Certificate (some subjects), Advanced Level Certificate, final diploma of Hong Kong Polytechnic.
Iceland Studentsprof.
India First and second class honours degrees from recognised institutions of university stauding.
Ireland Ardteisimeireacht, Leaving Certificate.
Israel Bagrut.
Italy Diploma di matunta (classica/linguistica, scientifica/anistica); technica/professionale; magistrale.
Japan successful completion of the first year of a degree course from a recognised university.
Kenya Certificate of Education, Advanced Certificate of Education, Advanced Certificate.
Lesotho Satisfactory completion of the first two years of a degree course at the National University of Lesotho.
Luxembourg Certificat de fin d'etudes secondaires.
Malawi Satisfactory completion of part one of a degree course at the University of Malawi.
Malaysia Certificate of Education, Advanced Certificate of Education, final diplomas of Mara Institute of Technology, Universiti Teknoliji Malaysia, Ungku Omar Polytechnic Ipoh.
Netherlands Diploma voorbereidend wetenschappelijk onderwijs.
New Zealand University bursaries examination.
Nigeria Passes in approved subjects in the West African General Certificate of Education, final diplomas of the Pon Harcoun College of Science and Technology, the Kaduna Polytechnic, the Yaba Polytechnic.
Norway vitnemal: den videregaende skole.
Portugal Certificado ensino secundario.
Singapore Singapore-Cambridge GCE ordinary and advanced level in English medium, final diplomas of the Ngee Ann Technical College, the Singapore Polytechnic.
South Africa Satisfactory completion of the first year of an approved degree course at a recognised university; higher matriculation certificate.
Spain Preubas de aptitud COU.
Swaziland Satisfactory completion of the first two years of a degree course at the University of Botswana and Swaziland.
Sweden Avaangsbetyg fran gymnasieskolan.
Switzerland Maturitatszeugnis, Certificat de matu-nte, Attestato di matunta Uganda Certificate of Education, Advanced Certificate of Education, Advanced Certificate.
USA Satisfactory completion of the first year of an approved degree course at an accredited university or satisfactory performance in the SAT and two APT's.
Zimbabwe Satisfactory completion of part one of a degree course at the University of Zimbabwe.
*NB If your qualifications are not listed here or if you are offering one of these qualifications but are uncertain about the exact standard required, please contact the relevant Faculty Office for further information.
Application Procedure
You have to apply through the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS).
Details about this and about how to obtain an application form are given in the section of this book ‘Applying to Edinburgh’(page 24).
The University may consider applications from overseas candidates received after the normal closing date of 15 December, but candidates should make early application through UCAS, so that they can be informed in good time of any further qualifications required before they can be considered for admission.
Those who have to take a further qualification in English should make an early application to the relevant authority.
Overseas candidates who are applying from the following countries are advised to submit their application to UCAS through the appropriate overseas students' office in London listed in the UCAS handbook: Cyprus, Ghana (private candidates only), Guyana, India, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Tanzania, Thailand.
Candidates from other overseas countries should send their application to UCAS direct.
Prospective students who are already in the UK or who intend to come to the UK and wish to visit the University should write to the International Office providing details of their proposed course of study and possible weekday dates when they could visit.
Please ensure that reasonable advance notice is given to enable the office to make the necessary arrangements bearing in mind overseas postal delays etc.
Overseas applicants are generally not expected to come to Edinburgh until their course of study commences.
Fees
In common with all universities in the UK, the University of Edinburgh has a separate scale of fees for students whose fee status is that of ‘overseas student’.
The fees charged on this scale represent the full economic cost of tuition for each degree.
The fees can change from year to year and the figures appearing in section (2) of the table below headed ‘Estimated Costs’ must be used only as an indication of the minimum likely to apply.
They are for the session 1993–94.
All applicants are advised of the fees to be charged when offered a place, and an up-to-date statement of any later changes can be obtained by writing to Faculty Offices from March onwards.
All applicants for admission from outwith the United Kingdom or European Community, applicants who are temporarily resident in the UK or EC at the time of application and those who have within the past three years spent a period of employment or residence outwith the UK/EC are advised that they should be certain of their status for fee purposes before registering for their courses at the start of the academic year and be certain that they have the necessary funds to meet the appropriate fees, and for subsistence throughout the course of study.
Definition of Fee Status
In accordance with the Education (Fees and Awards) Regulations 1983 (as amended), higher (overseas) levels of fees are payable by students who do not have a ‘relevant connection’ with the UK, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
HOME STUDENTS
In order to establish a ‘relevant connection’, two elements are required, as follows:
(a) the student has been ordinarily resident in the UK and Islands throughout the three-year period preceding 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the beginning of the first term of his/her course; and
(b) the student has not been resident therein, during any part of that three-year period, wholly or mainly for the purpose of receiving full-time education.
Note that both conditions (a) and (b) must be satisfied in order that a student may establish the ‘relevant connection’.
It should be noted that special fee rates apply to students from the Channel Islands and Isle of Man.
EXCEPTED STUDENTS
There are certain categories of ‘excepted student’ who, although they do not have a ‘relevant connection’with the UK and Islands, are not liable to pay the overseas rates of fee.
These include:
(a) a student who is a national of a member state of the European Community* or who is the son or daughter of such a national, if:
i. the student has been ordinarily resident in the EC throughout the three-year period preceding 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the beginning of the first term of his/her course; and
ii.
he/she has not been resident therein, during any part of that three-year period, wholly or mainly for the purpose of receiving full-time education;
b) a student whose failure to satisfy the three-year UK residence requirement outlined above arises only because the student, or the student's spouse or parent, was temporarily employed outside the UK;
(c) a student who is a national of a member state of the European Community, or who is the son or daughter of such a national, whose failure to satisfy the three-year EC residence requirement outlined above arises only because the student, or the student's spouse or parent, was temporarily employed outside the EC;
d) certain recently-arrived immigrants who are formally ‘settled’(in terms of the Immigration Act 1971, as amended) in the UK by 1 September, 1 January or 1 April closest to the beginning of the first term of their course; and certain refugees or persons of similar status.
Applicants who consider that this exception may apply to them should seek detailed advice by writing to the Registry.
Further details regarding the definition and exception can be provided on request to the Registry at the address given on page 157.
*Currently Belgium; Denmark (excluding the Faroe Islands and Greenland); France (including the overseas departments Guadeloupe, Maninique, French Guiana and Reunion but excluding other French Overseas Temtories); Germany; Greece; the Republic of Ireland; Italy; Luxembourg; the Netherlands; Portugal (including the Azores and Madeira but excluding Macao); Spain (including the Balearic Islands, the Canaries, Cueta and Melilla); the United Kingdom with Gibraltar.
Andorra, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City State are not part of the European Community.
Any student who is uncertain of his fee status should write to the appropriate Faculty Office, giving as much information as possible.
Estimated Costs of Studying in Edinburgh
You must ensure that you have sufficient support to cover all your financial needs.
If and when you are made a firm offer of a place, you will be asked to confirm the details of the funds available to you.
All fees are subject to annual review.
The University will do its best to avoid large increases and guarantees that for students on course, fees will not rise by an amount larger than the annual rate of academic inflation.
None the less, some increase in fees (and in general living costs) in each successive year of your course should be expected.
If you are a student from overseas you should note that you are currently likely to require approximately £106 each week for costs other than fees during your stay in this country.
An estimated breakdown of this sum under various headings is given in the table for guidance only.
The figures are costed for a single person.
Accommodation for married couples is scarce and expensive.
Married students are therefore advised to come to Edinburgh on their own in the first instance and to send for their families only when they have secured suitable accommodation.
Estimated Living Costs for Overseas Students Studying in 1993/94
(1) For each week you are resident in Edinburgh you should allow yourself the following sums of money to cover your expenses.
You will also need approximately £170 each year for books.
Students from hot countries should include an additional amount to cover the costs of purchasing warm clothing in the first year of their studies.
A sum of £200–240 is recommended for this purpose.
Costs for travel outside Edinburgh should also be taken account of when drawing up a budget.
(It should be stressed that these figures are all approximate and will vary according to your personal lifestyle.)(2) Tuition fees 1993/94 (Annual)
NOTE
(1) Non graduating (JYA) students should refer to the ‘Study Abroad Guide’ prospectus for details of fee charges for 1993/94.
(2) Continuing undergraduate students should obtain details of fee charges for 1993/94 from their Faculty Office.
3) All students should note that certain courses involve expenditure (for example, on instruments, preparation of theses, vacation work and/or field study) which is additional to that estimated here.
You should consider carefully the costs of this kind which relate to the course which you have chosen, and make allowance for further funds if required
Payment of Tuition Fees
The University does not issue accounts to individual students for tuition fees.
It is the student's responsibility to arrange for payment in full on or before enrolment.
Enrolment must be completed by students by the end of the first week of session.
If your fees are to be paid direct to the University by your home institution, government or other sponsoring agency, the University will submit an account to that body.
You must however provide, on enrolment in October, written confirmation from the body concerned that it will be responsible for your fees.
Tuition fees must be paid in pounds sterling.
As it can take considerable time to effect the transfer of overseas funds to the University account, you are strongly advised to make arrangements well in advance.
The University will accept direct transfer to its bank account, provided that you have asked your bank to initiate the transfer before 15 September.
The University's bank and account numbers are Bank of Scotland, 32A Chambers Street, Edinburgh EHI IJB, Sort Code Number 80-02-24, Account Number 00919680.
(Please ask your bank to quote reference ‘7740101’.)
The University will confirm receipt on request to the Registry.
Alternatively, payment may be made at the time of enrolment in cash, or by personal cheque or bank draft drawn on a UK bank.
Arrangements exist to enable self-funding students attending the University for the full session to pay their fees in termly instalments.
At least one third of the annual amount due must be paid on enrolment and  the balance in two equal instalments (preferably by post-dated cheques, alternatively by bank standing order) by the end of the first week of the second and third terms respectively.
A service charge, currently 3.75 per cent of the amount outstanding at the date of enrolment will be payable in full with the first instalment.
These arrangements can be made at the time of enrolment, without advance notice, provided that you have opened a bank account in the UK and (for post-dated cheques) have a cheque book.
Banking
You are recommended to open a British bank account as soon as possible, preferably before your arrival.
Most banks offer two types of account, namely interest-bearing deposit accounts (sometimes requiring notice of withdrawal) and current accounts (cheque or checking accounts) with immediate access.
Many people have both.
If you wish to open an account before you leave your home country you should write to the head office of one of the four main Scottish banks.
You should make it clear that you will be a student at the University of Edinburgh and ask for an account to be opened at a convenient branch.
If you are joining the Faculties of Science and Engineering or Veterinary Medicine, ask for an account to be opened at a branch near, respectively, the King's Buildings or Summerhall.
Personal cheques drawn on overseas banks are generally difficult to negotiate in the UK and, even if accepted, it may well be many weeks before the funds can be drawn.
It is suggested that, to have money available on your arrival, funds are remitted to your account-holding bank in the UK by inter-bank transfer prior to your departure.
Alternatively you may bring travellers cheques with you.
A certified cheque, cashier's cheque or bank draft is quite acceptable although there could be a delay of up to a week before these funds can be used.
Visa and Access (Mastercard, Eurocard) are widely accepted throughout the UK although not by the University.The main Edinburgh offices of the four major Scottish Banks are:
Clydesdale Bank PLC, Chief Office, 29 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2YN.
Bank of Scotland, Head Office, The Mound, Edinburgh EH2 2EL.
Royal Bank of Scotland, 42 St Andrew Square, Edinburgh EH2 2YE.
TSB Scotland, 120 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 4TS.
ARTS
For over four hundred years the high reputation of the Faculty of Arts has attracted students and teachers with a wide variety of experience from throughout Scotland, Britain, Europe and beyond.
Arts subjects are concerned with the culture and history of humanity, especially as they are expressed in language.
Consequently, not only does the faculty include departments that study Philosophy and History over a wide range of time and place but there is also a notably broad spread of modern European languages and literatures (English and Scottish, of course; but also Danish, Dutch, French, Gaelic, German, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish) as well as the Classics (Latin, Greek).
From further afield, there are those of the Near and Middle East (Arabic, Hebrew, Persian) and of south and east Asia (Chinese, Japanese; and Sanskrit, the language of ancient India).
The study of language itself in its theoretical aspects — a rapidly developing and important field — is undertaken in Linguistics; and culture in wider senses is investigated by Archaeology, by Fine Art, by History of Art and by the School of Scottish Studies.
The degree structure is such that an Arts student can often construct a curriculum, with the advice of a Director of Studies, that enables individual interests and aptitudes to be followed.
New subjects can be experimented with alongside more familiar ones.
Arts courses use both large lectures and small group tutorials, but the bulk of the student's time is spent in individual study, reading, thinking and preparing essays and tutorial papers.
The University Library and individual departmental libraries provide ample materials and facilities for these pursuits.
Admission
Applications for admission to full-time Faculty of Arts degree courses must be made through UCAS.
All applicants must satisfy the General Entrance Requirement, the faculty entrance requirements, and, where appropriate, a course entry requirement.
For mature candidates, there are modified entrance requirements.
As a requirement for entry to most courses in thefaculty, SCE applicants must offer passes in four Highers at BBBB, taken at the first sitting; if taken over two sittings, slightly better grades are required.
GCE applicants must offer passes in three A-levels at grades BBC, taken at the first sitting.
However, for entry to certain courses which are under considerable pressure, higher grades are required: these courses are identified in the tables of degree courses earlier in the prospectus.
In addition, the Faculty of Arts normally requires all candidates to possess an O/S/GCSE pass in a language other than English and in an approved mathematics or science subject.
Certain Scotvec modules are acceptable at appropriate levels as an alternative to O/S or Higher qualifications.
In special circumstances, however, consideration may be given to candidates without these qualifications who are otherwise suitably qualified.
Certain courses require passes in specific subjects; details of these course entry requirements are given in the tables.
GCE AS levels are normally acceptable as entrance qualifications (see section ‘Requirements for Entry to the University’).
It should be noted that AS levels in modern languages may not always be regarded as satisfying faculty and course entry requirements; applicants offering these qualifications are advised to consult the Faculty Office.
Applicants are also advised to consult the information on ‘approved subjects’ contained in the section ‘Requirements for Entry to the University’.
Applicants who will have met the minimum academic entrance requirements by the time they enter university stand a good chance of being made an offer: those who have already met these requirements before applying will receive unconditional offers, while those with examinations still to take will receive conditional offers.
This general rule holds good except in the case of degrees including English, and of the joint degrees in modern languages and business studies, where particularly heavy pressure on places means that it may not always be possible to make    offers even to applicants who possess grades above the minimum.
Applicants for these degrees may therefore wish to list an alternative course choice, such as a language with another subject, on the UCAS form.
Applicants who are uncertain as to the validity of their qualifications or of their present course of study, or who wish further information on any aspect of their application, are advised to write at the earliest opportunity to the Associate Dean for Admissions, Faculty of Arts Office, David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JX.
The Schools Liaison Office organises visits to schools and can give information and advice about all aspects of the work of the faculty, as well as arrange interviews with appropriate departmental staff.
Some school pupils may, however, prefer to visit the Office, in which case they are invited to write or telephone for an appointment (see section ‘Addresses for Enquiries’).
Which Degree should you take?
The Faculty of Arts offers the following degrees: MA(General) and MA (General Honours), in both of which a student takes a spread of subjects with some studied to an advanced level; and the MA(Honours), in which a student concentrates on one or two subjects in depth for most of the period of study.
Depth of training is looked upon with favour by many employers, but breadth is valued by others.
The MA(General) is especially well suited to those who intend to proceed subsequently to vocational training by means of a Diploma, Certificate or second degree.
Transfer between different degree curricula is often possible at the end of the first or second year, as the student's interests and skills develop.
Many applicants will have a firm idea of what they want to study at university, but others will want to take some time to consider various possibilities before they apply.
University  offers a unique opportunity to study subjects not offered at school as well as those of which applicants may have some experience.
The brief guides to subject areas taught in the Faculty of Arts that follow are intended to help in coming to a decision.
The MA(Honours) lasts four years and may be taken either in a single subject, or in two subjects (a ‘joint’ degree).
A list of all the possibilities (single and joint) will be found in the table in the section ‘Degree Course Requirements’.
There is also a diagram of the joint degrees in the Faculty of Arts on page 61 .
Some MA(Honours) degrees require a student to take a secondary subject for two years, and virtually all of them require one or two ‘outside’ subjects, in addition to the main field of study.
These may be chosen from among any of the first-level courses offered for the MA(General).
The final two years are then devoted solely to the principal subject or subjects of the degree.
The MA(General) and MA (General Honours)degrees continue a long and honourable tradition in Scottish universities of encouraging breadth of study.
For the MA(General), each student is free to construct a curriculum within the broad structure of the degree, which requires a total of eight course-units.
At least four different subjects will be studied, some for two or three years, some for only a single year.
Five of the eight required courses have to be chosen from the Faculty of Arts, but courses from Social Sciences, Science and Engineering, Divinity, Law and Music may also be taken.
Students who do well in the three years of the MA(General) may choose to proceed for a further year to obtain the MA (General Honours).
These degrees make possible a pattern of study uniquely adapted to an individual's interests.
Some students, for example, might wish to concentrate their choice on Scottish, or European, or Asian, or medieval, or classical studies.
Others will prefer a curriculum with no evident pattern beyond personal inclination or skills.
A typical example of the way in which an MA(General) degree is constructed is set out in the panel on page 62.
The example also illustrates how the flexibility of the system enables a student's developing interests to be accommodated.
Subjects not studied at school can be taken up and pursued to an advanced level.
Candidates should note that some degree curricula include travel requirements and that students will be expected to bear part of the cost of their travel programmes.
Classics
The study of the literature and civilisation of ancient Greece and Rome continues to fascinate and illuminate the western mind.
Through the twin heritage of Christianity and the Renaissance, the ancient world has largely shaped the culture and civilisation of Europe, and its languages, literatures, history, art and archaeology provide a rich and complex field of study.
Moreover, the skills of precise analysis and imaginative understanding which are developed by the study of the ancient world continue to be in demand by employers across a widening range of occupations.
The Department of Classics at Edinburgh is uniquely placed to provide access to this study, combining the flexibility and breadth of the Scottish degree structure with a range of disciplines not available to the same extent elsewhere in Scotland.
All of the courses at first and second level described below may form the basis of honours degrees in Classical subjects.
They are also available as outside courses for students in their first and second years taking honours in other subjects, and as courses leading to the MA(General).
Introductory reading: ed.
J. Boardman, J. Griffin and O. Murray,Oxford History of the Classical World .
Ancient History
Courses in Ancient History are available at all levels.
Ancient History 1 surveys the whole of Greek and Roman history from the Mycenaean period to the foundation of Constantinople in the fourth century AD.
It is  designed both as a basis for further study and for those students who want an overall understanding of ancient history as part of a degree in other subjects.
Ancient History 2 covers the history of the fourth to second centuries BC, with particular emphasis on Macedonian and Roman imperialism.
Both this course, and the courses offered at honours level (which examine in greater depth the archaic and classical periods of Greek history, and late republican and early imperial Roman history) make use of source material, studied in translation and/or in the original languages.
There are no linguistic entrance qualifications for any of these courses.
Classical Art and Archaeology
Courses in Classical Art and Archaeology are offered at all levels.
Classical Archaeology 1 introduces the archaeological evidence for the everyday life and social development of Greek and Roman civilisation c. 1000 BC — AD 400; and Classical Art 2 covers the development of Greek and Roman art during the same period.
More specialised courses may be studied at honours level.
Honours courses at present offered include the art and society of Minoan and Mycenaean Greece, the archaeology of Greek sanctuaries and of the Greek city-state; Etrusco-Italian studies; and on the Roman side, evidence for burial customs and funerary art, and for state propaganda in the visual arts.
Classical Literature
In Classical Literature, Greek and Latin authors are studied in translation, with some archaeological and historical background.
In Classical Literature 1, the texts studied are drawn mainly from the fields of epic, drama and pastoral.
This course has proved of great value to students with little or no knowledge of the ancient languages, especially those whose interests are mainly in English or other European literatures, or in art history.
Greek
Courses at first-year level are available both for beginners who can show proficiency in Latin or a modern European language (Greek 1A) and for those who have already obtained a pass in SCE Higher or GCE A-level (Greek 1B).
Beginners are given intensive language teaching, leading rapidly to the reading of original texts, and are able, on successful completion of the course, to join former 1B students in the second-year class.
The work of the first two years is based mainly on prescribed texts, and on literary and stylistic criticism.
Either prose composition or other linguistic exercises form the basis for tutorial work.
In the third and fourth years, a wider range of authors is studied in greater depth.
An opportunity is available for all students taking honours courses in Greek to study Modern Greek in their third and fourth years.
Latin
Latin 1 is divided into two sections.
Section A is an intensive language course for beginners or less advanced students.
Section B is for those who already have a fair knowledge of the language; it aims to consolidate this knowledge and to introduce students to major authors and the elements of literary criticism.
In the later years, the emphasis is on the study of the main areas of Latin literature through representative texts.
Students combining Latin with a modern language usually spend their third year studying Latin at a university in the appropriate country.
Honours Degrees in Classical Subjects
Honours degrees taken from the subjects within the department involve work in the third and fourth years taken from the wide range of interests covered by the department in Greek and Latin language and literature, archaeology, art and history.
The Honours degree in Classics is centred on both Greek and Latin literature studied in the original; the Honours degree in Classical    Studies on literature studied in translation, Ancient History and Classical Art and Archaeology.
The other classical joint degrees concentrate primarily on the areas indicated in their titles.
In all cases, there is opportunity for students to take courses offered in areas outside their main interests.
A short period of travel in Mediterranean countries is also part of all these degrees, and funds are available to assist with this.
The Honours degree in Classics and Medieval History allows for specialisation in Ancient History, Classical Archaeology, Greek, Latin or literature studied in translation, or combinations of these.
English
There are two English departments, which together offer the long-established MA(Honours) in English Language and Literature, while each also offers a single honours degree in its own branch of the subject, as well as combining with other subjects in the faculty in a wide range of joint degrees.
English Language
English Language is the study of the English language as it is today as well as of the history of its development over more than a thousand years.
These descriptive and historical sides of the subject come into contact in various ways.
For instance, they both involve application of the techniques of modern linguistic analysis to the investigation of the sounds, forms, constructions, and uses of the language, both now and at earlier stages.
Furthermore, history illuminates actuality, so that present-day features of the language can be shown to have been shaped by (and to continue to reflect) quite varied developments in the language at earlier times.
Alongside that, regional and social variation in the language in our own day is only fully understandable when we come to see the language as also varying in the temporal, historical dimension.
Descriptive and historical studies of English have both undergone significant and rapid development in our own day.
The courses offered at Edinburgh consequently seek to reflect a subject that is complex and evolving, and allow for different interests to be pursued and for different emphasis to be given to the historical and descriptive sides of the subject.
Accordingly, courses range over syntactic and phonological structure, and both temporal and spatial variation, embracing all the major stages of the language, from its Anglo-Saxon origins down to our own times.
Courses in the earlier years introduce and develop the study of topics that are taken to an advanced level at honours — the pronunciation and grammar, and the functional, regional, and social varieties of present-day English and of the earlier periods of Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern English.
Appropriately, particular attention is given to Scots, in both its earlier and contemporary forms, and courses in Scots are offered at several levels.
The overall aim is always to add to our understanding of the complex and various nature of the English of the British Isles.
Graduates who have specialised in advanced work in English Language have pursued a wide variety of careers, including teaching at all levels at home and abroad (where further vocational qualifications may be necessary), librarianship, lexicography, the Civil Service, finance and banking, industry and management, and computing.
Introductory reading: Robert Burchfield,The English Language ; David Crystal,The English Language ; Randolph Quirk,The Use of English .
English Literature
English Literature is a popular and expanding subject in modern universities.
At the University of Edinburgh, where the Department of English Literature is the oldest-established in Great Britain, continuity is maintained with the long tradition of literary study here.
The range of courses extends from the Anglo-Saxon period to recent times, and includes Scottish Literature and the literature of the United States and parts of the Commonwealth.
The courses offered try to strike a balance between literary history in the traditional sense and approaches that involve  multi-cultural, theoretical, and interdisciplinary considerations; but the whole of the department's activity is controlled by the conviction that literature is an art, and that its proper study is inseparable from whole-hearted enjoyment and appreciation.
The four-year degree-course in English Literature is devised to represent some of the ways in which the subject can be studied.
Full courses in Scottish Literature are now offered throughout the four years.
English Literature 1 is governed by the concept of literary theory and literary period : the theory has a weighting towards narrative, and the period studied is the seventeenth century.
Scottish Literature 1 also studies narrative as well as providing a general survey of literature by Scots.
Both English Literature 2 and Scottish Literature 2 deal with two more recent periods alongside the investigation of theoretical approaches.
All honours courses taught in the department attempt a fuller treatment of periods, topics, and authors, from which students may make their own choice of areas of special study.
Among the honours courses special mention may be made of Drama, which offers coverage beyond the purely English field as well as the opportunity for practical theatre work in ‘drama workshops’.
Other courses offered range from Old English Literature to Film Studies.
Graduates in English Literature find their way into a wide range of occupations, including various kinds of educational work, and work in the Civil Service, in industry, and in the media.
As general introductions to the subject, three books by members of the Department may be recommended: Alastair Fowler,A History of English Literature ; W.W. Robson,A Prologue to English Literature ; and — to cover more recent developments — Randall Stevenson,The British Novel since the Thirties .
Fine Art and History of Art
The History of Art is the historical and critical study of art in its various forms.
Like all university subjects, it offers a training for the mind, but it is also one of the small number of disciplines which attempt to understand the creative impulse.
In many ways these two aims conflict, providing a constant reminder of the existence and importance of two opposing types of human behaviour.
The study of history looks backwards, seeking the ordered accumulation of information and its application to the reconstruction of the past; the creative arts, on the other hand, in both their making and their understanding, are by definition about something new and forward-looking.
The subject also has another unusual strength: at school a great amount of effort is put into teaching us to read, but little or none into teaching us to see, still less to look.
The History of Art is thus largely about training the eye to think in its own way, along with the mind.
Art historians may be interested in anything which requires the use of one's eyes in order to understand it, from Chartres Cathedral and Michelangelo's Moses to the signs and symbols of everyday life in twentieth-century society, and they may find the objects of their study anywhere from the sale rooms to the archaeologist's excavation trench.
Because of this, the History of Art has contacts with a wide range of other subjects such as political, social and economic history, philosophy, religion, archaeology, anthropology and psychology.
Students of Art History can therefore find themselves confronted with a vast range of historical circumstances which raise important questions and provide revealing insights into the past.
From the views of Plato to those of Ernst Gombrich, from the meanings of Anglo-Saxon stone carvings to the value of Van Gogh's Sunflowers, the History of Art is an intellectual and aesthetic storehouse of fundamental and often controversial issues of almost unlimited scope.
History of Art 1 covers Western art, particularly painting and sculpture, from c. 1500 to the present day.
History of Art 2 complements the first-year course by surveying the main developments in the art and architecture of Europe and the Near East from Late Antiquity to c. 1500.
In History of Art 3 and 4, honours students specialise by choosing among such detailed courses as Royal Iconography in Medieval  Islamic Art; Gothic Architecture in France, England and Scotland; Mythological Painting in Italy c. 1500 — 1650; Scottish Painting 1843 — 1979; and British and American Art c. 1940 — c. 1970.
In the third year of the History of Art honours course students have the option of taking up a short work placement in a museum, art gallery or auction house.
The department offers a wide variety of degrees: honours in Fine Art in which half the student's time is devoted to practical art; honours in the History of Art which studies the subject as an academic discipline like English Literature or History, involving no practical work but stressing the relationship between the study of the arts and their practice; and a variety of joint degrees such as those with French or Italian.
The MA(Honours) in Fine Art is a five-year degree taught jointly by the University and the Edinburgh College of Art, with approximately equal amounts of practical and academic work.
As a course this demands a very full timetable, but it offers strongly-motivated students an opportunity to develop in parallel the intellectual and practical sides of their study of art.
Students for this degree work on the same courses as those taking History of Art honours with, in the third year, a course in the Philosophy of Art specifically designed for them.
At the Art College, after a preliminary course in the first year, students choose their area of practical specialisation and pursue it to the fifth year, when they work full-time at the College with no timetabled commitments at the University.
The degrees offered by the department provide a good basis for entering a number of professions, such as teaching in universities, art schools (especially for those with a combined practical and academic degree), colleges and schools, working in museums and galleries, in publishing and in the book trade in general, in auction houses, in arts administration at local or national level, and in the conservation and display of ancient monuments.
The Fine Art degree might lead to a career in the visual media, or as a practising artist.
Introductory reading: H. Honour and J. Fleming,A World History of Art ; E.H.
Gombrich,The Story of Art .
History
History is the accumulated experience of mankind; it shapes our understanding of the present and governs our response to current problems.
There is truth in the weary cliché, societies that neglect history are forced ‘to relive it’.
Not surprisingly it was the study of history that gave birth to the social sciences.
Yet, despite the rapid growth of these more recent subjects, history retains its traditional importance in higher education, since its social, cultural, economic and political concerns provide us with an interdisciplinary approach to problems that includes the perspectives and many of the methods of the various social sciences, yet also seeks to establish a broader, overall assessment of the issues it examines.
The diversity of skills it develops  makes history graduates particularly attractive to employers who seek flexibility of mind rather than specialised expertise in a single discipline.
This is the case in most spheres of public and private management and administration (eg civil service, commerce and industry), just as it is in public relations, sales-promotion and the media.
In an age of rapidly-changing methods and technology, perception and adaptability are prime requisites for a successful applicant for employment.
History sharpens both.
Edinburgh's remarkable collection of libraries, including the copyright National Library of Scotland, makes it one of the best-provided cities in Britain for the study of history, while its archival resources and architectural heritage leave it unrivalled for the pursuit of Scottish history.
The University as a whole contains well over fifty teachers of history, who between them provide nearly ninety courses — thereby offering students a breadth of choice equalled by only three other British universities.
In addition to the Departments of History and Scottish History in the Faculty of Arts, the University also has, in other faculties, Departments of Economic and Social History, and Ecclesiastical History.
Courses in Ancient History, History of Art and Archaeology are also provided by the appropriate departments, while several of the language departments (both European and Asiatic) offer courses in the history of the area they cover.
The History Department itself has a staff of more than twenty, offering several dozen courses of their own, while many more courses from other departments are also available as part of the four-year programme for the honours History degree.
The overall range of choice stretches chronologically from the civilisations of the Ancient World to the present day, while the areas covered include Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and the Americas.
Besides many degrees combining History with other Arts subjects, joint honours degrees with the Departments of Politics and Sociology are offered.
The course for the MA (Honours) in History falls into two parts, with the division coming at the end of the second year.
Most of the first year is devoted to British and European history since the mid-sixteenth century, while the second year is occupied by Medieval history, and two courses chosen from a range which includes historical surveys of America and of the British Empire, Scottish History, Economic and Social History and the History of Science and Medicine.
Those who perform sufficiently well are admitted to the third and fourth years of the History honours programme.
They choose seven specialist courses from three extensive lists.
In the third year they take two full-year courses, two one-term options, and in addition they write a long essay on a selected topic.
In the fourth year they take two further one-term options and one senior honours course, which lasts two terms and which often involves the close scrutiny of primary source materials.
Introductory reading: G.R. Elton,The Practice of History ; Peter Burke (ed.),
The New Cambridge Modern History , vol. 13:Companion Volume , especially the first and last chapters, which indicate the startling variety of directions in which historical thought and writing are going.
Linguistics
Linguistics is the study of language in general, and takes its subject matter from a wide variety of languages.
It examines sounds and grammatical constructions that occur in natural languages, and how meaning is conveyed.
It considers the part that language plays in everyday life, in communicating information and in cementing human and social relationships.
The study of this aspect of language provides links with other disciplines such as sociology, social anthropology, psychology and philosophy.
Since it is not normally taught at school, the study of Linguistics starts from scratch with no assumption about previous knowledge of the subject.
It draws its students from a wide variety of subjects, including English, other languages, the social sciences (psychology, anthropology), mathematics, computer science  and artificial intelligence.
The wide range of joint degrees available reflects the extent to which Linguistics relates to other subject areas.
Some of these — Psychology, Social Anthropology, Artificial Intelligence — link the department with other faculties.
The joint degree in Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence is unique in Britain.
It allows students to concentrate on the more formal and computational aspects of Linguistics, in addition to taking a special course exploring the links between linguistic theory and Artificial Intelligence.
This degree should prepare students for work in the developing field of natural language processing by computer.
Linguistics may be studied either as a single honours degree or as part of a joint honours degree.
Alternatively, it may be studied for up to 3 (or 4) years within the MA General (or General Honours), or as an outside subject for one or two years.
The first-year course gives a broad introduction which is taken to a more advanced level in the second year.
The third and fourth years, as well as taking the study of certain central areas (syntax, semantics, phonology) further, allows a wide choice of optional courses, including, for example, Historical Linguistics, Sociolinguistics, Psycholinguistics and Computational Linguistics.
The Department of Linguistics in Edinburgh is one of the largest linguistics departments in Europe.
The staff combine teaching and research interests which cover most of the main areas of linguistics, and are specialists in various languages including French, German, Russian, Arabic, Dravidian languages and some African languages.
The department has a large well-equipped phonetics laboratory with facilities for recording (both sound and vision) and for the analysis of speech, speech synthesisers, and its own computers.
The department has strong research links with the Centre for Speech Technology Research and the Human Communication Research Centre.
Opportunities for employment for graduates in linguistics are very similar to those for any graduate in Arts curricula, but there are some cases where a degree in linguistics is regarded as a relevant qualification, namely speech therapy and language teaching.
Also, there is an increasing demand for graduates who have combined Linguistics with Artificial Intelligence in the joint degree.
Introductory reading: R. Hudson,Invitation to Linguistics .
Mathematics
Mathematics is concerned essentially with understanding abstract concepts.
It is a challenging subject to study, but it is also one in which great intellectual satisfaction can be derived through the mastery of its various ideas.
It is loosely divided into Pure Mathematics (concerned with developing a rigorous and logical framework for mathematical entities) and Applied Mathematics (the use of mathematical techniques and results in the study of other disciplines, eg Biology, Economics, Physics).
There has been a long and fruitful interplay between the two branches: Pure Mathematics develops methods used in Applied Mathematics; Applied Mathematics has in turn raised problems which have ultimately led to the creation of whole areas of Pure Mathematics.
Research in both branches is pursued actively at Edinburgh University.
At Edinburgh University, Mathematics may be studied in the Faculty of Arts or in the Faculty of Science and Engineering.
Joint degrees involving Mathematics are also available in both these faculties and additionally in the Faculty of Social Sciences.
The entries for the other faculties should be consulted for further details.
Within the Faculty of Arts, emphasis is laid on Pure Mathematics, though Applied Mathematics courses may be followed (see entry under Faculty of Science and Engineering).
The primary degree is the four-year MA(Honours) in Mathematics with a secondary subject, but in addition, joint degrees in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy (ie Physics) and Philosophy and Mathematics are available.
During the first two years, the key mathematical courses are Mathematics 1A and 2A.
Mathematics 1A is a traditional first-year pure mathematics course covering calculus, analysis and  algebra.
Calculus extends material learnt at school on differentiation, integration, circular and hyperbolic functions and differential equations; analysis introduces notions of limit, convergence and continuity; algebra introduces such structures as complex numbers and vectors in two and three dimensions.
These topics are developed and broadened in the second year and more emphasis is placed on rigour and abstraction.
A secondary subject is also followed during the first two years.
A common choice is a broadly related subject such as Applied Mathematics, Computer Science, Linguistics or Philosophy, but the student is free to choose from an extremely wide list of courses drawn from across the University.
Additionally, a further ‘outside’ course is taken in each of the first two years.
These courses may be chosen virtually without restriction and are intended to maintain the breadth of the student's education.
In the third year, a basic core of full-time modern Mathematics is presented, and in the fourth year, courses are chosen from an extensive range of more specialised topics to suit the student's taste.
Mathematics is becoming increasingly important in its applications and uses in the modern world.
For instance, recent graduates have embarked on a wide variety of interesting careers, generally in industry, the financial world, science or education.
The prospects for later vocational training and employment are good.
This is partly due to knowledge that enables understanding and acquisition of specific statistical, computing or operational research techniques, and partly because the study of Mathematics cultivates a range of abilities such as flexibility, clarity of thought, thoroughness, concision, and accuracy in exposition.
Introductory reading: E.W. Swokowski,Calculus , 5th Edition.
Modern European Languages
The departments which teach modern European languages — French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Scandinavian, Spanish, Celtic — are committed to preserving the best features of traditional courses of language study so that students may acquire competence and skill in the written and spoken language as well as an extensive knowledge of the literature and civilisation of the countries concerned.
Departments are alive, however, to recent developments in language work and have successfully integrated new ideas and procedures into the traditional course structure.
For example, account is taken of the growing importance of theoretical linguistics, for which Edinburgh University is particularly well-known.
The introduction of new joint honours courses designed to prepare students for careers in various fields in which a high degree of linguistic competence is required further illustrates the modern approach that has been adopted in the structure of curricula.
Within the MA Honours in Modern European Languages, students opt for either a single honours (one language) or a joint honours (two languages) curriculum.
In the case of single honours, it is necessary to choose a secondary subject to study alongside the language in the first two years, after which students devote all their attention to their main subject.
A large number of joint degrees with other subjects is available.
However, prospective applicants should note that a few combinations of languages are not possible because of the teaching timetable.
There are several degrees in the Faculty of Arts that combine a language with Business Studies (the Faculty of Social Sciences also offers this combination, with greater weight on Business Studies, within the BCom; for this, applicants should consult the Social Sciences section of this prospectus).
The first two years.
All the European language courses are designed to give students familiarity with the language, literature and civilisation of the relevant country.
The courses in the first two years usually contain five or six hours of tuition per week and cover the following aspects: language work in small tutorial groups (for the spoken language students are taught by native speakers); modern literature taught in lectures and tutorials; and in most departments, aspects of history and civilisation.
All students follow  this type of course.
Additional elements (of medieval, renaissance or modern linguistic, literary or cultural history) supplement the main courses for MA(Honours) students in the second year.
The third and fourth years.
Students of French, German, Hispanic Studies (Spanish or Portuguese), Italian and Scandinavian Studies are required to spend eight months of their third year in residence abroad (South America may be an alternative to Spain for students of Spanish).
During this year, students do regular work for the University of Edinburgh, as well as following university courses and/or working as foreign language assistants in the country of their residence.
Where students are following a joint honours curriculum consisting of two languages, two months must be spent additionally in the country of the second language.
Students of Russian and Celtic are not required to spend a year abroad.
Students of Russian normally spend 3 or 5 months in Russia, Byelorussia or the Ukraine.
Celtic students, if not native speakers of Gaelic, are similarly required to attend summer schools or reside in a Gaelic-speaking community in circumstances approved by the department.
Students return to Edinburgh in the fourth year to take further advanced courses appropriate to their final examinations.
Beginners' courses…
With the exception of French, study of all of the languages described below may be begun in Edinburgh, in specially-planned courses (designated 1A courses) that enable the student to reach an advanced level of proficiency in the first year.
For entry to any 1A course, a Higher grade or A-level pass in another foreign language is normally required.
It is not advisable, however, to attempt to learn two new languages at once.
In addition to these beginners' courses, introductory classes are available in Celtic, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish.
French
The study of French at Edinburgh University takes as its starting point the student's achievements in the final year at school and aims to develop linguistic skills to their fullest potential.
These skills include advanced listening and speaking, analytical reading and writing, and a thorough awareness of ‘register’— that is of the different types or styles of French appropriate for different situations.
While translation exercises (from and into French) are still used as part of the programme, a wide range of exercises designed to foster accurate and appropriate self-expression in French is also used.
Acquiring these advanced linguistic skills goes hand-in-hand with the study of the culture of France — mainly of its literature, but also of its cinema, and of modern French society and politics.
For all honours courses, residence in France is an important element in developing and maturing linguistic skills.
Where French is the main degree subject, students spend the third academic year abroad, either as students at a French or Belgian University, or as English Assistants in French schools.
For some students also specialising in Business Studies, there is the possibility of a job placement in commerce or industry.
Students for whom French is the minor component in their degree spend two months in France during summer vacations, and some financial help is available from the University to enable them to do this.
The course is both demanding and rewarding; a graduate in French will have shown competence in a variety of academic and intellectual skills, will have adapted successfully to a challenging foreign environment, and will thus have demonstrated the qualities of intellect and personality most prized by employers.
French may be studied at Edinburgh not only at all levels of MA(General) and MA (General Honours) but as a single honours subject (with a secondary subject taken in the first two years); or as the major or minor subject in a wide variety of joint degrees, where it is combined with another modern European language, or with one of a number of Arts Faculty subjects, or even with subjects (Business Studies and Law) from other faculties.
Surprisingly, only a minority of graduates in French  choose to make use of it in their choice of a job.
Many of our graduates are recruited into the Civil Service, into banking (UK and international) and the financial services, industry generally, into local administration, arts administration and — increasingly — into retail management with a wide variety of companies.
Changes in the curriculum in schools will lead to an increase in the number of language graduates recruited into teacher training.
For teaching, two languages are better than one.
There are increased opportunities in the EC with the establishment of the single market in 1992; here, too, someone with university qualifications in two Community languages will have a distinct advantage, and anyone with ambitions in this direction should consider supplementing French with one of the other languages that can be learnt from scratch in Edinburgh.
Continuity is obviously important in foreign language study, and students are encouraged, in the time between school and university, to maintain a high level of contact with French in any way open to them (newspapers, magazines, books, radio, television, films, visits etc.)
For Scottish students staying on for a sixth year, a CSYS course (if available), will provide an excellent introduction to the kind of study undertaken at university.
Introductory reading: J. Ardagh,France in the Eighties ; A. Camus,L'exil et le royaume .
German
German is the mother tongue of over 100 million people living in a number of countries, each with its own distinctive cultural history and traditions.
It is also the language of some of the most influential works of philosophy, psychology, sociology and other disciplines which have helped to shape the modern world; and it is the medium of a rich variety of literary works, ancient and modern.
Studying German therefore involves not only learning to understand and to use the language (although that is the first essential) but also implies an awareness of the German-speaking countries today, of their geography and history, their political and social institutions, and their culture.
The Department's courses accordingly aim to give an understanding of what German writers and thinkers have had to say in the past of the age and the society within which and for which they wrote and make students familiar with contemporary life and literature, art and film in the German-speaking countries.
German may be taken for one year, as part of an MA(General) curriculum or as an outside subject for a degree in another honours group (perhaps English, or History, or Philosophy), or as a progressive course lasting for two, three or four years within the MA(Honours) or the MA(General).
The first-year course concentrates on modern German language and modern German literature, with teaching hours shared approximately equally between the two components.
Teaching for both is conducted in a variety of forums, including lectures, seminars and small tutorial groups.
Weekly practice in spoken German with native speakers, and a variety of exercises other than conventional translation are used to develop command of the language.
A beginners' course is also available, good progress in which will enable students to join the second year course.
In the second year, language work, oral and written, is developed further, while for the study of literature students are offered the possibility of selecting their field of study from four different programmes: German Texts from the Middle Ages to the 16th Century; the ‘Golden Age’ of German literature (1760–1820); German Literature and Society 1830–1950; Literature, Art and Media in 20th Century Germany.
In addition, elementary Dutch may be taken as an option.
In the third year, honours students with German as their major subject spend a minimum of eight months in a German-speaking country, either as a student, or as a part-time assistant in a school, or, if they are taking a joint degree, most probably attending courses at a university.
In the fourth year, in addition to consolidating their command of the language, students choose from a menu of options which cover topics ranging from the earliest texts in German to the work of contemporary writers and including some study of art and film.
These topics are studied through active discussion in seminar groups.
Graduates in German have taken up a wide range of jobs in recent years, in advertising, journalism, local government, tourism, banking, insurance, hospital administration, librarianship, the Civil Service, broadcasting, and in industry and commerce, in Britain and abroad, as well as in teaching.
With the creation of a single European market, it may be expected that a good command of a European Community language and familiarity with the country in which it is spoken will become an increasingly valued asset.
Introductory reading: Malcolm Pasley,Germany: A Companion to German Studies ; Manfred Durzak,Erzahlte Zeit: 50 deutsche Kurzgeschichten der Gegenwart .
Italian
Italy is a country of great cultural and political importance.
Hence the Italian Department designs its courses to instil into students not simply a skill in handling the Italian language and in appreciating its literature, but also an understanding of its history, politics and institutions.
The department offers a full range of courses, from those for beginners (including a non-graduating Italian Language half-course, of particular interest to students from outside the Faculty of Arts) to advanced courses in language, the literature and history of all periods and other aspects of Italian culture, such as cinema.
It is possible to study for an honours degree in Italian, or for the variety of joint honours degrees set out at the beginning of the Arts section (with another modern European language, for example, or with a number of other Arts subjects, or with Business Studies), and Italian may also be taken as a major or minor part of the MA(General) and the MA (General Honours).
In the case of the MA(Honours) in Italian and those joint honours degrees in which Italian is the major element, the third year of study will be spent in Italy, usually at an Italian university or teaching in an Italian secondary school.
What do Italian graduates do?
Some go on to postgraduate courses aimed at giving their degree a particular vocational emphasis, but a degree in Italian can  lead to a very wide variety of careers.
In recent years, Italian graduates have found rewarding career opportunities in commercial management, insurance, teaching, accountancy, publishing, the wine trade, the Civil Service and many other areas.
Introductory reading: F. Spotts and T. Wieser,Italy: A Difficult Democracy .
Russian
Russian can be studied with or without any previous knowledge of the language in a variety of degree structures.
There are two first-year courses, 1B for those with Higher or A-level Russian and 1A for those with no previous knowledge, but with a qualification in another foreign language.
For those with no knowledge of Russian, there is an intensive beginners' course, known as Russian 1A1/1A2, with a total of eight to nine contact hours weekly, which allows students to spend two-thirds of their time in their first year on Russian.
This is followed by a summer vacation course, after which the students can normally join the second-year course and graduate in the usual way at the end of four years.
In general, language teaching during the first two years is in small groups with grammar classes, oral classes (with a native speaker) and classes devoted to the written language.
Nineteenth and twentieth-century literary texts are also studied through lectures and tutorials.
Satellite TV facilities allow use to be made of Russian TV programmes and films.
For students who wish to take one year only of Russian from scratch the course 1A is recommended as an outside subject.
This course has similar entrance qualifications to 1A1/1A2.
For students taking two modern European languages in their second year, there is also the opportunity to study Russian nineteenth- and twentieth-century history or the history of the Russian language.
For those continuing with Russian to honours level, whether as single or joint honours, there is an opportunity to spend a period of study (two months as a minimum, but up to ten months for single honours students) in Russia, Byelorussia or the Ukraine.
During the honours years, students will be able to widen and deepen their knowledge of the Russian language and Russian culture.
The honours programme is structured so that, in addition to their language studies, students take a selection of options, covering areas of Russian literature, including some study of art and film; recent political, social and cultural developments; and the possibility of acquiring another Slavonic language, Polish or Serbo-Croat.
By the end of their honours course, students are able to read, write and speak the language with sufficient fluency and with the necessary cultural background to make practical use of their Russian in a future career, if they so wish.
Introductory reading: R. Cockrell and D. Richards,The Voice of a Giant .
Scandinavian Studies
The Department of Scandinavian Studies is the only centre in Scotland — and one of the few in Britain — for the study of Scandinavian languages and cultures.
Its situation in Edinburgh is both a recognition of past and present links between Scandinavia and Scotland and an excellent opportunity for collaboration with other Scandinavian institutions within the city and with the many other departments with Scandinavian interests within the University.
Students specialise in either Danish, Norwegian or Swedish and the chosen area may then be studied as a single honours course or part of a joint honours course in Modern European Languages and with Scottish Ethnology or Linguistics.
Degrees with Celtic and Social Policy are also now available.
Danish may also be studied as part of European Community Studies.
The courses are designed to provide the student with spoken and written fluency in the principal language together with an ability to understand the written and spoken forms of the other two Scandinavian languages.
In addition, the student will acquire a detailed familiarity with the history, culture and contemporary situation of the selected country and a broad-based knowledge of the Scandinavian field as a whole.
Students may enter the department without any previous knowledge of a Scandinavian language, since  there are two first-year courses, one for students with SCE or GCE qualifications and one for beginners.
Students who follow the beginners' course must spend at least one month in Scandinavia before entering their second year.
The department also offers a one-year Scandinavian Cultural History course which uses translated materials and therefore requires no knowledge of a Scandinavian language.
Graduates in Scandinavian Studies have the same range of job opportunities as other Arts graduates, and are to be found in such areas as journalism, industrial and commercial management, tourism, transport planning, the Civil Service, librarianship, accountancy, shipping and banking.
Introductory reading: W. Glyn Jones,Denmark ; R. Popperwell,Norway;I. Scobbie,Sweden .
Spanish and Portuguese
The Department of Hispanic Studies provides the opportunity for the study of Spanish language, history and film, Latin-American literature and Portuguese language and literature (including Brazilian).
Spanish is one of the three most widely-spoken languages in the world (approximately 350 million people).
It is the official language of twenty-two countries and one of the five official languages of the United Nations, as well as an EC language.
Portuguese is spoken by over 150 million people in Europe, Brazil and Africa; it is also an official EC language.
Spanish may be studied for single honours or as part of the MA (Honours) in Modern European Languages.
Other joint honours degrees are listed in the table.
There are two first-year courses: one for students with the appropriate SCE or GCE qualifications (Spanish 1B) and the other for those with little or no previous knowledge of the language (Spanish 1A).
Both first—and second-year courses aim to develop a high level of proficiency in spoken and written Spanish, and also to extend the student's awareness of Hispanic literature, history and culture.
In the second year, most students in the department have the opportunity to learn Portuguese, if they wish, and continue with it to their final year.
Honours students from the department spend their third year in Spain or Latin America, at universities, as language assistants in schools, or, occasionally, with jobs in industry or commerce.
On return to Edinburgh, courses are selected from a wide range of options.
The emphasis in the language teaching is on analytical and comprehension skills, not merely on translation.
The department also offers an honours degree in Spanish and Portuguese.
After passing a first-year course in Spanish, students in their second year would normally learn Portuguese from scratch and take a course on ‘Culture and Society in the Portuguese-speaking World’, together with their second-level course in Spanish.
In the third year, students spend a total of eight months of approved study abroad in Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries.
In the final year, both languages are studied, and options on Portuguese and Brazilian literature are combined with two Spanish options.
Graduates in Spanish and in Portuguese are in demand in a wide range of fields, both in the UK and abroad.
Former students have found jobs in management, banking, the foreign and civil services, academic research, teaching, publishing and journalism.
Introductory reading: R. Carr,Modern Spain J. Hooper,The Spaniards ; E. Williamson,The Penguin History of Latin America ; M. Kaplan,The Portuguese: the Land and its People .
European Community Studies and Modern European Languages
This course aims to provide the range of linguistic, analytical and cultural skills necessary for British graduates to compete in the rapidly integrating administrative, social and economic market of the EEC.
Students in other Community countries traditionally take wide-ranging curricula which include languages, philosophy, history, law, political science etc, disciplines which provide them not only with directly relevant skills for employment, but also ensure a common    set of references and cultural values which are vital to mutual understanding and cooperation.
The Edinburgh curriculum covers similar ground, providing intensive language and cultural courses relating to one of the community countries, plus a range of core subjects designed to introduce students to the common denominators of European experience, Philosophical Tradition, History, Politics, Institutions and Legal Framework.
In addition, opportunities exist during the first two years of the course to study further subjects which can include an additional Community language if students so wish.
The third year of the course is spent following European Studies courses at a university in the country whose language is being studied.
The final year back in Edinburgh is divided between further language and cultural studies, continuing study of institutions, and a further appropriate law or social science course.
The Celtic Languages and Cultures
Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Welsh language and literature courses are available at Edinburgh; both the Medieval and Modern periods are covered.
There is (naturally) an emphasis on Modern Scottish Gaelic, Scotland's living Celtic language.
For linguists, the Celtic family of languages is extremely interesting, while, on the literary side, medievalists are attracted by the early sagas, heroic poetry and Arthurian material; and in the Modern period, Gaelic poetry of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and that of the twentieth century Renaissance poets are especially popular.
In all periods, attention is paid to the social and cultural background which gave rise to the literature.
Celtic may be studied either alone, for the MA(Honours) in Celtic Studies, or in various joint honours degrees.
In each case, students choose between Medieval and Modern Options for their honours work.
It is also possible to take Celtic courses for one, two or three years as part of the MA(General) or as a secondary or outside subject for another honours group.
At first-year level there are two separate classes: Celtic 1B for those who are already competent in Gaelic, and Celtic 1A for beginners.
Celtic 1B attracts mostly Scottish students, including native speakers of Gaelic; Celtic 1A is larger and more cosmopolitan, but still small, compared with many courses in the faculty.
A recent addition to the range of Celtic classes is Celtic Civilisation, a first-level course which explores the history and culture of the Celts, with emphasis on the literary, intellectual and artistic achievements of the Celtic tradition through the ages.
Those students who take Celtic through to honours level tend to be aiming for a Gaelic-related job (eg in journalism or broadcasting, Government agencies, local government or teaching); but a typical first-year class also includes many who simply have an interest in Scotland's languages or heritage.
Oriental Languages
The University of Edinburgh is one of the main centres in Britain for the study of the languages and cultures of Asia.
The Faculty of Arts offers instruction to honours level in Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Persian and Sanskrit.
These languages and their related cultures may also be studied as components of the MA(General).
No previous knowledge of an oriental language is required for admission to the first-year courses in any of the languages, but a modern or classical language at SCE Higher or GCE A-level would be an advantage.
For joint degrees in Arts involving these languages, see the diagram at the beginning of this faculty section.
Arabic
The world situation now places the Arabic language in an increasingly important position.
Consequently, there is a demand for graduates with a knowledge of Arabic in a variety of jobs, including the Civil Service, industry, commerce and education.
The MA(Honours) in Arabic may be taken with a wide variety of secondary subjects, while there are also a number of joint degrees linking Arabic with appropriate subjects in Arts and Social Sciences.
The first-year Arabic course is primarily concerned with teaching Modern Standard Arabic, which is the form used for public purposes (broadcasting, newspapers, etc).
Towards the end of the year, the older ‘classical’ form is introduced, and study of both is continued into the second year.
For the MA(Honours), students also study Islamic History during their first two years.
For part of the second and third years, students spend six months studying Arabic in an Arabic-speaking country, and then return to continue their investigation of Islamic culture and Arabic literature of all periods.
There is usually a large number of Arab postgraduates in the department (for the University Library has an important collection of Islamic MSS), which helps to keep undergraduates exposed to Arabic in everyday use.
Introductory reading: B. Lewis,The Arabs in History ; G. Endress,An Introduction to Islam .
Chinese
Knowledge of Chinese language and culture is of vital importance in the modern world.
One of the richest and most ancient human civilisations lies today at the cultural roots of the world's most economically vibrant region.
Graduates in Chinese are in great demand in an exciting variety of occupations.
Students taking MA(Honours) in Chinese study two compulsory courses in their first year.
Chinese 1 provides an intensive grounding in the structures and usage of modern spoken and written Mandarin.
The two main tasks of acquiring oral/aural competence and achieving basic literacy are dealt with in the course's two parallel streams.
Native Chinese teachers provide coaching in conversation and calligraphy.
Audio-visual and computer-aided learning packages are also employed.
Chinese Civilisation 1 introduces the major aspects of Chinese history, philosophy, religion, art and literature.
Honours students may opt to include two literature in translation courses in their curriculum.
Chinese Literature 1 (Literature in Revolution) and Chinese Literature 2 (The Great Tradition) are also open as outside subjects to students taking other degrees, as are Chinese 1 (and its continuation, Chinese 2) and Chinese Civilisation 1.
The second year of the MA(Honours) curriculum is spent studying in China.
In the third year students continue the study of modern spoken and written Chinese and begin the study of Classical Chinese.
They also read representative works in traditional and modern Chinese history, literature, philosophy and religion.
Each student either selects a special subject from among these fields of study or takes a course in Japanese language.
In the fourth year, students continue the third-year courses, including the special subject or Japanese.
Edinburgh hosts one of the UK's largest concentrations of students from China as well as a substantial ‘Chinatown’ and students in the Department of East Asian Studies benefit from its intimate relations with both groups.
Introductory reading: David Bonavia,The Chinese ; Raymond Dawson,The Legacy of China .
Hebrew
Courses in Hebrew language and literature are provided for the Faculty of Arts by the Department of Hebrew and Old Testament Studies in the Faculty of Divinity.
These courses concentrate on the classical Hebrew of the Bible and the Mishnah and Talmud, but some opportunity is afforded for the study of selections from modern Hebrew literature.
In each course there are supporting lectures and tutorials on history, archaeology, and culture.
More advanced courses in Hebrew (eg Dead Sea Scrolls, mystical texts) and in related languages (eg Ugaritic, Phoenician, Aramaic) are available in the Faculty of Divinity, and are open to interested Arts students on a non-graduating basis.
Japanese
The Centre for Japanese Studies offers a range of courses in Japanese language, modern literature, history and culture.
The first and second year Japanese language courses are available to students in all faculties, and classes typically feature a broad mix.
An Honours degree course in Japanese has been established recently in response to an increasing demand.
Japanese honours students spend their third year studying at a university in Japan.
Student exchange schemes have been established with several prestigious Japanese universities and during their year in Japan students will have the chance to experience many aspects of Japanese life and culture in different regions of the country.
In addition, students will prepare an honours dissertation on an appropriate subject under the supervision of staff in both Edinburgh and Japan.
An MA.
Honours programme in Japanese and Linguistics is also offered.
Students of Japanese at Edinburgh are able to obtain various academic awards for further study in Japan after graduation, and an honours degree in Japanese opens the door to a range of career opportunities in Japan, the U.K. and Europe.
The blend of a varied and ancient culture with a modern economy based on technological innovation which characterises Japan and Japanese Studies has an appeal to students with a wide range of interests.
Persian
Iran has recently been prominent in world events, which has reminded outsiders that it has never been more important to understand the people of Iran, their culture and their traditions.
Persian is also one of the two principal languages of Afghanistan, is spoken in what was Soviet Central Asia, and was for centuries the official language of much of the Indian subcontinent, where many fine poets wrote in Persian.
No previous knowledge of Persian is required for admission to Persian 1; by the end of the year students should be able to read newspapers and simple Persian texts, and to communicate in Persian with native speakers.
Persian 2 continues the work of Persian 1, and provides an introduction to the classical Persian language and to the history and culture of Iran.
By the end of the second year, students will be able to appreciate and enjoy reading the rich classical literature of Iran, including the poetry, both secular and religious, which forms such an important part of the social, political and cultural life of Iran.
This study is taken a stage further in Persian 3.
Students following the MA(Honours) course are expected to study Islamic History and the Modern History of the Middle East during two of their four years.
In the summer vacation after the second year and during the first term of the third year, they will, if possible, study Persian in a Persian-speaking country.
Thereafter they will study a representative selection of outstanding Persian literary works, continue to develop oral and written proficiency in the language, and study in depth aspects of the social, political and cultural development of Iran past and present.
Introductory reading: G.R. Sabri-Tabrizi, Iran,A Child's Story ,A Man's Experience ; E. Abrahamian,Iran Between Two Revolutions .
Sanskrit
Sanskrit is the language of classical India, one of the oldest and most significant of the civilisations of the world.
The courses at Edinburgh (one of only four universities in Britain where an honours degree in Sanskrit may be taken) aim to provide a detailed study of the manifold achievements, both secular and religious, of that civilisation.
The first-year course is designed to take students from scratch to a level at which they can cope with simple Sanskrit texts (the two texts studied in the first year are the Pancatantra , an ancient collection of humorous fables, and the Bhagavad Gita , the most revered of Hindu religious texts).
In subsequent years, students of Sanskrit continue their study of language and also read Sanskrit texts, particularly in those fields in which the ancient Indian writers excelled, such as philosophy, poetry, drama and linguistics.
Students may take either a full MA(Honours) degree in Sanskrit, in which case a subsidiary related language such as Prakrit is normally studied in the last two years of the course, or a joint MA(Honours)  degree in Sanskrit and Greek, Latin or Linguistics, where both subjects are studied for all four years of the curriculum.
Introductory reading: A.L.
Basham,The Wonder that was India .
Non-Linguistic Courses
The Oriental departments offer several courses that do not require knowledge of exotic languages but do provide an opportunity for the study of the eastern civilisations, ancient and modern.
Chinese Civilisation 1 deals with selected topics from the Bronze Age to modern times, including social and political history, philosophy, art and literature (in translation).
Chinese Literature in Revolution 1 discusses the complex relationships between literature and Chinese society in the twentieth century; Traditional Chinese Literature 2 traces the history of literature from its beginning to the end of the imperial dynasties: both are based on translated readings.
Indian Civilisation 1 (the development of Hindu culture from its origins in the Vedic age to the end of the eighteenth century) may be followed by Indian Religion and Philosophy 2 (the Vedas, the Upanisads and the philosophical systems to which they give rise, and related religious philosophies such as Buddhism), or by South Asian Studies 2 (an ‘area studies’ course concerning modern developments in the subcontinent from several perspectives).
Islamic History 1 gives a general introduction to medieval Islamic civilisation, and Modern Middle  Eastern History 1 deals with the history of the Islamic Middle East since the mid-eighteenth century.
Islamic Religion gives a general picture of the development of Islam through the centuries.
Philosophy
Philosophy deals systematically with questions that every reflective person asks from time to time.
Is there anything that we can really know with certainty?
Are there any genuinely absolute moral values?
What is time?
What is justice?
How is the human mind related to the body?
What makes me the person I am?
Such questions are not only perennially interesting; answers to them are presupposed by much of what counts as human knowledge.
Students reading philosophy should be able to think about such questions in a clearer and more disciplined manner than was possible to them before.
They should be able to see the connections between diverse areas of human experience, and should become more aware of the assumptions that underlie their beliefs.
They should be able to analyse arguments and assess their validity, and to express themselves in a clear, exact and literate way.
In the first year there are introductory courses, consisting of lectures and small-group tutorials, on Moral Philosophy, General Philosophy, Philosophy of Science and Logic.
These aim at implanting basic skills and making students acquainted with some fundamental topics and some classic philosophical texts.
General Philosophy covers such topics as mind and body, theory of knowledge, causation and personal identity.
Moral Philosophy is concerned with questions about the nature of human goodness and wickedness, about justice, freedom, punishment, suicide and so forth.
History and Philosophy of Science, and Logic and Philosophy of Science focus on problems about the growth and nature of the various sciences and about the validity of arguments.
Some of these courses are followed by more advanced second-year courses.
Philosophy may be studied at the third—and fourth-year levels, for single honours and for joint honours, as well as for the MA(General) and the MA (General Honours).
In these courses, deeper study is undertaken, and undergraduates reading single honours have the opportunity to choose two subjects, of particular interest to themselves, for specialist study.
Joint honours degrees include a number of inter-faculty options, such as Philosophy with Economics, with Psychology, with Politics, with Law or with Theology.
A philosophical training, as well as leading to a knowledge of some of the greatest philosophers of the Western tradition, has much to offer wherever analytical skills and clarity of thought are valued.
Graduates in philosophy, or with a philosophy component in their degrees, have found appropriate employment in a variety of administrative and managerial posts in industry and public service, in education, commerce, journalism and broadcasting.
Introductory reading: Martin Hollis,Invitation to Philosophy ; Bertrand Russell,The Problems of Philosophy .
Scottish Studies
It is possible to study the history and culture of Scotland in a variety of courses offered by several departments in the Faculty of Arts.
In particular, the School of Scottish Studies and the Department of Scottish History are wholly concerned with Scotland.
Besides the MA(Honours) degrees offered in these two departments and in Celtic, various joint degrees are available which combine different Scottish elements.
The courses mentioned below can also be combined within the MA(General) and MA (General Honours).
Scottish Ethnology
The School of Scottish Studies was founded in 1951 as a centre for research into Scottish traditional life and culture.
It now maintains extensive sound, video, film and photographic collections, together with the Tale and Place Name Archives.
The Linguistic Survey of Scotland, founded in 1947, became a part of the School in 1983.
Undergraduate teaching began in 1971.
The term ‘Scottish Ethnology’ covers all aspects of the work undertaken by the department.
Courses in Scottish Ethnology are offered at all levels: several joint honours courses were instituted in 1985, and single honours in 1987.
Scottish Ethnology 1 is an introduction to Scottish folklore and folklife, seen against the background of European and world ethnology.
It may be taken by any student as an outside subject, or may form the starting point for a single or joint honours MA in Scottish Ethnology.
More specialised work is tackled in later years.
An element of training in fieldwork and archive methods and techniques is involved in most of the courses.
Honours courses are offered in Custom and Belief; Linguistic Geography and Onomastics; Material Culture; Traditional Music; Traditional Narrative; Traditional Society; Traditional Song.
There is also a special subject option, and most candidates will submit a dissertation on a subject of their own choice, approved by the department.
(A knowledge of Gaelic is not a prerequisite for any level of study.)
The study of Scottish Ethnology provides a useful qualification in various fields where a broad knowledge of Scottish background is relevant, for instance the media, museums, community work, development agencies and aspects of primary and secondary school teaching.
Introductory reading: E.J. Cowan (ed.),
The People's Past ; B. Kay,Odyssey, Voices from Scotland's Recent Past , Vols. 1 and 2; I.F.
Grant,Highland Folk Ways ; A. Fenton,Country Life in Scotland .
Scottish History
Scottish History 1 and 2 are available within the MA(General) or as outside subjects, but the principal way to study Scottish History is to take the MA(Honours) in Scottish Historical Studies.
This degree course is designed to cover Scotland's past as a whole, and to put it in its wider European context.
There are more opportunities, therefore, to look at language, literature, material culture and other subject areas than are sometimes open to students of history.
Students normally take Scottish History 1 and 2, British and European history and two outside subjects in their first and second years.
The Scottish history component in the first year comprises an overview of Scottish history: this establishes the long-term trends in the history of the country and its people.
In the second year, there is an in-depth examination of Scotland since 1660; this brings out how many aspects of modern Scotland were shaped as long ago as the late seventeenth century.
In third year, all students study the cultural and intellectual history of Scotland (Scottish History 3), Documents and Palaeography, and History of Settlement in pre-Industrial Scotland, the latter being examined by dissertation.
Two ‘Special Subjects’ occupy the final year, chosen from a wide range of courses taught within and outwith the department.
Joint degrees are available with Scottish Ethnology, Scottish Literature, Celtic and Latin.
A well-established feature of Scottish Historical Studies is the evaluation of original source material and some training in research methods.
The course, however, is not vocational, and a wide range of career opportunities is open to graduates, who are to be found in journalism, television, central and local government and tax consultancy, as well as teaching, and in archive and museum posts.
Scottish Language and Literature
Scottish Literature 1 provides an introduction to selected major authors from a variety of periods (Henryson, Dunbar, Burns, Scott, Hogg, Galt, MacDonald, Grassic Gibbon, Gunn, Muir and Spark).
Scottish Literature 2 and 3 build on this foundation by examining selected themes and genres, with particular emphasis on the twentieth century.
Scottish texts and authors are also studied in several of the honours courses offered by the department of English Literature and there is a joint honours degree in English and Scottish Literature.
The Scots language is taught in a full first-year course as well as in English Language 1 and 2, and there is also an honours course devoted entirely to it.
Students interested in studying Scottish subjects may wish to consider learning Gaelic.
It is not necessary to have any prior experience of Gaelic, since Celtic 1A is designed to give a full training in the language, and can lead to honours.
(It is also possible to confine oneself specifically to Modern Scottish Gaelic in the two-year combination of Celtic 1A and Celtic 2A.)
A knowledge of Gaelic increases the options open to Scottish Ethnology students and opens up a range of additional sources for Highland and, to some extent, Scottish History.
An outline of the courses is given earlier, under Modern European Languages.
Among other courses devoted to Scotland, Archaeology of Scotland 1 and some of the honours courses in History of Art should be noted.
DIVINITY
The Faculty of Divinity of Edinburgh University is one of the largest in Britain with a variety of Christian traditions represented among both staff and students.
Moreover it houses Religious Studies students who make use not only of classes within the faculty but also of courses in the Arts Faculty which specialise in cultures and religions other than Christian.
Classes in the faculty are normally conducted in New College, a striking historic building on the Mound in central Edinburgh which includes the largest theological library in Britain.
Divinity degrees require some study in each of the departments listed below in the first two years of the course.
Seminars, tutorials and group teaching are in use as well as lecture methods.
The results of work done throughout the year counts considerably towards the final assessment.
Degrees and Certificates
BD Degree
A four-year course leading to a degree with or without honours.
All students take an essential core of subjects covering the main theological disciplines.
Students taking the degree without honours have a choice of the subjects which they may take at a higher level.
Students reaching the required standard may be permitted to proceed to honours in the final year in any one of the subjects offered by the faculty, or joint honours in two of the subjects.
BD (Second Degree) with or without Honours
This is a three-year degree available to graduates only and allowing specialisation in one or two fields of study after completion of a basic two-year core covering all subjects.
Combined MA/BD Degree
By taking certain courses common to the MA (in the Faculty of Arts) and the BD degree, it is possible to attain the combined MA/BD degree in five years.
Candidates must first be accepted for the MA degree, in the normal way.
Licentiate in Theology
A three-year course allowing a choice of options within the theological field.
BA (Religious Studies)
A three-year course enabling students to combine courses whose content is directly relevant to Religious Studies with a wide variety of courses in the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences, Law, Science, and Music.
MA (Religious Studies)
A four-year honours course allowing specialisation to honours level in either one or two of the major religious traditions of the world and one method of studying religion in general.
BA/MA (Divinity)
A three-year BA or a four-year honours MA in New Testament and Classics.
Other combinations involving Biblical Studies are available.
The faculty also offers the following Certificate courses providing further training: Certificate in Christian Education.
Certificate in Pastoral Studies.
Certificate in Theology.
Careers
Traditionally the faculty has drawn many of its students from those who are proceeding to the ministry.
This remains true and the faculty has responded to the needs of the contemporary church in its Practical Theology courses.
Other students come to prepare for a teaching career.
But because the degree includes literary and linguistic study, history and introductory philosophy, it is a good foundation for a wide variety of careers, including business management and the Civil Service.
Departments of Study
Hebrew and Old Testament Studies
The Hebrew Scriptures serve as the basis for two great world religions — Christianity and Judaism — and it is in full consciousness of this fact that they are studied in the Department of Hebrew and Old Testament Studies.
The department provides a wide range of courses in Old Testament Studies for the BD degree, involving a general insight into the world of ancient Israel and ancient Semitic culture and thought, detailed attention to the problems of understanding and interpreting Old Testament texts, and the study in depth of Old Testament theology and ethics.
For the degrees in Religious Studies a range of courses in both classical and modern Judaism is provided, including the study of biblical, rabbinic and modern Hebrew texts.
The department also offers in this programme a number of courses in Ancient Near Eastern Religions.
Study of the Hebrew language is strongly encouraged by the department but is compulsory only for those students who take a full honours course in our subject.
New Testament Language, Literature and Theology
All our generalisations about Jesus and the church are based on a reading of verses from the New Testament.
All our ethical discussions draw on the Sermon on the Mount and other passages in the New Testament.
All theological discussions that divide churches from one another and Christians from one another are based on interpretations of key verses from the New Testament.
Rather than launch into these discussions with yet another set of theories, the aim of teaching in the New Testament department is  to help students to go back to the verses and passages themselves for new insights and new understanding.
We encourage students to take Greek, and give a great deal of special help in language study at all levels, but it is quite possible to take both New Testament 1 and New Testament 2 in English.
Each year we offer two lectures a week on five passages from the New Testament.
In second year, students study another five passages, two theology problems and one special historical problem.
The passages change every year.
These lectures are supplemented by colloquies in which students themselves ask the questions raised by the text, and learn, under expert guidance, to find their own answers.
These three hours of teaching are in turn supplemented by a further hour of lectures on the history of the Graeco-Roman world in New Testament times, on the theology of the New Testament, and on questions of date, authorship and purpose of the individual books of the New Testament.
Ecclesiastical History
The Department of Ecclesiastical History takes up the story of the emerging ‘Jesus movement’ and carries it forward through twenty centuries to the present day.
A general survey of the whole span of Church history leads on to a second-level course which explores the growth and diversification of Christianity in three contexts; the second century in the Roman Empire, early modern Europe and nineteenth-century Africa and America.
More advanced courses cover Christianity in Roman Africa; the ‘Age of Reform’— religion in sixteenth-century Europe; Scottish Church history from the Reformation onwards; Christianity, race and slavery in the nineteenth century; and Church, state and society in nineteenth-century Britain and Ireland.
The department studies the Church's history with the aid of other relevant disciplines, for example, social, political and economic history and social anthropology, as well as with a sensitivity to theological perspectives.
The department is fully involved, through the Board of Historical Studies, in the wider teaching of history in the Faculties of Arts and Social Sciences.
Systematic Theology
The Department of Theology and Religious Studies offers two aspects of theology: doctrine as it has emerged in Christian tradition, and the relation of theology to influences from philosophy, other contemporary studies, and atheistic alternatives.
Christian Doctrine concentrates on a critical and constructive study of such central beliefs of the Christian Religion as those which concern creation, the person, mission and function of Jesus, the triune being of God, Scripture, Church, Ministry and Sacraments, the nature of faith, revelation and prayer, the Christian understanding of salvation.
Its aim is to understand the historical origins and the development in the successive cultural milieux through which the Christian faith has passed of the major doctrines in which these beliefs have been expressed; and it is particularly concerned with the contemporary appraisal and formulation of these doctrines in view of the dominant directions of modern thought, and with their ecumenical prospects.
Advanced classes study the classical works of the most influential writers of the Patristic, Medieval, Reformation and Modern periods.
In the field of Religious Studies attention is given to a Theology of Religion in which there is offered a positive and critical evaluation of basic religious concepts and truth-claims in different world religions.
The department's offerings secondly recognise the fact that Christian theology and the doctrines in which much of it is distilled took form in the course of the Christian faith's varying relationships with the changing religious philosophies of the West.
Hence, in addition to such general topics as reason and revelation, science and religion, history and faith, and the validity of religious language, courses cover the content of Graeco-Roman philosophical (religious) thought and its influence upon early formulation of Christian doctrine; the medieval syntheses of philosophy and theology; the critical turn of modern philosophy and its insistence on a rational Christian faith (Descartes, Kant, Hegel); the challenge to Christianity and Christianity's answer to Marxism, Atheistic Existentialism, Humanism and Anti-Humanism and British Empiricism from Hume to the Linguistic Philosophers.
Seminars cover such specific topics as proofs of God's existence, the problem of evil, liberation theology.
Advanced courses afford the opportunity to study classical religious and anti-religious texts of influential philosophers from Plato to Sartre.
Finally, the field of comparative religion is opened up for the students in the study of the faiths of the modern world.
Christian Ethics and Practical Theology
The subject is concerned with the interrelationship of theology and practice, belief and behaviour.
In Christian Ethics the focus is on how norms for Christian behaviour are derived and applied; Practical Theology examines patterns of Christian praxis in church and society.
There is a major concern with the specifics of ministerial formation, but this is set within the department's broader interests and is treated in a soundly academic fashion as in the other forms of professional preparation offered in the University.
The basic courses in Practical Theology concentrate on the theology and practice of worship and preaching, church music, group work, introductory sociology of religion, religious education and Christian nurture, pastoral care and counselling, and communication.
Basic courses in Christian Ethics cover the theological, philosophical and biblical roots of ethics and then move on to the consideration of various specific problem areas such as war and peace, social justice, sexual ethics, euthanasia, etc.
Attention is also given to the history of Christian Ethics, and to textual study.
The department has a substantial programme of supervised field education which is an integral part of several of its courses, involving student placements in parishes, hospitals, industry, prisons and social work agencies, etc.
A wide range of teaching aids is used, including TV recording and playback facilities.
Religious Studies
Courses and degrees in Religious Studies draw upon the teaching resources of several departments in Arts and Social Sciences — Chinese, Islamic Studies, Philosophy, Psychology, Sanskrit, Social Anthropology, Sociology, Fine Art, English Literature — as well as expertise in Christian and Jewish studies in Divinity.
Three of the basic courses, Religion 1, 2 and 3, are available as options for students in Arts and Social  Sciences.
They provide a comparative introduction to the world's major religious traditions.
In the BA and MA (Religious Studies) degrees the basic courses lead on to the Phenomenology and History of Religion, exploring in depth a wide range of issues across different religions.
In addition MA students specialise in one of the leading world religions (Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Chinese religions, Ancient Near Eastern religions), and normally in either a second major religious tradition or one of the chief approaches to the study of religion — sociology, psychology, anthropology, philosophy or fine art.
The BA (Religious Studies) curriculum requires less specialisation but allows a wide range of choices, enabling a student to take, for example, a three-year sequence of courses in a subject in Arts or Social Sciences.
All intending applicants for admission to the Faculty of Divinity are always welcome to visit the Faculty for a discussion with a member of staff.
In the first instance please write or telephone for an appointment.
Letters should be sent to Associate Dean, Faculty of Divinity, University of Edinburgh, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX.
Tel. 031 225 8400.
LAW
Why Study Law?
Because it is not studied at school, many entrants are unsure of what is involved in an LLB degree.
Perhaps the best way of explaining about legal study is to try to remove some of the misconceptions which have grown up around it.
The first misconception is that legal study at university is exclusively for students who intend becoming solicitors or advocates.
While it is true that the majority of our students continue from the degree into the legal profession, a sizeable proportion do not.
In recent years, about one-third of our graduates have entered a wide variety of other careers ranging from accountancy and banking, to administration, commerce and management.
As the law plays an increasingly important role in almost all spheres of modern life, it is likely that the LLB degree will continue to provide a useful qualification for a number of career opportunities.
The mixed honours degrees mentioned below specifically cater for the non-vocational law student.
A second misconception is the belief that law is solely about criminal trials.
The truth is that most legal work does not involve courts.
Even of cases which do come to court, a very great many are not concerned with crimes at all but rather with people's rights as employees, consumers, householders and members of local communities.
In recent years there has been a steady growth in the use of tribunals to deal with legal disputes rather than courts.
Well-known examples are Industrial Tribunals and Social Security Tribunals.
The picture of studying law as a wearisome task in which lots of dull rules and regulations have to be memorised is a distorted one.
The law student is not expected to learn every single rule in every single legal topic.
Much more important is that the student is aware of the general principles of that particular area of law, has acquired the proper technique for finding out the specific rules and can apply them to the facts of the case.
In other words, precision of thought, accuracy of expression and understanding of the legal system in general are more important goals for the law student than repetitive memory work.
The law degree has two different roles.
It is an academic discipline worthy of study in its own right as well as a necessary preliminary for entry to the Scottish legal profession.
Why Edinburgh?
Edinburgh is the ideal centre in Scotland for the study of law.
From our site in Old College it is only a few minutes walk to Parliament House, where the highest criminal and civil courts in Scotland sit, and to the local Sheriff and district court.
The Law Library and Europa Library, which occupy all of one floor on the north side of Old College, have a fine range of legal materials.
Although Edinburgh has the largest law faculty in Scotland and is unrivalled in the range of undergraduate courses it provides, it is still small enough for students to get to know members of staff personally and to mix easily with other students.
Throughout the year, it is also possible for students to take part in the social events organised by the Student Law Society and in the general life of the University.
The LLB Curriculum
In principle, the law degree is a very flexible one.
All students can, in consultation with their Director of Studies, arrange a programme of courses specifically tailored to their individual requirements.
Certain general factors have, however, to be borne in mind.
There is a minimum number of subjects which must be passed in order to graduate LLB and a few courses, such as Scottish Legal System, are compulsory for all students.
In the case of the ordinary LLB, 12 ordinary subjects are necessary and in the case of the honours LLB, eight ordinary subjects and five honours subjects.
Although not compulsory for the degree, several courses are required for those who wish to enter the legal profession the ‘professional courses’.
Then there is the question of honours.
Application for admission to honours is made at the end of the second year of study.
Admission is based on the applicant's academic record  in the first two years.
The honours programme lasts four years while the ordinary degree takes three years.
At the outset of the degree most students are not sure of where their future path lies although most go on to enter the legal profession.
In recent years, not all those who wish have been able to find traineeships with legal firms, although the large majority continue to do so.
Most first-year students want a programme which leaves open the option of entering the legal profession and of taking an honours degree.
To give an idea of the syllabus for an LLB student it is worth looking at the typical curriculum in individual years.
First Year
1.
Scottish Legal System (first half of year)
Contract (second half of year)
2.
Family Law (first half of year)
Criminal Law (second half of year)
3.
Constitutional Law
4.
Optional course either Civil Law or International Law or a course from outside the Law Faculty eg German 1, British History 1
Information Systems 1
The overall aim of this programme is to provide an introduction to general legal principles and legal technique.
Members of staff are aware of the special nature of the skills required for law and make every effort in lectures and tutorials to ensure that the transition from school to university work is a smooth one.
Second Year
For those wishing to leave open the option of entering the profession and taking honours, the second year programme comprises the remaining degree required and ‘professional subjects’.
The typical programme is therefore:
1.
Jurisprudence
2.
Property Law
3.
Commercial Law
4.
Delict (first half)
Taxation and Social Security (second half)
For those not wishing to enter the profession or take honours, only Jurisprudence is essential.
Third Year (Non-Honours Students)
The aim for students completing an Ordinary LLB is to satisfy the degree regulations and, for those entering the profession, to ensure that all the ‘professional’ courses have been included.
Otherwise a free choice is available in which students can select courses such as Criminology, Forensic Medicine and Housing and Employment Law or courses from other faculties.
Third and Fourth Years (Honours Students)
Application to honours is made at the end of second year.
Once admitted to honours study, students take two honours subjects in their third year, together with at least one ordinary course or two ordinary half courses (typically Evidence and European Community Law), and three in their fourth year.
Students have a free choice deciding on five honours subjects, which are chosen from a total list of about thirty.
These honours subjects range over the whole field of legal interest.
Examples are Labour Law, International Law, Commercial Law, Sociology of Law, Medical Jurisprudence and Legal History.
Each course involves more advanced study of the topic in question than at ordinary level.
The emphasis is on the development of critical and analytical skills.
Teaching is usually in the form of seminars and students will often be required to write fairly substantial essays for assessment purposes.
Mixed Honours Degrees
It is possible for students to combine legal study with study of another discipline.
At present the faculty offers mixed honours degrees in which law can be combined with any of the following: Politics, Economics, Philosophy, Sociology, History, Accounting, Business Studies, Social Policy, Economic and Social History, Celtic, French, German and Spanish.
Such degrees are attractive to a student who wishes to study the law at university level but wishes also to develop his or her knowledge of another discipline.
Because it is necessary to include subjects from the other discipline from the first year onwards it is very difficult, although not impossible, to complete a mixed honours degree programme incorporating all the ‘professional’ law courses.
There are ‘professional’ curricula for Law with French, German, Philosophy and Spanish.
It is, however, worth stressing that it is possible to revert to a ‘pure’ law degree until the end of second year.
Course for Graduate Students
Such students are normally allowed exemptions from up to four subjects in the LLB curriculum, thereby reducing the Ordinary degree from 12 subjects to eight.
This has the consequence of enabling the degree to be taken in two rather than the normal three years.
The subjects in respect of which concessions can be given need not be law subjects.
The course for such students will broadly follow the pattern of that for normal first-year students and enables all the ‘professional’ law subjects within the two year span.
ERASMUS Study
The faculty has a wide range of links with other law faculties in European universities.
Our students are  encouraged to spend up to a year of their LLB abroad under the ERASMUS link.
Some courses offer tuition through the medium of English, some are taught in the language of the host institution.
Europa Institute
The Institute was established in 1968 to specialise in the law and politics of the European Communities.
At the undergraduate level it offers two ordinary half courses in European Community Law, and four honours courses available to LLB honours students.
These are European Institutions, which is concerned largely with the institutional and constitutional aspects of the European Communities, EC Substantive Law, German Constitutional Law and Government and Law & European Economic Integration.
The Institute maintains a major library relating to its fields of interest.
Centre for Criminology and the Social and Philosophical Study of Law
Edinburgh has long enjoyed a considerable reputation for the study of Criminology and the Philosophy of Law.
This Centre, established within the faculty in 1983, offers a wide range of courses at undergraduate level.
There is also a lively series of seminars organised by the Centre and there are frequent visits from distinguished overseas scholars.
Admissions
All applicants must apply through UCAS.
The code number M320 applies to the LLB only.
Separate codes are given for the various mixed degrees which are on offer.
Multiple selection of courses is not necessary (except for Law and French which is under a separate quota) and candidates need only use one space on their application form.
Age
Only in exceptional circumstances will the faculty offer places to applicants who will be less than seventeen and a half years of age at the time of commencing their studies.
Normally the faculty will not make offers to candidates who have yet to sit their SCE Higher grade examinations.
Entrance Requirements
The normal minimum entrance requirements are set out in the Degree Course Requirements list.
The  ‘going rate’— that is the rate for unconditional offers — is usually a grade or so above the minimum rate specified there.
It is, however, within the discretion of the Faculty to make offers at below the ‘going rate’ or minimum rate.
The faculty is particularly keen to ensure that candidates who have not made the ‘going rate’ because of disadvantaged or deprived circumstances but who are of good academic potential are given every chance of entry.
Such circumstances should be mentioned in the report of the UCAS referee.
If you are in any doubt regarding the acceptability of your qualifications you should not hesitate to contact the faculty for advice.
Mature Students
Details about the relaxed entrance requirements for candidates aged 21 or over are given in the admissions section of the prospectus but all such candidates should contact the faculty at an early date to obtain information about the subjects and grades they require to achieve for entry.
Graduates
A number of places in the faculty are taken up each year by students who are already, or are about to become, graduates in other disciplines.
Competition is keen and a good honours degree or meritorious performance in an ordinary degree is normally required.
As explained above, such students can usually complete the LLB ordinary programme within two years but, as they are not entitled to an SOED or LEA grant for this period, they must ensure that they have sufficient financial resources to cover the cost of their studies.
Diploma in Legal Practice
All students intending to enter the legal profession in Scotland must take, in addition to their law degree, the one year Diploma in Legal Practice at a Scottish university.
This provides systematic instruction in the practice of law in preparation for further training in a law office.
Possession of the ‘professional’ law subjects mentioned earlier is a prerequisite for entry to the Diploma.
There is, however, no automatic right of entry to the Diploma and application for admission is normally made during the final year of a student's degree course.
English Law
English law differs from Scots law in a number of important respects.
The needs of applicants who are contemplating legal practice in England and Wales will generally be better met by studying in a university or college south of the border.
But applicants from England who are contemplating other careers, such as banking, industry or the civil service, will not be disadvantaged by having taken an LLB degree in Scotland rather than England.
Further Queries
Before UCAS forms are lodged, any applicant, parent or teacher is very welcome to write or to make an appointment with either the Associate Dean or the Faculty Officer at the Faculty Office in order to resolve any questions or difficulties.
MEDICINE
Medicine has been taught in Edinburgh since the early sixteenth century.
The establishment of the Faculty of Medicine in 1727 was the culmination of three earlier events.
The formation of the Incorporation of Surgeons and Barber Surgeons (1505) which later became the Royal College of Surgeons, the foundation of the Royal College of Physicians (1681) and the foundation of the University in 1583.
The international fame of Edinburgh as a centre of medical education grew from the large number of outstanding individuals who either studied or taught here.
To mention only two, Joseph Lister was the first to practise antiseptic surgery and Sir James Young Simpson discovered chloroform anaesthesia.
Edinburgh is also noted for having the oldest student medical society in the United Kingdom, the Royal Medical Society.
What Degrees are offered
MBChB Degrees — Five-Year Course (A100)
The course is divided into three phases.
Phase I occupies the first two years which are divided into six normal academic terms.
The objective is to provide the student with a basic knowledge of normal human biology with aspects relevant to clinical medicine.
The subjects taught in this Phase are listed in the Table.
A special feature of the Phase is the Clinical Correlation course which occupies six terms and illustrates the application of material in Phase I to a variety of clinical situations.
Phase II occupies the third year and consists of three normal academic terms.
It provides a single coordinated course whose objective is to introduce the various clinical subjects that will be studied again in greater depth in Phase III.
Phase III occupies 96 weeks in the fourth and fifth years, commencing in July.
There are three holiday periods of two weeks each.
The objective of the Phase is to enable the student to expand the skills and knowledge gained in the earlier phases and to study particular disorders in greater depth their aetiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, management and prognosis.
Elective Period An important feature of Phase III is the 16 week Elective Period during which students  can undertake approved work in Edinburgh, or elsewhere in the UK, or abroad.
The faculty attaches considerable importance to this opportunity for the student to obtain special experience in a chosen area.
It is an introduction to the lifelong responsibility for continuing study and education borne by all members of the medical profession.
MBChB Degrees — Six-Year Course (A104)
The six-year course (intended principally for non-Science pupils at school) is provided for well-qualified students who lack the requisite subjects for entry to the five-year course (see the Table of Admissions Requirements).
The course commences with a Premedical year of studies taking the same course as is offered to the first year Biological Sciences students.
These students then proceed to the five-year course outlined in the Table.
BSc (Medical Sciences) Honours Degree
Selected students can interrupt their medical studies for a year at the end of year 2, 3, 4 or 5 and take a BSc (Medical Sciences) honours degree.
The course consists of one year's advanced study in one of the following honours schools: Anatomy, Biochemistry, Human Genetics, Immunology, Medical Microbiology, Neuroscience, Parasitology & Entomology, Pathology, Pharmacology, Physiology and Psychology.
Teaching Facilities
The faculty is based mainly at the Medical School within the central area of the University and thus close to the centre of the city.
Most of the preclinical teaching is within the Medical School.
Edinburgh is well provided with clinical teaching hospitals.
The Royal Infirmary, adjacent to the Medical School, and the Western General Hospital are the main teaching facilities, in addition to several other hospitals within the city.
Other hospitals in the Lothian and Fife Regions and elsewhere take clinical students, thus increasing the student's range of opportunities for experience.
Most teaching is carried out using small groups, especially during Phase III where most clinical instruction is with 4–5 other students.
Admissions Procedure
Minimum Requirements All candidates must apply through the UCAS and should possess the General Entrance Requirement of the University.
All applicants who possess the minimum entrance requirements for the MBChB degrees course will be considered.
Number of Places.
There are 195 places overall for the 5 and 6-year courses.
Apply for only one course, A100 or A104.
If you are uncertain which, enter A100 and the Admissions Office will choose the appropriate course.
Age on Entry The minimum age is 17 years and six months on 30 September of the proposed year of entry.
Time of Submission The time of submission of the application within the date set by the UCAS is not important; all candidates are given equal consideration.
Number of Entries on UCAS Form Applicants are advised that no more than five choices from the possible eight available should be used for medical courses.
An applicant who is unable to gain an offer from five choices is unlikely to be successful using a large number of choices.
The remaining choices, if the applicant wishes, may be used for alternative courses without prejudice to their commitment to medicine
Selection Process Each application is considered on its merits with a view to assessing fairly whether the applicant will make a good doctor.
In this, academic qualifications obviously play a large part, but close attention is given also to the applicant's personality and non-academic interests and attainments based on information supplied by the candidate and by the confidential referee.
There is no discrimination for or against any candidate on the basis of sex, ethnic origin, social class, home location or whether they have a medical background.
No type of school has an advantage over another.
Interviews Most candidates are not interviewed, but a candidate may be invited to attend for interview if the Admissions Committee feels it would be particularly helpful.
Overseas applicants will not be called for interview.
All graduate and mature applicants will be interviewed before an offer is made.
Offers Only a small number of offers are made before late February.
When all applicants who have met or are predicted to meet the conditions stated in the table of course requirements have had their UCAS form seen by the selectors, offers will be made to the rest of the applicants.
Subject to availability, those being made offers are invited to an Open Day during the Spring Term.
Because the faculty receives an excess of applications over places available, having the grades listed in the table of course requirements does not mean that a place will necessarily be offered.
Special Classes of Applicant
The majority of entrants are school-leavers from the United Kingdom.
The remainder come from the following four categories:
1.
Overseas Applicants Because the number of well-qualified UK applicants greatly exceeds the places available, it is regretted that the Faculty of Medicine is no longer in a position to consider applications from candidates from countries that have adequate medical training facilities.
Competition for the few places available is keen and a high academic standard is required.
Students accepted for admission from overseas countries must give a satisfactory guarantee that they will have sufficient funds to cover fees and maintenance for each year of the course.
Please read carefully the definition of an overseas student in the UCAS handbook.
See also general information about overseas students in this Prospectus.
2.
Graduate Applicants A small number of places is available for graduates in other disciplines.
Competition is keen and a first or upper second class honours degree is required together with evidence of satisfactory financial arrangements.
Applications must be made through the UCAS.
3.
Mature Applicants No special concessions are made to mature applicants.
In view of the competition for places, all applicants are required to have covered the same basic entrance requirements.
The only relaxation in such cases must be that the Admissions Committee will not insist on the passes having been attained by the date the applicant left school.
The Admissions Committee regrets that it cannot consider  SCOTEC, SCOTBEC and other National Certificates and Diplomas, nor nursing qualifications nor Open University credits as alternatives for all or part of the Minimum Entrance Requirements.
4.
Applicants for the Clinical Course Students from the Universities of Cambridge, Oxford and St Andrews reading for medical science degrees who have completed the appropriate parts of their course may be admitted to Phase II in order to complete their medical studies.
Initial enquiries should be made to the Faculty of Medicine Office.
Medical students from other Medical Schools cannot be considered unless there are extenuating reasons.
Medical Registration
Those medical graduates who intend to practise in the UK become provisionally registered with the General Medical Council after graduation.
Thereafter, they are required to work in recognised resident House Officer posts at one or more approved hospitals for at least twelve months.
Upon satisfactory completion of this preregistration year, the graduate becomes fully registered by the General Medical Council.
Postgraduate Training
By the time of registration, graduates will know in which area of medicine they wish to specialise.
If it is in one of the basic sciences, then graduates normally carry out research in an appropriate university department leading to the award of PhD degree.
If it is in one of the clinical subjects, graduates normally take Senior House Officer posts and prepare for examinations set by the relevant Royal College or faculty.
Further Information
Enquiries for further information should be addressed to Admissions Office, Faculty of Medicine Office, Medical School, Teviot Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG.
Tel. 031 650 3187.
Fax 031 650 6525.
Intending applicants (or their parents) are always welcome to visit the Medical School or talk to an Admissions Officer to resolve any questions or difficulties.
Appointments may be made by letter or telephone.
MUSIC
The Faculty of Music owes its existence to General John Reid, soldier in George III's army, music lover, amateur composer and benefactor.
He passed ‘the pleasantest part of his youth’ as a student at Edinburgh University — or so he declared in his will — and it was as a result of his generous bequest that the Faculty of Music was founded.
The faculty, which is conveniently situated in the central University area, has excellent facilities and resources, including its own library, listening rooms, computer room, electronic studio, concert halls and practice studios; and a teaching staff comprising composers, performers, historians and theorists.
The course for the degree of BMus is broadly based and former students are to be found in all walks of musical life in broadcasting, recording, publishing and musical administration, as teachers, writers, performers, composers, conductors and instrument makers.
Some former students have entered other professions such as librarianship or arts administration.
The degree of BMus can also be taken in Musical Technology.
The course will bring together scientific and artistic approaches to the academic discipline of music and will be run in collaboration with the Department of Physics.
Admission
Details of the BMus admission procedure and of University and faculty entry requirements may be found in the Admissions section.
Beyond satisfying those requirements no specific grouping of subjects is stipulated.
All candidates are required to attend for interview and practical tests at some mutually convenient time.
For overseas students who are unable to attend for interview in Edinburgh, arrangements will be made for specimens of work to be submitted before a decision on admission is taken.
A secure keyboard technique is essential, and all students, even those for whom piano is second instrument, should have reached a standard equivalent to Grade VII of the Associated Board examinations.
Admission procedures for the BMus in Musical Technology are also noted in the Admissions section: students should have reached a standard equivalent to Grade VII of the Associated Board examinations in any recognised instrument.
Faculty also welcomes enquiries from overseas students who wish to attend courses on a non-graduating basis.
Enquiries about entrance or curriculum should be addressed to The Faculty Officer, Faculty of Music, Alison House, Nicolson Square, Edinburgh EH8 9DF.
Interviews may be arranged with the Director of Studies.
Curriculum
The degree of BMus requires three years of study, or four years if a student reads for honours.
Exceptionally honours may be taken in three years.
Admission to the two honours years is dependent on the standard achieved in the first two years, during which the curriculum is broadly divided between compositional, historical and practical studies.
Instrumental performance is examined at the end of second year.
The third and honours years offer a wide range of subjects grouped under four headings — Compositional Studies; Historical Studies; Performance Studies; Scientific and Theoretical Studies — from which, subject to certain constraints, students select subjects of their choice.
In Final Honours year students may also make a submission which can take the form of compositions, or a dissertation, or an edition, or a portfolio of practical work, or a recital.
As well as pursuing these formal curriculum studies, students are required to develop the practical musical skills with which they enter the course, and to receive regular lessons in at least their principal instrument.
Here the faculty is able to draw on the wide range of professional musicians who reside in Edinburgh or  visit regularly.
All students are urged to pursue these performing studies as far as the acquisition of a Teacher's Diploma of one of the recognised colleges of music and, in suitable cases, to proceed to a Performer's Diploma.
There are no compulsory outside subjects for the degree but students may, at the discretion of the Director of Studies, attend classes of their choice in other faculties.
The School of Scottish Studies in the Faculty of Arts affords opportunities for work not only on Scottish music but in all fields of ethnomusicology; there is a sound archive containing material from all over the world.
Music for Students in other Faculties (see Arts Faculty Section)
The Faculty of Music offers courses in History of Music to students from other faculties who, while they have no professional musical ambitions, would welcome the opportunity to become more informed about the subject.
No preliminary academic qualification in Music is necessary, though it is an advantage to have some practical experience of the subject at however modest a level.
Some interest in listening to music on record, or better still in the concert hall, is pre-supposed.
Within the course, certain more advanced options are available for those who have a good ‘H’ or ‘A’pass in Music.
History of Music 1: a general introduction to the subject, covering the social and religious functions of music in Western civilisation and the history of musical instruments.
A wide range of music is studied from the Middle Ages to Beethoven.
History of Music 2: Western art music in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
German Romanticism, French music, Nationalism, Modernism and Post-Modernism are the chief topics.
History of Music 3& 4: A wide range of options from the 3rd BMus syllabus is available at this level.
Scholarships
A number of scholarships are available at entrance, undergraduate and postgraduate level.
An entrance scholarship of £200 per annum tenable for three years is awarded each year on the basis of a selection examination; the Mackey Entrance Scholarship for pianists is open for award every third or fourth year at the value of £200 per annum for three years, as is the James Smart Entrance Scholarship for organists.
A Sir Thomas Beecham Scholarship of £200 per annum for three or four years is also open to instrumental performers.
Undergraduate scholarships of the value of approximately £200 are open for award to students, usually in the summer vacation of their second year of study, for travel abroad directed towards the enlargement of their experience of music.
At postgraduate level the Bucher and Fraser Scholarships provide opportunities for further research or for advanced studies in composition or performance.
These scholarships  have enabled graduates to pursue such diverse studies as conducting and composition in Rome, piano in Vienna, and harpsichord in Amsterdam.
An Organ Prize (value £400) is open to all full-time students in the Faculty of Music.
Full details of scholarships are given in the University Awards Programme .
Musical Activities
There are many clubs and societies within the University which afford students and staff opportunities to perform in every kind of vocal and instrumental music.
Regular choral and orchestral performances are given by the Edinburgh University Musical Society (EUMS).
The Chamber Choir and the Renaissance Singers provide for those interested in joining smaller choirs.
The University Opera Club performs notable pieces outside the standard repertory and the Savoy Opera Club presents a Gilbert and Sullivan opera each year.
Chamber music of every kind is the concern of the University Chamber Music Club.
There are a number of concerts during the session devoted to the performance of students' compositions.
Information about all these activities may be obtained from the Concert Secretary at the Faculty of Music Offices.
Concerts
The University promotes an extensive series of lunchtime concerts and organ recitals in the Reid and McEwan Halls and in St Cecilia's Hall.
The programmes are wide-ranging and involve visiting and local professional musicians and students.
There are occasional evening concerts.
Concerts in St Cecilia's Hall are devoted to classical and pre-classical music performed on authentic instruments from the Russell Collection.
Details of all these concerts appear in the brochure ‘Edinburgh University Concerts’ which is published each year in September and December.
The University also has close connections with the Edinburgh Quartet, who appear regularly in the lunchtime concert series and are also involved in student workshop sessions.
Music in the City
Edinburgh is not only the home of the most internationally celebrated of British music festivals; throughout the more wintry months of the academic year, too, it offers a variety of excellent music-making for every taste.
The Royal Scottish National Orchestra gives weekly concerts in the Usher Hall; Scottish Opera comes to Edinburgh regularly and there are performances by the Scottish Ensemble, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, the Scottish Early Music Consort and other groups, many of these in the Queen's Hall, just a few minutes' walk from the central University area.
There are several flourishing amateur choral and orchestral societies including the Edinburgh Symphony Orchestra, the Meadows Orchestra, and the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union, which are always interested in gaining new members.
Some students have also become members of the choir of St Mary's Cathedral (Episcopal) and a number of choral scholarships are available.
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
The Faculty of Science and Engineering is one of the largest single science faculties in the country.
It is, therefore, able to offer a very wide range of courses in Science and Engineering.
Most degree courses have very flexible structures and allow students to include subjects of special interest to them from the large selection available in the University.
This flexibility extends to the choice of degree and it is possible in some cases to delay the final decision until the end of the third year.
There are also many joint degrees available where departments work together to train graduates who will be well equipped to face a rapidly changing job market.
A Science or Engineering degree from the University of Edinburgh opens the door to a large number of employment opportunities, and many courses lead directly to professional qualifications.
All can lead to research and higher degree work.
A wide range of careers in Science and Engineering are available in industry, government and education although a Science or Engineering degree can lead to a career in almost any area.
There continues to be a shortage of graduates in many fields and our students find that they are greatly sought after.
The reputation of the University of Edinburgh in Science and Engineering is such that industry is keen to collaborate with us in teaching as well as research.
Support has frequently been provided in the form of specialised equipment and, in some subjects, visiting staff contribute to course teaching to provide an up-to-date industrial dimension.
Admission
Entrants to the University must satisfy the General Entrance Requirement.
In addition, applicants to the faculty must have passes in the subjects specified for each degree course.
Detailed information about these subjects and the procedure for admissions is given in the section ‘Applying to Edinburgh’.
This faculty gives equal consideration to all applications received, irrespective of whether an asterisk has been placed against Edinburgh on the UCAS form.
Applicants are not normally called for interview, but those given offers for our courses are invited to visit the relevant Department or School.
The distinction between ordinary and honours students is normally not made until the third year.
Consequently, there is no separate UCAS code for the ordinary degree.
Applicants should apply through UCAS under the appropriate honours degree code number.
The faculty welcomes applications from mature students.
Enquiries about admission are welcome and should be addressed to Faculty of Science and Engineering Office — Undergraduate Section, The University of Edinburgh, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JY.
Tel 031–650 5755/5756/5739.
Deferred Entry and Sponsorship
The faculty appreciates that in certain circumstances a year between school and university, spent in employment or another worthwhile activity, may be advantageous.
If you are considering applying for deferred entry, you should discuss this possibility with your head teacher and should also write to the Faculty of Science and Engineering Office, stating the course for which you intend to apply and your reasons for seeking deferment.
Sponsorship is not a prerequisite for any of our courses but we are happy for students to arrange sponsorship if they wish to do so.
You should contact relevant industrial organisations if you wish to seek sponsorship for your university course.
The Degrees of Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Engineering
The degrees awarded are the BSc and the BEng.
Either degree can be taken with honours in a single subject, eg BSc(Hons) Molecular Biology or BEng(Hons) Electrical  Engineering, or with honours in two subjects jointly, eg BSc(Hons) Computer Science and Mathematics, and BEng(Hons) Electronics and Physics.
The normal duration of these degree courses is four years.
Applicants holding GCE A-level passes of sufficiently high standard in appropriate subjects may be offered exemption from all or part of the first year of most honours degree courses; indeed such opportunities may also be available to applicants offering other qualifications.
Students taking a single subject degree course, study their degree subject throughout all four years and study other supporting subjects in addition during the earlier years.
Three subject courses are taken in the first year, two or three in the second and one or two in the third to make seven in all.
The fourth, or final, or honours year is devoted to the degree subject.
A degree course scheme for honours in Physics is typical:
1.
Physics 1 Mathematics 1 A third subject
2.
Physics 2 Mathematics 2 A third subject
3.
Physics 3
4.
Physics 4
Similarly, a joint degree course in which two subjects are studied, consists of eight courses in all.
The following is a typical arrangement:
1.
Computer Science 1 Mathematics 1 Engineering 1
2.
Computer Science 2 Mathematics 2 Electrical Engineering 2
3.
Computer Science and Electronics 3
4.
Computer Science and Electronics 4
Admission to the fourth year of an honours course depends on performance in previous (usually third year) courses.
The BSc or the BEng can also be taken as an ordinary degree after three years.
Selection of Degree
The choice of the most appropriate and satisfying degree course can be a perplexing one, but the University is aware of this and our degree course structures allow students to keep options open until the end of first year or later.
As explained in the UCAS handbook, applicants are required to name the course or courses for which they are applying.
Many closely related subjects are grouped together, and an application for a course in any group ensures consideration also for the other courses in the same group.
Where a course appears under two groups, one application to either group is all that is required.
The groups are identified in the list of degree course requirements.
Students' choices are usually based on their knowledge of, and competence in, science subjects studied at school, notably mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology.
This choice indicates the general direction of their interests, but it must be backed by the appropriate mathematical ability.
The main honours degrees are listed below, grouped roughly according to the amount of mathematics required throughout the course.
Special mathematical ability : Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics; Mathematics; Computer Science and Mathematics; Computer Science and Statistics; Mathematics and Business Studies; Mathematics and Statistics; Mathematical Physics; Mathematics and Physics.
Competence in mathematics and certain aspects can demand special aptitude : Physics; Computational Physics; Computer Science and Physics; Electronics and Physics; Geophysics; Astrophysics; Engineering (Chemical; Civil; Electronics and Electrical; Microelectronics; Mechanical); Chemical Physics; Chemistry; Computer Science; Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science; Computer Science with Management Science.
Less emphasis on mathematics but Mathematics may be included in the first-year curriculum : Geology; Geography.
An O grade (or Credit Level of Standard grade) or O/GCSE in Mathematics at least, but an initial standard above this is most desirable : Agriculture; Agricultural Science; Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Economy; Biological Sciences; Ecological Science; Forestry; Environmental Chemistry; Environmental Geoscience; Environmental Archaeology; and Psychology.
Choice of Subjects
Each degree course involves the study of a number of different subjects chosen from the wide range offered by the faculty.
The courses have to be chosen to suit each student's interests and ability, and, perhaps, with a view to keeping degree options open.
Assistance in making these choices is given by the Director of Studies to whom each student is assigned on joining the University.
The teaching methods employed vary across thefaculty, and from year to year within individual subjects, but, generally, the early years are based on a pattern of lectures, small group tutorials, and laboratory work.
Certain subjects use projects and field work as an essential part of their teaching.
In the later years, teaching generally becomes less formal.
More time is spent on project work, and in individual contact with staff.
Most degree courses have certain subjects specified as essential, but usually some choice is allowed.
Students may take a wide variety of subjects both from within and outwith the faculty this is one of the ways in which options can be kept open.
Many of the subjects available for study are not taught in school, and consequently may be unfamiliar.
These, and other areas, are described more fully in the supplementary material which is available from most departments on request.
Intending applicants who wish to visit a particular department will be made welcome.
Contact should be established in the first instance through the Schools Liaison Officer or the Faculty of Science and Engineering whose addresses are given at the back of this prospectus.
Those living within reach of Edinburgh should certainly take advantage of the annual University Open Day.
They can then seek advice on courses, career prospects, etc, from staff of the different departments.
Astronomy and Astrophysics
Modern astrophysics studies the formation, structure and evolution of stars and galaxies and of the Universe itself.
It applies to environments covering the extremes of temperature and density the results of many branches of physics from the special and general theories of relativity and plasma physics to nuclear reactions and elementary particle physics.
Observational astronomy involves much advanced technology such as solid state detectors, computer controlled instrumentation, and image processing techniques, and covers the whole electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays to radio waves.
Astrophysics graduates find jobs not only in government and university observatories, but also in most fields of industry and applied research where a physics degree would be appropriate.
The BSc course in Astrophysics runs in conjunction with the BSc course in Physics and the first two years are essentially the same for both.
In the third and fourth years, the work is divided roughly equally between Astronomy and Physics.
Provisionally an MPhys (Astrophys) is proposed, normally taking five years.
For further details, see Physics entry.
Honours and MPhys courses include cosmology, stellar astronomy and astronomical techniques.
Introductory astronomy courses can be taken as outside subjects for various honours degrees.
The Department of Astronomy has its own stellar, solar and radio telescopes, measuring machines and microcomputers, but is housed within the Royal Obser-vatory Edinburgh which is an SERC establishment responsible for several major national research facilities, including the 3.8-metre infrared telescope and the 15-metre James Clerk Maxwell telescope, in Hawaii.
The School of Biology
The School of Biology is an association of several departments in Science and Medical Faculties, together with Psychology which collaborate to provide courses leading to honours degrees in Biological Sciences, Agriculture and Ecological Science.
Many course combinations are possible during the first three years, facilitating transfer between these three streams.
Within each there are many honours degree specialisations, and, although courses become progressively more specialised, students defer a final choice about their ultimate subject of study until the end of their third year.
Students are encouraged to take a broad curriculum in first year, choosing up to 6 courses from the following: Origin and Diversity of Life; Quantitative Biology; Physics in the Life Sciences; Life Science; Human Population Biology; Molecules and Cells; Biological and Economic Systems; and Chemistry for the Life Sciences (two courses).
Choice is based on students' background and interests, and, in some cases, alternative courses may be taken.
Examples are Industrial Management (normally taken by Agriculture students in place of Chemistry for the Life Sciences), Psychology, Geology or Geography.
In second year, students take 6 out of 16 biological courses.
These cover the whole range of biology, with topics from agriculture, resource economics, ecology and the physical environment, animal and plant biology, psychology, biochemistry and genetics.
There are also courses in quantitative methods and chemistry, and it is possible to broaden the curriculum by taking non-biological courses in, for example, the history, philosophy or practice of science.
Specialisation becomes more pronounced in the third year.
Four courses are picked from 28 on offer.
It is possible to pick courses in rather closely related areas or to diversify, depending on the student's inclination.
The result is that most students can choose between two or three honours specialisations in the final year.
Within Biological Sciences there is considerable emphasis on laboratory skills and research, combined with tutorial and seminar work, in the final year.
In addition, General Honours courses are offered, in which students can combine study of biology with another subject to an advanced level, or can combine biological courses to make a joint honours degree.
Third-year courses include material on business management and the management and utilisation of natural resources.
Such courses are open to Biological Sciences students as well as to students of Agriculture and Ecological Science.
Students in these latter two areas can also combine their courses with study of environmental science, by taking special courses in second year and undertaking project work in environmental studies.
Entrance to courses in the School of Biology is suitable for students who have taken either SCE Higher grade examinations or GCE A-Levels.
Biology and Chemistry are the most appropriate subjects, but these two sciences are not obligatory for entrance, nor are applicants who offer them given preference.
An introductory course is provided for students who have not previously studied Biology at these levels.
We also encourage applications from students with European or International Baccalaureates or other examinations comparable to SCE Higher grade, and from mature students with appropriate qualifications.
Applications should be made for Biological Sciences, Agriculture or Ecological Science through UCAS, but only for one specialisation within an area.
Consideration for admission does not depend on the candidate's likely specialisation since flexibility is preserved until a late stage in the course.
Biological Sciences
Within Biological Sciences there are twelve single honours degree specialisations.
In each case the honours subject occupies the whole of the final year with a research project as a major component.
Students are helped to appreciate current research controversies in their subject, and, through their own experience of research, learn to appraise such topics critically.
Experience in the laboratory or in the field gives those who do not intend to undertake research as a career the opportunity to learn how their subject has progressed through experiment.
There is a steady demand for biological graduates in a variety of interesting careers.
Many enter research, especially in the pharmaceutical, agricultural and food industries, depending on their specialisation and interest, and a common route for doing this is a higher degree, obtained either at Edinburgh or at another university in Britain or abroad.
Biology graduates are also well qualified for employment in the newer biotechnology-based industries.
There are also openings in hospitals, government and local authority laboratories, particularly in areas related to medical research.
Further openings are to be found in teaching at various levels and, in addition, biologists are well qualified to take up further training in areas such as production management and scientific information services.
Biochemistry
Biochemistry is the study of living systems at the molecular level.
Biochemists are therefore interested in the compounds that make up cells and organisms, and how they are formed and can interact.
This involves studying the structure and function of macromolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates, as well as experiments on the properties of biological systems varying in complexity from cell extracts to whole organisms.
These experiments involve many different techniques, chemical, physical, cell biological, and immunological, as well as data analysis with computers.
Biochemists therefore need a good background in many aspects of science.
In the first two years, students take courses in molecular, cell, and organism biology, together with some other subjects including Chemistry.
In the third year, they take at least one course specifically in Biochemistry, together with others from a wide range including Pharmacology, Physiology, Molecular Biology, Genetics, Immunology, and Microbiology.
Botany
Botany today comprises a multi-disciplinary approach to all aspects of plant science.
The latest technology is applied to major problems fundamental to our understanding and utilisation of plants how plants grow and develop; how they respond to and interact with their environment; how they evolve and diversify.
Answers to these problems are of great importance to man's survival and well-being.
Subjects as diverse as tumour growth, gene structure, adaptive radiation in grasses, cell wall composition and the production of compounds of economic importance by plant tissue cultures are some of the topics of current research.
Most types of plant receive attention in the general teaching programme.
In the third and fourth years, optional courses of increasing specialisation cover topics ranging from the molecular and cellular to the whole plant and its physiology, ecology and evolution.
Genetics
Genetics is the study of biological variation and its inheritance, and hence of the fundamental control mechanisms of living systems.
It has a central place in biology and interconnects with many disciplines, such as biochemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, botany and zoology.
There are applications of genetics from the molecular to the quantitative level in medicine and agriculture.
Genetics is taught as part of several first- and second-year courses.
Basic genetic analysis and chromosome theory are dealt with in the first year, while biochemical, molecular and physiological aspects of gene action are emphasised in the second year.
Two courses spanning a broad area of genetics are available in third year, while individual topics are studied in depth in fourth year.
Immunology
The immune system consists of specialised cells and macromolecules which defend the body against infection through their ability to recognise ‘foreign-ness’ and to respond to the presence of micro-organisms or parasites.
Its study gives an insight into mechanisms of cellular recognition and of cell growth and differentiation as well as providing, through antibody technology, powerful tools for diagnosis and research.
A specialised course in Immunology in the third year builds on earlier courses in cell and molecular biology, and leads to an honours specialisation in the fourth year.
Medical Microbiology
Medical microbiology is concerned with the interactions between micro-organisms and their hosts; for example, the explanations in biological and molecular terms of infectious processes and resultant host tissue damage, or of the action of antibiotics and antiviral agents, and the emergence of resistant organisms.
Much is being discovered about the nature of bacteria and viruses, and the physiology of cells, leading to a better understanding of the control of host cell function and to development of more effective chemotherapy.
Many course combinations in the first two years provide a background for Medical Microbiology in third and fourth years.
In the third year, three courses cover the fundamental aspects of microbiology, immunology and virology, while fourth-year study covers molecular aspects of infection and immunity, with major emphasis on a research project.
Microbiology
The world abounds with a great diversity of micro-organisms adapted to many different habitats.
Many are of medical, industrial, agricultural or environmental importance.
Microbiology students learn about the structure, physiology, genetics and other properties of the main groups of micro-organisms, especially bacteria, viruses and fungi.
A small amount of microbiology is taught in first- and second-year courses.
Two third-year courses then cover the fundamentals of microbiology and virology in one course and aspects of applied microbiology and biochemistry in another.
These courses are taught jointly with Medical Microbiology and Biochemistry respectively.
In fourth year, several topics in microbial genetics, physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology are covered in depth at theoretical and practical levels in the  Microbiology honours course and students then apply this background in a research project.
Molecular Biology
Molecular Biology is the study of biological systems at the molecular level.
As a relatively young but expanding discipline it is currently making, principally through the techniques of genetic engineering, an increasing contribution to medicine, agriculture and industry.
Third-year courses are designed to illustrate the ways in which combined genetic and in vitro molecular approaches have led to the rapid growth of our understanding of many fundamental biological and cellular processes.
In the fourth year a number of topics of current interest are studied in detail, taking the student to the leading edge of current research.
Students are introduced to the techniques that are important to genetic and molecular studies of both micro-organisms and a number of more complex higher systems, including molecular cloning and genetic manipulation.
Each student then has the opportunity to apply this experience in an individual research project supervised by a member of staff.
Neuroscience
Neuroscience, the science of the nervous system, is about what the brain does and how it works.
Study of the brain ranges from anatomical investigations of neural circuitry through to clinical work on patients with various types of cerebral pathology.
Study of the physiology and pharmacology and neurons is enriched by work at a systems level about how networks of brain cells interact to control behaviour and by the insights and techniques of molecular and cellular biology.
The honours year course builds on courses in physiology, pharmacology or a third-year course on brain and behaviour, but many students turn to neuroscience having done biochemistry, zoology or psychology as third-year options.
It consists of a series of short modules through the year, with students having considerable choice and the opportunity to complete a research dissertation.
Pharmacology
Pharmacology is the study of the interaction of drugs and living organisms.
Drugs are chemicals which alter the level of physiological activity of living tissue such as the kidney, heart, brain, muscle, or endocrine glands, or of worms, bacteria and other organisms.
Some drugs are useful agents in the treatment of disease in man and animals but some may also produce undesirable effects.
Other drugs find application as insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides.
Many chemicals employed in industry have little therapeutic usefulness but may produce poisoning in man when they are used.
Investigations of the way in which drugs act draw on a knowledge of physiological and biochemical processes.
The relation of pharmacological activity to chemical structure gives biology students an opportunity to make use of their early training in chemistry and physics.
Students studying for the degree in Pharmacology take general Biology courses including Mammalian Physiology with Pharmacology in the second year.
In the third year they take Pharmacology with three other courses, one of which should be Physiology.
The final year is entirely spent on the study of Pharmacology.
Physiology
Physiology is the study of how living things work, grow and reproduce.
At one level physiologists study how cells maintain their integrity and respond to stimuli and changes in their environment.
At another they study how cell functions are integrated in tissues, organs or complete animals and how information, vital for co-ordination, is sent from one cell or group of cells to another by chemical and electrical signals.
A growing field of interest is how function develops during the growth of an animal from a single cell after fertilisation to the adult stage.
In Edinburgh, our courses concentrate on human and mammalian physiology though we draw on examples from other animals to illustrate physiological principles.
Students take their first physiology courses  in the second year and a further course in the third year.
The fourth-year course reflects the research interests of the department.
We are currently working on the regulation of breathing, the control of movement, ion movements across heart, muscle and blood cell membranes, the developing nervous system, hormone release and lifetime changes in the reproductive system.
Teaching is in small groups with students carrying out short research projects in the laboratories of staff members.
Career prospects for physiology graduates are good.
Opportunities exist in University departments and research institutes, in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries and medicine.
Psychology
Psychology has close links with Social Sciences and with Natural and Biological Sciences.
Its main aim is to understand the behaviour of the individuals in society.
While psychology is mainly concerned with ordinary people, the course also covers aspects of psychological disorder, including brain damage, genetic defects, and mental illness.
Applications of psychology are also taught.
In the first three years, teaching is provided at introductory, intermediate, and advanced levels across the breadth of the discipline social, developmental, biological, comparative, and applied psychology, plus the psychology of perception, action, cognition and individual differences.
In the fourth year, there is a wide range of options in courses closely related to contemporary research issues in psychology.
Students complete a research-based project in fourth year under individual staff supervision.
The use of computers is taught and encouraged.
Attractive subject combinations with psychology are pharmacology, physiology and behavioural neuroscience.
Job prospects are good.
Psychologists are employed in hospitals, universities, schools, research institutes, government departments, and industry.
Psychology is normally taught as part of a Biological Sciences degree programme, but there is also a joint degree with Artificial Intelligence.
Entrants to Psychology in the Faculty of Science and Engineering can generally transfer to other Biological Sciences subjects, though the reverse transfer is not always possible.
Zoology
Zoology ranges from the study of molecules to that of animal communities.
It provides a good training for any biologist because it looks at living organisms from many different viewpoints.
In second year, the zoology course reviews some of the major animal groups, their behaviour and ecology.
In third year, there are courses covering animal physiology, evolution, population ecology, behaviour and parasitology.
In fourth year, seminars and discussions cover special topics and students spend about one half of their time on a research project.
Ecological Science and Forestry
Ecology is the scientific study of organisms in relation to the physical and biological environment.
Our concern is particularly with the processes which drive and characterise those relationships.
The degree course has two main aims: first, to promote this study so that the relationships between organisms and their environment are better understood and, second, to apply the principles of ecological science to the management of forests, water, wildlife and the environment generally.
Graduates find employment as forest and other resource managers, in rural planning, conservation and ecology, but all have a common interest in ecological science and its application to the wise use of renewable resources.
The degree course concentrates on the integration of biology, environmental sciences and resources management, rather than on human sociology.
After first year, the ecology courses are complemented by an introduction to global environmental processes, soil, climate, water, and the economics of resource management.
This provides the basis in third    year for the ecology of biological production systems such as forestry, upland grazing and freshwater fisheries and wildlife conservation.
In fourth year, students take a number of specialist options and also undertake a major piece of original research.
During the vacations each year there are obligatory field courses.
Students may have to contribute to the cost of these (up to £100 per year).
Honours in Ecological Science are currently awarded in one of six schools (Ecology; Forestry; Resource Management; Wildlife and Fisheries Management; Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Economy; Environmental Science).
Agriculture
Agriculture is an industry in which the biological sciences and the principles of economics are applied to the production of food and industrial raw materials.
Agriculture includes a wide range of service and support industries in addition to conventional farming.
Examples include businesses concerned with the development, manufacture and distribution of agricultural machinery, fertilisers, agro-chemicals, seeds, animal feeds and veterinary products.
Additionally, there are many organisations involved in the processing and marketing of livestock products, cereals, other cash crops, and horticultural products.
Supporting this vital basic industry there is an agricultural advisory and development service staffed predominantly by graduates, and an extensive and substantial agricultural programme financed by central government and by individual companies.
Agriculture has learned to respond quickly to technical advances and has achieved greater increases in productivity over the last 25 years than any other industry.
Graduates are active both in creating innovative opportunities to enhance further agricultural efficiency and in applying scientific findings to production practice.
Agricultural resource management is now an important aspect of the industry as it is becoming increasingly necessary to place primary agricultural production within the context of environmental and market constraints.
Good career prospects exist in agriculture, animal science, crop science, forestry and economics.
Over 95 per cent of graduates in agriculture obtain employment before the end of the year in which they graduate and most students have offers of jobs before taking their final exams.
Because agriculture is such a basic industry throughout the world, good opportunities exist for agricultural posts overseas and the Third World in particular has an unsatisfied demand for graduates, once they have acquired the necessary experience or postgraduate qualifications in an appropriate field of tropical agriculture.
The agriculture courses available at Edinburgh are designed to provide maximum flexibility and to allow the student to select a degree course best suited to career interests.
The honours BSc degree is offered in Agriculture, Agricultural Science (Animal Science; Crop and Soil Sciences; Agricultural Microbiology; Environmental Science), and Agricultural Economics.
A three year ordinary degree in Agriculture is also available.
Undergraduate course work takes place within the environment of the School of Agriculture's research, development and consultancy activities.
The School possesses a number of specialist farms on the Bush Estate, where ten different research institutions share the unique facilities of the Edinburgh Centre of Rural Economy, a 1,000 hectare ‘agricultural science park’ just south of Edinburgh.
Work experience is regarded as beneficial for students of Agriculture and beneficial for those following the Agricultural Science/Economics degree.
Those admitted to Agriculture and cognate subjects are recommended to gain a minimum of 16 weeks varied experience before graduation, and during undergraduate vacations.
Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Economy
Joint honours in Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Economy can be taken as a degree in Agriculture or as a degree in Ecological Science.
The joint degree course provides a general education in rural resource management and focuses on farming and forestry as the principal rural industries and as the centre of attraction in land use planning.
The study of the interaction of these industries with water resources, wildlife conservation, game management, fisheries and recreation gives students a broad perspective on the management of production systems and of the environmental factors on which they depend.
Courses in the first, second and third years are chosen from biological and management sciences, Ecological Science and Agriculture; in the fourth year study units will be taken on rural land management.
Stress is laid on field study, drawing on the School of Agriculture's farms, the forests used in Ecological Science teaching, and several nearby estates, commercial forests and nature reserves.
All Ecological Science vacation field courses are attended.
Chemistry, Chemical Physics, and Environmental Chemistry
Chemistry is concerned with the composition, structure and transformations of matter.
Its scope is enormous, ranging from the borders of biology to those of physics.
It is the fundamental science base on which depends the design and production of materials as diverse as medical compounds (from aspirin to antibiotics), plastics and polymers, synthetic fibres, catalysts, petroleum products, cement, semi-conductors, photographic materials and countless others.
The Chemistry courses in Edinburgh reflect the breadth of the subject and over the four years the topics covered range from the molecules of nature found in biological systems through a wide range of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry to fundamental properties of atoms and molecules.
In the courses due recognition is given, not only to chemical theory, but to the importance of chemistry to research, development and production in industry.
The lectures and tutorials are complemented by extensive laboratory work and in the final year each student undertakes a supervised research project.
Chemistry students in their first year normally take Chemistry with Maths and one other subject which is usually Physics but can be Geology, Engineering or Computer Science.
The breadth of study is maintained in the second year when Chemistry is taken with two other subjects for which there is wide choice including Astronomy, Business Studies, Chemical Pharmacology, Computer Science, Economics, Geology, Industrial Management, Maths, Physics and many others.
The third and fourth (Honours) years are devoted entirely to Chemistry.
The degree in Chemical Physics integrates substantial parts of chemistry and physics.
Industrial problems involving lasers, solid state or quantum electronics and the development of materials to withstand exotic conditions are all interdisciplinary.
This course is designed to produce graduates conversant with the techniques of physics and chemistry and armed with the necessary mathematical skill to work effectively at the chemical/physical interface.
The first two years are therefore spent in acquiring a broad background of Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics the third and fourth years are devoted entirely to Chemical Physics.
The degree course in Environmental Chemistry enables students to acquire an understanding of the bio- and geo-spheres and the abnormalities caused by man.
Graduates have a basic understanding of the workings of modern technological society, with its predominantly chemical basis, and of the environments in which it exists.
In the first year, students normally take Chemistry with either Biology or with Mathematics and Geology or with Mathematics and Physics, and later Chemistry is studied along with courses selected from options such as Chemical Pharmacology, Soil/Climate/Water, Economics, Geography, Geology, Industrial Management, Meteorology, Oceanography.
The fourth year is devoted to Environmental Chemistry.
The new Chemistry with a year in Europe degree  includes study of the chosen language (French, German, Danish or Italian) in the first two years.
The third year is spent abroad at another European university.
Graduates in Chemistry, Chemical Physics and Environmental Chemistry are well qualified to enter careers as scientists involved in research, development, analysis and production not only in the oil, chemical and pharmaceutical industry but also in other manufacturing industries, water authorities, the health service, the scientific civil service and education.
In addition, those who treat their course as ‘education through chemistry’ are able to enter all of the occupations which have significant recruitment at graduate level, eg commerce, finance, teaching and administration.
The School of Engineering and Information Technology
The School consists of the Departments of Chemical, Civil, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering and the Departments of Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive Science and Computer Science.
Courses leading to BEng are offered by the Engineering Departments and by Computer Science.
BSc degree courses are offered by Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science.
A number of joint degree courses are available.
All departments in the School have strong research activities and are involved with industry through collaboration in both teaching and research.
A 5-year MEng degree course in Electronics has been introduced for students who demonstrate their potential eventually to occupy posts of high responsibility in industry.
Entry to the final two years of this course is dependent on performance in the first three years.
First-year Engineering comprises a first half course which is common to all four specialisations and which is followed by a second half in which one or more of the major engineering disciplines are studied in greater depth.
This gives students two advantages.
Firstly, all students can defer their choice of specialisation until the second half of the year.
In many cases the choice can be made much later, at the beginning of the second or even third year.
Secondly, the system allows them to study subjects such as Chemistry, Physics, Economics, Computer Science, Building Science or Astronomy.
Some students venture further afield and choose courses in the Faculties of Arts or Social Sciences.
This flexibility allows a typical student entering second year to have a choice of honours degree courses between Engineering disciplines or between Engineering and a science subject.
The broad foundation on which our degree specialisations are built is considered particularly desirable by employers in industry and other fields.
Detailed advice on choice of specialisation and other subjects is provided by the student's Director of Studies on admission to the School.
In second year, most students specialise in a single branch of Engineering, attending a course in that area, in Mathematics, and another subject.
Many students take the opportunity to study a non-engineering subject.
For most students, the third year is devoted to topics from within their chosen branch of Engineering, and some students will also pursue non-engineering subjects.
An ordinary BSc degree may be taken at the end of the third year but the majority of students proceed to the fourth year of the BEng honours degree.
Practical work is an important part of the education of all engineers and so forms an integral part of all four years of the course.
The practical work during the course also satisfies the Engineering Applications requirements of the Engineering Council.
Engineering is a professional subject and the BEng and MEng degrees offered in the School are all accredited by the appropriate Professional Engineering Institution as acceptable for leading to the status of Chartered Engineer.
All students are required to take a course in Management and some also have lectures on Law.
Opportunities for men and women graduates in Engineering are excellent.
Many women apply for and enter our courses and we are keen to see the numbers of women increase still further.
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence is a new discipline that seeks to explain intelligent behaviour by building and testing models of cognitive processes in the form of computer programs.
Its scope is very broad, ranging from research which simulates human mental activities such as perception, natural language interpretation and mathematical reasoning, to projects which seek to design intelligent machines, such as robots for deep sea mineral exploration, and consultation programs for diagnosing diseases.
The Department of Artificial Intelligence is the leading European centre for research in AI.
It offers the joint degrees of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics.
(Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence is offered in the Faculty of Arts, and Artificial Intelligence and Psychology in the Faculty of Social Sciences.)
In first and second years students normally take courses in both disciplines, together with an appropriate outside course such as Computer Science or Mathematics.
The third and fourth years are devoted to equal amounts of honours work in Artificial Intelligence and the associated discipline.
Topics in AI include automated reasoning, knowledge-based systems, natural language processing, machine vision and intelligent robotics.
Project work is supported by well-equipped laboratories.
The department also offers first- and second-level courses as appropriate outside subjects for many other honours degrees.
The first course is an AI appreciation  course requiring no specific prerequisite skills; the second focuses on the techniques used in AI work for modelling problem solving, linguistic and visual abilities.
Career prospects in industry and commerce, both here and abroad, are excellent due to the significant growth of interest in knowledge-based systems.
Employment opportunities also exist in universities and government research establishments.
Chemical Engineering
The theme of Chemical Engineering is the interaction of scientific, physical and economic factors in the design, operation and management of plant in the process industries.
Such industries are traditionally centred on oil and chemicals but increasingly cover a much wider spectrum including pharmaceuticals, food technology, bioengineering, nuclear engineering and many others.
This is thus a subject for students with wide interests; courses are taken in Chemistry, Mathematics, Economics, Computing and Management in addition to Engineering subjects.
In their final year, students participate both in a comprehensive design project and in a research project.
The design project is aimed at preparing specifications for a complete industrial process and is generally carried out with the co-operation of an industrial sponsor.
Chemical Engineering graduates are qualified for employment in the process industries; they are also especially well placed for the wide range of jobs which require numeracy, a knowledge of scientific and engineering principles and practice, together with an understanding of economics and industry.
Our graduates have found employment in management, economic planning, systems analysis and in many areas involving computer applications in the Engineering industries.
They also work in both fundamental and applied research in industry, universities and research establishments.
There are increasing opportunities for Chemical Engineers in the biotechnology industries, and provision is made within the course for students with a school background in Biology, Chemistry and Mathematics.
A five-year MEng degree in Chemical Engineering with European Studies incorporates a range of European Studies courses — languages and/or social policy, history or law — within the full Chemical Engineering programme, preparing students for responsible positions in the Europe-wide chemical industry.
Civil Engineering
Civil Engineering offers an exciting and well-paid career with opportunities to work either both in an office or out on site both in the UK and overseas.
The courses lead to careers in Civil, Structural, Fire Safety, Geotechnical and Environmental Engineering.
Edinburgh graduates have risen rapidly to the top of their profession, obtaining partnerships in consulting engineers' design offices, senior posts in local authority offices, directorships of civil engineering contractors and university chairs.
The Department of Civil Engineering offers two single-honours Bachelor of Engineering (BEng) degrees, Civil Engineering; and Civil and Environmental Engineering.
The first two years of each degree comprise similar courses with the third and fourth years providing specialist topics.
The first year is designed to give a broad introduction to engineering and some choice of subjects is available.
Mathematics is studied throughout the first two years.
Other major subjects studied in the early years include Design of Structures, Engineering Materials, Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Geology, Fluid Mechanics, Computing, Surveying, Environmental Impact Assessment and System Analysis, Resource Economics and Civil and Environmental Management.
Students undertake laboratory and design office work, use state-of-the-art mainframe and microcomputers and attend a surveying field course.
Final-year students undertake design projects using CAD, prepare a research thesis in a topic of their choice, and are given a choice of specialisations including Geotechnics, Structures, Hydraulics, Environmental Engineering, Transportation, Fire Safety Engineering, Pollution Control, Fire Hazards to the Environment and Energy Resources.
Opportunities exist for students in their first year to gain sponsorship for the remaining three years from major civil engineering companies.
Computer Science
Computers are an essential feature of modern life, overseeing daily activities in transport, medicine, banking, retailing and advanced research in the Sciences and Humanities.
Computer Scientists study the principles involved in designing and implementing computer systems, and learn to produce efficient, reliable and cost-effective systems.
Computer Science has emerged as a well-defined discipline with a solid theoretical foundation.
The emphasis in the degree course is on the design of general-purpose systems, but the same principles underlie special-purpose systems in areas such as communications, graphics and computer-aided design.
Computer Science is a practical subject and, at Edinburgh, students are fortunate in having the opportunity to use systems ranging from single chip microprocessors to some of the world's highest performance parallel processing systems, with much of their work being carried out on a distributed system of UNIX-based workstations.
They gain wide experience of different types of hardware and many varied programming languages.
Theory and practice are integrated throughout the course, with students undertaking a wide variety of practical exercises and projects which reinforce and build upon lecture material.
Communication skills, initiative, professionalism and team-work are developed during the course as integral parts of the learning process.
There is an honours degree course in Computer Science and joint honours courses in Computer Science with Artificial Intelligence, Electronics, Management Science, Mathematics, Physics and Statistics.
The above joint degree courses lead to a BSc, apart from Computer Science and Electronics which leads to a BEng.
The difference between the BSc and the BEng is that the latter includes a module on Professional Issues, and is recognised by the Engineering Council as satisfying part of the requirements for achieving Chartered Engineer status.
The single honours degree in Computer Science can be taken as a BSc or a BEng, depending on the student's wishes.
Graduates with a good Computer Science degree are very much sought after, and Edinburgh graduates particularly so.
They receive job offers from software consultancies, large corporations, banks and government research institutions.
Electrical Engineering and Microelectronics
The department offers three single-honours Bachelor of Engineering (BEng) degrees of four year's duration, one in Electronics and Electrical Engineering, one in Communications Engineering, and one in Microelectronics, and a five-year Master of Engineering (MEng) honours degree in Electronics.
To keep pace with these fast-moving subjects, undergraduates become involved in industrially-relevant projects and research in later years of the course.
The first year lays the foundations while more advanced topics such as physical electronics, electromagnetic theory, analogue and digital circuits, instrumentation, computer systems, communications, electrical machines and power systems are covered in second and third year.
Tutorials and laboratory sessions underpin lecture material and teach practical skills and problem-solving.
An ‘Engineering Applications’ laboratory is available, which ensures that the practical component of the course is prominent in the first and second years.
In the third year, five structured design projects, stretching over the entire academic year, continue the strong applications component of the course, and introduce an ‘industrial’ influence.
For example in the GATEWAY project, each student designs an Integrated Circuit (or ‘Microchip’) which is fabricated in the department, while in the SATWAY project, circuitry for a satellite television receiver is designed, built and tested.
The fourth-year course comprises lecture modules, a substantial experimental project and a dissertation on a topic chosen by the student from an approved area of advanced study.
The lecture modules selected in the first term by individual students determine the ‘flavour’ of the degree course to be followed, and may indeed determine its title.
For example, the degree in Microelectronics requires emphasis on integrated circuit design, integrated circuit fabrication and systems applications.
The five-year MEng honours degree course is for particularly able students who expect to assume responsible positions in industry immediately after graduation.
Industrial sponsorship is normally necessary for the fourth and fifth years, and can be arranged for those who do not already have sponsorship.
The MEng project will be carried out on the sponsor's premises.
The project extends into the early part of the fifth year, which concludes with a series of industrially-oriented modules using innovative teaching methods.
The courses have all been designed to provide the basic knowledge and skills needed to cope with the rapid developments which are met by professional engineers, along with essential practical and design skills.
Employment prospects for electrical engineers are excellent due to the ever-extending applications of electronics, and Edinburgh's graduates continue to be in great demand.
In combination with other departments the Department of Electrical Engineering also offers joint-honours courses leading to the BEng degree.
There are well established joint degrees in Electronics and Physics, Computer Science and Electronics, and Electrical and Mechanical Engineering.
A joint-honours degree in Electronics with Business Studies was introduced in October 1992.
This is aimed at providing students with a sound appreciation of the principles of electronic engineering and management techniques required in the development and marketing of new products in the electronics industry.
The course is designed to respond to demands from industry and business for numerate graduates who have a combination of communication, managerial and technical skills.
Mechanical Engineering
The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers BEng honours degrees in Mechanical Engineering, and in Electrical and Mechanical Engineering.
Both degrees prepare graduates for technical and managerial careers, by developing a sound knowledge of scientific principles, and their application to design, development and manufacture.
The joint degree focuses on control systems, automation and power.
Opportunities exist to combine Mechanical Engineering with Management, or a Language.
In the Mechanical Engineering degree, the basic subjects of dynamics, fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, materials science and solid mechanics are complemented by subjects such as control, design, and production engineering which relate strongly to  engineering applications.
Electronics and electrical machines are included as important fields of study and the ever-increasing importance of computing is recognised by the provision of courses on computer applications in engineering and the integration of computing into design and laboratory projects.
Students select a limited number of additional subjects, such as robotics, CADCAM and manufacturing systems, for advanced study in the fourth year.
They also carry out individual and group projects designed to develop expertise in specialised areas, and to improve communication skills.
Industrial experience is an essential part of the training of the professional engineer so most of our students go into industry when they graduate.
Some go on to study for a higher degree, and some take postgraduate courses in management or production engineering.
The variety of careers for mechanical engineers is enormous.
They are employed by every sector of industry in fundamental research, designing new products, in testing and developing prototypes, in commissioning new plant, in manufacture, in marketing and in management.
Joint Degrees
The following joint degree courses are available: Computer Science and Electronics, Electronics and Physics, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, Electronics with Business Studies, all leading to the BEng degree.
These are a blend of courses from the co-operating departments.
Students intending to take a joint degree join either department for the first year and  since requirements of two departments must be satisfied, joint degree students normally have a restricted choice of courses in first and second years.
On the other hand, graduates with a joint degree often have an even wider range of employment opportunities.
Geography
Geography is an environmental science which draws on knowledge from the physical, natural and social sciences.
Students who read Geography in the Faculty of Science and Engineering are admitted on the basis of their qualifications in science subjects.
In first and second years, Geography is studied along with supporting courses that are drawn dominantly from the science programme.
Thus, Geography can be combined with either basic sciences (eg Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics) or with ‘applied’ sciences (eg Ecology, Environmental Chemistry, Geology, Geophysics, Meteorology, Oceanography), or with ‘technological’sciences (eg Artificial Intelligence, Computer Science, Information Systems) or with a mixture of different sciences in a stimulating and attractive degree programme, in which environmental issues are prominent.
Within the Geography component of the degree, first year provides a common foundation.
In every subsequent year, flexibility and choice is the hallmark of the Geography degree.
In second year, students choose a range of half courses from a selection including Environmental Sensitivity and Change, Geomorphology and Land Environment Information Systems.
Third and fourth years are full-time in Geography and include common core courses, supervised project work, and a choice of options from an extensive range of specialisms.
Fieldwork is an integral part of the curriculum and may include a foreign field course in third year.
Employers are attracted by the proven flexibility that stems from the Geography graduate's breadth of education and ability to cope with a diversity of subject materials.
In recent years, employment prospects have been excellent and geographers have been placed successfully in a wide range of employment in research, industry, commerce, government, and the professions, either entering directly or by using their first degrees as a foundation for further qualifications.
There are also career opportunities in teaching and planning, although these have accounted recently for less than 10 per cent of Geography graduates.
Students may also study Geography in the Faculty of Social Sciences (see page145).
Environmental Archaeology
Environmental Archaeology seeks to understand the relationship between human populations and the natural environment through time; it is the study of the ecology of past human cultures.
As a result Environmental Archaeology integrates information drawn widely from the environmental, biological, earth and archaeological sciences.
In the first two years students combine the study of the material record of the human past with the study of environmental systems and processes using complementary elements taught by the Departments of Archaeology and Geography.
These are combined with two further courses chosen from across the spectrum of basic, applied or technological subjects offered within the Faculty of Science and Engineering.
In the third and fourth years courses in Palaeoecology, Palaeoeconomy, Quaternary Environmental History and Culture and Environment provide a practical and theoretical core around which students may build particular specialist interests in archaeology and the environmental sciences.
These skills are applied in a dissertation which provides an opportunity to undertake original research.
Fieldwork is a major element of this degree since the material for study is gained by survey and excavation.
By participating in practical work students gain a vital understanding and appreciation of environmental processes and the nature of the sedimentological, biological and archaeological records.
Fieldwork is closely tied to current research projects and involves students in ‘real world’ problem solving and decision making in areas ranging from Iceland to the Mediterranean.
Both departments involved in teaching this degree are actively engaged in palaeoenvironmental research and possess established research facilities.
The combination of numerical, literary and practical skills, together with a theoretical knowledge across a wide range of subject areas is of proven popularity with employers.
Science-based archaeologists can be found working in all spheres besides those traditionally associated with archaeology.
Further information on this degree can be obtained from the Department of Archaeology, The University of Edinburgh, 19 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ.
Geology & Geophysics
Geology
Geology is the study of the Earth and its evolution over some 4,600 million years.
It is an applied science founded on the careful observation of the natural world coupled with the application of physical, chemical and biological concepts to explain Earth processes.
The unifying theory of plate tectonics is transforming our understanding of the birth and destruction of oceans, the origin of volcanoes and of ore deposits, and the building of mountains.
The relative distribution of continents and oceans interacts with variation in solar energy to induce dramatic variations in climate.
This affects the processes of weathering, erosion, and transport and deposition of sediment that mould the Earth's surface through time, and produce the changing environments that promote the evolution of life.
The study of meteorites, the Moon and planets provides vital evidence of the earliest phases of Earth history which have been obscured by its own dynamic evolution.
Geology comprises one third of the curriculum in each of the first two years of study.
The remaining two thirds may be made up from a combination of full or half courses in many subject areas, for example chemistry, physics, maths, oceanography, geophysics, geographical sciences, meteorology, archaeology, astronomy, computer sciences, psychology, science studies, economics, arts subjects, languages, law, etc.
The third and fourth years are devoted to geology alone, with an increasing emphasis on independent project work.
Fieldwork is stressed in all years.
Typically students participate in residential field courses in Arran, Dorset, Mull, the Scottish Highlands and Cyprus.
Independent fieldwork for an honours thesis is carried out between the third and fourth years of study.
There is a continuing demand for well qualified geologists to satisfy the world-wide demand for oil, gas, coal, geothermal energy, minerals and other raw materials.
Geological knowledge is essential in the siting of dams, bridges, buildings, roads, and in the search for water supplies.
The broad range of concepts in the Geology course produces graduates who are adaptable to alternative professions in industry and commerce.
Geophysics
Geophysics, an active and rapidly advancing subject, is the study of the physical structure of the Earth, with a strong appeal to all who are curious about the Earth we live on and the Moon and the planets we see around us.
Physical methods, combined with mathematical analysis and theories of solids, are used to study the shape of the Earth, its internal physics, its magnetic field and the movements of its outer parts.
Artificial satellites and space probes have contributed much new knowledge.
Geophysical methods are widely used in searching for oil and minerals, in studying the nature of earthquakes and in engineering problems.
The Department of Geology and Geophysics offers a degree in Geophysics and an introductory course which serves as an appropriate outside subject for many honours degrees.
Students following the degree  course take, in addition to Geophysics, a selection of courses from Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, Physics, Geology, and Astronomy.
The practical course includes work both in the laboratory and in the field.
A project associated with the research activities of the department or one of the geophysical units of the NERC British Geological Survey or with a geophysical exploration company is undertaken during the vacation prior to the final year.
There are openings for geophysicists in oil and mineral exploration companies, geological engineering companies, in the various geophysical units within the British Geological Survey and in university teaching and research.
Furthermore, Geophysics forms an excellent background for those concerned with the control and development of our environment.
Extensive use of the computer in project work opens up the further possibility of a computer-oriented career.
Geology and Physical Geography
The Geology and Geography degrees contain complementary elements that are brought together in this course, designed for students interested in the Earth's surface processes.
In the first two years of study the Geology and Geography courses offered to single honours students are compulsory.
Subsidiary courses may include other earth science courses (eg Meteorology, Global Environmental Processes, Land and Environmental Information Systems and Oceanography), or other subjects from the science programme.
In the third and fourth years the course consists of half of the Geology and Geography Honours programmes with an interdisciplinary field project.
Environmental Geoscience
There is a growing public awareness of the sensitivity of the natural environment to human activity, reflected by local problems such as the pollution of groundwater and sea and by possible global effects such as climatic change due to burning of fossil fuel.
One consequence of public anxiety is an increasing demand for scientists with the specific skills of chemists, geoscientists, biologists etc, who are aware of the contribution that their own discipline can make to understanding the environment and are sufficiently acquainted with other disciplines to enable them to work in multi-disciplinary teams.
An understanding of environmental problems is needed as a basis for policy making by national and local government, for the work of national and international agencies concerned both with use and conservation of natural resources, and for industries which inevitably have an environmental affect and education.
The Geosciences (Geology & Geophysics) are concerned with the structure and composition of the solid earth and its evolution, including its animal and plant life.
The solid earth is the source of many natural resources whose extraction can present environmental problems.
It forms the surface on which soils form, over which rivers, oceans and glaciers flow, and through which groundwater permeates; it is the source of many natural hazards, such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, landslips, environmental change, as many changes which are currently under way can be followed to completion in the geological record, and their consequences better understood.
The Environmental Geoscience degree aims to train professional geoscientists eligible for the traditional geoscience professions, but concentrates on those aspects which are particularly important for the study of the environment.
Geology comprises one third of the curriculum in the first two years of study.
The remaining two thirds is made up of whole or half courses in chemistry, geography, biology, oceanography, global environmental processes, environmental chemistry, ecology, meteorology, archaeology, computer sciences, etc.
The third year comprises geology alone, with an emphasis on environmental relevant material.
The fourth year focuses on the development of field and laboratory skills through the medium of group and individual projects, many of the topics for which are developed in a course on Environmental Problems    and Issues.
Stress is also laid on oral and written presentation of scientific reports.
A field programme, largely parallel to that of the Geology degree, runs through years 1–3, whilst at the beginning of year 4 a supervised field programme is followed by a field-based project.
Career opportunities in environmental science are expanding, particularly in fields such as water supply, environmental impact assessment, engineering geology and pollution monitoring and control.
In addition graduates will be able to compete for the conventional careers open to geologists.
Further information on these degrees is available in brochures which can be obtained from the Department of Geology and Geophysics, The University of Edinburgh EH9 3JW.
Mathematics and Statistics
Mathematics
In recent years mathematics has undergone rapid growth and change.
Part of the impetus has come from the intrinsic interest of the mathematics itself, which has led to major advances in such fields as algebra, analysis, number theory, geometry and topology.
At the same time, the needs of the physical, biological and social sciences have provoked rapid advances in the applications of mathematics in such fields as fluid mechanics, dynamical systems, numerical analysis, coding theory, operational research and optimisation.
The increasing ability of desk-top computers to perform sophisticated mathematical manipulations, in addition to massive calculations, is rapidly extending the applicability of mathematical techniques.
The many new applications of mathematics in technology, management and environmental science have increased the demand for mathematics graduates in a wide range of occupations.
In advanced technology, mathematicians play an essential part in the design of aircraft, power plant, transport and telecommunication systems and in space research.
On the management side of industry, mathematical techniques are used in the solution of a variety of complex problems in production, distribution, transportation, marketing and capital investment.
In the financial world, mathematicians have made careers in accountancy, insurance and investment analysis.
Others have entered general management where the clarity and precision of thought which the study of mathematics develops is valuable.
In education there is a great need for well qualified mathematics teachers in British schools.
The choice of career is therefore very wide and this broad-based demand for mathematicians is expected to continue in the foreseeable future.
The basic mathematics degree in the Science and Engineering Faculty is the BSc in Mathematics; there are also joint degrees with Artificial Intelligence, Business Studies, Computer Science, Physics or Statistics.
MA degrees in Mathematics are available through the Arts Faculty.
In Social Sciences, joint degrees can be taken in Business Studies and Mathematics or Economics and Mathematics.
In the first two years, the BSc Mathematics curriculum includes pure mathematics (calculus, analysis, algebra and geometry) and applied mathematics in the broad sense (numerical methods, optimisation, computer programming, probability and statistics as well as the traditional topics of vectors and mechanics).
In addition, two other courses are taken which may be chosen from a wide range of other science subjects or from the Social Sciences or Arts.
The third and fourth years are normally devoted entirely to honours work in Mathematics.
In the third year, a basic core is presented, while in the fourth year, courses are chosen from a wide range of options, according to the student's interests.
The basic plan for joint honours is that both subjects are taken in the first and second years; then, in the third and fourth years selected parts of the honours courses in mathematics and the other subject are taken.
Among the various BSc mathematical degrees  the curriculum is very flexible in the first two years, and the degree choice can be kept open until the end of the second year.
Transfer to other degrees such as Physics or Computer Science is also possible.
Note that Business Studies, Computer Science, Physics or Statistics can be studied for one or two years in the curriculum for BSc Mathematics, so that a joint honours course is not the only way to acquire some knowledge of these subjects.
Statistics
The science of statistics is essential to the quality revolution in industry, the assessment of new medicines, the monitoring of environmental hazards, market research, the controlling of telephone networks, the planning of educational provision and countless other aspects of modern life.
Statistics is important for planing how data should be collected, analysed and interpreted.
The methods used in statistics depend on many branches of mathematics and their implementation requires extensive use of computers but the subject has its own logical concepts and theory.
An extra dimension is added by the practical motivation of the problems considered and by the need to formulate these mathematically.
The first-year curricula for Mathematics and for Mathematics and Statistics are identical; and the second-year curricula agree sufficiently to allow a student to delay the final choice between the two until the beginning of the third year.
The undergraduate teaching in statistics is designed to provide a balanced course in joint honours in Mathematics and Statistics and in Computer Science and Statistics.
(There is also a joint degree in Economics and Statistics in the Social Sciences Faculty.)
All the courses attempt to balance theory and application and students are introduced to the use of statistical computer packages in a practical context.
For those not wishing to specialise in statistics, some courses may be taken as options with Mathematics honours or in an ordinary degree; such possibilities are valuable to those who intend to teach in schools or to take other employment in which they will apply mathematics.
During a period in which jobs for some specialists are difficult to find, opportunities for trained statisticians remain good.
Moreover, a student who obtains a reasonably good degree can usually obtain financial support for a year of postgraduate study leading to an MSc in Statistics.
This fits the student for a professional career in a wider range of applications.
Graduates often enter other professions such as those of the actuary, accountant, and operational research scientist.
This requires further study in those subjects, but the undergraduate statistical training received is of value in these professions.
ENTRANCE QUALIFICATIONS
SCE candidates who have the opportunity to undertake sixth-year work in mathematics will find it a valuable preparation for all courses offered by the Department of Mathematics and Statistics.
Knowledge of Physics is not required.
Meteorology
Meteorology — the science of the atmosphere — has the advantage that many of its phenomena and characteristics are already familiar, in a general way, to the student.
Both intellectual satisfaction and practical benefit are to be gained from learning to understand their nature and causes.
The Meteorology Department has outstanding facilities for monitoring the weather elements: it commands fine open views of sky and landscape, has a sophisticated system of local sensing and recording, obtains ‘live’ meteorological satellite pictures, and has a direct link with the national and international network of observers.
No degree course as such is available in Meteorology, but instruction is given at both introductory and advanced levels.
The course at the introductory level, which is open to students of all faculties, offers a thorough grounding in both theoretical and practical aspects of atmospheric science.
The course at the advanced  level is an optional part of the fourth year of the Physics degree course.
Students in this year may also opt for a substantial period on an experimental or computational project within the Meteorology Department.
Job opportunities are available in the Meteorological Office in the practice of weather forecasting and its applications, and in experimental and theoretical research, and with some independent companies which provide specialised meteorological services of various kinds.
There are also posts in various environment-oriented research institutes and other organisations for which a knowledge of meteorology is advantageous.
Physics, Mathematical Physics & Computational Physics
Physics probes the physical world experimentally, and describes it mathematically.
It investigates phenomena which range in size from subatomic particles to the universe itself.
It is concerned, on the one hand, with abstract concepts, and on the other with industrially useful materials and instruments.
Because physics underpins so much of modern industrial society, every educated citizen needs some understanding of its methods, successes, and limitations.
There are three physics-centred degree courses: Physics, Mathematical Physics and Computational Physics.
The three courses have a common core in which students study the principles, methods and applications of both classical and modern physics.
The topics in this common core include dynamics, optics, electromagnetism, wave motion, relativity, quantum mechanics and their applications in the study of solids and fluids, atoms, nuclei and elementary particles.
As part of the first- and second-year laboratory courses, all students undertake short introductory courses on computational methods.
These are followed up by a short course on computer simulation in Physics for all students in third year.
Students in all three degrees also study mathematics in their first two years.
The three degrees differ in a number of respects.
In the first and second year, mainstream Physics students are free to choose an outside course from other faculties but the student of Mathematical Physics must undertake further study in mathematics and theoretical physics; Computational Physics students take a first-level course in Computer Science.
In third and fourth years, the degree programmes progressively diverge from a set of core modules common to all.
For Physics students the laboratory classes serve a double purpose.
They provide expertise across a wide range of topics while allowing the students to contribute to the year-to-year developments in experimental techniques.
The choice of optional lecture modules allows specialisation in one or other of the broad topic areas in contemporary physics.
This structure is also used in the Mathematical Physics and Computational Physics degree programmes.
Mathematical Physics students usually do not continue with practical physics.
However, they take a larger number of those lecture modules in which emphasis is placed on theoretical physics and associated mathematical principles and techniques.
For Computational Physics students, practical work becomes entirely computational, using the outstanding facilities of the department's computational physics laboratories.
Many of their lecture modules are chosen from a set which demonstrates the potential of computational techniques, for example in simulation.
In all three degrees, students write a dissertation in final year.
The content and style of these honours degrees result from a recent restructuring to maintain their compatability with the wide range of career areas open to physics graduates.
Our proposed MPhys degrees can be viewed as part of that revision.
Years 4 and 5 of the MPhys together provide increased breadth and depth of study, compared with the Honours BSc.
Its final-year dissertation is based on an extended project and the necessary preliminary literature survey.
The MPhys is an enhanced first degree which will be taken by students seeking careers as professional physicists.
The MPhys degrees, like the BSc Honours degrees, are in Physics, Mathematical Physics and Computational Physics, and the range is extended to include Astrophysics    (whose BSc degree is structured as a joint degree — see Astronomy entry).
Provision is made for students to be able to switch between BSc and MPhys early in third year.
There are substantial physics contributions to several honours degree courses in inter-disciplinary fields Astrophysics, Chemical Physics, Computer Science and Physics, Electronics and Physics, Geophysics and Mathematics and Physics.
Transfer into or out of these honours courses is possible up to the end of second year, provided suitable subjects have been studied.
We run a vacational placements scheme which provides industrial experience for students in the summer vacation before final year.
Our ERASMUS Exchange Scheme for third-year students is in operation with the Universities of Paris (Orsay) and Pisa.
Graduates in physics are employed throughout the science-based industries and the Scientific Civil Service both in research, development and management and in the fields of finance and commerce; in the Scientific Civil Service as research workers and administrators; and in teaching in schools, colleges and universities.
Many graduates proceed to research posts in universities, often working much of the time in international laboratories, such as CERN in Geneva.
Science Studies
The Science Studies Unit offers teaching to science students on the structure and historical development of the scientific community, the nature of the claims and ideas of science, analysis of the intellectual and social role of the scientist and physician, and some of the cultural, political and social implications of the emergence of science, medicine and technology in Western society.
The unit offers a range of first-year half-courses in the ‘History of Science’ and ‘Science and Society’.
SOCIAL SCIENCES
What are the Social Sciences
The departments in the Faculty of Social Sciences are at first glance diverse, but they are all linked, in one aspect or another, by an interest in people and society.
Some are closely related to a specific professional qualification, while in others a vocational orientation is much less obvious.
Those departments involved in undergraduate teaching are: Accounting, Architecture, Business Studies, Canadian Studies, Economic and Social History, Economics, Geography, Nursing Studies, Politics, Psychology, Social Policy and Social Work, Social Anthropology, Sociology.
Students are admitted into a faculty to study for a particular degree.
By the end of the second year they will have taken courses in at least three departments, not all of which need be in the Faculty of Social Sciences.
As we shall see below, there are opportunities for transfer from one degree course to another, and even (to a limited extent) from one faculty to another.
What Degrees are offered?
General Degrees
There are three General degrees in the faculty, all of which may be awarded with Distinction.
The BSc (Social Science) and the BCom are three-year degrees.
The other is a four-year degree course combined with professional training: the BSc(Nursing), which includes the RGN or RMN qualification.
The BSc (Social Science) is an eight course degree.
It must include one ‘treble’(a subject studied to the third year level — three courses) and a ‘double’(studied to the second-year level — two courses), but otherwise the structure may be varied.
It may include three courses taken at the first year level only, or a second double or less frequently a second treble, ie
either 3 2 1 1 1
or 3 2 2 1
or 3 3 1 1
The BCom General degree is essentially similar, but the treble must be in Business Studies and other courses taken must include at least one course in Economics and one in Accounting.
Candidates for the BSc(Nursing) spend the third year of their four-year course in clinical practice in hospital.
Honours Degrees
All single and joint honours courses are listed on pages 43–46.
In addition to joint degree courses combining two disciplines, students can combine the study of a discipline eg Geography with a general topic of study eg Gender Studies or study of a geographical area eg South Asia in the final two (Honours) years.
The courses for the MA(Honours) and BCom (Honours) degrees take four years, thh BSc(Nursing) degree with Honours four years 3 months and the MA(Architecture) five years.
Students apply for entry to an honours degree, but admission to the honours years depends on performance in the first part of the course.
For the MA (except in Architecture) the decision is made at the end of the second year; students not proceeding to honours classes have the opportunity to complete a BSc(SocSci) in their third year.
For the MA in Architecture and the BCom the decision is made at the end of the third year, by which time the student should have satisfied the requirements for the general degree.
Degree Curricula
The Programme of the Faculty of Social Sciences, which is a section of the University Calendar, outlines the ‘normal curriculum’ for all degrees.
In most degrees there is an element of choice, and particular courses may be selected with the guidance of a Director of Studies to suit the student's interests.
The possibilities of choice are rather less in the most obviously vocationally oriented degrees, such as Architecture, Housing Studies and Nursing Studies, but some freedom of action is still possible.
Choice of courses may be influenced by career  intentions even within those degrees that are not firmly career-orientated.
For instance, in several degree curricula it is possible to gain exemption from Stage One of the Chartered Accountant's qualification provided that the curricula include the relevant courses specified by the Institute of Chartered Accountants.
There is considerable opportunity for transfer between one degree curriculum and another, at least until the end of the second year.
For instance, a student who entered the University intending to take the Honours MA in Sociology, and did Sociology 1, Social Policy 1 and Politics 1 in first year, might then proceed to Honours in Sociology, Social Policy and Politics, or Politics, or to a BSc(SocSci) curriculum with one of these three providing the ‘treble’ subject.
(See the accompanying diagram on the ‘Specimen Curricula’.)
This flexibility is particularly valuable when so many of the subjects within the Faculty are not taught at school and the first year university course will be the first opportunity to sample them.
Nevertheless it is important that the initial choice of degree course should be as well-informed as possible as in some subject areas the curriculum is tightly prescribed from an early stage.
This is especially true of curricula which include an element of professional training such as Business Studies and joint degrees involving Accounting.
Students should take every opportunity to discuss and read about the subjects they are interested in, before they come to the University.
Some suggestions for reading are given in their sections by particular departments.
Departmental brochures are available on request (see page 163).
What do Social Science Graduates do?
Graduates in the Social Sciences are well equipped to enter a large variety of occupations on leaving the University.
Some occupations are entered directly after graduation whilst entry to others follows completion of a postgraduate course.
Each year about one-sixth of all social science graduates undertake further study or training; many pursue management careers in industry and commerce.
Apart from Architecture, Housing Studies and Nursing Studies students who are trained for particular professions, over half of the faculty's graduates go immediately into full-time employment.
In the past few years, the most popular careers for graduates in a range of social science disciplines have been: Accountancy; Banking and Insurance; Buying/Marketing/Selling; General Management/Administration; Welfare/Education; Research and Scientific; Uniformed Services; Media/Information.
What about Admission?
The faculty receives a very large number of applications for the limited number of places available.
Entry is thus competitive, although the pressure is not  felt evenly throughout the faculty.
At the present time the greatest demand is in Business Studies and Economics, in Architecture and in Psychology.
For admission purposes, the faculty considers candidates offering GCE Advanced Level and SCE Higher Grade on an equal basis.
Applicants seeking direct entry from fifth year in Scottish schools will be considered with reference to age, experience and extra-curricular activities.
There are, however, advantages in delaying entry, particularly in this faculty where few subjects form part of the school curriculum.
Whether a post-Higher year is spent in the sixth year or in gaining experience away from school is essentially an individual decision.
The Faculty Office or the Schools Liaison Office will be pleased to advise on this and also upon an appropriate choice of sixth year subjects, particularly where students have marginally failed to meet the entry requirements at the first sitting of Highers.
Whilst students are encouraged to offer subjects at CSYS level, Highers taken in sixth year are also taken into account and should include at least one new subject and not more than two resits of existing Highers to improve grades.
At GCE Advanced Level, no more than one subject should be repeated to improve aggregate performance over two sittings.
Candidates offering a range of subjects, rather than all Maths/Science subjects are more likely to receive offers for certain courses.
A full description of matters relating to admissions and degree types is to be found in the section ‘Applying to Edinburgh’.
Specific enquiries relating to this faculty should preferably be made by letter to: Undergraduate Admissions, Social Sciences Faculty Office, 55 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU.
The faculty welcomes prospective students wishing to visit departments.
Visits can be arranged through the Schools Liaison Office (see page 4 and 5 for details).
The faculty's Schools Liaison Officer will be happy to discuss curricula and issues relating to entry requirements.
Appointments can be made by writing to:The Schools Liaison Officer (Social Sciences), Schools Liaison Office, 57 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JU or telephoning 031 650 4315 or 4360.
Mature Students (ie those over 21 years of age): the faculty welcomes applications from mature students who will have obtained passes in 3 SCE Highers at B grade or 2 GCE A-levels at B grade within the 2-year period prior to commencing university studies, or who are taking an approved Access course or OU courses.
For further information see the University of Edinburgh Mature Students Prospectus .
Accounting
Accounting is an important part of one of the world's largest industries — the information industry.
The purpose of information is to enable people to make better decisions and accounting plays a major role in the vital area of decisions about finance and investment.
The accountant is involved at all stages in the economic activity of organisations, whether private or governmental.
He designs and manages the financial information system of the organisation, and the information which he provides goes beyond the organisation and its executives, to a variety of other users such as investors, prospective investors, creditors, government agencies, etc.
Accounting can only be studied in depth at Edinburgh as part of a joint honours degree: MA honours in Economics and Accounting; BCom honours in Business Studies and Accounting; or LLB honours (Law and Accounting).
Accounting cannot be studied as a single honours degree.
These degrees form the basis for exemption from the major UK professional accountancy bodies.
Undergraduates who intend to pursue a career in the profession are advised to ensure that their courses will entitle them to the maximum exemptions from the examination and training requirements of the various professional accounting bodies in the UK.
Introductory reading: Nobes, C. & Kellas, J. Accountancy Explained (Penguin, 1990).
Archaeology
Archaeology is the study of the human past through the medium of the surviving material remains.
The historian's approach is based largely on documentary evidence, and the anthropologist encounters contemporary societies and cultures, but the archaeologist works with artefacts, the often fragmentary remains of houses, tools, tombs, industrial or food debris.
Archaeology is increasingly a multi-disciplinary subject, which is hard to place into the administrative structures of universities.
Archaeologists share techniques and methods with people who work in the humanities, social scientists, geographers, environmental scientists and natural scientists.
Because of the interdisciplinary nature of the subject, and because our archaeology students have acquired considerable experience in working with field research teams, graduates are to be found working in archaeological posts but are also keenly appreciated by employers in a very wide variety of jobs in business, industry and the public service.
Archaeology at Edinburgh
There is too much archaeology to be contained in any undergraduate degree or to be taught by any group of teachers.
The geographical range of the Edinburgh syllabus reaches from the Northern and Western Isles of Scotland through Central Europe and the Mediterranean world to Egypt and Western Asia.
The courses offered cover a huge range of time, from the origins of the human species, through the millennia of prehistory, the early civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt and the East Mediterranean and down to Celtic Europe at the beginning of Roman imperial expansion in Western Europe.
In these fields Edinburgh has established itself as a centre of excellence with an international reputation.
The department has the advantage of being one of the oldest and therefore best supported in the country.
In addition, the city of Edinburgh is home to the National Museums of Scotland, Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, with all of which the department works in close collaboration.
The book resources of the University Library are supplemented by several important archaeological libraries in the city.
Since archaeology is scarcely ever available as a school subject, the teaching at university begins from basics.
The two first-level courses are (Archaeology 1) a general introduction to the subject, or (Archaeology of Scotland 1) an introduction in the context of the prehistory and early history of Scotland.
At second level the department offers a series of five half-courses, which students can combine in various ways to make up a full course.
As well as courses in European prehistory and the archaeology and ancient history of the early Middle Eastern civilizations, there are half-courses in archaeological theory and interpretation.
The third and fourth year courses are a mixture of thematic units, units on various aspects of theory, method and practice (including, for example, graphical and computer applications, and underwater archaeology), and a rich variety of specialised courses on particular periods or regions.
A particular feature of the archaeology degrees is the final-year dissertation, in which students often find an opportunity to engage in real archaeological research.
As well as the single honours degree in Archaeology there are several other combinations, spread across three faculties.
In the Faculty of Social Sciences there are degrees in Geography and Archaeology, and in Archaeology and Social Anthropology.
In the Faculty of Arts there are degrees in Ancient Civilizations of the Mediterranean and Middle East (taught by members of the Classics Department, the Faculty of Divinity and the Archaeology Department) and in Archaeology and Scottish Ethnology.
In the Faculty of Science there is a B.Sc.
degree with honours in Environmental Archaeology.
In all of these degree programmes, students are required to undertake fieldwork during vacations in order to acquire practical experience of research in the field.
Introductory reading: C. Renfrew and P. Bahn,Archaeology: Theory, Methods and Practice ; C. Renfrew,Before Civilization ; B. Fagan,Archaeology, a Brief Introduction .
Architecture
An architect is someone who is trained to design buildings.
This requires imagination, inventiveness and aesthetic sensitivity informed by historical precedent.
It also demands an understanding of social needs, economic factors, production and procurement systems, natural and environmental sciences, technology, and information handling techniques — an almost unlimited range of factors act upon the architect, requiring an appropriately broad repertoire of skills and techniques.
But central to this activity is the design process itself, a blend of logical thinking, creativity and judgement, acquired through practice and experience.
The vocational course in architecture seeks to equip students with the knowledge and skills needed to enter the profession.
For this, five years of full-time study are complemented by two years of practical training in architects' offices — the first between third and fourth years, and the second after completing the Diploma in Architecture.
In the first two years, the department offers separate courses in Design, and Architectural Science, but the mutual interdependence of these subject areas is reflected in their merging into a single design course in third year.
Discussion of architectural history and theory accompanies a continuous series of design exercises and projects — each student has a workplace in a studio — while lectures on the construction and behaviour of buildings provide the background to practical workshops in the science laboratories.
During the first three years, three additional courses are taken, one of which is in architectural history while the others may be selected individually from a range of courses offered by departments in the Social Sciences and Arts Faculties; in keeping with Scottish University traditions, this encourages the development of diverse interests and allows insights into other academic disciplines.
Fourth Year focuses on architecture and the city, in parallel with studies of building technology, energy-conscious design, historic buildings and a dissertation.
Excellent facilities exist to develop skills in computer-aided design.
In Fifth Year, students undertake a major design project, and are required to demonstrate competence over the full range of architectural design.
Successful completion of the first three years carries exemption from Part 1 of the Examination in Architecture of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and students at this stage may graduate BSc(SocSci), but most continue to MA (Honours in Architecture), taken at the end of Fourth Year.
At the end of Fifth Year, students take the Diploma in Architecture, and so gain exemption from the RIBA Examination, Part 2; the Diploma is also taken as a two-year course by students who have obtained a first degree in architecture elsewhere in Britain.
An examination in Professional Practice (RIBA Part 3), set jointly through the Association of Scottish Schools of Architecture, is taken at the completion of the second period of practical training, and successful candidates are eligible to register with the Architects Registration Council of the United Kingdom, and become full members of the RIBA and/or the RIAS.
Information leaflets are available from the department.
Recommended introductory reading: Curtis, W.J.R. Modern Architecture Since 1900 ,(Phaidon Press, Oxford, 1982) and The Architectural Review (monthly journal).
Architectural History
Architectural historians study buildings and human settlements in relation to the societies which made them.
The knowledge gained is concerned with the history of the development of the built environment and, as in other disciplines, the resulting insights contribute both to a critical understanding of the present day, and to the formulation of strategies for future development.
Since architecture is one of the visual arts, the study of architecture is also a study of the ways in which the philosophical, religious and intellectual preoccupations of societies find expression in visual form.
In addition it offers training of the eye as well as of the mind.
The Architectural History degree is organised in the standard form for honours degrees in the Faculty of Social Sciences which seeks breadth of education in the first and second years.
The core studies comprise Architectural History courses taken alongside other clearly associated courses (either history of art or architectural science, according to the student's choice), while a third course in each year is chosen by the student from all subjects in the Faculties of Arts, Science or Social Sciences, subject only to compatibility of timetable.
The student is therefore likely to study four different subjects in these two years, in up to four departments.
The curriculum for the junior and senior honours years comprises three optional honours courses in each year, together with a compulsory course in the history of architectural theory in the junior honours year and a dissertation based on individual research in the senior year.
Study visits to European cities are undertaken in both honours years.
The University and the City of Edinburgh provide an ideal environment for the degree course, academically and physically.
The fact that vocational architecture students are taught in the same department is a particularly positive aspect because it results in expertise in all fields of building design being readily available to the historian.
The city offers excellent experience of historic architecture in the medieval burgh of the ‘Old Town’ adjacent to the University, the Georgian ‘New Town’, and Victorian and later buildings both in the centre and suburbs.
The Architectural History degree at Edinburgh University is the only honours degree course in architectural history available in a British university.
Introductory reading: Pevsner, N. An Outline of European Architecture (Pelican 1966); Summerson, J. Architecture in Britain 1530–1830 (Pelican 1963); Curtis, W.J.R. Modern Architecture Since 1900 ,(Phaidon Press, Oxford, 1982).
Business Studies
The great companies and other organisations which make up modern economies have considerable discretion in choosing the goals they will seek to fulfil, and even more discretion in deciding how they will fulfil them.
The task of the manager is to choose sound goals and then achieve them.
There are many disciplines which can help in this task, and the department's team of more than thirty discipline specialists will help you to learn them.
The first year introduces the core concepts of management, which are economic analysis, finance, market analysis, production and operations planning, and the management and development of people.
If you take the single honours BCom degree, you will also study at least one year of economics and accountancy.
If you choose a joint honours degree, you will commence your university study of the joint subject; joint degrees are available with Mathematics, French, Accountancy, Spanish, Arabic, Computer Science, Engineering, Psychology, German, Economics, Italian, and Law.
The remaining years of the single honours BCom allow further study of the fields of business.
The theoretical concepts of psychology and sociology are used to study how people work in organisations.
The concepts of economics and financial economics assist in the study of financial markets, corporate finance, and international business.
The mathematical techniques of management science are used to ensure the efficient conduct of operations.
You may choose from ten intermediate courses which use case studies, projects, and computerised exercises to explore these subjects.
You may also take up to two other courses from a wide range of different subjects of your choice.
Eventually, you may select, from more than twenty honours courses, the ones you are most interested in for study to professional standard.
If you choose one of the joint degrees, you couple a smaller amount of business studies with an approximately equal amount of law, accounting, economics, mathematics, computer science, engineering or a European language.
The ERASMUS scheme allows you to study for a year in Europe, whether you choose the single honours BCom or one of the joint degrees, provided you are able to study in the language of your host country.
The worlds of industry and commerce, accountancy and finance, advertising and government have been major recruiters of graduates from the department for many years.
Every organisation needs good managers who understand how to make the enterprise work better, which is what this degree is for.
Introductory reading: Peters, T.J. & Waterman, R.H.Jr.
In Search of Excellence (Warner Books, 1983); Heller, R.,The Making of Managers (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1990).
Economic and Social History
Economic and social historians study the ways in which societies and economies change and the causes and consequences of those changes.
The knowledge they gain is often fascinating in its own right, but economic and social historians believe that an understanding of past change is also vital in helping us to understand today's society.
Many popular beliefs about the past are little more than myths; the marvels of the Victorian family or the failure of the British economy over the past hundred years are two examples of such myths.
And many of our society's institutions and problems can only be understood if we know about their origins and their subsequent development; our industrial relations system, conflicts between religious groups, the ‘crisis’ in the welfare state and the problems of the world economy today are four instances of this point.
The Department of Economic and Social History offers two single honours degrees.
Honours in Economic History focuses on economic change and offers students a strong foundation in economics alongside the maximum opportunity to study a wide range of aspects of world economic development over the past 500 years.
Honours in Economic and Social History allows students to combine the study of economic and social change or to focus more closely onto social change, combining if they wish courses in social history with some of the courses offered by the Sociology and the History departments.
There are also joint honours degrees with Economics, Politics, Geography, Sociology, Social Policy and Law.
The first-year courses (honours students take one or both) focus on British economic and social development.
The second-year economic history course looks at changes in the world economy between 1750 and 1914 while the second-year social history course studies world urbanisation from antiquity to the present day.
A wide range of more specialised honours course are offered, ranging in period from the medieval to the very recent past and geographically from Britain to Eastern Europe, Latin America, India, Russia and the former Soviet States, and the USA.
Edinburgh graduates in economic and social history have had little difficulty in entering a wide range of challenging and rewarding careers in such areas as financial, industrial and public management and administration, the media, and a range of research activities.
The analytical skills developed in an economic and social history degree, and particularly the ability to interpret bodies of often conflicting information, are prized by potential employers.
Introductory reading: Lee, C.H. The British Economy since 1700 (Cambridge University Press, 1986); Porter, R. English Society in the Eighteenth Century (Pelican, 1982).
Economics
Economics consists of the study of how societies produce to meet their needs, of what is produced, by what means, and in what quantities; of how products are used and distributed; and of the resulting processes of economic growth and change.
An understanding of these processes is of value to all those — for instance, politicians, trade unions, businesses — who wish to understand, forecast and influence economic developments and policy at either an aggregate level or at the level of individual markets.
Courses in economics therefore include the study of theoretical models of economic processes, of the statistical methods used to analyse economic data and to prepare economic forecasts, of markets and economic institutions such as the labour market or industrial firms or banks, and of economic policy and policy-making with respect to matters such as taxation, natural resources and the environment, financial markets and the international economy.
Single and joint degrees in Economics are available.
In the first two years a third of the course work is in economics.
The other subjects taken depend upon the degree course chosen.
Joint degrees in economics and another subject have become increasingly popular.
Economics and Accounting allows those wishing to follow a career as a chartered accountant the opportunity to combine courses which exempt them from part of their professional exams with courses on broader economic questions.
The curriculum for this degree includes a mixture of courses in economics, accounting, and law.
Business Studies and Economics permits the combination of two strongly complementary subjects.
Economics and Economic History permits the wider and deeper study of economic history, with less emphasis on theoretical and quantitative aspects of economics.
Economics and Politics provide a training in the techniques of two major social sciences disciplines.
The same applies to Economics and Sociology and to Social Policy and Economics.
For students with a mathematical background of a good grade in Higher or A-level mathematics, the joint honours degrees in Economics and Mathematics and in Economics and Statistics provide an excellent training in modern quantitative techniques.
There are also joint honours degrees in Economics and Law, in Arabic and Economics and in Philosophy and Economics which allow students to combine courses from the Law and Arts Faculties with economics.
By a judicious selection of courses in the first two years students may apply for transfer to a different joint or single honours degree.
Because of their quantitative and analytical skills, the demand for economics graduates is buoyant.
Many proceed to the accountancy profession or financial institutions but a wide range of other employment is available.
A recent survey has shown that Edinburgh graduates have entered occupations as diverse as investment analysis, banking, market research, business management, teaching and public administration.
Other graduates continue with economics at the postgraduate level; some have taken up posts as economic advisers in Africa.
Penguin publish a number of books which provide a good background to first-year courses, including Pen, J. Modern Economics ; Mishan, E. The Costs of Economic Growth ; Stewart, M. Keynes and After.
Geography
Geography, the study of people interacting with their environment, is a discipline with economic, social, political and physical dimensions.
At Edinburgh, honours degrees in Geography are available in both the Faculty of Science and Engineering (see separate entry) and the Faculty of Social Sciences.
As a social science, Geography focuses on how people create and use their socio-economic, built and cultural environments.
There are no specific subject requirements for those studying Geography as a Social Science, although most students excel in Geography at Higher grade or A-level.
Geography is studied with supporting courses that are drawn mainly from the social science programme, and flexibility and choice are the hallmarks of the degree.
In addition to studies in Geography, popular course combinations can include Archaeology, Economics, Economic and Social History, Politics, Social Policy, Sociology and Social Anthropology.
Joint honours degrees are available in Geography and each of these subjects.
A degree in Geography with Gender Studies is also offered (see course tables).
Within the Geography component of the degree, the first-year foundation course covers the major global issues of population, environment and resources.
In second year, students choose from a selection of courses including: Economic Landscape, Environmental Sensitivity and Change, and Social Landscape.
For Single Honours geographers, third and fourth years combine core courses in Geography with a choice of options drawn from an extensive list ranging from disease and environment, to leisure studies and regional specialisms, as well as courses focusing on the aspects of the discipline.
Fieldwork also forms an integral part of the curriculum.
Second year fieldwork includes participation in a ten-year study of socio-economic change in Edinburgh, and in the third year, there is a foreign fieldcourse, which currently offers a choice of venue: Iceland or Alsace.
Geography provides an extensive training in numeracy, literacy and in handling geographic information of all kinds.
Practical classes and laboratory work are part of this training, with opportunities to use all the tools of the social scientist as well as a variety of equipment in surveying and photogrammetry, computing and Geographical Information Systems (GIS), and physical geography.
The study of Geography develops a diversity of skills making Geography graduates popular with an extremely wide range of employers.
Geographers are well represented in industry, commerce, government and the professions, and are widely sought-after as graduate trainees.
Introductory reading: Rogers, A., Viles, H. and Goudie, A.S.
(1992)The Student's Companion to Geography (Blackwell, Oxford).
Johnston, R. J. and Taylor, P. J. (1989)A World in Crisis ?
Geographical Perspectives (Blackwell, Oxford), second edition.
Housing Studies
The honours degree in Housing Studies provides both a broad-based education in the social sciences and intensive preparation for a professional career in housing.
It is the only undergraduate degree in Scotland which qualifies for full exemption from the professional examinations of the Institute of Housing.
The degree is offered jointly by the Department of Social Policy & Social Work, University of Edinburgh and the Department of Planning and Housing, Edinburgh College of Art/Heriot Watt University.
Entry to the degree alternates annually between the co-operating institutions.
In even-numbered years entry is to the University of Edinburgh.
In odd-numbered years, entry is to Edinburgh College of Art/Heriot-Watt University.
Each cohort of students will be admitted to only one institution and will normally remain registered with that institution until  graduation.
However the entry requirements and the course content will be the same for all students regardless of which institution has admitted them.
During each year of study, work will be undertaken in both departments which are located within easy walking distance of each other.
The degree gives a thorough understanding of the social, economic and environmental context of housing, focusing on Scottish housing policy, practice and law.
The first two years provide a broad background in the social sciences together with a specialised introduction to the field of housing studies.
In the first year students take Housing Studies 1, Social Policy 1 and another social science course.
In the second year they continue with Housing Studies 2, Social Policy 2 and a further social science course.
At the end of the second year there is an eight week supervised placement with a housing association or housing co-operative.
In the honours years, students concentrate more on subjects which are directly related to the professional qualification in housing.
In the third year they will study Housing Policy and Practice, Housing Economics and Finance, Housing Law, Research Methods and Management Studies.
Students also continue to study Social Policy by taking Principles of Social Policy and one Social Policy option.
In addition, there is some project work and at the end of the third year, a twelve-week supervised placement with a housing authority or another housing agency.
In the final year, students complete the study of Housing Policy and Practice and take additional courses on Planning and Development, Building and Maintenance, Human Resource Management and another Social Policy option.
They also complete independent research on a housing topic for their dissertation and carry out a programme of practical work and field trips.
Introductory reading: Malpass, Peter and Murie, Alan,Housing Policy and Practice (3rd edition), London: Macmillan (1990); Clapham, David, Kemp, Peter and Smith, Susan J,Housing and Social Policy , London: Macmillan (1990).
Nursing Studies
Both study and nursing practice are essential in nursing education.
The study of nursing involves the examination of nursing and several other disciplines which bear upon nurses' activities and health care services in general.
Relevant aspects of sociology, psychology and biology provide insights which contribute to the understanding of human feelings and behaviour in health and illness.
Nursing practice forms an integral part of learning to nurse and is a crucial element in nursing studies.
The department offers general and honours degree courses in nursing.
These courses are recognised as preparation for professional registration and students can choose either general nursing or mental health nursing.
During the first two years, all students take the same nursing courses.
These offer a sound foundation in knowledge and understanding of what contributes to health and nursing care.
Accompanying practical nursing experiences in community and hospitals helps to elaborate understanding and develop nursing skills.
There is also a strong element of liberal education and students can choose from a range of social science and arts courses offered by other departments in the University.
In the third year, students study either general or mental health nursing.
During this year, a greater emphasis is placed on learning the skills of the practising nurse, a variety of opportunities being provided in hospital wards and in the community.
During the final year, students follow the curriculum for either the general degree or the honours degree.
The study of wider social, economic and organisational issues in health care is a major component.
Most graduate nurses start their professional careers in clinical nursing.
Subsequently, many opportunities exist to specialise, for example, in intensive care, in midwifery or in community psychiatric nursing.
Some advance their careers by moving into nurse teaching, management or research, while some find that other  countries and international health care organisations provide alternative career opportunities.
The increasing complexity of health care and its organisation and the rapid advances in science and technology are likely to continue to bring even greater opportunities, responsibilities and satisfactions in every field of nursing.
Introductory reading: Kenworthy, N., Snowley, G. & Gilling, C. (1992)Common Foundation Studies in Nursing (Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone).
Politics
A degree in Politics is one of the best first degree courses for a student wanting to make a career in business, administration, the media, voluntary bodies or central and local government.
It combines a rigorous intellectual training with an understanding of the modern world.
Students interested in European affairs and a career in a Community institution will find this degree especially useful, as there are courses in European politics and Community affairs, and the department has close links with the Europa Institute in the Law Faculty, as well as with several other European universities.
The main degree we offer is the four-year MA Honours in Politics.
There are also joint honours degrees in Politics with Economics, Economic and Social History, Law, Modern History, Philosophy, Social Policy, Sociology and a range of languages including French, German and Spanish.
The first-year course, Politics 1, is an introduction both to political theory and to British politics, while Politics 2 concentrates on comparative politics and the political systems of eastern and western Europe.
Students studying single honours Politics must take one compulsory course, in Political Theory, which covers the main concepts used in contemporary political thought, and the arguments of the major political theorists from the renaissance to the 19th century.
All other courses are optional.
They include full-year courses on subjects such as the USA, the Soviet Union and its successors, international relations, European integration, the environment, Africa, policy making, theories of democracy and revolt, politics and markets, and Hegel.
There are also term-length courses on Marx, public order, Ireland, Scotland, women and politics, electoral politics and educational policy.
If they wish, students can do an optional dissertation, and pick up word-processing and other computer skills.
They can also spend all or part of an honours year abroad, as the department and the faculty have links with many European and American universities.
Course work in the department is helped by a departmental library and micro-lab, and by a range of interesting outside speakers, many invited by the Politics Society.
It is complemented by reading weekends for honours students, and by friendly, informal contact with the fifteen members of staff.
Introductory reading Coxall, B. & Robins, L. Contemporary British Politics (Macmillan 1990); Barry, N. An Introduction to Modern Poltical Thought (Macmillan 1989); Smith, G. Politics in Western Europe (Hutchinson).
Psychology
Psychology is the scientific study of behaviour and the mind.
Its aim is to understand the behaviour of the individual and of society.
This wide range embraces biological aspects such as brain mechanisms and effects of drugs and hormones, the experimental study of sensation, perception, learning, motivation, skills, memory, thought and language, individual differences of personality and intelligence, and social behaviour including attitudes and beliefs.
An active growth area is the developmental study of psychological processes.
Although psychology itself is concerned with normal people the course also covers relevant aspects of psychological disorders — brain damage, genetic defects, mental illness.
Courses in applied areas such as educational psychology are also taught.
The first-year course provides students with an introduction to the main areas of contemporary experimental psychology.
Intermediate and advanced teaching in the main areas continues in the second- and third-year courses.
In fourth year, students are  able to choose from a range of different courses which are allied to contemporary issues and research in psychology.
Fourth-year students carry out an original research project under staff supervision.
Instruction is provided in research methods and analysis from first year; and training is provided in the use of computers.
In addition to the single honours degree there are also joint honours degrees with Linguistics, and with Business Studies in the Faculty of Social Sciences, with Philosophy in Arts, and with Artificial Intelligence in Science and Engineering.
After graduation psychologists work in a variety of areas.
For Clinical or Educational Psychology, postgraduate qualifications are needed.
Other graduates work in industry, in personnel and management, in the civil and armed services.
The honours curriculum is designed to provide a good background for many types of work.
Introductory reading: Miller, G.A.
Psychology: The Science of Mental Life (Penguin, 1964); Gleitman, H. Psychology (Norton, 1991).
Social Anthropology
Social Anthropology is about men and women (and children) in society.
Its aim is to understand the different ways in which people around the world engage with each other and the physical environment to sustain their lives.
This involves studying the social relationships people enter into as well as the kinds of knowledge and beliefs, values and sentiments people acquire as part of these social processes.
Social Anthropology 1 presents an assessment of the contribution of the work of anthropologists to knowledge and understanding of a number of human concerns including ritual and religion, the family and marriage and the consequences of the spread of money economies and industrialisation among the populations of the Third World.
These and other themes are also pursued through detailed case studies from several contrasting regions of the world.
Social Anthropology 2 addresses a range of current issues in social anthropology including symbolic classification, witchcraft and magic, environment and society, gender, and ethnicity and conflict.
Social Anthropology 3 forms part of the BSc degree and shares courses with the Junior Honours year of the MA degree.
Junior Honours (3rd year)this is the first half of the two-year Honours MA degree programme.
All students pursue certain courses of general anthropological concern.
In addition students will choose other courses from a range of options which will include specific regions of the world for intensive study as well as particular themes and issues in anthropology, eg social development, gender, healing, identity, world religions.
Training in research methods is part of their preparation for their research projects on the basis of which they will write a dissertation.
The project consists of several months' fieldwork carried out during the summer term and long vacation of the Junior Honours year.
The field research can be carried  out almost anywhere in the world though the project has to be designed with the assistance of the staff and is subject to their approval.
Senior Honours (4th year)all students will continue with the study of certain courses of general and theoretical relevance to anthropology as well as selected optional courses.
At the same time students will be preparing under supervision the results of their field research for presentation as a dissertation and will be attending classes on how to write up anthropological research.
In addition to the above single honours degree there are Joint Honours degrees in Social Anthropology and Archaeology, Social Anthropology and Sociology, Social Anthropology and Social Policy, Social Anthro-pology and Geography, and Social Anthropology and Linguistics.
Finally there are honours degrees in Social Anthropology with Gender Studies, with Development, and with South Asian Studies.
Those students who do not go on to do postgraduate degrees in Social Anthropology may enter a wide range of occupations and professions, both nationally and internationally.
Former students of the department have entered the Civil Service, local government, social work (both at home and abroad), international agencies (such as the UN, FAO, WHO, Oxfam), industry, commerce, teaching, journalism, radio, television and advertising.
Introductory reading: Lewis, I.M. Social Anthropology in Perspective (CUP 1976).
Social Policy
Social Policy is a subject for students interested in contemporary social issues.
For at least twenty years after the Second World War most people supported the welfare state but since then it has come under attack from all sides.
The right characterise it as the ‘nanny state’ stifling initiative and giving unproductive employment to the middle classes.
The left asserts that far from helping the poor it props up capitalism and embodies unacceptable forms of social control.
Social policy courses examine these arguments and the evidence on which they are based.
Social Policy 1 evaluates different explanations of the growth of the welfare state and conflicting accounts of the ways in which it functions, and then examines issues and arguments which arise in two areas in which controversy is rife; namely poverty and disease.
Social Policy 2 is taught as three separate half courses and students are normally expected to take two of these.
Equality, Markets and Welfare 2h deals with the issues of choice, accountability, efficiency, fairness and management in housing, education and social work.
Work and Welfare 2h examines how social policies influence the availability, distribution and rewards of work.
European Social Policy 2h deals with the development of European Welfare States and the changing role of the European Commission in social policy.
The department offers an MA honours degree in Social Policy and joint honours degrees with Economic and Social History, Economics, Geography, Law, Politics, Social Anthropology and Sociology or with Gender Studies, as well as courses for the BSc(SocSci) degree.
At honours levels, there are compulsory courses in the principles of social policy, in research methods and in computing and many options which cover all the major policy areas (eg education, health, housing and social work), different policy perspectives (eg economics, gender, and law) different national orientations (eg Scotland and developing countries); and specialist subjects (eg children, the private sector and poverty).
Practical Experience and Opportunities for Study Abroad
In first year students are encouraged to take part in a series of observational visits designed to illustrate the main themes of the course.
At the end of the second year, students complete a 4 — 6 week fieldwork placement.
Recent placements have included social work area teams, housing associations, Women's Aid hostels, MPs and the Central Research Unit in the Scottish Office.
In their third year, honours students also write a 10,000-word dissertation based on supervised research on a subject of their choice.
Among recent subjects have been council house sales, public attitudes to embryo research and the effects of unemployment on young women.
Honours students may, if they wish, spend a term abroad in the European Community (under the ERASMUS programme) or in Finland.
Some graduates go on to take further qualifications, for example in housing or social work, or into postgraduate research.
Others go into the civil service, journalism, pressure groups, or voluntary organisations and a variety of other careers.
Introductory readings: Michael Hill,Understanding Social Policy (third edn)(1988, Blackwell); Martin Loney & others (eds)The State and the Market (1987, Sage Publications).
Sociology
If you want to understand more about the society in which you live, if you are curious about why groups of people behave the way they do or hold particular sets of beliefs, if you are intrigued by how societies change, then Sociology may be your kind of subject.
Sociology 1,the first-year course, introduces some of the key ideas of sociology in the context of modern Britain and Scotland.
Its central theme is ‘modernisation’, how societies are continually transformed by major social, economic and political changes.
The course also stresses the importance of research methods, how sociology is actually carried out.
Sociology 2 encourages critical and theoretically-informed sociological understanding.
The major varieties of sociological theory are introduced through case studies selected for their current interest, so that knowledge of the constitution of modern societies continues to develop.
The current roles of class, gender, ethnicity and nationality as bases of social organisation and social division are analysed, and the prospects of recent social movements as initiators of social change.
Honours in Sociology occupy the two honours years.
Students are required to take courses in Social Theory and in Methods of Social Research but thereafter they are free to choose from a wide range of options.
All honours candidates have to undertake a research project and submit a report on this as part of the final examination.
For students and staff alike these exercises in ‘doing’ sociology are exciting and rewarding (and very frequently stand students in good stead when they apply for jobs).
For students who wish to combine the study of Sociology with an interest in other subjects the department offers a sizeable array of joint degrees.
Sociology can be combined with Social Policy, Social Anthropology, Social History, Economics, Politics, Law and History.
Sociology can also be studied with Scottish Society, Gender, or South Asian Studies.
For sociology graduates there are career opportunities in many different areas.
Some former students have taken up administrative posts in various public and private enterprises and in the civil service and local government.
Others have embarked on careers in teaching (at all levels), and a good few now work in journalism and the mass media.
Specifically sociological skills are required in diverse research posts associated with education, medicine, urban planning and the social services.
Introductory reading: A. Giddens,Sociology, a brief but critical introduction (MacMillan); D. McCrone,Understanding Scotland: the Sociology of a Stateless Nation (Routledge).
Centre of African Studies
The Centre of African Studies, established in 1962, is in the Faculty of Social Sciences, but does not offer any undergraduate courses of its own.
Instead, its members teach in several departments of the faculty (Economics, Education, Politics and Social Anthropology), and students are welcome to attend its weekly seminars.
Centre of Canadian Studies
The first Centre of Canadian Studies in the United Kingdom was established at Edinburgh in the Faculty of Social Sciences in 1974.
This Centre offers a programme of studies both at the undergraduate and intermediate postgraduate levels.
The undergraduate can incorporate one or two courses in Canadian Studies in several of the degree curricula in the faculty.
The Centre also contributes to teaching at honours level in various departments.
Canadian Studies 1 deals with the peopling, resources and regions of Canada.
Canadian Studies 2 with contemporary Canadian questions.
VETERINARY MEDICINE
The veterinary degree course at the Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies at the University of Edinburgh is broad and balanced and provides an excellent basis for subsequent specialisation in either clinical practice or research.
Founded by William Dick in 1823, the Edinburgh Veterinary School is one of the oldest and largest in the United Kingdom.
It was incorporated in Edinburgh University in 1951.
Though the youngest of the eight faculties in the University, the reputation of the School stands high throughout the world and students from many countries attend its undergraduate and postgraduate courses.
What Degrees are offered?
BVM& S Degree (D100)
The course falls into three interrelated parts.
The first, or preclinical section, deals with the structures and functions of the animal body, aspects which are essential to an understanding of both health and disease.
The second section covers the paraclinical subjects which deal with the nature of disease and the various hereditary and environmental factors responsible for its production and this is integrated closely with the final section which comprises the clinical subjects and deals essentially with the study of disease in individual animals and in the flock or herd.
The emphasis is on diagnosis and treatment by medical or surgical means and on the measures available for the prevention and control of disease.
An important feature of the course is the subject of Animal Health.
This extends across all five years and gives students the opportunity to handle animals from the start of the course.
The principal subjects of study are listed in the Table.
BSc (VET Sc) Honours Degree
Selected students can interrupt their veterinary studies for a year at the end of years 2, 3 or 5 and take a BSc (Vet Sc) honours degree.
The course consists of a year's advanced study in one of the following honours schools: Animal Nutrition, Biochemistry, Neuroscience, Pathological Sciences, Preclinical Sciences.
Teaching Facilities
Students are normally taught in small groups throughout the course.
Most of the preclinical teaching is within the Royal (Dick) School at Summerhall close to the centre of the city.
Clinical teaching is at the Small Animal Practice at Summerhall and the Large Animal Practice based at the Veterinary Field Station several miles south of the city.
Much of the work of the latter practice involves attending cases at local farms or neighbouring institutes.
The Large Animal Practice also provides veterinary services at Edinburgh Zoo.
Admissions Procedure
Minimum Requirements.
All candidates must apply through UCAS and should satisfy the University's General Entrance Requirement.
All applicants who possess the minimum entrance requirements for the BVM&S degree course will be considered.
SCE: A, A, A, B, B to include Chemistry and two of Biology, Maths, Physics.
Chemistry and one other science subject at A pass.
GCE: One of the following:
3 A-levels at A, A, B in Chemistry (at A grade) and two of Biology, Maths, Physics
4 A-levels at A, B, B, B in Chemistry (at A grade), Biology, Maths and Physics.
Candidates wishing to present other types of qualifications are requested to write to the Faculty Office outlining their plans.
The grades shown above for course requirement purposes should normally be obtained at the first attempt, but the Selection Committee may waive this requirement in exceptional cases, eg mature students showing academic ability and strong motivation, or on compassionate grounds.
Candidates from Scottish schools are generally encouraged to take a 6th year at school and undertake CSYS in Chemistry and one other science subject.
If unable to take a triple science in the 5th year the missing subject should be included in the 6th year of study.
Going Rates In recent years most SCE entrants have attained grades A, A, A, B, B or better and have returned for a sixth year at school.
Most GCE entrants have attained at least grades A, A, B.
Number of Places There are 65 places available for ‘home/EC’ students.
Practical Experience Applicants will be expected to have taken every opportunity to gain relevant practical experience of handling animals.
If at all possible, prospective students should have prior experience of veterinary practice and of agriculture.
They are strongly advised to describe any relevant practical experience on the UCAS form and to forward any references directly to the Faculty Office.
A conditional offer may include evidence of relevant practical experience as a pre-condition for entry to the course.
Age on Entry The minimum age is 17 years 6 months on 1st October of the proposed year of entry.
Time of Submission The time of submission of the application within the dates set by UCAS is not important; all candidates are given equal consideration.
Selection Process Each application is considered on its merits with a view to assessing fairly whether the applicant will enhance the veterinary profession.
In this, academic qualifications obviously play a large part, but close attention is given also to the applicant's personality and non-academic interests and attainments based on information supplied by the candidate and by the confidential referee.
There is no discrimination for or against any candidate on the basis of sex, ethnic origin, social class, home location or whether they have a veterinary background.
No type of school has an advantage over another.
Interviews All prospective candidates are interviewed.
Special classes of Applicant
The majority of entrants are school-leavers from the UK.
The remainder come from the following categories:
1.
Overseas applicants.
Applicants from overseas are welcomed.
Candidates will be expected to offer high grades in the science subjects, be competent in both written and spoken English and show evidence of satisfactory financial support.
2.
Graduate applicants.
A small number of places are available each year for graduates.
Competition is keen and candidates must offer a minimum of an upper second class honours degree together with evidence of satisfactory financial arrangements.
Applications must be made through UCAS.
3.
Mature students.
Although mature applicants receive special consideration there are no relaxations of course requirements for them and because of the current competition for places the number of successful mature applicants is likely to be small.
Registration
Those veterinary graduates who intend to practise in the UK or the EC become registered by right of their BVM&S degree, in the United Kingdom Register of Veterinary Surgeons and become Members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons.
Career Opportunities
Though the veterinary profession in Britain is relatively small in number, it is responsible for essential aspects of the maintenance of health and production in farm animals, for the prevention of animal disease and for the diagnosis and treatment of disease in farm animals, horses, household pets, laboratory and zoo animals.
Veterinary graduates are required for teaching and research in universities and for posts in research institutes, government services and industry.
There are also opportunities for service overseas where the veterinary surgeon can play a major part in the world-wide struggle against malnutrition, particularly in the developing countries.
Parts of the course have much in common with medical science; thus veterinary graduates specialising in anatomy, biochemistry or physiology can contribute to a general understanding of the structure and function of the living body; veterinary pathology can help to increase our knowledge of cancer, heart disease and other syndromes common to a variety of species.
For those who are interested in aspects other than private practice there is a wide variety of options.
Government posts are available in the disease control and investigation service of the Animal Health Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
In this service veterinary surgeons are employed in the control and eradication of serious diseases of livestock, in the investigation of outbreaks of disease, in the application of health schemes aimed at increasing the efficiency of our livestock industries, and in all matters of animal health and welfare which may affect the country as a whole.
Local authorities offer appointments in the field of Veterinary Public Health concerned essentially with preventing the spread of disease from animals to man.
University veterinary schools and a wide variety of research institutes provide opportunities for veterinary graduates to work on both fundamental and applied aspects of the preclinical and paraclinical subjects as well as in the various clinical fields.
Zoological organisations require veterinary graduates to supervise the health of the animal species with which they are concerned.
Commercial firms, especially those concerned with pharmacological and nutritional products, employ a limited number of veterinary advisers both in this country and overseas; and there are opportunities for giving technical assistance to developing countries under the auspices of either the Overseas Development Administration or one of the United Nations external aid agencies.
Further Information
The faculty welcomes enquiries from prospective entrants and holds visiting days during the year (see Schools Liaison section at the front of this prospectus).
Enquiries for further information should be addressed to The Admissions Officer, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1QH.
Tel 031 650 6148.