

[MOONDREAM]
All Things Undreamed Of
‘Tallis!
Tallis!’
The girl's voice was very distant.
It might have been shouted in a dream.
Tallis glanced towards the exit from the mortuary house, then frowned and looked around.
The fire was dead.
Tig was nowhere to be seen.
Since the embers were cool, Tallis imagined that she had been sitting there for hours.
She stood up, on legs that were stiff and aching, and limped from the cruig-morn, massaging circulation back into her flesh.
She stepped through the sinister half-circle of rajathuks and saw Morthen, standing uneasily at the entrance of the enclosure.
The girl's face darkened slightly when the woman stepped into view.
She seemed angry, or perhaps discomforted.
‘Hello, Morthen.’
‘My father,’ Morthen said, without greeting.
‘He's come home to us.’
‘He's awake!’
‘Yes.’
There was a dull tone to her voice.
She was definitely distancing herself from the older woman.
As Tallis began to move past her, Morthen caught her arm.
Her dark eyes were fierce.
The snail shells, formed into a loose net over her hair, clattered slightly as her head lifted.
She said, ‘He is my brother.
I've been waiting for him all my life.
You must let me look after him now.’
Tallis tried to smile, but the girl's fierceness froze the gesture.
So she said simply, ‘I've been with him all of my life.
I shan't let him go that easily.’
Morthen made a sound like a wild animal, turned and ran down through the blackthorn.
Tallis followed glancing back at the huge carvings, their grotesque faces watching her, some compassionately, some with mocking expressions.
Sinisalo — child in the land — seemed to leer at her.
They passed through the gate to the settlement, weaved between the new hides stretched on their frames, and ducked into the long-house.
Morthen stayed by the door.
Across the gloomy interior, Tallis could see Scathach crouched by the straw mattress, his arm around the back of the old man's head.
Glimmering light caught Wynra jathuk's eyes as he watched his son and listened to Scathach's softly spoken words.
Tallis moved quietly round the house and came up behind the hunter; she sat on the rush matting and hugged her knees, listening to what was being said.
Scathach had been telling about his first journey through the wood.
‘…the Jaguthin are always called away.
You were right about that.
But the way of calling differs.
For a while I rode with one group who were summoned by a crone, guarded by giant hounds.
She emerged from the centre of the earth, surrounded by black dogs.
But the Jaguthin who became my close companions were summoned at night, during the full moon.
Their calling came in the form of a night spirit, a  wraith.
It drifted through the branches of trees and lifted the spirit out of the man.
It was both strange and terrible to see the ghosts of each of my friends leave their bodies, then to watch those bodies rise and run into the nightwoods, in pursuit of their souls.’
In a wheezing, faint voice, Wynne-Jones said, ‘They would be reunited…body and soul…at the place of the deed to be done…the great battle…all quest legend is like this…first thing is to find the inner self…’
Scathach hushed the old man, who was struggling to keep the flow of his words.
‘I lost them all.
All my friends.
Gyonval was the last, just a few short seasons ago.
His loss distressed Tallis more than any of them.
He seemed to resist the calling, perhaps because of his love for Tallis.
There was a special feeling between the two of them.’
Tallis went icy cold.
She touched her eyes and face and her heart thundered.
She had not known that Scathach had known, not been aware that he had seen.
It brought back a flood of fear and an almost unbearable memory of loss, the body of the warrior Gyonval fighting with the wood, impaling itself on a sharp branch as if that might keep the soul from parting.
An empty, broken corpse, it had walked past Tallis, stepping through the fire; above the trees the wraith was twined about the ghostly image of the man, dragging it across the canopy, even though it struggled for flight back to the woodland camp.
Only Scathach's restraining grasp had stopped Tallis following Gyonval into the wood, to try to bring him back.
She had been silent, resisting Scathach powerfully but uttering no sound.
‘He's gone,’ he had whispered.
‘We've lost him…’
My loss is greater than you realize, Tallis had thought bitterly; but that is a knowledge I shall spare you.
Now, in the long-house, she realized that Scathach had been fully aware of the special pain she felt.
‘I was sad to lose them,’ Scathach said.
‘Three of them, Gyonval, Gwyllos and Curundoloc were still with me when I reached the forbidden world and found the shrine in ruins.’
‘Oak Lodge,’ Wynne-Jones breathed, and repeated the name as if savouring the sound of a place he had once known well.
‘A ruin you say.
Not inhabited, then…’
‘It was overgrown by forest.
The trees had entered every part of it.
The wood will never let it go, now.
But I found the journal.
I read it as you asked, but rain had made the magic blur.
The symbols were hard to interpret.
It was very confusing.’
‘Was there any reference to my departure…into the wood?’
Scathach nodded.
‘Yes.
It was written that you had discovered the oolerinnen.
You became obsessed with the opening of gates into the heart of the forest.
It was written that one day you returned smelling of snow and very ill from winter.
A week later you returned to that place of winter and never returned.’
There was a moment's silence.
Wynne-Jones's breathing slowed.
He was staring vacantly across the lodge; Tallis leaned forward slightly to watch him, but he didn't see her.
‘I passed through,’ he murmured.
‘It took me very much by surprise.
It was in the oak-thorn zone, near to the horse-shrine.
We had explored the area very thoroughly.
We had mapped the energy of the ley-matrix.
Oak and thorn always made powerful generative zones, and oak-thorn is a prime genesis zone for mythagos of a very primitive origin.
Many of them were more animal than human.
The oolerinnen must have set a trap for me.
I passed through and I could not get back…’
Again Scathach hushed the man, raising a beaker to his lips so that he could sip cool water.
Wynne-Jones sighed and his hand, gripping his son's wrist, fluttered like a flightless bird, then found a new, more reassuring perch upon the stronger limb.
‘And Huxley himself?
What of my friend George?
What of the old magician himself?’
‘His wife was dead.
He created the mythago of a girl and fell in love.
His eldest son came home from a great war in another land…’
‘What was she called?
The girl…’
‘Guiwenneth.’
‘Where was she from?’
Scathach dipped his head in thought for a moment.
‘A wildwood princess of the Britons.
I think that's what I read.’
Wynne-Jones shuddered; Tallis thought he was coughing with pain, but he was laughing.
‘The quietest man I knew…engenders the fieriest of women…
Vindogenita herself…
Guinevere…’ he rasped with amusement for a moment longer, then relaxed.
‘As far as I can tell,’ Scathach said, ‘father and son contested the love of the girl —’
‘How predictable.’
‘And that's all.
No resolution.
No final passage.
I cannot tell you what occurred after.’
There was silence for a while, only the old man's breathing breaking the stillness with its catching, painful rhythm.
Then he asked, ‘And what of you?
How far were you able to travel from the edge of the world?’
‘A full day on foot,’ Scathach answered.
‘Then a terrible pain began in my head; and dizziness and a feeling of fear.
The world seemed dark even in daylight.
I could see the shadows of trees on a land that was as  bare as naked rock, and there were ghosts behind the trees, taunting me.
I had to return to the area of the shrine.
But I spent a year in that shadowland.
I disguised myself in the clothes of the people.
I worked on a farm.
I helped to build one of their houses.
I was paid in coinage.
I asked about you, and about Huxley, but I found nothing.
Then, when I returned to the shrine — to Oak Lodge — I realized that the Keeton girl had been making contact with me.’
‘Later,’ the old man said.
‘Later…tell me of Anne…my daughter Anne.
Did you manage to see her?’
‘I used a telephone.
I spoke to her from a great distance.
She was still living in Oxford, as you mentioned.
It was easy to find the way to call her.
I told her my name, who I was, and that you were old, but in good health, and had journeyed very far into the wood.
I told her of my mother Elethandian, your wife, and I would have told her more but she began to scream at me.
She called me a liar.
She was very angry.
She said that I was a fraud.
She said the police would come to take me into the stockade like the cruel and wild animal I was.
I told her of the dead snake that you and she had found once, and which had been your special secret.
How else could I have known about it unless I was your son?
But she stopped speaking.
She went away without leaving a message for you.’
Scathach gently rubbed his father's wrist.
‘I'm sorry.
I truly am.’
The news had deflated the old man.
He sighed with disappointment and lay carefully back on the straw pallet.
‘Never mind…’ he whispered, and closed his eyes.
Soon he was sleeping.
Tallis stayed with Scathach for a while but found the atmosphere in the long-house increasingly uncomfortable; it was smoky, and her lungs became choked.
It was  cold, too, an icy wind sneaking in through the thatch and through gaps in the mud wall.
There was the smell of bitter herbs and of Wynne-Jones's incontinence, and soon the idea of the crisp outside world became attractive again.
If Scathach had wanted her to stay she would have stayed, but he remained distant, not responding to Tallis's touch.
He slumped, then turned slightly, staring through the gloom of the house towards the north, as if he could see through the walls, through the wood, to that place of battle, that cold place, which lay northwards and to which he and Tallis — as everything that passed this way seemed to be moving.
Morthen slipped into the lodge, circling Tallis warily and keeping her eyes averted.
She seemed nervous at first, then almost resentful of the older woman's presence.
Tallis resolved to remain for a while, but turned her gaze away.
The girl whispered to her brother.
‘There are tamers in the valley.
They've cleared a trapping ground, half a day's tracking to the south.
There are only a few of them, but they have several horses.’
‘Tamers?’
Scathach asked indifferently.
‘What are tamers?’
‘Tamers of horses,’ Morthen said excitedly.
‘Their weapons are poor.
Their stone points are very crude and we can cut their nets easily.
They're big men, but stupid, covered with clay streaks on their bodies.
We should subdue them easily.’
‘You're just a girl,’ Scathach murmured, and Morthen looked shocked.
Her brother was less than interested in her information, but Morthen seemed determined to win his favour.
‘All I will do is cut the tethers.
First-hog-of-summer and others of the hunters will do the raiding.
I'll bring you back a horse.
I'll name it for you.’
‘Thank you.
Be careful.’
Morthen reached out and rested her hand on her brother's face.
‘I will soon be older,’ she murmured.
Tallis grew aware of the girl's angry gaze towards her, then Morthen had slipped away, leaving a swirl of grey smoke where her body had passed by the hearth.
Tallis left too.
She already had her travelling companion, Swimmer of Lakes, and if she thought of the wild horses in the valley at all it was simply to wonder about the legend of the tamers: to subdue the spirit of the wild animal; to be permitted to ride upon its back; yes, magic would have been necessary in early thought, and cult legends certainly would have grown around the hunters who snared the fast, proud creatures.
She returned to the mortuary house.
Tig was nowhere to be seen.
The fire had been kicked over, though, the ash distributed around the floor.
From the earth bank outside she looked north; soon she saw the bulkily-furred figures of Morthen and three of the hunters; they followed the edge of the wood, round to the south, and were soon lost to sight.
But to the north: there was just greyness, a swirling mist; and perhaps the hint of mountains and winter beyond.
It was hard to see detail; the canopy of the forest grew black and shapeless, only the shuddering elms reaching gigantically above the sea of foliage.
She heard her name again, and again she emerged as if from a dream and found that time had passed.
When she looked down the hill she saw Scathach making his way slowly towards her, through the dense thorns.
He carried Wynne-Jones on his back; the old man beat at the thorns with his stick, one arm held tightly around his son's neck.
They came into the enclosure.
Wynne-Jones rammed his stick into the ground then eased himself down from his mount.
He slung his cloak of feathers over the staff and Scathach helped him to sit down in the slight shelter that  this garment offered.
He was facing the rajathuks.
His good eye glittered as he stared at them.
But Tallis, as she came down the bank, could see that he was frightened.
His white beard was ragged.
A blue line had been daubed across his forehead and round his short white hair.
Scathach had entered the mortuary house.
He came out again.
‘No sign of Tig.’
‘Keep watch for him,’ Wynne-Jones said sharply, anxiously.
‘He can't be far away…’
Then he turned to smile grimly at Tallis, adding quietly but audibly, ‘And I don't want that little killer anywhere in slingshot range.
He's too accurate.’
Man and woman exchanged long, searching stares.
‘Tallis…you are Tallis…’
‘Yes.’
‘You spoke to me in my sleep.
You told me tales and adventures.
You asked me questions.’
‘Yes.
Can you remember that?’
‘as if in a dream,’ he replied, then beckoned her over.
She went to him, crouching down on the cold earth.
When he took her hands she felt the tension in him; he was shaking.
The shadow of Tig masked him more than the ferocious wound that had blinded his left eye and decorated his cheeks with scars.
Wynne-Jones ignored her worried look and continued to touch her, cradling her face in his hands and touching her lips with his fingers.
‘How old were you when the wood took you?’
‘Thirteen,’ Tallis said.
‘But the wood didn't take me.
I went in with Scathach.
I didn't intend to stay very long.’
The old man found that amusing, but he said, ‘Can you remember much about England?
About your life?
About the world?’
She said that she could.
‘I'll tell you what I know, though I was a bit of a reclusive child…’
‘Later,’ he said.
‘I'll hear about it later.
First there is  something I must show you, something to encourage you.
Then I need to think about all the strangeness that happened to you as a child; my firstborn son has already told me something of your life, and of the questions you have for me.’
His words made Tallis look sadly towards the mortuary house, a last shiver of loss making her huddle into her furs.
‘Are you all right?’
Wyn asked, his voice concerned and kindly.
‘A few hours ago I burned the remains of my own first born,’ Tallis said.
‘Ah…’
After a while Wyn asked, ‘How long did the child live?’
‘A season or two.
A few months.’
Tallis smiled.
‘I still try to remember the old way of measuring time.’
‘How many children…how many altogether?’
‘Three.
The others were never properly born.’
‘Were they my son's?’
Wynne-Jones asked.
‘Yes,’ Tallis said quickly, but she couldn't help dropping her gaze as she told the partial lie, and when she looked back Wynne-Jones was not smiling.
Suddenly he reached out and tugged a small, black feather from the fringe of his cloak.
The cold wind blew his cropped white hair and made him shiver violently, but he resisted Tallis's attempt to tug the cloak around his shoulders, instead pushing the feather into her hand.
‘Rites and rituals in late Neolithic Europe,’ he said with a wry grin.
‘A black feather to show my sorrow.
Tomorrow you should bring it to the shaman's lodge and we'll burn it with bird fat, honey and a strip of the dried skin of a wolf.
In a hollowed stone, of course, and you must scratch your body-mark upon the stone so that I can decorate it later.’
He was almost laughing, his eye narrowing with humour, the look in it one of knowingness, a  shared joke between people from an advanced culture.
‘It will help the spirit of the boy to travel on.
Or so they believe.’
Tallis shrugged.
‘Perhaps it will, though.
Things do seem to work in this world.
Magic things.
Psychic things.’
‘That's very true.
And it still frightens me.
It frightens me how a child can be made of flesh and blood but decay to wood.
What biological process is at work?
Scathach and Morthen are the only two children of mine who survived out of a great number.
Oddly, I realize that that means there is more of the wood in them than flesh.
My son found it almost impossible to leave the edgewoods and explore the farmland around Ryhope…’
‘I know.’
‘And I'm afraid your own fate was sealed from the moment you entered the forest with him.
Once he had been to the forbidden place — for him, England — and once he had succeeded in returning, he would have been taken by a tide, a powerful current drawing him back to the heartwoods.
You are only allowed one journey into hell…
He could not have returned you to England no matter how hard he had tried.’
Tallis nodded grimly.
‘I had expected to explore the wood for a month.
I have been lost here for eight years.’
‘Be prepared to be lost here for the rest of your life.’
‘I won't ever accept that,’ Tallis said sharply.
‘I shall get home somehow.’
‘You will never get home.
Accept that now.’
‘I will find my brother.
I will get home.
I accept nothing else.’
‘Ah yes…’
Wynne-Jones said, a fleeting smile on his lips.
‘Your brother.
Help me up.
I want to show you something.’
He was unsteady on his feet, leaning heavily on Tallis.
He used his stick and pointed up at the grim-featured totem-poles.
‘You recognize them of course.’
Tallis stared at the wood, experiencing the feeling of familiarity.
She shivered, uncomfortably close to an understanding.
‘Yes and no,’ she said.
‘They remind me of my masks.’
‘I've seen your masks,’ the old man said.
‘I saw it at once.
That one is Falkenna…’
‘The flight of a bird into an unknown region.’
‘And the one with the new growth upon it is Skogen…’
‘Shadow of the forest,’ Tallis breathed.
‘I have always felt a strange affinity for that one.’
Wyn laughed, a wheezing sound.
‘It was how I knew you were coming.
It changed.
Skogen is the changing shadow of the forest.
I thought that my son was doing it, changing the totem because of the way he was reaching towards me.
It was you, though.
You are the skogen.
You are the shadow of the forest…like Harry before you.
It is in the shadows that you will find him.’
He looked up again, pointed to the rajathuk which Tallis knew better than all, because of her own obsession with the wood…
‘Moondream.’
‘The eyes that see the woman in the land.
I lost that mask.
I dropped it when I left for the realm.
My father has it, now.’
She smiled.
‘I sometimes wonder if he is watching me through it.’
Wynne-Jones seemed alarmed by what she had said, though.
‘You must make it again.
If the masks have remained of importance to you, you must certainly fashion it again.’
‘Important to me?’
Tallis shrugged.
‘I use some of  them.
Others I hardly ever use.
They seem to work, though.
I see things through them…’
‘You miss the point of the masks,’ Wynne-Jones murmured, stroking his grey beard and watching Skogen.
‘Perhaps you are not yet ready to use them correctly.’
‘I use the Hollower whenever I wish to cross a threshold…’
Wynne-Jones chuckled.
‘Of course.
What else would you use?
But Tallis…listen to me…in legend's terms, the masks, like these rajathuks, are the facets of an oracle!
The voice of the earth speaking its vision through the shaman: that's me; or you; or Tig.
You cannot use the masks as an oracle if one of them is missing.’
He turned to stare at Tallis, who pulled a face.
‘But they still work.’
‘They work to an extent.
But they could work much better.
Think of each mask alone as being on a chain.
That chain leads from the mask, when you wear it, deep into your mind.
There are many concealed places in your mind, many forbidden or forgo–ten places.
Think of each mask as reaching to one of those locked parts of the mind.
The patterns on the masks, the shape of the wood, the touch of the wood, the smell of the wood, any smell you have incorporated, the bright colours, or the dull shades…all of these are part of the essential pattern, the essential knowledge, the unknowing knowing that is at the heart of magic.
Each mask unlocks lost memory when you look at it; each mask gives access to a lost talent: it opens the door, if you like, and lets the legends out…or perhaps in across the threshold.
So if that is the capability of one mask at a time…think of the power of all ten!’
Tallis said nothing, frightened by the old man's words.
He simply shrugged, tapped her on the shoulder with his staff, then pointed again at the rajathuks.
‘Think about oracles later.
For the moment, look closely at the faces of my masks.
Do you see?
They're lopsided.
One eye on each seems to be ruined.
One side of the mouth droops.
Do you see?’
Understanding blossomed in Tallis's mind.
She began to shake in anticipation of Wynne-Jones's words.
‘Years ago,’ he said, ‘a man from outside the realm passed up the river towards Lavondyss.
The wood sucked out his dreams to make mythagos.
He made everything you see, the Tuthanach, the lodge…the totems.
There is only one thing I can tell you of these totems.
He had a mark on the left side of his face.
It was a mark that controlled his life.
He was obsessed with it.
Disease, perhaps, or a wound?
Deformed?’
‘Burned,’ Tallis said.
She stared at Skogen.
Suddenly its dead face took on life.
Wynne-Jones was right.
The shadows there were shadows of Harry, not the forest.
It had seemed a cruel and empty face; now she saw urgency and sadness.
Had he gone into the wood to find a way to cure the blemish?
Burned in the war.
Shot down.
Burned.
He had come to her in the night.
I shan't be far away.
There is something I have to do.
A ghost I have to banish.
The ghost of his burning; an ugly mask-fire, fear and evil-a mark that had spread across his face; it had not covered him completely.
But a mask is what it was, and he had hated the mask; and unlike Falkenna, Sinisalo, Hollower, it could not be used at whim.
It could not be removed.
All this Tallis expressed to the shaman, Wyn-rajathuk, who listened in silence, his hand on her arm, his eye on the face of Harry which watched from the pieces of dead wood.
‘Then it was Harry who passed up the river all those  years ago, ahead of me.
He is years ahead of you, but he is there.
Those years may sound like frustration to your quest, but that is not necessarily the case.
Time plays strange tricks in the wood.
I've been lucky: Scathach has returned only four years older than I expected him to be.’
He took a breath, squeezed Tallis's arm hard.
‘But equally, when you get to Lavondyss you may find that Harry is a million years away.
I do not understand the laws which govern Lavondyss.
I say this only because of what I have gleaned from the living myth of the wood.
But be prepared for it.’
Tallis helped him sit again, sheltered in his cloak.
The wind was growing even colder.
‘Winter is coming,’ Wynne-Jones said.
‘A terrible winter,’ Tallis agreed.
‘It seems to have been following me all my life.’
‘What little I know of Lavondyss has left me in no doubt of one thing: it is a place of snow, of ice, of winter, of an age past when the land was frozen.
Why this should be of such importance in the minds of you and me, and all the others from the world of the nineteen-forties I do not know.
Later myths make of the Otherworld a place of endless hunting, endless feasting, endless pleasure…a sunny place.
A bright realm.
It is reached through caves, through tombs, through hidden valleys.
But that is wish fulfilment.
Adventurers have quested for Lavondyss since the beginning of time.
I wonder how many of them knew that they would find a barren world, a place of death, of cold…no magic in Lavondyss…and yet the memory is there.
There is something there, something that calls.
Something that engages.’
‘My brother travelled there, I'm convinced of it.
He called to me from the place.
He is trapped there and I have made it my promise, Tallis's Promise, to release him.
If he went up-river, then that's where I shall go.’
‘And what will you find there?’
Wynne-Jones asked with a smile.
‘Fire,’ Tallis answered without pause.
She had learned of the place from an encounter some years ago.
‘A wall of fire, maintained by the fire-makers of an older age than even these Tuthanach.
I shall pass through the fire and into Lavondyss.’
‘You will burn,’ the shaman whispered pointedly, shaking his head.
‘No one passes through the fire.
No human.
I have heard of mythagos which have succeeded, but they are part of the myth that says tumuli and fire guarded valleys are the way to the Otherworld.
For you, the route certainly lies in another direction entirely.
It will take you through a forest far stranger than this tiny Ryhope Wood.’
‘Harry got there.’
‘If Harry got there,’ the old man said, ‘then he got there by finding his own path.
He certainly didn't pass through the fire.
And nor can you…
Because, like me, you are human.
We don't belong.
We are voyagers in our own living madness.
Around you are your brother's dreams, later modified by myself, recently modified by you.
What we have that these wretched creatures around us do not, is freedom.
The freedom to choose.
Oh, I know Scathach has chosen for himself, for a while…but look at him, touch him, feel his mind…
I was awake for just a little while and I could tell —’
Alarmed, Tallis said, ‘Tell what?’
‘That the wood in him is being called.
That the legend in him is being summoned.
That his time with us is fast coming to an end.
He must go to Bavduin, to be reunited with his knightly comrades.’
Tallis felt sick.
She looked up to the skyline, where Scathach's tall form was a silhouette.
He was looking to the north, away from the river.
Tallis said, ‘I once had a vision of your son.
I saw him at the very moment in his life when he earned the name Elethandian gave him: the boy who listens to the voice of the oak.
I am not ready for him to achieve that moment of glory.
Not yet…’
She would have talked on, but Wynne-Jones had suddenly pushed his hand against her mouth.
She jerked back, surprised by the anger on his face, then reassured by the apology she saw there.
The hand lowered.
‘I beg your pardon,’ the man said.
‘Like you, I'm not ready to hear or know my son's ultimate fate.
It would tempt me to interfere.
If we interfere we become involved.
We become trapped…
I have discovered this over many years.’
Tallis leaned forward, suddenly excited by the old man's words.
She was thinking of her brother, of being trapped, of being caught…
‘Then is it possible that Harry interfered with legend?
Is it possible that he found the way into Lavondyss, changed something, and is caught because of it?’
‘Very much so,’ Wynne-Jones answered simply.
‘Then how could he have called to me?’
‘To answer that,’ the old man said, ‘I need you to tell me the story of your girlhood.
Your memories of Harry.
And everything that has happened to you in the way of learning.
I dreamed something about a castle made of stone which is not stone…’
‘Old Forbidden Place,’ Tallis said.
‘Or at least, a part of the tale.
I whispered it to you while you slept.’
‘You must tell me again,’ the scientist murmured.
‘It may be that I have seen this place.
A long way from here, but a place that is familiar from your whispered words.’
Her heart missed a beat.
‘You've been to the castle?’
But he shook his head.
‘I've only seen it from a great distance.
It is well defended; by a storm that would  surprise you.
Before I settled among the Tuthanach I wandered further up the river, crossing the great marsh.
But it was too cold up there, so I returned.
It was too far.
Too remote.
There comes a time, for people like you and me, when the mind has been stripped of all that is mythic.
It's hard to describe the feeling: it's a kind of tiredness, of exhaustion…of the spirit.
I felt vigorous; my work fascinated me; I remained handsomely potent —’ He smiled and shook his head at his own unspoken memories.
‘But something had returned to the earth, and it took me with it.
So I came back here, to the Tuthanach.
They are an earth people and their legend is horrific, dramatic, almost senseless.
Each and every one of them will undergo death by burial and rebirth renewed.
They are part of the legend, of course; you and I wouldn't survive it.’
Scathach called from the other side of the enclosure.
‘Tig is coming up the hill, from the south.
He's carrying an axe.’
‘Take me back to the lodge,’ Wynne-Jones whispered.
‘I'm tired and cold.
You can tell me your stories in the warmth of my hut.
And I want to hear all the stories.’
Tallis smiled.
‘I was asked that once before.
It seems like a lifetime ago.’
‘There are old truths in the memories of childhood,’ Wynne-Jones said quietly.
‘Make that journey for me…then make Moondream again.
I'll give you what help I can…’
At dusk an eagle began to swoop and soar over the village.
The children imitated the bird's behaviour, arms outstretched.
The young men stripped and painted themselves in black and white imitation of the feather pattern on the predator: bringing the hunting eye of the eagle to the clan.
While all eyes were on the majestic bird above them, Tallis had seen the fluttering movement of a more sinister flock, in the high trees around the river.
One of the birds flapped towards a tall, dead elm, whose limbs had been stripped by fierce winds until only two remained, like gnarled horns, rising from the top of the trunk.
Black against the sky, the black stork, too, was a silhouette.
It perched on the elm's horns and soon several others followed it.
When they launched themselves into the dusk they seemed to fill the sky to the north for long minutes, and their cries reached as far as the village.
Scathach had seen the storks as well.
He approached Tallis, drawing his fur cloak tighter round his chest.
He smelled strongly of woodsmoke after his long hours in the lodge, nursing his father.
‘Are they an omen?’
Tallis turned to glance at him.
She saw affection and concern in his eyes, but imagined that the love was gone, the intensity of the gaze, that knowingness that she had shared for so many years as they had fought to find this place through the forest.
‘I don't know,’ she said.
‘But they disturb me.’
He watched the birds again.
‘Everything is going north,’ he murmured.
‘Everything.
I feel impelled to follow…’
Tallis nodded her agreement.
‘That's where I must go too, if I'm to find Harry.
But first I have to make Moondream again.’
Scathach frowned, not understanding.
Tallis had always kept her masks to herself.
‘To allow me to see that woman in the land.
Your father says I should carve it again.
I hadn't thought it important, but perhaps my power to open the hollowings has been affected by its absence.’
‘I'll help you make it,’ Scathach said.
His hand was on  her arm.
Tallis wrapped her fingers round the welcome grip.
‘What about Morthen?’ she asked pointedly.
The girl had returned earlier, and prematurely, from the hunt, but was not around as far as Tallis could see.
‘Morthen is my sister and a child.
I am her brother from the wood, but until she gets older, that's all I am.
And by the time she reaches a suitable age, I shall be long gone.’
‘Does she know this?’
‘She knows it.
Besides, what I do with Morthen I do because of the forest in my blood.
What I choose to do with you I do because of love.’
Tallis said, ‘I hadn't realized you knew about Gyonval.’
‘I knew that you loved him.
But I never felt that you'd stopped loving me.
So that seemed to me to be all right.’
‘Well,’ Tallis said, with a smile and a private thrill of relief.
‘I'm glad to hear it.
And you were quite right.’
She leaned towards the man and brushed her lips across the beard that grew unkempt from his cheeks.
He put his arms around her.
Out of the corner of her eye she saw angry movement.
Morthen was running from the enclosure, slapping the taut hides on their frames as she passed them, her clay-streaked hair flying free.
She was making sounds like a bird: the screeching of a bird, defending its nest against intruders.
She knew what she would use to make the mask, but when she returned to the glade where, yesterday, she had visited the Moondream rajathuk, she found it quite destroyed.
An elm grew there now.
Its roots, earth-encrusted and massive, curled through the dense oak and hazel at the edge of the glade, lying lazily, snakelike upon the land, feeding freely on the forest.
Its trunk was almost black; thick fungus and moss grew in the deep grooves in  the bark.
It rose into the evening sky; three odd, twisted branches tangled with the clouds, all that remained of the tree's broken limbs.
The glade was silent.
An overpowering smell of vegetation filled the air, drifting on a fine steam.
The light was sharp, the sense of power in this woodland mythago almost terrifying.
Tallis circled the giant tree twice.
She found a shard of the broken totem and picked it up, feeling its dry, dead surface.
Scathach waited in the forest, his eyes showing his concern as he stared into the heavens, where black storks flapped and watched the earth from the bare-bone branches.
‘Is it after you or my father?’ he whispered to Tallis when she came back to him.
‘I don't know.
But it has destroyed the rajathuk.
I was hoping to sit here and make my mask…’
‘Do you have an image for it?’
Tallis stared down at the shard of the ruined statue and with a thrill of pleasure realized that she did: an image of the female in the land.
An image of white moon.
An image of horns, of horse, of the smile that knows, of a mother's kiss.
An image, too, of blood.
An image of a child's bones burning.
An image of a wild rider, white clay on long hair, circling the pyre where her lover lay.
An image of bone in flesh, a child's cut flesh knitted closed with bone, with sharp bone fragments, the wound healed, the blood dried.
And Gyonval…gentle Gyonval.
He was in the image too, his laughter, his concern, his ready acceptance that he was somehow a ghost to Tallis; that he, like Scathach, was shadow, soon to be banished by a night whose coming could not be stopped.
Gentle when he loved her.
Even as his broken body had followed its spirit into the night woods, there had been something about him: his fingers flexed just so, as if signalling to her; a frown on  his face, as if he was struggling to turn his eyes to the woman by the fire; a sparkle in those eyes, the dead eyes, the tears that said how he longed to stay.
Tallis looked up, met Scathach's eyes.
‘Yes,’ she said ‘I have an image…’
Fascinating to watch: how she smoothed down the shard of the totem to make it a circle, to flatten it out; how she trimmed and chipped to make the natural lines flow; how she scored out the eyes, the mouth; how she touched colour with her fingers to emphasize the woman in the land, in the mask; how the dead wood began to live and breathe.
Crouched in the shadows, Scathach watched, but his eyes were on Tallis, not on her fingers as they moved swiftly over the charm.
‘You truly are possessed.’
‘Yes.’
Red for cheeks, and green in subtle lines, and here the moon, made with white clay, and there the blood of the child.
All from dyes and ochres used by the Tuthanach.
‘Does it speak to you yet?’
‘It has been speaking to me all my life —’
There, the spectre, the woman in the land.
There the snow.
There the memory.
White memory, daubed, smeared…
The land remembers.
There is old memory in snow.
And a gentle touch for the gentle dead.
I shan't forget you.
And it was finished.
She held it before her, stared at its eyes, kissed its lips, breathed through the mouth into the unconscious region beyond the wood.
Then turned it round and held it to her face.
‘Don't look at me through the eyes…’
Tallis sat quietly, Scathach's words frightening her.
She  stared through the mask at Wyn-rajathuk, old, broken man, fascinatedly watching the process of creation.
His eyes narrow, he glanced at his son-from-the-flesh-and-wood, then back at Tallis.
‘Don't look at him.’
‘Why not?’
‘Don't look at him.’
‘What will I see?’
‘Don't look at him!’
She lowered the mask.
There was a sudden wind and the small fire in the shaman's lodge guttered.
Stones and shells, slung on twine, rattled.
Sheaves of the parchment, on which Wyn kept his journal, fluttered.
A brief moment of the winter which pursued her sent a scampering chill through the warm place.
Scathach had gone.
Tallis heard him walk away from the lodge.
Then the heavy skins which formed the door were still again, the fire burning more calmly.
She stared at the mask, her touch on the wet colour of its face like a lover's touch on moist, flushed skin.
‘I don't understand.’
‘He is going away from you,’ Wyn said quietly.
He tugged at his sparse white beard, then drew his dark fur robe tighter around his bent shoulders.
He looked very ill and frightened.
Tallis knew that he was worried about the boy: where was his son?
Where was Tig hiding?
At his words, though, she looked up sharply.
Scathach going away?
Wyn raised a finger to his lips and said, ‘I imagine he is afraid that the same spectre haunts him, calling him to Bavduin, that took his friends, Gyonval and the rest.
He didn't want you to see it, perhaps because he doesn't want to know the truth as yet.’
Puzzled, Tallis shook her head.
She knew Scathach's quest was for Bavduin, but he was not himself Jaguthin; he had merely joined the band.
Why should he be called like the others?
‘He became Jaguthin when his life in the wood became inseparable from theirs,’ the old man said.
He picked up his journal and leafed through the parchments until he found a certain sheet, then read it through in silence.
For a moment he looked as if he would pass the script to Tallis, but he changed his mind.
He stoked the fire so that it flared, then reached behind him for a pouch of thin leather which contained charred bones.
He rattled the pouch.
‘Recognize this?’
Tallis nodded.
Wyn-rajathuk shook the pouch, then banged it on the ground, then struck it against his shoulders; he chanted softly as he made the rhythmic movements, and the words were nonsense words.
Tallis recognized what he was doing immediately, and sensed the point of what he was trying to tell her.
She flew back through imagination to the festival at Shadoxhurst, to the dancers, the nonsense words they often chanted as they went through their formations.
Jiggery, higgery, hoggery, joggery…
‘The land remembers,’ she whispered.
‘Men dance and chant, they fight with sticks, and one rides among them on a hobbyhorse, striking them with a bladder filled with pebbles…we don't forget…’
‘We just forget why,’ Wyn-rajathuk agreed.
‘There is no magic left in the festive practices of Oxford, or Grimley, or wherever-the Morrismen and Mummers no magic unless the mind that enacts the festival has a gate opened to the first forest-’
That expression again.
First forest.
'— but how many times have I stood and laughed as that man on the hobbyhorse, a fool, an outsider to the troupe, prances round and through the dancers?
The devil.
The joker.
The wily one.
Old Coyote himself.
Trickster.
Reduced, in our time, to a fool on a stick for a horse, waving the symbols of forgotten shamanism.
We always see that aspect, but we forget that first he must have been a warrior too.
He is outside the band, yet a part of it.
As a hunter he will die in the forest to become a warrior; as a warrior he will die in battle, and be resurrected to become a sage.
The three parts of the King.
Remember your stories of Arthur and his knights?
Arthur had been all of those things himself: hunter, warrior, then king.’
Wyn smiled, perhaps remembering those tales himself, or some connection with them that he had witnessed in the wood.
‘Of course my son is being called,’ he murmured.
‘He has been the hunter.
When he entered England he died, in one sense.
Now he is a warrior.
His death and resurrection as shaman lies in his future.
His flight on wings of song and dream lies many years ahead…’
‘I will be gone by then,’ Tallis said.
She leaned forward and passed her hand through the flames of the small fire, letting its glow and its heat excite the ancient in her.
First forest…where was thefirst forest?
She said hesitantly, not fully understanding how to frame the words, ‘Two beliefs war within me: I am convinced that I will find my way back home again.
And I dream of dying in a great tree…burning…is that the first forest?’
‘You are at the edge of the first forest,’ Wyn-rajathuk told her; there was something about the expression on his wounded face, the slight edginess of his good eye, that made Tallis suspect he was holding back.
But she didn't comment.
‘All your life you have been at the edge.
You have opened threshold after threshold and stepped closer and closer to the centre of the realm, to the heartwood to Lavondyss.
But you still have a journey to make and it will be a terrible journey.
It will bring you home, yes, but  equally it will take you further from home than you have ever imagined.
You will travel in two directions at once.
You will probably die.
You do not enter the first forest for fun, for adventure.
When you go there, do not expect to return.’
‘Harry is there.
In the unknown region.
I promised to set him free.’
‘You will never set him free.
Not in the way you mean.
There is no return from that unknown region.’
She was silent for a moment.
Hunger clawed at her.
Close by, faint against the growing wind, a woman sang.
Then came another sound: a boy's voice, shrieking at the top of its lungs.
The shrieking sent shivers up Tallis's spine, and Wyn-rajathuk paled even more as he straightened and stared, alarmed, through the lodge walls, towards the mortuary hill.
The boy's taunting turned to laughter, drifting on the chill night air.
It was possible to hear the way he summoned the old man, calling his name in a mocking tone, calling out for his dreams, calling that he wished to eat those dreams.
Tallis reassured him.
‘He won't enter the compound.
He won't come close to the lodge.
All the families are watching for him, to drive him off…’
Wyn shuddered violently and leaned down again, sucking at the fire's warmth.
After a while he seemed to relax and Tallis prompted him further.
‘You seem to be saying that this first forest is an imaginary place.
You are saying that I will not ride there, or open a hollowing, or step down through a cave, but must find the threshold to a journey inwards.
How do I find that threshold?’
‘Through the story of your Old Forbidden Place.
Through the castle.’
‘Where is the castle?’
‘You have already seen it.
When you opened the  hollowing.
Beyond the marsh.
You have known about it all your life…’
Tallis was confused again, disbelieving; a strange response in a world where ghosts walked and shadows cast effective spells.
‘And by coincidence I have found it?
I can't accept that.’
‘Not by coincidence.
You have been looking for it for eight years.
You were bound to find it.’
‘Did I dream it then?
How can I have dreamed it as a six-year-old?
Why did I see it in a story?
Who were the gaberlungi women who could tell me about a castle that it turns out you know all about?
How could I have seen your son Scathach in a vision, and named a land Bird Spirit Land out of my childish dreams, and arrive here to find that you know about Bird Spirit Land, and Bavduin?
And your totems have the same names as my masks, but I made those names up!
Why are we so linked?’
Wyn-rajathuk placed small sticks on the fire, letting Tallis's edgy, urgent questions settle in the air.
His pallid flesh glowed.
He smiled.
‘Why — through your brother Harry.
Who else?
I thought I'd told you earlier.
You found Harry years ago!
You found him and you entered him.
Look around you.
Everything is Harry.
All of this.
The wood, the river, the Tuthanach, the birds, the stones, the totems…
The first forest that he imposed upon the world is the world in which I live and through which you are journeying.
The world in which you and I exist is not nature, it consists of mind!
You have been in your brother's skull for years.
You have simply not learned to speak to him.’
‘But he's trapped,’ Tallis protested.
‘He called to me from a winter place.
He called to me.
I can find him again, his physical body, not just his mind.’
Wyn-rajathuk thought about what she had said, then  slowly agreed.
‘It's not a journey I would wish to undertake.
But I am not you, and except for the shadow-elms I see little evidence of genesis from you — you are moving too fast, perhaps.
But you are not yet sucked dry.
Which means you have creative energy.
Perhaps you can find the location of the earthly remains.’
Frowning, Tallis asked, ‘The shadow elms?
Those giant trees?
You think they're my mythagos?’
‘Certainly they are yours.
An unusual mythago form.
Old, of course; they represent fear of the forest; mythologies about the birth of birds; the relationship between earth and sky through the thick trunks of the wood…’ he chuckled to himself.
‘No simple creatures of legend for Tallis Keeton — while the rest of us engender Robin Hoods and Green Jacks and golden-tressed princesses, you bring into existence the living earth.
Just as Harry did.
You are drawing upon a more ancient and powerful source of memory than me, or Huxley, or the boys, his sons, Christian and Steven — and God alone knows what happened to them.’
He prodded the fire, forcing warmth into the hut.
‘But that is all beside the point.
You and your brother Harry…in a way you are the same.
It's the only way I can think of to explain the coincidences in the tales you've told me.
You told me that the gaberlungi women were your grandfather's mythagos.
I think that can't be right.
The broken stag had been known for years.
Harry sent it!
It was a fragment of his own mind, designed to journey to the edgewoods, to find his rescuer.
Your brother himself seems to have led you into the wood.
But such spirit journeys are costly.
He sacrificed strength to send himself to you in that way.
His journey from the unknown region must have been terrifying — a fragment of his soul, running the land but without benefit of flight or fin…and he came too soon…
‘Then those three women were his mythagos, too, therefore himself, bringing images and talents from the primitive age in which he had become lost.
You must remember that the gaberlungi are real elements of legend.
They can only function in their legendary way: as teachers of magic.
So you learn how to open the gate between ages and worlds, to cross the thresholds that have been the province of the shaman since the great days of the hunter.
So you learn to make dolls and masks, simple oracles, simple earth magic.
‘This is the only thing that makes sense.
Harry has a link with you, through blood, through mind, through family.
The women were made of Harry, but also a little of your grandfather and of you.
Your grandfather was too old, but he knew what you came to know.
That's what you imply.
And why not?
Harry left his mark on everything, on the totems, for example.
His mythagos take a shape that of course you recognize.
From the moment he left your home on his quest he has been leaving a trail for you to follow; not of pebbles, not of bread or coloured beads; a trail of memory, of image like blood, like a scent; something that you have always known even though so often it seemed to you that you did not recognize it.’
‘What you are saying is that I am not so much searching for Harry, rather, Harry is winding me in, like a fish on a line —’
‘Yes.
It is the only answer which makes sense to me.’
‘He sent the women to show me what to look for.
They arrived too soon because time is strange in this world.
They waited for me.
To show me what to look for.’
Wyn-rajathuk rubbed ash between his palms and stared down at the smear of grey lines.
‘Yes.’
‘And Scathach?
Your son?
And Bavduin?
Are they part of Harry too?’
Wynne-Jones frowned.
‘I don't see how they can be.’
‘Then how do they fit into what has happened to me?
Why are you and I linked?’
If Wynne-Jones had an answer to that question, he was not given time to express it.
Quite suddenly the world outside began to scream.
He grabbed for his staff and a stone knife, his face melting with fear as he watched the skins over the door.
‘It's Tig…it's his magic…’
Tallis went outside quickly, alert for the boy, her own heart racing in response to the awful wailing from the woods.
The dead trees had edged closer to the settlement; they crowded in around the clearing and the blackthorn hill, with its bones and its wooden idols.
The birds of the forest gathered in the antlers of those trees, clustered in the horns.
From the dead limbs they cried at the moon, pecked at the wind-shattered stubs where winter had stripped the branches from these creeping giants, added their own anger to the screaming from the split and rotting bark.
The Tuthanach screamed back, rattled bones, beat drums.
They ran around the wall of the village holding streaming fires.
Twenty torches burned in the moontouched darkness, a circle of defence.
The women slapped strips of painted leather against the palisade.
The children threw stones into the night.
The air filled with the strong scent of herbs being burned to discourage elemental spirits.
Birds circled in the dark sky.
The trees shook, their movement making the earth tremble.
When the clouds thinned, and the bright moon shone through, the dead arms of the elms seemed to beckon.
They were the raised arms of the first shamans; the broken horns of the first stag; the broken memory of the fiercest winter.
It was only the clouds which moved, Tallis tried to tell herself.
But as she thought of her Moondream mask, so it seemed that the elms were creeping in to crush no one but her.
A screaming night.
Wind of wings.
The invisible flutter and swoop of black creatures, still furious with the woman who had once banished them.
She had been fleeing from winter all of her life.
She had not realized how close the birds and the snow and the deadwoods had been behind her.
A small white shape darted through the line of torches and came swiftly to the earth wall around the village.
It was Tig, of course.
He was naked and the icy wind blew his hair wildly.
He was chanting in his childish voice and whirling something round his head.
The whirling action stopped and something clattered off the palisade.
His body dripped blood from several self-inflicted wounds on his chest and arms.
As he passed quickly in front of the flame, Tallis got the hint of scratches on his body, and she imagined he had run through the tight thorn scrub between the village and his purloined domain upon the hill.
He squatted down in front of the gate and smeared the soil from his body on the path.
He laughed uproariously, an artificial sound, taunting despite its ineffectiveness.
Then he was off again, in and out of the torches, the slingshot whirling, the missiles impossible to see as they sped into the compound.
He stopped where Tallis stood on the wall.
She watched him across the points of the stakes.
He passed his hand slowly and deliberately through the fire from the nearest torch, his eyes never leaving the woman.
(He had been watching her in the shaman's lodge earlier!
He had been that close!
And she had told Wynne-Jones that he had nothing to fear.
The boy was mimicking her own ‘play with the fire.
He had seen!)
Tallis was tense, ready to duck if he fired at her.
But  he began to chant in a sombre, sing-song voice.
‘Where are you my father?
Come to me old rajathuk.
I am hungry for your dreams, old man.’
His voice rose steadily in pitch, at first almost lost against the wailing from the wood, then loud against it, then clear.
I am hungry for your dreams.
Come to your son from the wood.
Come now…
When Tallis went quickly to the long-house, where Wynne-Jones had gone for extra safety, she found him huddled in a corner, shaking violently, his body wrapped in skins and his bird-feather cloak.
Cold sweat ran from his face; he had scratched at the wound which Tig had inflicted previously, and blood and yellow fluid seeped down into the feathered ruff.
‘You'll be safe with me,’ Tallis said.
‘Where is my son?
Where is Scathach?’
‘I'll find him.
Keep warm, now.
You'll be safe with me.
I shan't let Tig near you.’
Wyn-rajathuk smiled wanly, his good eye glittering.
‘Poor Tig.
He is only doing what he has to do.
But I have no dreams for him to eat.
They have all gone.
If he ate the earth he would get far more nourishment…’
Outside, Tallis called for the young hunter and Scathach called back, emerging from the children's lodge.
He looked confused and quite alarmed.
He had been searching for Morthen, to protect her from his violent half-brother, but she was nowhere to be found.
On the wall they watched as Tig circled the village again, running and weaving between the torches, his body like red-veined porcelain, almost translucent, almost fragile.
The earth rumbled.
Wings beat the winter air.
Tig became shaman.
His chanting put fear into the hearts of the listening families as well as into the mind of  the old and dying man who was his father.
When Wyn-rajathuk slept, guarded by one of the Tuthanach, he shivered even in his sleep.
His mouth opened and closed, as if gasping for breath, the dying struggle of an animal bleeding out its life through the sacrificial cut.
After a long while, watching the attack and listening to the screeching wood, Tallis had had enough.
She found a heavy staff, hefted it and began to make her way to the gate, to go out and beat Tig back to his domain.
But Scathach called to her and she returned to the wall.
A dark rider had emerged suddenly from the woods.
It galloped towards the boy in silence, swinging a thorn bush from its arm.
When– it opened its mouth and yelled, Tallis recognized Morthen.
She beat at her brother's head, causing him to screech with pain.
He couldn't wield his sling.
He raised his hands protectively and she whipped the pale flesh of his backside.
When he clutched the torn skin of his buttocks, she tickled his belly, and soon the boy-who-was-shaman was whooping with anger, but fleeing back towards the hill, to the mortuary house and the safety of his bones.
As he ran he grabbed a torch, and Tallis watched its flame bob and weave into the darkness, soon lost among the trees.
Morthen kicked the wild horse and galloped up to the earth wall.
Her face was black.
She had blackened her limbs and her shallow breast.
Her hair was streaked white.
She was wearing the rags of her old tunic, hanging in tatters from shoulders and waist.
Tallis wondered if she had undertaken her own form of self-mutilation.
She controlled the horse with a length of twine and she had authority over the animal, which snorted then stepped proudly round to the gate.
Morthen entered the compound, ignoring the shadow wings which beat around her head.
Her eyes were fierce, watching from the black of her warpaint.
She circled  Tallis twice, staring down at her, not touching, not acknowledging her beyond the hard, contemptuous stare.
Then she rode to Scathach, who stood with his arms folded and his eyes narrowed, watching his sister.
She leaned down from the horse and he didn't flinch as she grabbed his long hair and shook his head from side to side.
In fact, he smiled slightly.
‘My brother from the wood!’ she said loudly.
‘My sister!’ he stated flatly, watching her, still allowing the rough grip on his hair.
‘Wait for me!’
Morthen said in an angry voice.
‘Will you wait for me?’
Now Scathach frowned.
‘Where are you going?’
‘To get older!’ the girl shouted.
‘To catch up with you!’
Her horse was suddenly restless, trying to step back, and Morthen kicked it forward again, wrenching back her brother's head to stare into his eyes.
Still his arms were folded.
‘Will you wait for me?’ she cried again, more a statement than a question.
Scathach said nothing, then reached up and detached her grip from his head.
‘I don't think I can,’ he said.
‘But we will meet up again, I'm sure of that.’
Morthen hesitated, then struck at her brother's shoulder with her clenched fist.
In turn he slapped her thigh and smiled at her, but she wrenched the horse away from him, swung around and, with a final cry, galloped from the compound.
She rode towards the river, entering the trees, entering darkness.
Birds followed her into the wood.
A little while later the restless forest calmed, the night sounds died away and the air, for so long thick with wings, was clear again.
Wynne-Jones ate broth.
He had woken from his brief sleep, emerging out of nightmares that had left him drained and sickened.
His hands shook  as he held the antler spoon.
Scathach crouched next to him, half conscious of his father, half lost in his own thoughts.
The old man had been deflated totally by the news of Morthen's leaving.
She had gone to find a place where she might age more rapidly.
Scathach, Tallis learned, had rejected the advances she had felt impelled to make to him.
She had wanted to stay with her brother, but he had called her a child, he had referred to Tallis as the woman whom he loved, and Morthen had taken both statements to her young heart.
She had blackened her body to signal the blackening of her spirit.
‘How will she get across the marsh?’
Tallis asked, and Wyn-rajathuk glanced at her, then cocked his head, gazing at the glowing hearth.
‘There is something of the bird in Morthen…perhaps she will fly across.
Who knows?
There are many ways to cross the marsh.’
There was a shout from outside.
The skins on the door were pulled violently open and the face of First-hog-of-summer peered anxiously into the firelit gloom.
‘Burning.
On the hill,’ he said.
Tallis helped Wyn to his feet and they went outside.
On the mortuary hill, fire streamed into the night; ten streaks of flame, licking at the clouds.
‘The rajathuks…’
Wynne-Jones breathed, shocked.
‘He's burning the totems.’
Intrigued, Tallis left the old man for a while and ventured through the intervening wood.
She emerged at the bottom of the hill and stared up at the brilliantly burning pyres by the cruig-morn.
She saw Tig standing on the enclosure wall, his arms stretched out to the sides, his head thrown back.
He was just a silhouette against the intense blaze, but she was certain that his mouth was open and that he was singing.
The fires burned through the night, signalling across the forest that the era of the rajathuk was at an end.
A new power was in the land.
It summoned its forces around it now and they played in the dying fires, kicked through the wood ash, spiralled into the heavens on the vortices of smoke; danced with the dancing boy.
The fires signalled to something else as well…
Shortly before daybreak Tallis was woken by the distant sound of a hunting horn.
For a moment she was confused.
Scathach was sitting beside her, his breathing soft as he listened.
The horn sounded again, four blasts, answered by four more.
They were on their feet in an instant, waking Wynne-Jones, waking the other men in the lodge, who gathered slings, sticks, spears and stones.
Tallis led the way outside; it was still quite dark.
Dogs barked and ran, excited by the sudden panic in the compound.
Children, woken by their mothers, cried or wailed as they were hurried from their small huts into the main lodge, to hide.
First-hog-of-summer and others ran to the palisade and peered at the forest edge.
Scathach went to the gate and made sure it was firmly closed.
Tallis just stood quietly, cloak around her shoulders, iron-bladed spear held in two hands.
She watched the great elms but saw no movement; they were quiet, now, though around them birds rose in short flight, then settled again.
There was stealthy movement at the edge of the wood.
The air hissed slightly as the Tuthanach whirled slings.
Scathach called out, warning them to keep still.
An uncanny silence covered the village; the voices of women hushed the children; dogs wailed but were muzzled.
Only Swimmer of Lakes made any sound, a restless snorting, an anxious pawing at the ground.
Tallis went to the makeshift corral and let the animal out, stroking her  bruised face, patting her flanks.
She led her to the gate.
Scathach opened the heavy wooden door and Tallis quickly gave the horse its freedom, sending her trotting to the south, away from the disturbance.
Soon the animal had entered the shadows of the trees.
The horn was sounded for a third time, a single blast, long and mournful.
The Tuthanach whirled their slings again.
Scathach flung his heavy cloak aside.
He carried a bronze-bladed spear and a heavy Saxon long sword, which he had won in forest combat some years before.
Most of the Tuthanach had weapons of bone and polished stone.
From the direction of the river, from the woodland there, a rider trotted into view.
He turned side-on to the enclosure and watched the low defensive wall as he walked steadily along the edge of the trees, a few paces in one direction, then the other.
As the light grew so Tallis could see his armoured helmet, crested by a fan of spikes, and the dull leather of his breastplate.
He wore short chequered breeches and a reddish tunic; on his legs, metalled boots; on his shoulders, a short cloak.
It was an all-too familiar garb to Tallis.
She stared at him, then glanced at Scathach and smiled.
The raider's spear rested across the pommel of his saddle, first light glinting on its long, polished blade.
Already Scathach was envying the look of the warrior by the trees.
After a few minutes of this silent contemplation the rider raised a curved horn to his lips and blew it three times.
‘This is it!’
Scathach shouted.
Tallis felt her mouth go dry and her vision became suddenly intensely clear.
At once the canopy of the wood erupted into screeching birdlife, fleeing from the sudden disturbance below.
Eight riders galloped from cover and came thudding across the  cleared land towards the settlement.
As they rode they made gruff, barking sounds; not war cries, just encouragement to their horses.
They carried spears and axes.
Only two wore helmets; metal armour gleamed on some; mail coats rattled; for the most part they wore an odd, ungainly mix of leathers, mail and furs.
Fair hair streamed and tattered cloaks billowed as they spread to ride around the earthwork wall.
There was not much colour to-this raiding band.
Tuthanach slingshot whizzed and whirred, and two of the horsemen fell back over the mounts' haunches.
Spears thudded into wood.
Sharp, guttural cries accompanied the drum of hooves.
The leader came towards the gate.
His horse, a black stallion of large breadth, reared and stamped, the hooves striking down the gate.
He yelled once, kicked forward, and First-hog-of-summer ran to meet him.
Slingshot missed and the rider's sword arm slashed.
First-hog was on his knees, hands to his throat.
As Tallis ran towards him she thought, with idle horror, that he looked as if he was praying.
The leader had turned, swung again and First-hog was sprawling on his side, head opened above the ear.
His dark buckskins shone with blood.
The crested helmet of the warrior gleamed in dawn sun and he turned and rode down on Tallis.
The sight of him made Tallis freeze.
For a moment she thought it was Scathach himself who came towards her; her mind was full of the vision from the oak tree, of the young man, identically dressed, bleeding out his life…
The black stallion was almost on her.
The bearded face of its rider grinned.
He was leaning down, his spear arm back, the gleaming bronze blade wavering as it came towards her.
She was pushed to one side.
The blade sliced her hair.
The horse whinnied, turned and rose above her, but Scathach was there, wrenching the spear's shaft.
Raider and hunter tussled, strength against strength, the one pulling up, the other down.
Around her Tailis heard the strike of wood on wood; a scream; yells; the frantic barking of the dogs as they ran through the confusion of hooves and legs.
Blood splashed her face: Scathach's.
He was stumbling, the wound in his shoulder shallow but momentarily stunning.
The point of the spear had slashed and caught him.
As the red-tipped bronze blade continued round towards her, Tallis struck it out of line and reached for the booted leg of the rider, pushing up so that he fell over to the side.
He fell heavily.
Tallis stood above him, spear aimed down, but a stone axe struck his head and his eyes dulled, his lips loosened.
He sank slowly down on to his right shoulder.
Scathach pushed her away, turning her in time to deflect the blow from another raider.
A slingshot unseated this one and Scathach impaled him.
When Tallis looked back at the leader he was slowly sitting up, reaching for his sword.
Scathach walked quickly behind him.
He used both hands and all his strength to swing his own sword and took the man's head with a single blow.
The gate was up, pushed back into place by two of the Tuthanach women.
The four riders who remained inside the compound were unsettled by the dogs, which ran among their horses causing them to buck and rear.
Tallis felt wind on her face as a stone whirred past.
She dropped to a cautious crouch.
One by one the riders fell, not without causing loss themselves: three of the villagers lay in their own gore, and one had been blinded by slingshot in the confusion of the raid.
But whoever these men had been, they had not expected stone and stone had won the day against the metal of their more ferocious weaponry.
Now Scathach stripped the body of the leader.
Tallis  leaned on her spear and watched him.
He sniffed the breeches and wrinkled his nose.
He tugged off the leather breastplate, then the tunic, and brushed at the blood.
He removed the boots.
He inspected the helmet, with its heavy crest and the circling ruff of fur around the rim; his blow had cut the ruff and damaged the cheek guard.
But when he put it on, for a moment he looked like a prince.
He smiled at Tallis, then removed the helmet.
He hefted the dead man's sword, then strapped the scabbard to his waist, over his heavy furs.
When he came to Tallis, carrying the spoils, there was a strange look in his eyes; he had been fired by the bloody encounter.
He was aware of her, but he was envisaging greater battles still.
His breathing was almost the panting of a hunting dog.
‘This will be more suitable clothing for whatever lies to the north.’
‘It will be colder in the north.’
‘This is for battle, I mean.’
He raised the soldier's clothes.
‘In the heat of battle I shan't need fur leggings.’
The Tuthanach had gathered their dead.
Wynne-Jones, leaning on the arm of a younger man, surveyed the corpses, which had been laid on their side, knees slightly bent, hands covering their faces.
There was an unexpected and odd silence.
No wailing, no beating of drums, no sobbing.
The families gathered round in a circle, staring down at the remains of their menfolk.
Even the dogs had fallen silent.
Tallis stared into the distance, where the sky was brightening, a beautiful iridescent blue, dark hued; the new day, and her last day here, she was sure of that now.
Smoke from the burned rajathuks still coiled into the heavens.
Tallis suddenly understood the eerie silence among the clan.
Wyn-rajathuk's power was gone; there was no way to bury the dead.
If they wished to bury them they would  have to summon Tig.
Tig-en-cruig; Tig never-touch-woman, never-touch-earth.
He was the power now.
He had stated so last night.
Tallis, listening to the silence, realized that Wynne-Jones was whispering to Old-woman-who-sang-to-the-river.
She was listening, her face grim.
Then she flung back her head and closed her eyes.
Her mouth opened and after a few moments a strange ululation sounded, a despairing cry, a death cry.
Wynne-Jones detached himself from the supporting arm and came over to Tallis.
He looked down at Scathach's armour, touched the small wound on his son's shoulder, then looked into the young man's face; he saw the distance there, the faraway look.
Tallis asked him, ‘What will happen to these people now?’
Wyn shook his head, then glanced round at the circle of villagers and the wailing old woman.
‘They are calling for Tig.
Before he comes we must be gone.
If Tig orders my killing they will do it.
I've told them that my power is finished.
I've told them that Tig is the new guardian of the threshold.
Whatever rituals he devises will be their rituals.
Until he comes they have no idea what to do.’
Indeed, even as he spoke Tallis saw fleeting movement in the wood towards the hill.
She thought it was Swimmer of Lakes for a moment, but her horse had already returned to open land and was quietly grazing to the east.
This new movement was the boy.
He appeared on the grass.
He held two tall staffs, one in each hand.
His face was blackened, an echo of Morthen.
Around his body were tied strips of greying cloth, and Tallis recognized the ragged shrouds of the decaying dead, before they were dismembered and burned.
They hung on him loosely, like a tattered dress.
Tallis went into the long-house and gathered up her masks and Wynne-Jones's few possessions.
It was too late  to go to the shaman's lodge and fetch his precious writings.
Wynne-Jones stood as if in a daze.
Scathach slung the clothing he had looted across one of the horses which still paced nervously in the enclosure.
He calmed the animal, quickly inspected it, then led it to a second, checked this animal too for wounds and led it to Wynne-Jones.
He helped the old man climb into the saddle.
At the last moment Wynne-Jones seemed to come alive.
‘My work.
My journal…’
‘No time,’ Scathach said.
‘We have to get away.’
Tallis ran from the long-house, arms filled with furs, blankets, cord and sacks of oatmeal and barley.
Scathach led the way to the gate, pulled it down again and mounted his own horse.
He clattered over the wood, reaching for Tallis's simple provisions.
Tallis ran to Swimmer of Lakes and flung herself across its back, twisting into a sitting position and quickly flinging a simple rope harness around its neck.
Tig took no notice of her.
He was still motionless, standing at the edge of the wood, perhaps waiting for them to leave.
Old-woman-who-sang-to-the-river filled the dawn with her wailing and chanting.
Scathach kicked his horse towards the river track, leading Wynne-Jones by the leather harness.
Wynne-Jones cried out, ‘My journal!
My writing.
Let me fetch my writing.
There is no point, otherwise…my writing!’
‘No time,’ barked Scathach again.
Tallis rode after them.
As she entered the wood, following the narrow track towards the water, she glanced back.
Tig was standing by the gate to the enclosure, staring in through the earth walls, his dream-filled mind on other things than the old shaman.
[DAUROG]
The First Forest
(i)
They finally reached the edge of the ancient lake late on the second day of their journey up the river, and in company they had not expected to attract.
They had not been able to travel fast, Wynne-Jones finding riding hard and requiring constant rests.
He was very weak and his body trembled and broke into sweats whenever he tried to sleep.
Scathach, impatient to get on, took note of Tallis's cautionary wisdom.
Wynne-Jones's knowledge of the woodland realm was far too useful for them simply to abandon him and race furiously for the north.
Wynne-Jones cried — cried for the loss of his daughter, Morthen, and for the leaving of his manuscript in the primitive village of the Tuthanach.
A lifetime's work, he wailed, and Tallis soothed him.
Scathach hunted and killed a wild pig.
They cooked strips of its meat over a  fierce wood fire, but the old man's appetite was small.
He chewed and stared to the south, where his precious parchment sheets might even now be ash, blowing on the storm wind of the new shaman's power.
It was during this first day of the journey that Tallis realized they were not the only travellers moving north, towards the marshlands.
At first she thought of wolves as she listened to the furtive movement in the woods to each side of the river.
Whatever it was, it journeyed in parallel, slightly behind the three riders.
When Scathach ventured into the forest, all sound stopped.
He emerged, shaken and slightly puzzled, long hair filled with leaves which he brushed away.
He had seen nothing.
Yet as they continued on through the shallows so birds wheeled about them in alarm, and creatures shifted in the undergrowth.
As she rode, Tallis unslung Skogen — the shadow of the forest — and placed the mask against her face, tying it, then covering her head with her woollen cowl.
Now, as she cautiously peered behind, she began to see the shadows in the trees, the gaunt and sinewy shapes of the mythagos which followed them, darting from shadow place to shadow place.
She kicked forward and whispered to Scathach, ‘They're not wolves, they're humans.
Or human-like.’
Scathach turned in his saddle, scanned the skies through the tangle of branches which arched across the river.
Wynne-Jones, slumped in the saddle, raised his head.
Spears of light made his pale features glow.
He sensed the movement all around, then saw Tallis's mask covered features, recognized Skogen.
‘What can you see?’ he asked.
‘Are they green?’
The three of them rode to the bank of the river, dismounted, then slipped quickly through the underbrush.
They found the ruins of a flint and pebble wall, all that remained of an old stronghold, perhaps, or the  defensive wall of a village; perhaps a tomb place, or shrine.
Beyond the wall there was nothing but the wildwood, a tangle of small oaks and patchy flowers, not yet destroyed by winter.
In the lee of this wall they crouched, horses tethered, weapons on the ground before them.
Wynne-Jones constructed a fire and pushed cut fragments of the wild pig over the flames.
Through the eyes of the mask Tallis watched the shadows move.
All Scathach could see was the forest and what appeared to be the flickering of light filtering through the thinning canopy.
But Tallis saw human shapes.
They hid against the thicker boles of oaks and elm, then moved away, following the autumnal leaf shadow, avoiding entering the lancing beams of grey light from above.
And they came close to the wall of flint where Wynne-Jones waited, breathless with anticipation.
‘Do you know what they are?’ his son asked.
‘I've only ever seen them from a distance,’ the old man whispered.
‘I've heard them, though.
Everyone has heard them.
But I've never been this close before…’
There were five of the creatures.
One seemed bolder than the others and came so close that it began to enter the realm of ordinary vision.
Distantly, the sound of movement in the river suggested that a sixth was coming to join its companions.
The wood began to fill with an eerie chattering sound, almost birdlike.
There was a human quality, too, to the noise, as if several women were clicking their tongues at great speed.
Odd whistles made birds flutter nervously.
Tallis could see how invisible feet kicked up the leaf litter, broke and trampled bracken.
It was a movement so subtle that it seemed to occur from the corner of her eye.
A movement, then  nothing; but the signs of the creatures' passing still quivered and calmed.
The nearest of the mythagos came into view, stepping away from the tree shadow, standing at the edge of the forest light.
Scathach gasped and reached for his spear.
Wynne-Jones put out a restraining hand, eyes fixed on the slender creature that stood before them.
‘Daurog,’ he whispered.
‘Green Man.
Becoming Scarag…winter aspect…be careful.
Be very careful…’
‘It's a Green Jack,’ Tallis said, amazed.
‘I remember seeing them in churches, carved in stone.
Old men of the forest.
Leaf-heads.’
‘It's an earlier form than you've seen carved in churches,’ the old man counselled her.
‘There is nothing jolly or medieval about the Daurog.
These are old, and they were made in the mind at a time of great fear.
In their winter aspect they are exceptionally dangerous…’
‘Green Jack,’ Tallis said to herself, and as if the sound of the fanciful name from folklore had attracted its attention it took a quick, awkward step forward, sinewy body cracking like old wood underfoot.
It stared at her, bristling…rustling…
It had stepped into a strand of light which played off the darkening face but caught the remnants of the leafy green which swathed the skull, the shoulders and the upper torso.
Its fingers were long, many-jointed; twiglike.
What Tallis had taken for a forked beard she could see, now, were curved tusks of wood growing from each side of the round, wet mouth.
The tusks branched, one limb reaching up to the leafy mass on the head, the other reaching down, becoming tendrillar, tendrils curling round the torso and the arms, then down the spindly legs, supplying lobate oak-leaves as a covering for the scored, scoured, bark-like flesh below.
The creature's member swayed as  it moved, a thin, thorned length of tendril that flexed like a worm between the rustling thighs.
It was carrying a three-pointed spear in one hand and a rough cloth sack in the other.
As it watched Tallis it began to sniff.
Flat nostrils opened in the bark of its face.
It was growing rotten, this thing, this Daurog, and was shedding summer's growth.
The face was something like a skull, but the contours were wrong.
The bone swelled and curved in the wrong places; the angles were unfamiliar.
The eyes were very close together.
The Daurog didn't appear to blink, and streams of sap ran from the edges of the eyes.
When it opened its mouth a slow drip of slime curled from the wet void; the mouth-tusks glistened.
The teeth it exposed were greened with mould, and sharpened.
It sniffed the air again, then focused on Tallis, leaned towards her, made another awkward, hesitant step forward; sniffed again and exhaled, a sound like a breeze, a sound of puzzlement.
Wynne-Jones reached out and clutched Tallis's arm.
The pig sizzled on the flames, spitting fat, startling the Daurog for a moment.
‘It smells your blood,’ the old man said.
‘It lives on sap, but it smells your blood.’
‘And not yours?’
‘It's male.
And I'm old and you're young.
It smells the exudates from your body: blood, sweat, filth…’
‘What?’
‘And mind-sap too, I think.
It smells your mind.
It can probably see the way you are manipulating the wood…
Tallis glanced at Wynne-Jones, frowning.
Me?
He said, ‘Of course.
You are creating life every second.
Mythago-genesis.
You are very alive, very active…you just travel too fast to see the end result.
It begins with a fluttering in the mould and rot of the leaf litter.
You only recognize it when it rises in bodily form, like the Daurog  itself.
But the Daurog can probably see the smallest activity.
It seems frightened.
It is trying to understand us.
Stay very still.’
Slowly the Daurog placed its spear and sack upon the ground.
It circled the small clearing warily, catching the light and jerking as it did so, moving quickly into shadow.
As it walked so browning leaves fell from its body.
When it came slightly up-breeze of Tallis she noticed the appalling stench that emanated from its form: marsh gas and the smell of death which she remembered from her time in the mortuary house.
But the old Daurog came closer.
Its companions hovered in the borders of light and shadow, hidden against the oaks.
Their chattering, clicking conversation had diminished.
Scathach stretched forward and rested his hand on his spear.
The Daurog was nervous and eyed the human warrior cautiously.
It stepped slowly towards Tallis, crouched with much rustling and snapping of sinews and reached a long, tapering twig-finger to touch her hand.
Its nail was a rose thorn; she allowed it to scratch at her skin, making a faint red mark.
The Daurog sniffed its own finger, then licked at the glistening nail.
Tallis thought a lizard had emerged from the creature's mouth to bite at the thorn, then realized she had seen its tongue.
The Daurog seemed pleased by what it had tasted.
It spoke words; they were high-pitched and meaningless: bird chatter; the creak of a branch; more chatter; the rustle of leaves in wind.
Tallis realized with a start that the Daurog's body was alive with woodlice, some of them as large as leaves themselves.
The creature rose and backed away.
The leaves on its back were being shed in lines and a skeleton of furry creeper and black, gnarled wood was showing through.
It picked up its spear and its sack, then called to the  shadows.
Its companions emerged and approached the small fire, but stayed warily at a distance, more afraid of the flame than of the humans who had kindled it, Tallis decided.
Two of the Daurog were young females, one with skin made of holly leaves, the other silver birch.
Their eyes were smaller than the males', sunk deep below forehead ridges of vine.
The branch-tusks from their mouths were a silvery grey.
They wore ‘jewellery’ of sloe and hawthorn berries, blues and reds hanging from thorny crowns.
The two males were young also, one skinned in willow, the other hazel.
Their tusks were gnarled and they differed from the older Daurog in one remarkable and savage aspect: ridges of long, black spikes grew from the fronts of their bodies; the central, vertical line of thorns ran down on to the twisting, restless sex organs that hung from their rotund bellies.
At last the sixth member of the group arrived, and Tallis almost smiled as she recognized the type.
Not a cloak of feathers, but a skin-cloak of every leaf imaginable.
Broad limes on his head, a beard of holly, tufts of pear, shoulders of whitebeam, a chest of browning oak and elm, belly of ivy and brilliant yellow autumn sycamore.
Dogrose wound about his arms; red berries hung in lazy bunches.
His legs were impaled with a thousand needles of pine and hemlock; hemlock cones and crabapple were strapped to his waist.
From his head grew a fan of spikes of rush.
It surprised Tallis to see, as her eyesight penetrated the mask of leaf and wood, that this shaman was young, as young, perhaps, as Willow-jack and Jack-hazel.
He carried a sharpened staff and five decaying, woody heads had been impaled upon it.
He waved the staff and the dead branch-tusks of the several heads clattered.
‘It's known as Ghost of the Tree,’ Wynne-Jones whispered.
‘A shamanistic function.’
Tallis smiled again.
‘I'd noticed,’ she whispered back.
‘Skogen reflected this ancient form.
Your mask.
My totem…’
‘Everything is older than we think.’
The Daurog group now crouched at a cautious and respectful distance from the fire.
The elder among them opened his sack and spilled berries of many different kinds on to the ground.
There were nuts, too, and acorns.
He looked at Tallis.
Tallis cut several strips from the sizzling joints of the wild pig and reached forward to toss them closer to the Daurog.
Ghost of the Tree moved forward in an awkward crouching fashion, watching the humans suspiciously.
He picked up a piece of the flesh, sniffed it and tossed it down.
He pointed to two discarded bones and Scathach threw them over.
The shaman broke the bones with his bare hands, and used the jagged edges to scratch at his bark.
He passed one fragment to Oak, the elder.
Tallis rose and walked over to the pile of nuts and berries.
Everything was here, dogwood, holly, cherry, buckthorn, sloe and even strawberry.
She selected from among them, knowing that they could eat very little of this forest feast.
Trade having been done, they settled to take the meal, to eat, to indicate their good intentions.
The Green Jacks were disturbed by the fire, but Wynne-Jones placed pieces of flint on their side of the flames.
This symbolic gesture seemed to satisfy them.
Darkness, then a bright moon.
The fire glowed and Wynne-Jones kept it fed.
He and the old Daurog remained awake, watching each other across the small space.
At one point the fuller figured female — Holly-jack — came up to Oak-elder, crouched, staring at Tallis, who  had been alerted from her drowse.
She spoke to her leader in her woodland chatter.
After a while she came over to Tallis and bent down to peer at the human.
Tallis was conscious of an overpowering and putrid odour, of sap running in streams down the silvery branch-tusks, of young eyes, of young power.
The female Daurog sniffed the air then whispered words.
She came even closer and emitted a sound like laughter.
She touched a finger to Tallis, then to herself, trying to communicate in some way.
Tallis touched her own fingers to the sharp holly on the female's belly and something fluttered in the wood-flesh, causing the mythago pain.
The black fungal mass of her sex quivered, and odd sounds came from the Green Jack's hollow mouth, like whistling gasps.
And in her body, the struggling of wings…
Holly-jack drew away, moonlight on evergreen causing her to shine among her fading friends.
He recognized the mythago form (Wynne-Jones whispered to Tallis in the silence of the night) from stories he had heard about them.
They were far older than the Tuthanach, probably engendered by the association with the first post-Ice Age forest of the Mesolithic period, ten thousand years or so before the birth of Christ.
By Bronze Age times the ‘green man’— Green Jack, or Hooded Robin, the medieval ‘wodehouse’— had become a solitary forest figure, partially deified, reflected in and mingled with such elemental forms as Pan, and Dionysus, and vaguely remembered dryads.
But to the Mesolithic hunter-nomads they formed a forest kingdom, a race of forest creatures, saviours, oracles, and tormentors all at the same time; they arose in the mythogenic unconscious both to explain nature's hostility to the people's actions, and to express the hope of survival against the unknown.
All he knew of the early Daurog myth was the creation myth.
He summed it up for Tallis:
With the coming of the Sun a cave opened in the ice, as far down as the frozen earth.
In the cave in the ice, lying on the frosted soil, were the bones of a man.
The Sun began to warm the bones.
The man had eaten a wolf before he died, all other animals having fled the winter.
The bones of the wolf lay with the bones of the man.
The wolf had eaten a bird before the man had hunted and killed it.
The owl had been cold and slow and had been a poor meal for the wolf.
The bones of the owl lay in the bones of the wolf in the bones of the man.
The owl had eaten a vole.
Its tiny bones lay there too.
The vole had eaten seeds and nuts and because it sensed the long winter to come it had eaten a little of everything: acorns, hazels, haws, hips, sweet catkins, sour apples, sharp sloes, soft blackberries.
The seeds of the forest lay among the bones of the vole and the owl and the wolf and the man.
The Sun warmed the bones, but it was the seeds which grew, feeding on the marrow in all the bones, which had cracked with the frost.
The life that grew was half tree, half man.
It had the speed of the wolf.
It had the cunning of the vole.
Like the owl, it could lose itself in the forest.
In spring its flesh was clothed in white flowers.
In summer, oak leaves shivered on its body.
In autumn, berries burst from its flesh.
In winter it grew dark and fed on the sap in trees, or the blood of animals.
Then spring again, and with the greening of the land the creature gave birth to birds before waiting in the deepest thicket for the call of the Men who were hunting and gathering from the forest.
In spring, summer and autumn it grinned at them from the greenwood.
Only in winter did it snap their necks to gorge upon their warm sap.
Each year the painful birth of birds brought more seeds, more bones, more wolves into the forest.
Soon there were many of the Daurog.
They copied the form and ways of Man, but saw how Man was clearing the forest and saw how this destruction released elemental spirits from the earth which had once been frozen.
So the Daurog spread out to mark the limit of the heart of the wood.
No Man was allowed to enter into that heart and live.
But outside the heart of the wood the Green Men brought berries and fertility in the form of birds to the villages and farms of the people.
Only in winter did the wolf emerge to stalk the snow wastes and the bare forest for prey.
The people called them Scarag.
In this way, Man and Daurog lived in uneasy harmony for many generations, each keeping to their realm, each finding power in the other, each recognizing the other in themselves…
There was more (Wynne-Jones went on, after a pause for breath and thought) but it was fragmentary.
Tallis was concerned that these Green Jack had come to kill them.
‘We're in the heartwoods, after all…’
Wynne-Jones thought not.
These Daurog were going north; they were themselves adventurers.
And the presence of Holly-jack — evergreen woman among the slowly transforming Scarag — was familiar to him; there was a story-cycle about her, but he didn't know the details.
They might find out during the days to follow.
During the night Tallis woke to the sound of wind in branches.
Scathach was curled up asleep.
She sat up abruptly, confused and still dizzy from slumber, and a hand reached out to silence her.
Wynne-Jones was alert.
He pointed into the faint moonlight on the far side of the  glade and Tallis felt a moment's shock as she saw what was happening there.
Holly was astride the supine form of one of the younger males, it was hard to tell which.
She was on her knees above him, back arched, body shaking, hands held to her head as if to block out pain.
She rocked slightly.
Moonshine on the holly leaves showed the way she twitched and jerked as the blackthorn spines probed deeper into the soft moss of her womb.
It was she who made the sound.
It was clearly pleasure.
The male was silent, watching his mate with an almost curious indifference.
A few moments later, Holly-jack flung herself on to her lover's blackthorn chest.
She stood, slowly turned, and where the spines had penetrated her she oozed bright sap.
She watched Tallis, then touched hands to her mouth, running her fingers down the bifurcated branches of her tusks.
And then she was gone, into the nightwoods, towards the river.
A few minutes later there was a human scream; the night, for a while, was filled with the sound of birds.
Stunned by what she had seen, Tallis was silent for several minutes; then she turned to Wynne-Jones.
‘Are they mine?
Are they mine?
Have I created these creatures?’
‘I would think so,’ the old man said, but he was not sure.
‘They seem to recognize you.
Something about you attracts them.
Holly-jack at least.
They seemed fascinated by you.
Yes, I would think they have formed from a pre-mythago pattern in your own mind…’
The copulated male was sleepy.
(Tallis saw now that it was Willow-jack.)
On his paunchy torso a spined snake curled and flexed as if in ecstasy, slowly shrinking.
Ghost of the Tree appeared suddenly in the moon, holding his staff of heads.
Tallis could not see clearly but he seemed to be pushing something on to the staff, working it round until, with a crack, it slid into position.
Then he was quite still, staring at the humans.
Watching him, Tallis soon could not see him.
He had become a small tree.
He was forest darkness, rustled by breeze.
Only the slight flexing of his left hand gave him away, this green man, nearing his winter death.
Disturbed by this strange and brutal event, Tallis found it hard to get to sleep again.
She must have succeeded.
She woke in the early dawn and peered around her blearily through the heavy mist that filled the wood.
Everything was very still.
The fire had died, though its smell mingled with the odour of the forest, the sharp scent of the undergrowth.
She looked for the Daurog, but they had gone — or so she thought.
There was a tight thicket of new, thorny growth in the clearing, a bird darting between the branches picking at the red and blue berries that hung from the twigs.
The bird, a small creature, abruptly fled.
The thicket quivered, then moved.
It dissolved into six human forms, each taking on the attributes of head and arms and limbs.
In the centre, Ghost of the Tree stood alone, his arms around his skull-staff, his head bowed.
The Daurog moved about their business, eyeing Tallis with the same shivering caution as the evening before.
Scathach stirred, sat up and rubbed his eyes, blinking at the dawn, scratching his beard.
He shook Wynne-Jones who murmured in his sleep, then began to weep.
But Tallis had no time for the old man and his sad, bad dreams of lost possessions, lost knowledge.
She watched the Green Jack.
Last night there had been six, then one had gone away…now there were six again.
She recognized one of the females — Silver Birch — but there  was a second female, now; and like the female of the night before, she too had holly on her breast and back.
She wore the same red berries.
Apart from being thinner, and less obviously female than Holly-jack, she was the same.
Indeed, as the Daurog elder scooped nuts and berries and held them out to his family, Holly-jack came over to Tallis and stretched her branch-tusked mouth into the semblance of a smile.
She rubbed a hand over the leafy belly, then plucked at the growth, tore it gently open, as if parting the folds of a shirt.
Tallis felt slightly sick as a glistening space appeared in Holly-jack's torso, with the gnarled shaft of a backbone clearly visible at the back; ribs like curves of polished mahogany gleamed.
The hollow in her stomach was filled with scattered feathers.
She took some out and let them drift away, still stretching the soft lips of her mouth with delight.
The silvery tusks trembled.
Holly-jack had shed her burden of birds, Tallis realized.
In some way this had freed her.
She had sent new life into the forest, and now she was young again, and hollow.
It had not been her head which Ghost of the Tree had worked on to his skull-staff the night before.
As Tallis focused her gaze on the young magic-man she could see that the newest skull was a blank-faced mask, crudely chipped out of a circle of rain-softened bark.
She raised Skogen to her face and through it she saw Ghost of the Tree turn a quizzical and penetrating look upon her.
In the damp dawn mist he radiated green light, tendrils of luminescence which reached from the points of his body into the canopy, and down to the earth.
The soft light bathed him, poured from him; the trees seemed to suck it in, like water.
The Daurog prepared for their journey.
They gathered up their few possessions and almost melted into the wood, close to the river.
But now, Holly-jack and Silver Birch kept themselves in human view, and called and chattered as they ran, keeping pace with the horses of their newfound friends.
Tallis rode with Wynne-Jones, who watched the antics of the Green Jacks with growing interest.
They were certainly drawn to Tallis, he suggested to her.
Something about her, some quality, some sign, had made them trust her.
He could not see, nor think what that link might have been, beyond what was an evident fact to him: that they were mythagos created by Tallis, and were responding to the mind which had engendered them.
They were not Harry's creation: they were too recently generated to have been from him.
Holly-jack — because of her evergreen skin — seemed set to be the one who would persist in winter as the human's friend; she would be the oddest of primitive heroines.
There was no ivy-jack in the Green Jack group.
Holly and ivy, the green leaves of winter…the thought of it made Tallis sing the carol, and Wynne-Jones joined in, adding his cracking voice to the melancholy memory of Christmas festivity.
As for the males: they were only days away from their final shedding.
The transformation would be rapid.
The sap in their bodies would dry, and with it the intelligence in their strange-shaped heads.
They would.become animals, ferocious, feral, fervent in their lust for the sap of life to sustain them through the cold.
‘We must have abandoned them by then,’ Wynne-Jones warned.
‘We'll cross the marsh with them,’ Tallis agreed.
‘Then force a departure.’
They reached the lake a few hours later.
Tallis thought  it was about the middle of the day.
It was chill and overcast.
She wrapped herself more tightly in her furs and hood and trod carefully with Scathach across the natural platform of reeds and rush.
He had not been here before and he was alarmed by the vast expanse of water that now stretched ahead of him.
His fur leggings became saturated as he paced around the edge.
Tallis, too, was taken aback.
The willows had crowded closer to the shore, a swamp of them; their branches formed a vault.
Their thick trunks leaned heavily towards the middle of the lake.
There were so many more than when she had been here with Morthen.
The Daurog began to whitter and make shrill noises.
They were splashing through shallow water, between massive, brooding willow trunks.
Tallis and Scathach followed them.
The source of their excitement was a broken barge, shaped like a small longship.
Whatever had been on its prow was now gone, sheared off when the sleek vessel had been driven among the trees.
It was shallow draughted, tapering at prow and stern.
The mast had come down, but rags of the canvas sheets remained.
They were white, decorated with a red emblem which Scathach thought might have been a bear.
It was too small for a Viking longship, not sufficiently decorated for the ship of a king.
Or so Tallis thought at first.
The hull was holed in several places and the vessel was awash.
But below the rags of canvas — which Scathach deftly cut and rolled — were garments, belts and brooches.
Some of the clothing was black.
Capes and cowls, and a dress with traces of gold filigree that had been woven along its edges.
Tallis rolled these too.
All clothing could prove useful.
She found bronze cloak pins, clasps, bead amulets and  hair-combs.
There were cut locks of hair, too: tight, black curls, some of them from a beard.
‘Three women and one man,’ Wynne-Jones decided, as he sifted through the artefacts.
‘And there's blood on the hull, do you see?
The man was dying.’
Tallis stared back into the wildwood, puzzled as to the fate of this craft's enigmatic passengers.
The Daurog pushed the boat upright.
The two males climbed aboard and worked on the leaks in the hull, using bundles of rush, which the females gathered.
Ghost of the Tree and Oak-elder crouched on the swollen roots of a willow, watching their repair, occasionally singing.
Wynne-Jones had been afraid of staying too long in the company of these changing spirits of summer.
His anxiety could now cease.
Though the elder, oak leaves bristling as he faced Tallis, invited them to share the vessel to cross the wide lake, she shook her head.
The boat would never have borne the weight of the three of them, plus the horses.
Indeed, as the Daurog clambered aboard so further splits appeared in the decaying planks of the hull.
The vessel wobbled, Holly-jack chittered and watched Tallis curiously, a girl again now that the haunting of wings had gone from her — for a while.
Ghost of the Tree rattled his skull-staff and the loose branch tusks of the dead clattered their challenge of the lake.
One of the males used a length of cut hazel to pole the craft out of the willow wood and into clear water.
Holly-jack waved, then pointed ahead of them to the north.
Mist, distance and the lake claimed the green men.
Tallis wondered if they were aware of the fact that they were moving further into winter…
Now she created the hollowing, the threshold to the north.
She wore the Hollower to do it.
Scathach held the horses.
Swimmer of Lakes was quite calm, but the raiders'  mounts, perhaps still missing their masters, were restless and nervous, pulling against him, pawing the rushes and the dirty water below them.
Wynne-Jones crouched behind Tallis, fascinatedly watching the way space changed before her, gasping as the first vortex of darkness announced the coming of the threshold into a new geistzone.
Her masks made a circle around her.
Water rose through the eyes and mouths.
She had placed Morndun the passing of a ghost into the unknown region — at the front, aware that she wished to travel and that in the realm she was the ghost, as was Wynne-Jones, and a part of Scathach.
The masks spoke to her with the voice of the past.
She held each one before her, staring at the patterns and the shape.
She felt each one unlock her mind.
As she knelt there, water soaking into her furs, it seemed to her that the masks were singing to her.
As the threshold came closer, Falkenna soared above her
I will give you wings to ascend the castle walls
— Silvering struggled in a shallow pool
Swim with me, through underground rivers, through streams
— Cunhaval, the great hound, sniffed at the air
I know the best forest tracks.
Run with me.
I fear nothing
— Moondream gleamed
Castle stone by moonlight; the castle is breathing; beware, beware
— Lament sang to her in old familiar melodies, and Tallis recognized the words and she felt chill
A fire is burning in bird spirit land.
My bones smoulder.
I must journey there
‘I am journeying,’ Tallis whispered.
‘I can't go any faster.’
And Morndun howled at her, its spectral presence  insinuating cold fingers into her mind, a tentative probing of the darkest region of her unconscious
Release the ghost from your bones.
Ghost follows ghost into the realm of ghosts.
Release the life from your bones.
There is no other way into the unknown region.
‘I shall do what I have to do to find my brother.
There is no point in dying.’
Sinisalo's voice was the calling of a playful child, running between the trees, hiding, teasing.
It too called
Bring out the ghost.
Bring out the ghost.
Angrily, Tallis blocked her ears.
A fish jumped in the water.
A tree root flexed, then was still.
Through her fingers Tallis could hear the horses protesting against the growing, icy wind.
The platform of rushes vibrated, almost unbalancing her.
The hollowing formed!
The transition was so abrupt that it took her by surprise.
As her mouth opened to gasp her shock it filled with snow and dead leaves.
She spat violently.
Water rushed over rocks.
A storm wind raged against the dull sky she could see, trees flexed and bent like flowers.
The sides of the valley were steep.
There was too much snow for her to tell whether this was the place she had seen before, with the stone walls of the castle rising among the thick, frozen trees.
But it was the same deep gorge — and it was on the other side of the lake!
She gathered her masks and stepped towards the hollowing, fighting against the gale that blew into the quieter realm of the marsh.
Behind her, Wynne-Jones scurried forward.
Behind him, Scathach tugged at the horses.
Tallis stepped across the threshold and screamed as the true cold struck her.
She was deep in a freezing river, and the bank was yards away.
She turned and helped Wynne-Jones through into the gorge.
He blinked his good eye and looked up, looked around, a half smile on his lips.
Snow drove against him, but he just brushed it aside.
He was experiencing something utterly new for him: his first controlled passage into a geistzone under the guidance of an oolerinnen; his first safe transit of the threshold for so long guarded by the bone, wood and bird-wing magic of the shaman.
Tallis screamed at Scathach to hurry.
The man appeared at the gate; he looked shocked and shaken.
He had passed through hollowings before, but never into a realm of such ferocity.
Branches cracked from trees and plunged into the turbulent waters behind Tallis, who clutched her cloak and cowl, holding them tightly against the tearing wind.
‘Hurry!’
The gale threatened to blow her into the water.
Scathach tugged at the crude bridles of the three horses and the beasts, terrified by the transition from tranquillity to rage and protesting loudly, stepped through.
Tallis took hold of Swimmer of Lakes, tried to calm the animal and succeeded.
She led the mare to dry land, then reached a hand to help tug Wynne-Jones from the surging river.
Scathach wrenched the two other animals to safety; and the opening between worlds faded, winter darkness replacing the light from the lakeside.
‘We are north of the marsh,’ Wynne-Jones said through chattering teeth, ‘But not as far north as I would have hoped.’
They hastened into the shelter of rocks and wood, wary of falling branches but aware that they had little choice but to seek refuge from the storm in the wind-shadow of great trees.
It was almost night.
They had very little time.
The snow was blinding but had blown so hard that it had not yet formed a blanket on the land.
Scathach slung canvases between trees that surged and shuddered.
Tallis  tethered the horses, backs to the wind.
Wynne-Jones eventually succeeded in starting a small fire.
They huddled together, wrapped in the canvas from the beached craft.
By early morning the ferocious wind had dropped.
A fine snow fell for a while, then that too ceased.
A welcome calm descended.
The horses ceased to struggle and Wynne-Jones slept.
Scathach came close to Tallis and they curled up together, her face buried in the fur collar of his clothing, his arms reaching into the warmth below her cloak.
The creation of hollowings had become a difficult and energetic process, leaving Tallis weary for hours after.
When she was fully rested they ate a meagre meal, conserving their supplies of meat and berries for the arduous journey ahead, then mounted up and began to pick their way carefully through the snow tracks in the wood.
They kept their path as close as possible to the river.
Occasionally Tallis, masked in the Silvering, scanned the waters, but she saw no fish.
Through Falkenna she glimpsed grey geese, but Scathach — expert with sword and spear — was an inaccurate shot with sling.
Only through Cunhaval was she aware of life in the forest and it was not a life-form that encouraged them to slow down and set a trap.
They were wolves.
They were close behind.
They were following steadily through the black winter woods.
The thought was never spoken, but the identity of the pack seemed obvious.
(ii)
On the second day of their slow ride up the river they found traces of Morthen, a snail-shell hair net, slung from the branch of a tree close to the cold remains of a fire.
Had the girl known they would follow her?
Tallis unslung the net and fingered the broken shells thoughtfully.
Everything about the odd relic suggested that Morthen had left it as a deliberate sign.
Wynne-Jones took the net and folded it carefully, tucking it into his clothing.
He stepped down to the water's edge and smelled the air hard.
‘She always used to leave little warning signs when she was younger,’ he said as he came back to the horses.
‘If we were hunting, or exploring, she would always go ahead.
She would warn me of animals, or ruins, or mythagos…’
‘Is this a warning sign?’
Scathach asked.
‘What is she warning us of?
Winter?’
He smiled.
‘Spring, I think.’
‘Spring!’
Tallis said, amazed, looking about her at the dark, snow-striped land.
Wynne-Jones laughed.
‘Can't you smell it?
It's in the air.
The seasons are in flight.
This is the strange storm I warned you of…
Come on!
We're getting close to a place that's very important to you.’
Spring.
It burst upon them almost between one bend in the river and the next.
The trees were in fresh bud, the air crisp but brighter, now, the water less fierce.
They rode through spring — it took two hours or so — and entered summer.
And by dusk were back in autumn; it seemed sensible to make camp in this gentler landscape, but during the night an odd wind fetched up and snow fell, followed by an appallingly humid heat.
Confused by it all, Tallis found it hard to sleep.
She sat by the guttering fire and watched creatures move along the river.
At dawn they were in autumn again, and as they rode on, they came back into winter.
They journeyed for four days, and in each day they  crossed the seasons twice.
But Wynne-Jones began to show unease.
Indeed, the wind was very strange, its scent and sounds confused, quite odd.
Scathach used the periods of summer to hunt for food, and gather edible plants.
They rode hardest in spring and autumn.
They spent most of their time in winter, simply because travelling through the icy storm was so difficult.
When they stopped, sometimes at the junctions between seasons, Tallis could feel the flow of time, the great spiral storm that curled around some focus a few days' riding to the north.
Wynne-Jones drew a diagram with charcoal on bare rock.
‘It's like a hurricane.
It has an eye, and around that eye are the circular flows of the seasons, moving very slowly in a number of distinct zones.
Because we are riding across them we are experiencing the seasons in very short order.
I have been through such a storm before, and it is the gusting that is most dangerous.’
A day later, with the valley walls steepening, the gorge deepening and the river widening, Tallis found out what he meant.
Towards dusk a ripple of colour fled through the summer woodland, a widening band of golden brown sweeping through the green.
It happened so fast she could hardly follow the change with her gaze.
One moment the forest was rich and lush, the next it had turned golden, then the leaves blew into the air, almost as if there had been an explosion.
The riders stopped.
Scathach's horse panicked and he shouted at the creature, which stamped in the water, twisting and tugging with discomfort.
Behind the leaf-fall came a gust of budding, the black branches sprouting new growth in seconds, the growth bursting into leaf.
The woodland shimmered, was still — a moment's stifling summer silence, then the howl of the new season, a freezing wind bringing death and shedding  so that for the second time in two minutes the land was drenched with fallen leaves and snow.
The journey through the zone of gusting time was terrifying.
Heads low, they pressed on, galloping whenever there was a moment's calm and heat, turning away from the ice-laden wind when the ferocious shards of the glacier came at them like insects.
After a few hours the speed of change slowed.
They found a pocket of spring/summer oscillation and camped overnight there, conscious that just yards away a biting winter was flaring and dying, the trees sprouting, then blackening again, as if the buds were tiny creatures, grasping and snatching at the light, then quickly tugging back into their wood-bark holes.
They came to the ‘eye’ of this storm, below a sullen, winter sky, and at once Tallis began to recognize the deep canyon which she had hollowed those days before, with Morthen.
‘It's here,’ she whispered to Scathach.
‘We're coming close.
This is the place…’
The young warrior brushed frost from his straggling beard and searched the steep sides of the valley, his breath misting.
‘I feel it too,’ he said.
He seemed alarmed, his horse turning nervously.
‘Listen!’
Tallis heard the howl of wind among trees, the clatter of stones.
She glanced at Scathach, frowning.
He had a half smile on his face and his green eyes were suddenly alive with excitement.
‘Battle!’ he said.
‘Can you hear the battle?’
She shook her head.
‘Only the wind…’
‘More than wind!
Sword strikes…horses at the gallop…shouting.
You must hear it.’
He still stared at the cliff top.
‘It's up there, beyond the woodland.
And my friends are there too…’
He turned fierce eyes on Tallis, then reached to hold her arm.
‘Now there's a link between us.
Your castle, my field of battle, close together…’
Wynne-Jones too had begun to recognize the dark and frozen place.
Their movements echoed here, the sound of the river loud, though only Scathach seemed able to hear the distant cries of fighting.
The canyon walls came close together as they rode in gathering darkness.
Above them, jutting fingers of rock and branch almost obliterated the sky: stone ruins overgrown with black trees, the broken edifices of the ancient place covering the canyon, seemingly hewn from the stone itself.
Among those ruins, among the blackened oaks and thorns, fires burned.
Now, when Tallis listened hard, she could hear a drum being beaten as a warning.
It was a familiar sound to her.
And perhaps the drum beat had been the noise which had excited Scathach.
When she looked into the dark she saw corrupt towers and crumbling walls, high on the cliff, the rooting place, now, of gigantic trees.
Black shapes moved there, some huddled below the leaning walls, others flapping against the grey skyline.
‘It isn't as I saw it in my dreams.’
Tallis said.
‘The gorge was wider.
The castle was less ruined.
Any youngest son trapped here could easily have escaped.’
Not listening to her, Scathach said simply, ‘This place draws me.
It tugs at my ghost.’
He stood in the crude stirrups of his saddle and smelled the air hard, seeming satisfied.
‘The smell of battle!
It's unmistakable.
Bavduin is close.
I'd recognize that smell anywhere.’
‘If only I had my journal,’ Wynne-Jones complained.
‘Something to write with, to record this.’
‘Look around you,’ Scathach hissed suddenly as they came round a curve in the river, riding slowly.
He turned in the saddle, face shocked.
‘Look everywhere!
Everywhere around!’
White rags fluttered in the trees.
Light glinted on  armour.
Figures moved slowly in the darkness.
Tallis gasped as she saw the bones of men and horses piled by the river and flung into the branches, grim remnants of those who had not won the day.
Warriors crouched by the water, some drinking, some just staring.
Tallis smelled blood and the more offensive stink of ordure.
A horse skidded on ice, whinnying loudly as it fell to its side.
It recovered, struggled to its feet and galloped away up the canyon, riderless, trappings flying.
As her eyes grew more accustomed to the hellish gloom, Tallis could see how many of these forlorn corpses were gathering on the north bank of the river.
They ignored each other in death, though sometimes they crouched no more than an arm's reach away from each other, even touching as they slipped on the ice.
They had eyes only for the journey downwards, now, and battle-fervour, love and pride had long since been sucked from them, leaving them soulless husks: in bronze, or leather, fur-cloaked or bright trousered.
Helmets gleamed, some with tall plumes, others decorated with animals, others plain.
The shoreline bristled with the spikes of spears and swords, rammed into the hard mud, no longer needed.
‘Bavduin is a timeless battle,’ Wynne-Jones said as he surveyed the sombre gathering of the fallen.
Bones slipped from a tree, clattered to the ground on top of rusting armour.
Tallis noticed shields impaled on broken branches, standards fluttering raggedly where they had been flung.
A cluster of decayed heads, slung by the hair, shifted in the wind, slack jaws singing silent laments, dulled eyes following the journey of their ghosts into the unknown regions of their age.
On the cliff-side, on ledges among the crumbling ruins: a scattering of fires.
And there were fires, too, on the skyline above them, while on the wind came the mournful blast of a trumpet.
Scathach cried out and raised his sword, then sheathed the weapon and slumped in his saddle, saddened, perhaps, by thoughts of his friends.
Tallis remembered his  fragmentary account of the battle of Bavduin, his incomplete memory of the legend that was ensnaring him.
A river flowed near to Bavduin, and each night the dead came to the water on their journey back to the cold earth of their own times and lands.
Here they summoned the gods and guardians of the dead of their own people, and the ghosts mingled in the air, like mad beasts, fighting and destroying as if blind.
When she placed Morndun across her face and peered through its ghostly eyes she saw the air shimmering with elementals, sharp-faced, wraith-like, coiling and twisting above the river, streaming out of the mouths and eyes of the men by the water and from the piles of skulls by the trees.
Horned shapes, scaled figures, shapes with the features of insects and spiders, birds with the faces of young women — it made Tallis shiver to witness this silent gathering of the supernatural forces of so many ages.
‘Show me,’ whispered Wynne-Jones, but when he looked through the mask he could see no more than the darkness.
So Tallis described what she could sense, and then they moved on through the silent and deathly place, watching the dying and the dead with caution.
They arrived at the bottom of a winding cliff path which seemed to lead to the fortress and the forest on the land above to the open land where a strange, timeless battle was being fought beneath the dusk sky.
They stole fire from a dead man, his limed hair, torque, bare breast beneath fur-lined cloak and cloth kirtle marking him as Celtic.
He had ended his own life, but in the cold had remained crouched, his hand resting on the hilt of the blade which he had pushed into his heart.
Twined about the fingers of his free hand were long strands of a woman's hair.
His tears had frozen so that his cheeks and  eyes continued to gleam with ice.
Scathach dragged the stiff body back into the trees and laid it on its side.
Then he straightened, sighed, and stared up the slope.
He whispered the names of the Jaguthin, and his fists clenched with pain.
‘They'll be there,’ he said quietly to Tallis.
‘They'll be there.
All of them.
I must go to join them.’
‘Don't abandon the old man yet,’ Tallis said.
‘Give me time to go to the ruins and look for a sign of Harry.’
‘And pass through to Lavondyss?
And leave me waiting for ever?’
‘I shan't pass through.
Not until I've seen what's there and taken your father's advice on what to do about it.’
Scathach still seemed uncertain.
She pinched his cheek.
‘A few minutes in the ruins.
An hour at the most.
I don't intend to be as rash as you!
Then we can say a proper farewell.’
She put her arms around Scathach and he tugged her hard to his body.
Their furs were too thick and they could feel very little of each other, but Tallis unfastened his cloak and quickly kissed the cold, taut skin of his throat.
He responded more passionately, and for a second the faraway look in his eyes was replaced by knowingness and humour.
‘A proper farewell,’ she repeated, eyes stinging.
‘Even in this cold.
Wait for me…’
‘I'll wait for you,’ he agreed softly, and glancing at the dark river valley he added, ‘I'll find food, if I can.
Enough for several days.
We could eat mythago-flesh…’
‘No!’
He grinned.
‘Then I'll find something with a thicker hide and tougher meat.
Be careful on the path.
And avoid anything that sounds like fighting — and anyone who looks dead.
And don't be long…’
A steep path, leading away from the river, wound up between low, stark trees.
A path made dangerous by loose stones and snow.
A path cut precariously into the valley side, sometimes only as wide as an animal's body, sometimes passing through the cliff itself.
When Tallis rode up this narrow track she sent stones tumbling to the glittering water below her, and at a certain height she stopped to listen to the sound, recognizing it from a time in childhood, from a time when she had summoned images of another world, and Harry had called to her for help.
This was the place.
It elated her to realize the fact, to recognize the echo of her horse, struggling on the icy path, to hear the drum, to smell the wood of the fires, the crack of the crude hide tents that had been erected outside the arched gate of the ruined fortress.
Eyes watched her from the thorn woods.
She rode past the fires.
These people had lived here for years; the places showed all the signs of long habitation.
Only the children were courageous enough to step out of hiding and watch her.
They were dull-eyed and fur clad, with hair bound up into a bunch at the crown and the rattle of bones and polished stones around their limbs.
They were like the boy she had seen at Oak Lodge…
The drummer was a woman cowled in black, who watched from a low tent, half obscured by hides, furs and wooden carvings.
Tallis saw a gaping split in the cliff wall, and the small fire that burned deep inside, illuminating the cluster of wooden statuettes, some standing, some dangling from twine, at the entrance to the cave.
She rode on, ducking below trees, shivering as she passed the guarding statues at the crumbling gate.
They were beasts, not men, but they had about them the features of nightmare, of ghosts, and though she recognized the animals of the forest in limbs, teeth and eyes, what struck her most powerfully was the element of madness in them.
All things in this world were born from the minds of men and since all men were mad, they were mad creatures, madly running…
So Tallis at last entered the stone corridors and galleries which had once led Harry to the first forest, and a forbidden land in whose winter embrace he had become lost.
The cold stone whispered to her.
She climbed stairs and peered through wide windows at the canyon and the forested land that stretched away to south and west.
She entered small chambers, stood at the side of a great hall, its roof decayed, dark creatures flying through the sagging beams, the falling eaves.
She knew this hall well, with its huge fire and its marbled floor.
She went to the place where the King had sat.
She stood where she had seen Scathach in the story, his face now indistinguishable from the young man with whom she travelled.
One remembered again the anger in his eyes as he had faced her across the table.
And she realized that the anger had not been directed at her at all.
He was looking at her for help — he was pleading, through his fury, for the assistance of his sister…it was just that, in his youth, he could not control the emotion in his face, and she quivered with the imagined rage, only now recognizing the desperation in his eyes.
Who was I ?
Why do I feel so old? y I was his sister in the story, why do If eel so old, so cold?
If only she had looked more closely at his eyes.
In them she might have seen her reflection.
She might have understood by now.
There was something comfortingly familiar in this maddening ruin, this mythagoscape, generated by a burned airman many years in the past, created by him as he journeyed to the innermost and most ancient place of all.
Glimpses of her stories made her smile.
Echoes of Harry  made her sad.
Although her body was cold, she felt enclosed by warmth, as if her brother's arms were around her, and she was snug and safe against his chest.
She touched the stone of the walls as she might have touched a cheek, deliberately and lingeringly.
It was so dark, so strange.
There was damp quality to it, an odd stickiness.
The patterns in the hewn rock were evocative, thin traceries of crystal, she imagined, beautiful whorls and arches, as fine to look at as the fine lines on a mother's face.
She recognized the stone for what it was, but the thought did not engage her, did not surface.
It was stone which was not true stone, and she continued to question that oddity, even though the answer to the slight conundrum was obvious and all about her.
Wandering aimlessly, she ascended towers and followed twisting galleries deep into the cliff.
Dusk was giving way to night and the fires outside the gate burned brightly.
Fine snow fell and transformed the image of the wood.
Wind gusted through the empty skull of the fortress, the ragged breathing of a dying man.
And in one room she found the tattered remnants of a standard, white, emblazoned with the image of a bird.
From this room she could see out through a wide window into a dense stand of woodland, which seemed to crowd together, not quite hiding a track leading to a small cave.
She was high on the cliff, here, and the ledge was close to the darkening sky.
She imagined that to walk that track, and to climb the rough hewn rock around the mouth of the cave, would bring her to the top of the canyon.
From such a vantage point she might see across the land for ever— to the edge of the wood in all directions…
The room felt homely, cold and damp though it was, and dark.
She walked around its edge.
She tried to imagine Harry being here, huddled by a fire in the centre  of the space, staring at the cave, reaching to the first forest, drawing the Ancient close to him.
Pale moonlight lanced through winter skies, the clouds withdrawing for a moment so that the bleak, whorled stone gleamed silver, reflecting back the cool rays.
Something in the stone…
She crossed the room, reached to touch the glistening object embedded in the rock.
It looked as if the rock had flowed around the pistol, curling strands of stone that gripped the barrel and the trigger-guard.
But the shape of the revolver was clear to see, the metal now corroded, the wood quite rotten.
Yet not so rotten that it had obscured the carved  initials at the base of the grip.
H.K.
Harry Keeton!
Her brother's pistol, then.
She thrilled to see it, to touch it.
She could not dislodge it, but she stood there, staring at the weapon.
Its barrel pointed to the cave.
Its presence occupied the room…
Following by instinct, following the trail of mind and memory that he had left, she had surely and with great purpose come to the final place of Harry's death
From here to rebirth was just a single step…
So she stepped out through the wide window, towards the cave.
To her left the land dropped away to the river below, sheer and terrifying.
She could see a flicker of fire, Wynne-Jones's fire.
The river sparkled by dusklight.
There was a sound from the gorge, a strange whirring.
She saw a dark, circular shape rising from the depths, ascending the sides of the canyon.
It was like a dark wheel, flecked with white.
It chattered…
Fascinated, she watched as this object rose towards her, and only after several seconds did she realize that it was a screeching flight of birds, whirling on the updraught towards the  freedom of the skies.
She crouched as the great flock screamed past her, wings humming; some of them tangled in the trees, a few panicked as they shattered themselves against the stone of the fortress, or flew frantically in the confined space of the room; but most of them circled above her head, then streamed away to the south, lost against the fading luminescence of the sky.
This sudden, panicked flight interrupted the mood of closeness to her brother.
Teetering on the sheer cliff, Tallis peered down at the river.
She heard her name called from below, the sound distorted as it echoed from the depths.
She grew instantly concerned and retraced her steps to where she had tethered Swimmer of Lakes.
Leading the animal by its reins, she descended the steep path towards the place of tents.
She skirted the fires, seeing no sign of movement, then realized that someone was running through the dark trees towards her.
The figure came up the path and into the sparse firelight, stopped, chittered, then darted on, arms waving as it ran.
‘Holly-jack!’
Tallis called, and as if it had understood its name the Green Jack stopped a moment, stared sadly at the woman with the horse.
It was certainly the evergreen jack, her holly skin torn and ragged, now, her thin body shuddering.
She looked as if she had been attacked.
As Tallis watched her, so several prickly leaves dropped from her chest, and the creature touched the broken stems as if in pain.
Then she turned and ran on, towards the gate to the ruins.
Perhaps she was aware of what lay above her, or perhaps she just ran blindly.
Then Tallis realized that Holly-jack was running out of fear.
A wolf bounded into the place of tents, stopped and straightened like a man.
Swimmer of Lakes panicked and reared.
Tallis dragged the animal down and soothed it, stroking its muzzle and  whispering soft words.
The Scarag stood, half visible in the dim light, swaying slightly and working its wet jaws.
The stink of beast and forest was strong.
It took a rapid step to the side, deeper into shadows, then turned its skull features to stare up the path.
As it moved it creaked and crackled, an old tree moving over crisp leaves.
Skeletal arms lifted, one pointing; eyes that were just holes in maggoty wood seemed to seek compassion from the human.
A mouth that trembled and opened to expose pointed thorns for teeth seemed to work to speak; over all, the shape of the woodland creature was that of a wolf, but a bare boned wolf, its fur gone, its flesh shrunken on to the jutting bones of its body.
It dropped to its forearms and padded slowly to left and right.
It sniffed the air.
It uttered a doglike howl, then raced past Tallis, moving so fast on its hind legs, bent forward, that she could hardly follow its motion.
It had entered one of the tents, but a moment later emerged and raced at Tallis, light reflecting in dull eyes.
She was carrying a small spear and only just had time to raise it and thrust it at the Scarag.
The point passed through its body as if through tree fungus.
But the creature stopped.
She withdrew the weapon, struck at its head and it staggered.
She impaled it through the ribs a second time and the point took and held, and this time when she jerked the Scarag to the side it came with her, clutching at the killing wood.
Wolfish cries, a sharp wail, a barking death cry; then Tallis had swung the winter monster across the ledge.
As it tumbled through the air it stretched out its arms.
She thought she heard an owl cry, and the falling shape, black now and only just visible, seemed to sweep suddenly to the left, soaring, then falling, turning a round and white face to glance at her as it vanished into the gloom.
Let free, and panicked by the Scarag, Swimmer of  Lakes had bolted.
She could hear the animal below her, struggling on the icy path, and she followed it down.
When she came to the river the horse was standing there, head hung as if abashed.
As Tallis approached it whinnied  loudly , then stamped and backed into the trees.
She realized that it was not shame that made it cower, but further fear.
She looked along the river to where Wynne-Jones's fire burned.
She could see a single horse, but no sign of men.
Something, though…something tall, something like an animal…quite motionless…
She approached it cautiously.
What she had seen was a Scarag, impaled through the jaw and hanging limp on Scathach's lance, which had been driven into the ground.
The creature twitched, then was still.
Its long fingers curled in agony, then relaxed.
The fragment of an oak leaf, brown and dead, quivering on its neck, let Tallis know that this had been the leader.
A second Scarag's head lay by the fire, its mouth stretched open, wolfish features hardly recognizable.
The corpse lay on the ground, arms and legs detached from the body.
Tallis noticed that the beginnings of feathers had sprouted from the dry-bark skin, interrupted in their growth by the sudden death of the creature.
Where was Scathach?
Where Wynne-Jones?
The snorting of a horse drew her attention to the right, and she saw Scathach's stolen mount, roughly tethered.
Behind her, a stone fell into the river and she turned, glancing up at the fires on the cliff and the dark clouds above the crags and ramparts of the fortress.
Movement…
It was all around her.
She swung back, weaponless and frightened.
She reached for the fire, intending to pluck a brand, but something grabbed her arm and swung her round.
Teeth sank into her cheek.
She screamed and  struck at the wolf.
A spear point cut through her fur robes, pierced her skin, then drew back.
The wolf had become still, then it sagged.
It fell in her arms, lay on its side.
Scathach had impaled it from behind, the point going too far and penetrating Tallis.
She rubbed her belly and touched her face tenderly, smearing the blood and pressing the shallow bite wound.
Scathach said nothing.
Tallis said, ‘I killed one on the cliff.
Holly-jack was fleeing…’
‘Then only the shaman remains.’
‘Will it attack like the rest?’
‘It needs life.
It will kill for blood.’
He looked around urgently.
Tallis stood by him.
The smell was overpowering as the winter green decayed faster around them.
‘Where's Wynne-Jones?’
Scathach said, ‘He took his horse and returned south.
He said he couldn't live without his journal…’
Tallis was furious.
‘You let him go?’
‘He went,’ Scathach said bluntly.
‘There was nothing I could do.
These creatures probably killed him a day ago…’
A day ago?
But she had only been on the mountain for two hours, three at the most.
What did he mean?
When she asked him he seemed astonished by the question.
‘You've been up there for two days.
I've been very patient!’
‘Two days!’
Her shock seemed to mollify him.
‘A lot longer than you promised.
And now it's my turn.
I have to go to the field.
My father has made everything clear to me.
The Jaguthin are there; my friends…my whole life.
I must meet them again, fight with them, be rejoined with them.
That way I can be liberated from them, receive my freedom.’
‘And what will you do then?’
‘Return to your world.
Continue my father's work.’
But you'll die, she thought sadly.
You'll die beneath an oak.
You'll be burned on a pyre.
There is only one freedom to be gained by travelling to Bavduin.
The freedom of violent death.
Tallis was dizzy with the pace of events.
Wynne-Jones had begun the return journey to the land of the Tuthanach.
But she wasn't ready for him to leave!
Now that she had found the place of Harry's entry into Lavondyss, she wanted the old man with her.
She wanted his advice, his insight…even his help!
And how would he cross the marsh?
He had no talent for opening the thresholds, the hollowings…
‘He'll die.
He'll never make it home.
Not without help.’
She glanced at Swimmer of Lakes.
Had the horse really understood her promise, she wondered?
If it had, if such magic worked in this realm, then Swimmer was the old man's only hope of returning.
And if he returned safely to the Tuthanach, then he might survive the boy Tig long enough for Tallis to return and question him after whatever journey she might soon take, through the highest room of the fortress, through the cave: in Harry's footsteps.
She told Scathach what she would do.
‘If he has this horse he has a chance.
But don't leave me.
Don't go up the cliff until I return.
I want to come with you to Bavduin.
I want to be there when you find the others.’
‘Then hurry,’ the man said.
‘I've waited two days for you.
The others will be looking for me.
We must enter the battle together.
I can't let them down.’
‘Wait for me,’ she urged.
‘And watch for the Daurog shaman.
He was young.
He'll be dangerous.’
‘I can look after myself,’ Scathach said grimly, and nodded to the twitching corpse of the Scarag leader, still dangling from the lance.
Tallis mounted Swimmer of Lakes and returned to the south, kicking the horse, challenging it, urging it to run faster through the night, back towards the swirling zones of seasons.
She found Wynne-Jones resting in the overhang of a rocky outcrop, exhausted, wretched, starving.
She caught a bird, plucked and cooked it, fed the meat to him in slivers.
She made a broth from the bones, using roots that flourished in the summer season, and after a while he had recouped some of his strength.
But he would not be dissuaded from his task.
He would not come north again.
‘What point is there in finding the site of my son's death?
I know it's coming.
I don't want to see it.
You have your own journey to make, I have my own death to avoid.
But I would sooner have my journal and fight against Tig than die, frozen, wolfmeat, without anything to remind me of the pure pleasure I've had during my life.
And those accounts are important to me.’
‘Tig will have burned them,’ Tallis said.
‘He burned your rajathuks.’
‘Yes.
He will have burned some of the parchment sheets.
But I've been in the wood for many years and there is a lot more to read than what I keep in the shaman's lodge.
Those few pages will have gone, but the bulk of it is hidden.
Only Morthen knew where…dear Morthen…’
He looked sad.
‘If you find her, bring her back to me…’
‘I'll try.
And I'll bring you Scathach too.’
‘How can you?
You have already seen his fate.’
Tallis smiled.
‘A wild rider, a woman, was reaching to tug him from the pyre.
She seemed to love him.
Perhaps he wasn't dead as yet.
But as you said to me in the lodge, he will be reborn after his death as a warrior.
So it's a question of recognizing him…’
Wynne-Jones's hand closed round her wrist.
‘I wish you luck.
I hope you get there.
I hope you find Harry.’
‘I've found him.
I found his pistol.
He was there, in the castle.
That is the way to Lavondyss.
There is a cave there.
All I need to do is find how to open the threshold through that cave.’
Wynne-Jones smiled wanly, scarred face warm.
She did not fail to apprehend the knowing gaze in his good eye.
‘What is it?’
‘As you follow him through the first forest,’ he said, ‘Remember this, if you can…keep asking yourself the question: why did he fail to return.
What trapped him?
Don't make the same mistake.
Don't follow too fast.
Keep watching for signs of winter, of wood, of birds.
Somewhere in all the confusion of image and story which you have carried with you is the reason for Harry's failure to return.’
He settled back.
‘I wish I could help you more.
I can't.
But I am certain that the mistake he made is somehow lodged in your stories.
You must enter Lavondyss as a child, not a woman.
Watch and hear with a child's senses.
You may see the mistake he made, and manage to avoid it…’
‘Thank you for the advice,’ Tallis said.
‘My gift to you, in return, is my horse.’
‘But I have a horse.’
‘My horse swims lakes.’
‘Ah.
That could be useful indeed.’
‘She's yours.
Treat her kindly.’
‘Look after my son.
Look for my daughter.
Don't grieve.’
‘If I can work events right, I shall rescue Harry and save Scathach.
I shall have it all ways.’
‘I like your determination,’ Wynne-Jones said with an affectionate squeeze of her arm.
‘I was pessimistic before.
I thought you were doomed to fail.
Now I'm not so sure.
You are creating faster than the realm is destroying.
You created stories.
You caused change.
Perhaps you do have the magic in your winter songs and odd chants to achieve a satisfactory end to your journey.’
Tallis kissed his cold, thin lips, stroked a finger over the savage mementos of Tig's attack upon him.
‘Ride well, old man.’
‘I will.
And you — don't forget.
Let the child ride with you.’
‘I shall.’
In her heart, Tallis had known that Scathach would not wait for her, but it still came as a shock to find that he had betrayed his word to her.
The fire had been dead for more than a day.
She kicked the ashes and howled her anger and her grief.
‘You should have waited!
I could have saved you!’
Through Skogen she could see nothing but shadows of a summer that had once flourished in this gorge.
Through Morndun she saw writhing spirits and running ghosts that drifted back into the trees as her haunting gaze fell upon them and they became aware of being watched.
The dead were everywhere around, bleeding into the cold water, waiting to begin their own journeys.
She could see no sign of the man she loved.
He had hunted the woods on her behalf, though.
The quarters of a small animal were wrapped in a leather sack and tied to a tree's branch.
She snatched the food down, threw it across the river shore, but on second thoughts rescued the precious meat and tied it to the slim horse that was now her steed.
The animal, restless, cold and hungry, responded to her sudden soothing.
It stamped a foot and snorted briskly.
Tallis fed it a meagre handful of the oats she carried.
It was thin, fading fast like all horses in this bitter  land.
She might get a few days riding from it, but it could not survive for long.
On the steep path to the fortress the fires still burned.
Tallis watched them, then let her gaze wander along the stark crags and jutting masonry walls.
Holly-jack had fled there, and perhaps still hid, terrified, in the cold and draughty rooms.
Harry's ghost called to her from the stone skull of the castle.
Images of that winter, and of the summer wood, taunted her…called her…
The way to Lavondyss was a short climb away, and all she needed was to resign herself to the journey, to abandon Scathach.
But she couldn't.
She had seen a woman ride from the dark woods, screaming her grief, her clay-streaked hair streaming; the woman had ridden around the pyre.
And then — and the memory was fleeting, but it had grown over the years — then she had reached to the boy…
What had she been about to do?
Rescue Scathach from the fire?
A woman who loved him…a woman who had followed him…long hair and face coloured with white clay.
Tallis had not made Moondream at that time — the mask to allow her to see the woman in the land — but she intuitively knew who she had seen, how she had reached through her vision to this very day, perhaps, in her own future.
She had haunted herself all her life.
If she had had her Moondream mask she might have seen it more, she might have distinguished between Harry's  presence in her childhood life, and her own…
Let the child ride with you.
Watch and hear with a child's senses.
She reached into her saddlebag and drew out a small cloth containing white clay which she had taken from Wynne-Jones's lodge and which she had used in the making of Moondream.
It had hardened slightly and she moistened it with icy water, kneading it until it shed a  film of white liquid.
This clay exudate she smeared across her face and streaked into her hair.
Just a little, now.
She would add to the clay as she journeyed.
In the act of decoration there was both a love ritual and a death ritual.
She climbed into the saddle of her restless horse and kicked it up the path, -towards the fortress and beyond.
(iii)
Soon the forest closed around her, so dense and dark in places that even as the new day broke she imagined herself still to be in a midnight realm.
The character and nature of the wood changed with every furlong's riding, and the traces and butchery of battle with it.
In the woods of oak she passed glades where cowled men chanted over carved wooden heads or walked about the piled armour of dead warriors.
She saw oval shields, with boars and stags brilliantly gilded upon the slashed leather, broken swords, highly coloured cloaks and small chariots of wicker, broken or burned, in each of which crouched the naked form of its dead rider.
There were heads hanging from branches in these places, which gleamed as if oiled.
The chanting of the priests seemed to summon wings, though as Tallis skirted these Celtic shrines she could see nothing; and only heard the raucous pleasure of the crow goddess.
A ragged legion passed by her as she huddled in a thicket of thorn and holly, her hand gently covering the muzzle of her horse.
She watched amazed as the broken ranks filed past in utter silence, silence save for the dull rattle of equipment.
She recognized the warriors as Roman, but had no knowledge of the arms they bore, nor of the type of uniform which would distinguish one legion  from another.
Their dull helmets seemed to be fashioned from iron; their cloaks were long and red; some carried shields, huge ovals with prominent bosses and the shape of an eagle painted upon them.
Horsemen rode among the infantry, and waggons clattered through the forest, butting against trees, being forced through marshy ground and over fallen trunks.
What mind had created this mythago, she wondered in astonishment.
As she rode further into the changing forest, she found the remnants of their defeat…
The woods were almost black; sheer trunks of pine and fir, some of huge dimension, crowded on the land, towered high above and blocked out light; they reduced the world to silence, and the depths of fallen needles below her feet made every movement quiet; even the snorting of her horse sounded dull, sucked into the black wood.
Tallis became frightened.
She could see fires occasionally, but when she approached them she found men strapped to stakes, burning.
There was movement around her.
Horses galloped too fast for sense through the black forest; she caught glimpses of their riders, tall men, yellow haired, their helmets crested with crescent moons, or spikes, or down-curved horns.
Their speech, when they cried out, was guttural.
The forest opened into a large clearing and she gagged as she saw the slaughter within.
Heads were piled in the centre of the place.
Around them, in a sun's corona, severed legs and arms.
The torsos of the dead were impaled on trees, a circle of greying flesh, mockingly decorated with tattered cloaks and kirtles.
Shields were propped against the boles of the pines; broken spears rested by them and helmets, the dull iron helms of the lost legion, had been nailed to the bark.
Four thin, wooden gods watched the rotting dead, each made of twisted lengths of birch-branch, no thicker than  an arm but twice Tallis's height.
Roman hair had been plaited to make hair for these gods.
A skull topped each pole.
Pairs of hands had been nailed down their lengths; and in the centre of each watching wood were the shrivelled greying sorrows of severed sex.
Blood, blackening now, was the paint on the birchwood gods.
Huge carrion birds gorged on the flesh.
They rose in panic as Tallis blundered into the shrine, but settled again, crying loudly, too bloated to fly far.
Tallis moved swiftly through this place of forest shrines, and after a while the nature of the wood changed again.
She struggled through holly thickets, forced through dense stands of winter blackthorn, still shrouded in dead leaf.
Towering mossy oaks led her to the edge of the wood, and soon she could smell the smoke of a fire, and sense the open field ahead.
There was none of the clashing of iron, or stamping of horse that she had come to associate with both skirmish and battle, only an odd silence, save for the distant and familiar sound of a storm wind, and the voice of a flock of birds, coming closer…
She led her horse to the very edge of the woodland, and peered out through the scrub at the rise of land before her.
Oh yes, she knew this place, she remembered it, she could recognize all the details.
She knew just where she stood, as seen from the twisted, ancient oak on the skyline.
The tree was in silhouette, but there seemed to be flames in one of its branches; flames that licked high, then guttered and were gone, only to flare again…as if a fire was coming and going…as if the fire was not of this time, but spent brief minutes in the tree, then flared in another world, before revisiting the winter branches.
There was no one below the tree.
The field ahead of her, across the small stream which flowed here, was darkening below the storm.
It was strewn with corpses.
This was the end of the battle that she had seen.
These were the dead whose stink had touched her when a child.
Those were the broken spears and spinning, shattered wheels of chariots whose mournful death had so affected her as she had tried to protect Scathach from the Scald-crows.
The swirl of carrion birds would be behind her, above the forest, out of sight.
Perhaps even now they were beginning to circle, to weave around the field, stretching out into a thin and malevolent line as they spiralled in to gorge…
Only to be thrown back by the magic of the fire in the tree, the tree spirit, herself, flickering through time, watching, watching for the clay-haired rider.
The pyre would be to her right.
She was too late to save him.
She knew this with a sickness and sadness that could manifest only as a cold feeling, a dead feeling inside her.
She knew she had ridden from the woods, screaming her grief…but she felt no grief, only a terrible inevitability, only cold acceptance.
Where was the passion she had witnessed, as a child, in her angry figure?
Where was the sorrow?
Where the determination to honour her lover's death, as he burned in Bird Spirit Land?
Only ice.
Only knowledge.
Only acceptance…
Then to her right, a woman screamed.
Tallis was shocked for a moment, and remained quite still.
A terrible thought had flashed through her mind.
There was a fast and furious movement in the woods, the sound of a horse stretched to exhaustion, the slap of leather against flank and the dull sound of hooves on blood-soaked turf.
Tallis ran from the treeline.
Her steed trotted after her.
Smoke from Scathach's pyre was black, rising high into the dusk.
The flames licked around the wood, around the corpse.
The arms of the dead warrior seemed to flex, moved by heat, twisted by the consuming flame.
A figure  in black was just disappearing into the wood.
Tallis thought she could hear the creak of a cart…
Then a woman on horseback burst from the wood, stumbled through the shallow stream-waters and struggled on to the field.
She rode around the blazing pyre.
Her black cloak streamed behind her.
Her clay-stiffened hair took the yellow of the flames.
Her body glistened, red streaked arms, white-and-black streaked face.
Her cries of sorrow and anger were like the fleeting cries of dawn birds, banished from this forbidden place of battle, this Bird Spirit Land…
Morthen reached for the foot of the corpse and dragged Scathach's body from the funeral mound.
She flung herself from her horse and smothered the burning body with her black cloak.
She shrieked his name.
She cradled him in her arms.
She kissed his lips, brushed at the burned flesh, slapped his face to try to wake him…but her brother from the wood was dead, and she leaned down, sobbing silently, furling him into her body like a dark bird gathering in its chick.
The girl was now a woman; she was years older.
Tallis could recognize this fact even beyond the mask of clay.
For a few minutes she stood in shocked silence; she had been so sure that the rider from the woods had been herself…but now, realizing that the lover she had seen had been Morthen, she felt angry and upset.
And yet, she could not apply that anger to jealousy, she could not storm out across the field and challenge Wynne-Jones's daughter for the body of the man they both, in their own ways, loved.
Suddenly Morthen seemed to sense the watcher.
She turned slowly to look towards Tallis, her eyes fierce, her mouth twisted with fury.
She was like a witch, a hag, all youthful beauty banished below the lines and hatred in her face.
She stood, reached for the clumsy metal blade  she now carried, flung back her cloak to expose patterned nakedness, threw back her head, howled Tallis's name, then Scathach's, then her own, then looked again, silent, furious, to where Tallis hovered in the shadows at the edge of the wood.
Tallis was prompted by this insult into an action that she knew she would regret.
She walked out into the open, drew her dagger, shouted, ‘Leave him, now.
He's mine.
I'll take your brother to a proper place of burial.’
‘He's mine,’ Morthen growled, her voice more feral than human.
It rose in pitch.
‘He's my brother from the wood.
I've aged for him!
I've sought him for years.
I've found him, and you have put a magic on him.
You have done this…’
‘Don't be stupid.
I've been with him since you left.
He rode away from me a day ago.
I've done nothing.
I didn't desert him…’
Morthen turned and ran for her horse, swinging across its bare back and violently twisting its head to face Tallis.
She rode forward, kicking the beast's flanks to make it gallop.
Tallis stood her ground, and then was shocked as Morthen's blade slammed against her jaw, almost completely following the line of the old scar.
Tallis fell, feeling no pain, only a sense of numbness and unreality.
The blade had been used flat.
There was no cut.
She stood and faced Morthen again.
How the girl had grown!
She was almost as tall as the outsider.
Her eyes were as beautiful as ever, even through rage, even through the warpaint.
Her hair stood like spines about her head, white, fierce, stiff with clay.
Her breasts were naked as she threw back her cloak again and let the winter ice make her flesh shiver.
A fully grown woman, the muscles on her arms and legs as thick and obvious as a man's.
Tallis, huddled in her furs, watched this naked apparition as it stalked towards her.
She fielded two  blows, then felt her left arm cut as Morthen struck swiftly, savagely; then her left leg, so that she collapsed in a heap, struck three times on the left side of her body, bleeding, left to die.
Morthen slashed through the bindings of Tallis's cloak, stripped the woman as she lay there gasping for breath and life, mind awhirl with confused thoughts, with loss, with fear…with need.
She felt the icy wind on her body.
Morthen wrapped the furs around her own body, tugged on the wolfskin trousers, brushing at the bloodstain where her blade had slashed.
‘He's dead,’ she taunted.
‘And the earth knows, I regret that.
But you will die too, and that I do not regret at all.
Now I shall return to my father.
From his own first forest I shall find my brother once again.
Scathach will come out of the wood…
I haven't lived my life to fail.
For you: the cold.
Only the cold.’
Her crude blade sheathed, Morthen wrenched back Tallis's head, then kissed her lips before flinging her down again.
She took me so easily.
She could have killed me if she'd wanted to…
Tallis stared at Scathach's burned and blistered body.
As she began to feel faint she reached for his smouldering cloak, the short red cloak he had taken from the raider.
She tugged it off the body.
Scathach's half-opened eyes watched the heavens.
His lips were swollen with the heat, ugly to look at; the line of burning began on his jaw and his fair neck was wealed and raw.
She tugged off his patterned trousers and the leather jerkin.
She eased them on to her body, cutting out a part of the cold.
Her horse came close and watched her.
She crawled closer to the funeral pyre, rejoicing in its warmth, and slept.
When she woke again only a little time had passed.
She found a  glowing ember and used it to close her wounds, then forced herself to stand.
Morthen had gone.
Having dragged the body of her brother-lover from the pyre, she had abandoned him, returning south, Tallis imagined, to find her father again.
She had gone from Tallis's life, then, and so the final link with Wynne-Jones was severed.
Tallis was on her own for the first time in her eight years or so in this unimaginable land.
The thought disturbed her and brought her to her knees by Scathach's scarred corpse.
Did you find your friends?
Was he there?
Gyonval?
Were they all here?
If I search the field, will find them all again?
Now she regretted stripping the clothes from his body.
She stared at the puckered, shrivelled flesh, its scars closed, all colour gone, save for blood like crude paint, its limbs without energy or force, its face without vitality.
She had insulted the proud warrior.
He had called to her in his dying moments, and she had thrown him a fragment of her white nightgown, which he had clasped with hope, and kissed, and kept as a precious icon.
Now she had rudely stripped the corpse, and at no time during the action had she thought of that strip of white fabric…
She prised open the body's right fist, and there, charred at the edge, was all that remained of the nightgown.
Linen.
Roughly made.
Cheap to buy, yet how precious it had once been.
In all her time with him she had never told him the details of what she had seen, that day one summer.
Had he grasped this shard of hope with any real understanding, she wondered?
She rode to the tree.
Scathach lay over the withers of her horse, his arms dangling; there had been no way to arrange his butchered corpse with more dignity.
She rode to the tree.
She looked up.
Bare branches, winter-stripped against the fading sky.
And yet when she had peered down at Scathach's body she had looked through leaves, through summer.
There was no fire there, now, no sign of life, nor of the spirit that had once shrieked at the local folk who had emerged from the fortress demesne to loot and honour the dead: Four black-robed women and one man, robed in grey, a greybeard: he had understood the mythology of stone.
The grey stone lay there now, chipped by his blade, cold on the ground, marking the place of rescue.
They had carried the body away on a rude cart.
But they had built a pyre for Scathach, and in so honouring the man they had indicated their recognition of him.
She looked up.
She dismounted, then climbed the tree, tugging and hauling herself high into the branches.
Co into Lavondyss as a child…
This was not the tree as she remembered it.
Had she positioned herself here?
Or over here?
Which of the various branches had been the branch along which she had lain, and watched the dying Scathach?
The tree was not the same in this world.
She could only approximate the position.
So she found a place in the old tree which gave her a familiar view of the land.
There she lay, cold and wounded, clutching the branch and staring at the corpse of Scathach, limp over the black horse.
There was no romance here, only the sickening remnants of battle, the dead looted, some still lying, waiting for the carrion eaters.
Night came close.
Scathach had lain just so…and she had been here…and had seen there…
And so, if she twisted round, perhaps she could see back to her own world, to the meadow…what was it  called?
And the stream…it had had a name once, but she couldn't remember it.
And that wide field.
Windy Field?
And the house, and her home…
Perhaps she should fetch her masks.
Perhaps one of them would allow her to see more clearly: the ghost in the land, or the child that she had been, or the old dog, or the rooks in the tall trees, or the woman…
She twisted on the branch, the wound in her leg hurting very much, still bleeding.
She ignored the pain.
She stared at the winter world through every aspect of this old tree.
Somewhere below, only a few minutes away but in another world completely, she was running back to the house, Simon in hot pursuit.
What did you see?
Tallis!
Tell me.
What did you see?
Somewhere close, somewhere — yes! just minutes away!— somewhere she was a child again, and Gaunt was pottering, and her father was getting angry with her antics…
And it was summer, late summer.
Mr Williams was walking in the countryside, listening for odd songs, looking for that magic to be found in a new song.
The festival would soon be under way.
The dancers would dance, the mannequin would shiver and give birth to the green girl.
The antler and noose would be used in the mock execution of the Morrisman, and the wild jig would bring everyone on to the green, laughing and screaming in the hot, summer night…
But there was only winter.
And the field of the mythical battle of Bavduin, or Badon, or the Teutoburgian Wood, any of the names which had characterized this mythical confrontation to end an era, to end hope…
This was the centre of the field, and a tree marked that place, and to this centre one hero among heroes always came…
She had seen Scathach.
She might have seen…who?
Any of a thousand  princes who had crawled away from the fire to shed their blood and start a legend…
If I jump from the tree I will be home again.
I can start again.
If I jump…
Temptation seduced her.
Her horse reared as she fell and Scathach's naked corpse slipped from its insufficient bindings, falling awkwardly, an ungainly mass of pale flesh and bone, head turned up, eyes dull.
She had not passed into another world.
Tallis tugged the body back on to the animal, then climbed into the saddle behind it.
There was nothing for her, now, nothing apart from Harry.
She did not believe that she could bring Scathach back to life, but he could at least be with her in the fortress as she made her journey into the first forest, as she went in search of whatever it was that had ensnared Harry, made him a prisoner in Old Forbidden Place.
She returned through the black woods, past the shrines, to the narrow defile which marked the nearer barrier to the castle.
She rode down the steep path, then up through the collapsed gate and into the area of the pinnacle of land on which the fortress had been constructed.
On the way she placed her masks in the shrine cave by the tents, where the fire burned.
And after giving the horse its freedom — perhaps a cruel act in this severe winter — she dragged Scathach's body through the empty corridors to the room where Harry's pistol marked the place of his final departure.
She propped Scathach against the ledge of the wide window, then made a nest in the middle of the room, furs, clothing, rags and tatters of standards.
Exhausted, Morthen's wounding cuts hurting her, she remained seated here, watching the cleft in the cliff over the gaunt and grimacing features of the man she had once loved.
She waited for Harry to beckon to her.
After a while she fell asleep.
An eerie light woke her.
The room was warm.
She rose and walked  through corridors, noticing how the stone walls seeped moisture.
When she touched the stone she found it to be sticky.
She ran her fingers over the tracery of pattern, following the curls and rings…
The light changed.
Sometimes as she moved through the rooms and hollows of the ruin the light was yellow; sometimes green, sometimes tinged with orange.
It grew warmer.
A heavy and pervasive smell began to fill the place, choking her.
The walls of the fortress seemed to close around her, stifling her.
When she returned to the top room, where Scathach lay, she found that the wall had almost completely absorbed Harry's corroded pistol.
Tendrils of stone had wrapped over the metal and the butt; there was a fine hair on the stone, like a plant's roots.
When she touched them they quivered.
The stickiness remained on her fingers.
Tasting it, she discovered it to be sap.
For only the first time, now, did she comprehend the nature of the stone from which the fortress had been constructed.
As she returned to her nest, looking around her, she could see it so clearly that it made her laugh.
Petrified wood.
Looking carefully she could see the fragments of the great trees whose fossilized trunks had been carved to make the blocks.
One great stone– spanning the nearer wall, was crossed with hundreds of lines, rings, marking the enormous age at which the forest giant had died.
The sap oozed and ran, pooling on the floor, slowly flowing along the incline.
The room was warm, cosy.
Green light flowed like the liquid, coming through the  stone itself, although outside the night was dark, the winter harsh.
She closed her eyes for a moment only.
When she opened them, Scathach's sad body had corrupted to bone.
The walls were alive with branches, running over the stone like veins.
She closed her eyes.
Images moved inside her.
Seasons flew.
Birds came and nested, then went to the south.
Herds roamed, snows came.
She opened her eyes.
A holly tree grew from the place where Scathach had lain.
Entangled with its branches were shards of human bone, crushed now, gleaming in the glistening green.
The holly shivered.
Around Tallis the room moved, tendrils of tree spreading along the floor, the ceiling, up the walls, reaching into the air.
She became caged in wood.
A gentle touch on her cheek, then her arm.
Fingers ran through her hair, stroked her throat, gently probed her mouth.
She closed her eyes and raised her arms, and the old fingers, gnarled yet soft, stroked her skin, then gripped her gently.
She was lifted.
She hung in the room, strong arms around her waist, strong fingers around her legs.
Leaves protected her, their broad faces covering her like skin.
Berries trembled against her lips and she licked them, swallowed.
The fortress grew around her, stone into wood, rooms into glades, fortress into forest.
Her body was squeezed as if between great trees.
The pressure began to hurt her and she cried out and the sound set bright birds to flight in the canopy around her.
She was lifted, turned, twisted and absorbed.
In the preternatural green light she watched oak and elm slide into vision, growing at a fantastic pace, their branches reaching, entwining.
Hornbeam moved as smoothly as a snake, creeper twisted, ivy writhed about the mossy bark, reaching towards her, its soft and furry touch tickling as it wound about her skin.
Then a harder, rougher feel, her legs forced open, rough bark serrating the flesh, butting against her, harder, bruising.
She squirmed with pain, but was helpless in the grip of the renewing forest, and she felt her body entered, a single motion that never stopped, just filled her, swelled out, tearing her apart inside, fingers of pain, shards of agony, curling snakes of pressure that reached inside to the tips of her toes, her fingers, up her spine and round her ribs, rising higher, filling her stomach, then her lungs, then her throat.
Stretching her eyes open to see the light, bulging with the strain, Tallis helplessly experienced her rising gorge.
She was going to be sick.
Her stomach churned.
The feeling of movement in her throat was torture.
It crept towards her mouth, inch by inch.
She retched and failed, squeezed, tried again, tried desperately to choke out the stodge that blocked her.
It came suddenly.
She stretched open her mouth, screamed, then spewed out the great twisting branch.
It came like a hard, brown snake.
It flowed from her.
It divided into two, then curled back on each side of her head, bursting into bud, then leaf, to wrap around her skull.
Her lips split, her jaw cracked as the branch thickened, then was still.
Something fluttered inside her, like the tremor of a heart.
It was still, then moved again.
The forest was silent.
She was in its heart.
The light was an intense green and she could tell the passage of sun and seasons above her.
Sometimes a fine and fluid mist filled the forest.
Sometimes a breeze blew and everything shifted, trembled, then was still.
The light faded, leaves fell, and a fine snow drifted through the air, vanishing below her.
Then green again.
Inside her, the movement became restless, almost urgent.
Sometimes it fluttered high, towards her throat; at other times it seemed confined to her stomach.
Tallis was idly aware that she had none of these organs left.
The bones of her skull rotted around the branch.
Her flesh fell away and only the impression of her face was left upon the wood.
The sap flowed easily through her veins.
Insects crawled beneath her skin, burrowed into her and were pecked out by flitting birds, which crossed her forest vision in a fleeting moment, came to her, and were gone, their beaks a brief sting upon her bark.
A tree fell.
She watched its slow collapse with sadness.
Its branches caught in the arms of its neighbours.
Seasons passed and the tree slipped lower.
A dense moss grew across its trunk and it sagged, then cracked.
A high wind disturbed the primal landscape, and the tree had gone.
Bright flowers bloomed, were drowned with snow, then shoots of oak twisted into the new light, grew serenely upwards, fought each other like beasts, tentacles entwined, one overpowering its companions, crushing them, then looming large in Tallis's view.
Its leaf tips touched hers and she soaked its energy, communed with the giant.
She grew older.
Her bark split, her branches fell.
Lines of painful rot began to rise along her legs.
The movement inside her filled her completely, an endless fluttering of wings, intense and urgent pecking of beaks.
One day she felt her stomach rupture.
The oak trunk opened, cracked by the forces of the earth.
The pain was unbearable and she screeched in the voice of the forest.
She was forced back as the bark opened and the hardwood below parted like a wound.
The black birds struggled out, a thousand of them, bright-beaked, anxious to find carrion.
The sudden birth of birds left her exhausted, watching as they fled and fidgeted through the canopy, upwards, to the brighter light.
When they had gone she felt fulfilled, emptied, at peace.
Great creatures roamed the forest, some like bears, others like cattle, reaching up on hind legs that were as thick as oaks to chew leaves and berries from the tops of the trees.
Tallis had seen nothing like them in all her life, their hides so thick, their fur patterned in blacks and browns and whites, infested with parasites.
Odd horns and protrusions covered their faces.
Tongues licked leaves into mouths where teeth grew at all angles.
There was other movement, slighter, quicker.
Bands of monkeys roamed through the canopy, sharp eyes glancing at her, small hands picking at the bark of her face.
A stag butted against her legs, far below.
Then a great elk passed by, trapped in the tangles of the wood.
In its panic it broke its antlers, shard by shard, tine by tine.
Its cries of distress saddened her for years.
Its corpse lay at her feet, slowly sinking into the moss and mud.
It grew cold.
The green light became grey.
Screens of holly and ivy sheltered her from the deepening winter, but now the forest became a black and frozen place.
Wolves prowled below her, fought each other and consumed the dead.
The wind became relentless.
Ice formed in her branches, seeped into the wounds in her body, expanded and cracked her.
She felt the strength in her body go.
She began to lean.
She broke suddenly, crashed into the arms of her neighbour and lay there, sinking into his branches.
Here she remained for what seemed an eternity.
But the winds became so fierce that the whole forest shook.
She slipped further and the lover-giant's grip upon her gave.
She struck the ground.
He shed his leaves to cover her.
They fell through the light for years.
Snow covered her, finally.
Small animals used her as a shelter, burrowing into her rotting bowels.
There was a sudden movement.
A grey shape passed across her vision, came back, peered down.
She sensed human sweat.
Saw elk-hide and wolf-fur.
Bright eyes in a pinched, cold face caressed her with their look.
The boy's hands ran over her face, his head cocking this way, that.
He touched her eyes, her mouth, her nose, and Tallis understood that he had seen the hints of the face within the wood.
He smiled; his broken teeth stung in the icy wind and he clapped a hand to his mouth in pain, his eyes watering.
He drew a stone axe from the belt at his waist and made tentative cuts around her neck.
He shivered with cold.
He was hungry.
There was frost on his hair, on the fur of his hood, but soon, as he hacked at the tree, his skin began to glow and a fine, warm moisture gleamed on his face.
Tallis felt the warmth from him and loved it.
He cut and chopped and she felt herself detached from the rotten wood.
He heaved her upright.
She was taller than him.
He caressed her body, peered at her face, used his axe to snick off bits of twig, loose bark, the bulging scars of old wounds.
Small though he was, he carried her over his shoulder, passing back through the frozen forest to the snow field beyond.
He had come from a miserable place.
He lay Tallis down in the shelter of tents.
They were slung between trees, closed over, roofed in, with a mean fire burning inside.
There were other grey shapes.
They spoke softly.
They drank thin soup and shivered.
The snow drove at them fiercely.
From where she lay Tallis could see the skulls and bones in them, the faces of death creeping close to the surface.
The tallest of the grey people, a man, came back with frozen roots.
They were in despair.
There was no hunting.
The winter had caught them by surprise.
The wind reached into the tent, blew the fire, blew ash.
They struggled to keep the winter out.
The trees rocked.
The sounds of animals were distant, great roars of dying elks, the barking of wolves.
Each time this sound came the man ran from the tent with his knives and spears, but he came back, huddled and weeping.
His skull poked into the day.
His lips drew back.
He was so near to death that even his eyes were like caves into the underworld.
The boy came over to Tallis and began to work on her with a knife.
She felt her eyes opened wider; he parted her lips.
Through nostrils she smelled the fear and the death in this wretched band more powerfully.
She could see the family clearly, now.
A father and a mother.
It was the youngest child who hacked at the wood.
There were two older children, both boys.
One had a wild look in his eyes.
The other was a dreamer.
He kept his mother happy by telling her little tales.
He made her laugh.
The father, black beard full of snow shards, watched the youngest son, watched him work.
Tallis could hear the way his belly rumbled.
The boy had finished.
Tallis was raised up and five faces stared at her, some smiling, some too dead to show emotion.
The boy carried her out into the snow and pushed her into the ground, turning her so that she faced the tent and the cluster of trees that formed their crude and failing shelter.
The land glittered with white.
The sky was utterly grey.
There were no features, save mounds below the snow, and the black of trunks.
No animals moved on this forbidding land.
Nothing grew.
This family was doomed.
Below her was the corpse of a woman.
Tallis had seen the grimacing features as she was carried to the grave.
Now, as she impacted with the body, she felt the bones stir.
A sap rose in her, human warmth in the veins of the  wood.
The dull, meaningless sounds of the family became clearer to her.
The family kissed the wooden image of their grandmother.
The woman cried, then rubbed her tears into Tallis's eyes.
The man scowled at her.
The youngest son looked proud.
His touch was the touch of an artist, inspecting his work, his craft, rather than honouring the dead woman.
The dreamer smiled at her.
Fierce Eyes watched her coldly, then nodded, then stared beyond her, at the denser wood.
Then sniffed the air.
He was behaving as the hunter he would soon become.
The storm came and drove them into their flimsy shelter.
Tallis watched the winter with awe.
She had never seen anything like this.
The snow drove across the land for days.
Trees cracked and fell.
Through the blizzard she could see the constant effort of the family to keep their crude tent intact.
Snow piled against it, threatening to destroy it, but this helped to protect it eventually as the snow wall hardened and compacted.
The blizzard eased.
A greyish light to the north told of ice.
Nothing moved on the land.
The youngest son came to the totem, to Tallis, and straightened her after the blizzard had made her lean to the left.
‘Grandmother Asha, send us food.
Please send us food.
Where are you?
Are you in the warm woods in the south?
I made you from oak.
I used the bone knife you gave me.
You told me it was a special spirit.
The deer was drowned in a lake.
Its bone made my knife.
My knife carved your oak.
This storm has killed the oaks, but you are in a warm place, where the leaves are green.
Grandmother Asha, send us food from that warm place?’
The woman came to Tallis and embraced her frozen bark.
Death grinned through the woman's skin.
She fingered her necklace of shards of antler.
She rattled the bone to draw the old woman's spirit from the wood.
‘Mother…mother…
I lost the child.
It would have been a girl.
It came out of me without blood.
I have no blood left.
Tell me what to do.
The rest of the clan are too far from us.
Most of them are frozen to death.
We have been too slow.
This winter will never go away.
My sons will never see themselves as fathers of the tribe.
What do I do?’
The dreamer came and crouched before her.
His hair was reddish below the hood, which he swept back despite the freezing of ice on his lashes and brows.
He was handsome, with dark eyes.
He had survival in him.
He contemplated death, but was thinking of life.
He called on Grandmother Asha through the oak statue that was Tallis.
‘You are a part of the first forest.
You have seen all things.
You have lived through all times.
You are bone and wood, Grandmother, so you must know how to save us.
Please send us food.
There are no birds here.
Please send them back to us.
Please show us the path to the warm place, and the warm forest, show us the path to the light which is green, and the leaf that hides the bird.
I have a song for you, Grandmother…’
He sang in a child's voice that was beginning to break, so that it was tuneless, the register awkward, the pitch uncertain.
It sounded like the song of a shaman.
He sang, ‘A fire burns in the warm forest where the woodcock flies.
My bones are burning with the thought of that warm forest.
Help me journey there, to that bird-filled land.
I will always sing of this winter, and your laughter, and of my journey to that land in the warm forest, away from this cold place of bird spirits.’
He drew a stone blade and carved a sliver of wood from Tallis's arm.
The shard was sharp.
Watching her, staring into her eyes, he opened his furs to the breast and  cut four lines with the wood, marking himself.
A pale, feeble line of blood seeped from his starving flesh.
‘With this mark I take your spirit with me.
With this mark I promise to remember your life, so that your life will always be remembered, Grandmother.
With this mark I will find the wings to fly to the warm place.
With this mark I will tell the life of our family, and our hunts, and this life will always be spoken of.’
He went away.
Fierce Eyes came and pushed her aside.
An icy wind howled and a great wall of snow bore down upon them.
He scrabbled in the snow for the rotten corpse.
He tore flesh from his grandmother, but tossed it aside.
‘We should have gone with the others.
My father was wrong.
Now we are alone and the next blizzard will kill us.
There is nothing left in this land.
Grandmother, you knew the great winter was coming, but you said nothing.
When you died I was glad.
But now I wish you were alive.
So that I could kill you and suck the warm blood from your neck.
You knew the great winter was coming from the north.
You said nothing to my father.
We hunted.
We journeyed.
We should have been running south!’
He struck Tallis a hard blow with his fist.
She leaned further.
This eldest boy seemed remorseful for a moment.
‘You taught me many things.
You showed me what to look for in the tracks and trails, to know where to hunt and where to follow.
You prepared me to lead a family on a long journey.
You prepared me for triumph.
Now the great winter is drowning us.
You should have prepared me better.’
The snow struck and drove him back to shelter.
The wind tore at the land.
The ice struck with glittering fists.
The land seemed to howl with pain for days.
Something  gigantic waded past during that long night.
By the time the family had become aware of it, it had travelled too far south.
The mother keened her anger while Fierce Eyes danced his fury.
Game had passed and they had slept, huddled, more aware of cold than of the hunt.
Another time of darkness.
A wolf skulked past, sniffed at the totem, scrabbled in the hard snow for the corpse of the grandmother and dragged out one of her arms, limping into the night with this meagre feast, to find some place where it could chew its way to the frozen marrow.
At dawn the father came out of the ragged tent among the trees.
His body was wasted.
His arms were wrapped around him, his body's breath so cold that it hardly frosted.
He stepped through the deep snow towards the grave where Tallis stood her silent guard.
He came down on his knees before her and hung his head.
He said only, ‘It has to be done.
Forgive me, Asha.
It is not the way of our clan, but it must be done.
Forgive me.’
He stayed there for a long time.
Soon the youngest son emerged into the grey light of the winter land and came silently towards the totem.
His eyes had dulled.
He was almost dead.
There was precious little flesh on his bones now.
He carried his bright bone knife and seemed to become more cheerful as he came closer to his art.
He was aware of his father, glancing at the frozen man whose darkly bearded head still hung as if with shame, his body hunched, the cold seeping through the bear and wolf skins.
They boy ignored him, though, and came up to the wood.
‘I must open your mouth.
Then you might speak to us.
It came to my brother last night, in a dream.
He told me I must open your mouth.’
He raised the bone knife to the wooden lips and she felt the first gentle cut.
Behind the boy the stiff figure of the man suddenly rose to its feet.
Grey light glanced off polished and sharpened antler.
The movement was swift, soundless.
Soundless except for the dull crack of the axe against bone.
The boy's eyes glazed.
His hood was tugged back and the axe struck again.
The brains and blood splashed across Tallis.
The axe was used again.
The head of the boy came away.
The axe struck.
The arm of the boy came away.
The man worked furiously.
The snow absorbed the blood and the sound.
Clothing was discarded.
Animal entrails drawn.
The man buried his face in the steaming soft mass of an animal's liver.
He gorged.
There were tears in his eyes as he turned his face to Tallis.
His black beard was stained red.
His lips were slack, his mouth still full of food.
He swallowed quickly, then like a jackal went back to the carcase, gulping down the soft tissue, sucking air and blood through his  nostrils , choking with the violence of his ingestion.
When he was full he leaned back on his haunches and looked at the mess of blood and flesh.
A moment later he turned to his right and was violently sick.
He wept as he released his son, and choked, then rubbed snow on to his face and in his beard.
Somehow the sound was deadened.
Though wind disturbed the tent, no one emerged.
After a while the man stood up.
He was shaking.
He looked at the stains on his hands, then at the murder beside the totem.
Quickly, glancing back to the tent, he gathered up the limbs and torso, wrapped them in the discarded skins, tied them crudely and gathered them into his arms.
There was scant eating in the meat, but it would sustain him for some days, assuming he could keep the scent away from wolves.
He staggered upright and carried his youngest son into oblivion, journeying towards the south, lost in the bleak and frozen wilderness.
He stood in the crude stirrups of his saddle and smelled the air hard, seeming satisfied.
‘The smell of battle!
It's unmistakable.
Bavduin is close.
I'd recognize that smell anywhere.’
‘If only I had my journal,’ Wynne-Jones complained.
‘Something to write with, to record this.’
‘Look around you,’ Scathach hissed suddenly as they came round a curve in the river, riding slowly.
He turned in the saddle, face shocked.
‘Look everywhere!
Everywhere around!’
White rags fluttered in the trees.
Light glinted on 
The lame wolf returned.
It sniffed the air.
It could not believe its fortune.
It nosed against Tallis, then turned and ejected a tiny, stinking drop of liquid from its shrivelled glans.
It chewed the bloody snow, gulped the entrails and the gore, growled in its throat as it worked at the tough tissues.
When the flap of the tent was disturbed it began to shudder, but hunger was now so powerful a force in its life that it could not bring itself to leave the stench of the kill.
It shovelled snow and food into its maw, turning to confront Fierce Eyes and Dreamer, too torn between the delight of meat and the fear of attack to make a move.
Fierce Eyes' spear took it in the shoulder.
It howled and leapt, but was knocked aside.
It leapt again, at Dreamer, raked the young man's face with its claws.
Dreamer fell, clutching at his left cheek.
The wolf was struck again.
The knife cut its throat.
The axe bludgeoned its life out through the holes in its skull.
Its skin was stripped and rolled.
Fierce Eyes chanted with triumph as he dismembered the scrawny animal, ignoring the goremarks of his youngest brother.
The woman came from the tent.
She fell to her knees by the head of her youngest son, cradled it, yet did not lift it from the snow.
She cried loudly, a sound that lingered.
She forced the sad and crushed skull below the snow and piled the ice above it.
She reached out and ran her hands through the blood-snow, dragging it towards her, lifting the stained ice to her chest, to her face, smelling and licking the discarded life of her youngest born.
Fierce Eyes watched her, chewing on the meat of the wolf.
He said, There's meat here.
Eat it.
Get strong.
Dreamer went to crouch by his mother.
Fierce Eyes kicked snow at him and laughed, then backed away, to guard his meat.
Dreamer watched him.
Fierce Eyes taunted him.
There's meat here, but not for dreamers.
We have a long journey to make to the south.
Take your dreams to the ice in the north.
I don't need your meat, Dreamer said.
You'll die, said Fierce Eyes, and chewed at the freezing wolf-flesh.
He threw back his head — he was a boy — no more than ten — a boy — he threw back his head — he laughed like a man — he chewed the ice flesh.
Tastes good, he said.
It will sustain me.
It will sustain our mother.
Fight me for the flesh.
I will eat snow.
Eat snow then.
Dreamer crouched above the place where his father had lost his youngest son.
The red mush had frozen in the snow.
Dreamer used his knife to cut the red snow into blocks.
He held the blocks and stared at them, small, cube-shards of his dead kin, like coloured stone, yet not stone.
His mother crouched beside him.
He gave her a son's kiss, than ate a piece of his brother.
She picked a block of the red ice and watched her dreaming son.
She gave him a mother's kiss and ate her son.
The act was done.
Fierce Eyes was subdued.
He chewed the wolf, then backed away, running into the tent, to shelter from the driving cold.
Dreamer and his mother ate the wolf until they too were sick.
They chewed small slivers of the rancid meat and cried, and Tallis watched all of this from the oakwood, and in the oak mind, through the brain sap that flushed through her body, she remembered a time of childhood, and a question from an old man.
What is a mother's kiss?
The kiss of acceptance.
The kiss of knowing.
The kiss of grief.
The kiss of love.
There was no such thing as a mother's kiss.
It was a kiss for all things.
A son's kiss, too.
It signalled the rightness of a deed.
It signalled  acceptance.
It signalled love that goes beyond the love of a kiss.
Yes.
She knew it now.
The two boys stayed in the tent.
A fierce blizzard raged for days, but through it Tallis saw the mother slip away to the south, carrying weapons and a bag.
She was like some bulky animal, bent low against the storm, layered in furs.
She had been sustained by the stray wolf.
Tallis knew where she was going.
Later the woman returned.
She carried a bundle in her arms.
She was exhausted.
She flopped through the snow, stumbling, picking herself up again and walking on.
She almost walked right past the tent, then saw the statue of her mother and brought the sad remains of her son to lay them at Tallis's feet.
There was blood on the front of her fur.
‘Mother,’ the woman whispered, her eyes screwed tightly shut.
‘The man is dead.
I killed him with this…’
She cast the broken antler-axe to the snow by Tallis.
‘I found the green sapling strength of my youth to do it.
The green child in me slipped from the old woman.
I have killed the man who was your husband and my father.
I have killed the man who was my husband and the father of my sons.
I have brought back his heart, because before this great winter his heart was strong for me.’
She took the greying mass from the furs and held it out.
She placed it down again and sank a little into herself.
‘And I have brought back Arak, my youngest-born.
It was my dreaming son who told me how to do this.
There is a spirit in the boy which is wiser than I am.
There is a spirit in the boy which can see further than I can.
There is a spirit in the boy that has smelled the forests.
He will remember what has happened here.
The memory of this snow will grow old with the people.
Nothing will be forgotten.’
Later, through the snow, Dreamer returned to Tallis and watched her with more knowing than before.
Again he sang the song: A fire burns in the forest where the woodcock flies.
How my bones smoulder to join that fire.
How I long to fly free…
Tallis felt a surging flow of sap; her bark ached for this young man.
Her wooden lips longed to cry her recognition, to call to Harry's spirit inside the boy who had been marked.
Harry!
Dreamer said, ‘I long to fly south, Old Silent Tree.
But there are no birds to carry me.
I long to fly south.
But there is no birdsong to inspire me.’
‘Old Silent Tree, once you gave birth to birds from your branches.
Bring a winged dreamer to me now.
Help me journey to the south, to see the way.
Arak is dead.
He had knowledge of the land.
He was close to the silent trees.
He could read the air and the stars.
My brother is a hunter.
He can see tracks.
He can trap and kill animals.
But we need birds to show us the flight to the south.
Where are the birds?
Without them I cannot release the restless spirit in my bones.
My bones smoulder to join the fires of the warm forest.’
He was quiet for a long while, and the snow blew against his huddled body, piling up.
At length, he lifted his face again.
‘Old Silent Tree, there is a spirit in me that is restless.
There is a ghost in my bones that struggles for wings.
I shall make great magic in my life.
I shall remember this snow.
But the ghost asks for freedom.
It is a bird spirit that longs for freedom.
I dream about it.
I see it high in the air.
Its wings are huge.
It is above the cloud.
It gleams.
It roars as it flies.
It is a strange bird spirit.
Old Silent Tree?
My mother tells a strange story.
When I was born two voices cried from my mouth.
One cried with the  voice of a bird.
When my youngest brother was born, all the birds went away.
We journeyed through a land without wings.
No birds to show us hope.
No birds to eat.
No birds to follow.’
‘Old Silent Tree…do you remember?
When this happened you said that I should call on the spirit of the wood.
That I should summon the spirit of the oak.
You are here.
I am here.
Our spirits are together.
But you must show me what to do next.’
He came close to Tallis, his red hair curling from below the fur hood, his eyes wide and searching.
The scars on his left cheek seeped a pale blood.
He kissed Tallis on the lips, then watched her eyes.
He said, ‘My brother carved you well.
You are more than a grandmother.
You are the spirit of my dead sister.
You are the spirit of woman in this frozen land.
My brother carved you well.
If only you could speak.
I am marked by the wolf.
How can I be both wolf and bird?
You could tell me.
You would have understood…’
He returned to the tent.
Later, the woman came through the driving snow, staggering before the howling wind, huddled in upon herself.
Her sons came after her.
The three of them fell to their knees before Tallis.
‘Mother…’ the woman greeted.
‘Old Silent Tree,’ murmured Dreamer, knowingly.
‘Old dead woman,’ sneered Fierce Eyes.
The woman said, ‘My youngest son made you.
Your spirit is in the wood.
Now my dead son's spirit cries to join with you.
Together you can return to us from the frozen forbidden place.
My dreaming son had found the way.’
Dreamer came up to Tallis.
‘You will be the fire burning in Bird Spirit Land.
Your flame will break the spell.’
Fierce Eyes scowled.
‘Get this over with.
If we follow  south fast we can survive.
Then you can tell this story until you die, brother.
But if we don't go soon we will go nowhere but into ice.’
Dreamer came up to Tallis and tugged and twisted her from the frozen ground.
He carried her in his arms, through the raging storm, into the freezing place within the tent.
Somehow they had kept a fire smouldering here.
They lay Tallis across the dull flame.
Fierce Eyes blew upon the embers until they flared.
Tallis felt the nip of warmth.
The fire drove the water from her.
She sizzled and singed, then the fire began to take a hold and flames leapt across her skin.
The three of the family warmed their hands.
It seemed to Tallis that she had smouldered for a long time before finally the fire had taken hold.
The woman took her dead son's bone knife and held it in front of Tallis.
On her side, Tallis watched the sadness in the woman's face.
She drew the antler necklace from her neck, unslung three fragments of tine.
She picked up the sheet-white leg of her murdered boy and warmed it by the fire.
Then she flayed the white skin from the flesh, drawing it carefully back, a silky, glistening sheet of human rag.
As it came away from the cold flesh, so she cut it into strips, and she wrapped each strip of skin around a piece of bone.
When the horn was robed she threaded back the leather of the necklace and gave it to Dreamer, who put it round his neck and tucked this frail memory of the broken boy into his furs.
The woman gave the knife to Fierce Eyes, who held it up, a grin of delight on his gaunt, ageing features.
The polished bone caught the light.
He held it like a sword, perhaps imagining the gutting and the killing he could perform with this weapon which had once been used to carve the image of a woman in the land.
His mother said, ‘It was fashioned from the bone of a  drowned beast in the water.
When you are old, it must be returned to the water.
It belongs to the realm of beasts.’
‘I will do it,’ Fierce Eyes said.
Dreamer watched him, smiling through the pain of hunger and cold.
He held a hand to his chest where he carried his brother's memory.
The fire ate deeper into Tallis.
The woman used long needles of bone to stitch the parts of her son together again.
The brothers dropped their gaze as the gruesome task was done.
The body was incomplete.
White bone through grey flesh made a lifeless puppet.
The mother cradled it in her arms.
Then she placed it on the flames.
Fierce Eyes went out into the storm and returned with the grandmother's grizzled skull, the hair frozen into spikes which he broke off and cast on to the fire, where they sizzled, cooled, then flared.
The skull was placed among the bones of Arak, and through the heat and the smoke Tallis watched the watching eyes, three cold people from an ancient day, remembering and honouring the dead.
Soon she was aware that the snow had stopped.
The crude hides of the tent ceased to billow and bulge.
The fire below her ceased to gust and roar.
Fierce Eyes went outside and came back excited.
He found a lure, tested its strength, then went outside.
Dreamer went too.
The woman pulled back the flap of the tent and Tallis, dying, saw a pale sun in the fields of snow.
Fierce Eyes was whirling the lure around his head.
It made a rhythmic sound, a pulse in the still air.
Soon it began to create the steady whine that she had come to associate with this strange instrument.
Dreamer stood beside his brother, watching the heavens.
There were specks of black, coming closer.
Tallis heard cries.
Bird cries.
The birds returned, invaded Bird Spirit Land and flocked and swarmed above the funeral pyre.
Fierce Eyes and his mother used nets to catch them, stamping on their heads as they struggled in the loose, confining space.
When they had killed twenty they laughed together.
Other birds stood on Tallis, pecked at her, pecked at the charred flesh of the youngest son.
The hunters of birds piled their catch and the moment of elation passed as the woman came into the tent space to watch the death flight of her youngest born.
In the beaks of birds, he went to whatever place would entertain his spirit.
As each black creature fluttered and flapped away into the greying sky, she watched it, tears in her eyes.
‘Goodbye Arak,’ she whispered with each of them.
‘Goodbye Asha…’
It was night.
The fire had burned low.
Tallis was charred wood, hardening, still aware through this gate into the first forest of what was occurring around her.
Dreamer came to the fire and brushed among the ashes.
He lifted Tallis in his hand, the small fragment of coal that she had become.
He kissed her, held her to the breast where the skin of the youngest son was warmed by his own skin, and the horn of the stag kept the life and the memory of the youngest son alive.
She watched from the burned wood.
The shards of horn stood out starkly against the snow-cloud sky.
(An image from another life: lying below Broken Boy, looking up at the summer sky through the broken reaches of the creature's antlers.
It had been a sexual feeling.
An intense feeling.
A recognition of the link between herself and Harry…)
Dreamer went out into the still night, wading through the snow.
If there was a moon it was behind clouds, causing brightness without form, a glow in the heavens, life struggling to pierce the confusing fog.
Birds came and flapped around the body.
He remained still and one of them settled on his shoulder, hopped to his head and reached a yellow beak to peck at his eyes.
The bird pecked and pecked.
The boy's blood flowed and he was blinded.
Tallis fell to the snow.
The spirit in the boy lifted from the bones, from the flesh, through the furs.
The man was there.
Tallis remembered the way he had looked.
He gleamed blue-yellow in the night.
He was naked and there was no longer a burn upon his face, but he was the brother she remembered.
He was gaunt.
She could see Dreamer through his insubstantial form.
Dreamer spoke to her, but the words were in a different voice from the boy's.
‘We all have our own ways out of the first forest,’ Harry said.
‘I was trapped.
You trapped me.
Now you have released me.
Thank you.
I shall not be far away.
I shall find you again.
You are not dead.
You have simply journeyed.
I shall not be far away.’
There was the sudden sound of wings.
The elemental presence seemed to shrink.
It rose into the air and was dark against the moongleam through the clouds.
Dreamer sang a shaman song, a chant of journeying, a celebration of release into the spirit world.
Crow-Harry circled, came close to the charcoal shard that was his sister, winked, then rose and was gone, flying to the south, to home, to warmth, to freedom.
Dreamer fell to his knees, blind, bleeding, journeying on wings of song.
But he was smiling.
He flailed around on the snow.
He found Tallis and lifted her.
He kissed her blackened face.
He hugged her  charred body.
He stared at her through eyes that saw the shadows of many lands.
He had absorbed Arak, and could see the shadows of forests.
So he was vision maker, now, as well as memory.
Fierce Eyes, with his bone knife and sense of triumph, would lead them safely to the warm.
There would be stories told.
The family would never be forgotten.
All the world would know what had happened here.
Arak journeyed to the forbidden places of the earth.
But after he had been lost he was brought home again.
Goodbye, he said to Tallis.
The woman was packed up.
Dead birds, plucked and dried, were slung from her belt.
The cold would keep them good.
They would eat the carrion of the carrion eaters as they journeyed south, out of the forbidden place.
Fierce Eyes was impatient.
He began to walk away.
His mother, his woman, followed.
Dreamer summoned them back.
He took the tiny bones of the stillborn girl from where they had been buried in the ice.
Sightless, seeing all, he placed them by the bones of his brother.
He had the remains of the wolf.
He found a fragment of his grandmother.
He placed berries from his hidden pouch beside these shards of life.
He put the skull of a bird on top of it all, then impaled the heart of his father on the beak of the bird.
He piled up snow and covered the remains.
All this happened in the area of the tent, the warm place that had been their haven.
He pressed the snow to make a mound, a burial mound.
Fierce Eyes and his mother made a wall of snow around the mound.
Dreamer placed Tallis on the snow, facing south, facing home.
Then he sniffed the air, took his brother's arm, and allowed himself to be led away.
Somewhere, in an unknown region, his spirit, his lost ghost, flew above dark forests.
The long winter came to an end.
Tallis sank through the snow, nestled among the bones.
The snow melted.
Tundra covered the land.
Animals walked there, the vibration of their passing stirring Tallis from her earthly sleep.
Small plants grew upon the tundra, and then the seeds buried with the bones hatched.
Thorns and holly grew where Tallis lay, absorbing the marrow of the wolf and the crow, sucking the sad life of the stillborn infant, tapping the memories of Old Silent Tree and the grandmother skull that nestled by it.
Out of the earth came a scrubland, and this scrubland grew and became a wood.
The first tree in the wood had been holly, wrapped around with ivy.
Shaded by prouder trees, Tallis waited in the stillness, watching the movements of summer through gleaming green and spiky leaves.
The Daurog formed.
The holly shuddered.
Sap drained in strange directions.
Leaves curled to form flesh; branches twisted to shape bones.
The holly tree shrank, then burst out again, swelling into the shape of a woman.
It detached itself from the thicket and reached rose-thorn fingers into the hard earth.
It moved aside the earth and found the petrified wood that was the heart in the forest.
Black, because it had been burned a thousand years ago; it still showed the shape of the face impressed upon it.
The Daurog opened her belly and placed the stone inside.
At once it began to hatch.
Warm, seeing through holly-eyes, heart beating like the frantic flutter of a bird, Tallis went with Holly-jack, deeper into the forest.
She was alone.
After many days there was a movement behind her and she turned to see a strange-shaped man, crouching, watching.
He wore necklets of forest fruit; his skin was a confusion of leaves; rushes grew from his scalp.
Tallis-Holly recognized the Daurog shaman.
He stood and came towards her.
Leaves rustled.
He lay down, smiling, his serpent's member twisting, rising.
Holly-Tallis felt impelled to straddle the force of magic, and knelt above the grinning wood and let him enter, let him feed upon her and fertilize the growth of birds.
She went with him through the forest.
He danced in moonlit dells, shivered in thickets, pranced at the edge of the wood, grinned at travellers from the green of the bush.
There were others with him, gathered on his journey: a leader, and two warriors, and a woman.
All their leaves were different.
They passed silently and swiftly through the rankest, wettest wood, feeding on the soft fungus of the bark of trees, sucking at the dampness in the rotting litter, chewing the lichen from mossy, greying stones.
When they came to the river they stopped.
Tallis-Holly watched and soon three riders passed from the human world, an old man, a young man, a woman with a face like stone.
Tallis smiled.
Holly-Tallis followed with the others.
The encounter came at dusk.
At some point during the evening, Tallis-Holly went to the crouching wary form of the woman, and watched herself watching the Daurog, and saw the fear and the tiredness in her eyes.
She could not tell the human who she was, but she remembered the feeling of affinity; she tried to indicate that affinity, a finger pointed to holly and to human flesh, but the blank look remained in that fur-wrapped, pale-faced Tallis.
The feeling between the two females was strong, however, and Tallis-Holly smiled to recognize it.
They shared food.
Holly-Tallis gave birth to birds.
The pain was very great.
Released, she joined the others.
They went up the river together.
At a great marsh Holly sailed with the other Daurog in a battered craft, entering  the mist for days, helping to propel the ancient boat across the stinking, shrouded waters.
She had felt sad watching as Tallis had slipped behind her, a figure on the shore, watching with concern but without understanding, since she had failed to place her Moondream mask across her face, and thus could not see the woman in the land.
Winter came and the Daurog shed their leaves.
The wolf emerged, sometimes the bird, and Holly-Tallis huddled, alone and unloved, her evergreen skin a challenge and an irritation to the others.
Soon they came to a place of ruins.
The wolfish appetites surged.
The Scarag attacked.
One of them turned on Holly-Tallis and she fled up the path to the gate, passing a woman she knew well, remembering her earlier shock at this unexpected encounter.
She watched from the gate as Tallis killed and discarded the Scarag.
She hid in the silent, stony rooms and watched Tallis secretly when the woman came into the castle, dragging with her the body of a man.
She watched the ruins take Tallis, the walls and the stones becoming trees again, responding to a glow of green that radiated from the woman as she sat within her nest of rags.
They took the man as well.
Bodies crushed and absorbed, Tallis-Holly herself became trapped in the quivering, silent forest that filled the stone place.
So she went into the room, pushing through the foliage, and found the place where the woman's corpse had rotted down.
She lay down and a sweet slumber came.
A long night.
She dreamed of childhood.
She remembered Mr Williams.
She sang old songs, and giggled at remembered stories.
When she woke she had shed her leaves, and the woodbones lay discarded and piled around her.
The trees had gone, absorbed back into the stone, which shimmered with a last remembered green, oozed a final sheen of sap.
Tallis was cold and she fled the place.
Her naked skin puckered with a dust of ice.
She went among the people of the tents and found dark clothes, and furs.
She stayed here for several days.
The people lived both on the edge of the world and on the edge of the battle.
Sometimes they looted the dead, sometimes they honoured them.
Their tents covered the cliff ledges, hugged the trees; every cave was used.
One cave was a shrine.
Tallis left her masks there.
After a while the pain of what had happened to her went away.
She had entered the first forest.
Wynne-Jones ad been right.
It had been no simple journey.
Her hands had aged.
She could hardly bear to look at them.
They were like gnarled wood.
When she finally looked into clear water and saw her face, she wept bitterly as she greeted the old woman who stared back at her.
‘But I found Harry.
I saw my brother.
Didn't I?
I released him from the tomb.
He called to me.
I came.
I did what he needed.
He flew away.
But I saw him.
Perhaps I can expect no more.’