

3
It was hard to tell, Loretta thought, which of them was the more disappointed by the other's prior knowledge of the news.
Tracey regained his wits first.
‘What are you going to do about it?’ he asked bluntly.
Loretta was irritated; she had not had time to think that far ahead.
‘I'll go to Oxford, of course,’ she said, hoping her tone was convincing enough to conceal that she had no idea what to do once she got there.
‘Wait a minute,’ said Tracey, in a friendlier tone of voice.
‘What about going to the police?
Shouldn't you consider that?’
Loretta remembered that Tracey knew nothing of her conversation with Andrew.
‘So you see,’ she said, as she finished explaining that the sheets must have disappeared from the flat, ‘I haven't got anything at all to back up my story.’
‘I see what you mean,’ Tracey said thoughtfully.
‘And the link between this chap Puddephat and the flat is a pretty tenuous one at the moment.
Maybe you're right.
But shouldn't you try and find out some more about him before you go rushing off?
And, unless you're intending to announce to the world what you're up to, you're going to need some sort of cover story.’
‘Oh, I'll look up the books he's written at the college library and take a couple out,’ said Loretta airily.
‘I can leaf through them on the train, and they might give me something to go on.’
‘I may be able to do better than that,’ said Tracey.
‘Let's see, it's nearly ten o'clock.
Let me make a very quick phone call and come back to you.’
Five minutes later, the phone rang again.
‘If you've got time  to go into the Herald office this afternoon, I've arranged for you to have a look at his file in our library,’ he told her.
‘They've just checked, and there are several cuttings in it.
Seems he was involved in some sort of scandal three or four years ago.
I shan't be in today as it's Monday, but I've given your name to Bill, the head librarian, and he's expecting you.
Oh, one more thing.
Have a look in Who's Who while you're there.
They'll have an up-to-date copy if you ask for it.
The library's on the second floor, by the way.
You can't miss it.’
She ought to be grateful for this lesson in investigative technique, Loretta thought as Tracey rang off.
But she couldn't help wishing he had offered to take a more active role in the affair.
The prospect of inquiring into a murder single-handed was not one that she relished.
But, looking on the bright side, she might have more idea of how to proceed after her visit to the cuttings library that afternoon.
And, although she had come up with the idea of a visit to Oxford very much on the spur of the moment, it wasn't a bad one.
She would need somewhere to stay for at least a night, and her closest friend in the town was herself an academic.
There was a good chance that Bridget would be in touch with all the gossip about Puddephat's disappearance.
Picking up the phone, she dialled the number of the college at which Bridget Bennett taught English.
She smiled as she waited to be connected to Bridget's college rooms; Tracey would strongly disapprove if he knew whom she was calling.
Loretta and Bridget had belonged to the same women's group several years before, a group which Tracey had nicknamed ‘the coven’.
He held its members, incorrectly, responsible for the break-up of his marriage.
She had few friends to whom he objected as strongly as Bridget.
But, if he wasn't going to give her more concrete help himself, she would have to find other allies.
Not that she had made up her mind about taking Bridget into her confidence — she would leave that  decision until later.
But, if the time did come when she needed another confidante, Bridget was the person she would choose.
Bridget's voice came on the line and, within minutes, the whole thing was arranged.
Loretta would arrive at her friend's house in Woodstock Road in time for supper, and the whole evening would be free for a chat.
Feeling much  more cheerful than she had after her conversation with Tracey, Loretta put the phone down.
Early that afternoon, as soon as she could get away from a lunch with colleagues from her department, Loretta set off for the Sunday Herald building.
She was glad to escape; it had been a working lunch, set up to discuss a new second-year course on the influence of gender on literary style, and the syllabus had provoked considerable opposition from two of her older male colleagues.
She felt her contribution to the discussion had been negligible; it had taken her all her patience just to keep her temper.
A walk was exactly what she needed, although the continuing hot weather made it less pleasant than it might have been.
She arrived at the Herald building at half past three, and walked past the uniformed commissionaire to the lift.
As she got out, she spotted a sign to the library, and set off in the direction in which it pointed.
In spite of Tracey's assurance, the library was not easy to find; after the initial good start, it was signposted only intermittently, and at the end of one corridor she was left to guess.
Choosing a left turn, she soon found herself facing a blank door which might, for all she knew, lead to the cuttings library.
Opening it, she found herself in a large room in which row upon row of men sat behind video screens.
The walls and doors, every available space in fact, were covered with pictures of large-breasted women from popular newspapers.
Loretta shuddered, and began to back out.
One of the men spotted her and emitted a stagy wolf-whistle.
Loretta felt herself blush and her fury rose: she was equally angry with the man, who had done it to discomfit her, and herself, for reacting.
She hastened back into the corridor and slammed the door.
Retracing her steps, she encountered one of the paper's rare female employees, who offered to show her the way to the library.
No wonder she couldn't find it, Loretta thought, as she followed the woman down a maze of identical mushroom-painted corridors.
When they reached the right room, Loretta thanked her guide and went inside.
The library was a big room with banks of filing cabinets to each side.
Down the middle there was a row of desks, all empty except one.
Monday was evidently a slack day for the  paper.
The library's sole occupant, an elderly man whom she took to be Bill, looked up interrogatively from the newspaper he was reading.
‘Yes, miss?’ he asked.
When Loretta gave her name, he thought for a moment, then his brow cleared.
‘Ah yes, miss, you'll be wanting the cuttings on that don chappie.
I got them out this morning when Mr Tracey rang.
Come with me.’
He led her to the last desk in the line, on which she could see a sheaf of pink sheets of paper.
As she got closer, she could see that each had one or two articles from various newspapers stuck to it.
‘'Fraid there's nothing very recent,’ the librarian said.
‘What's ‘e done this time, committed a murder?’
The man chuckled at his own joke.
Loretta forced a smile, and judged it better not to answer.
‘Is it all right for me to sit here?’ she asked.
‘Help yourself,’ said Bill, ambling back to his own desk and a waiting copy of the Morning Star.
‘By the way, try and keep 'em in order, miss,’ he added, over his shoulder.
‘Newest on top.’
Loretta sat down and examined the pile.
She had never been in a cuttings library before.
How useful it must be, she thought, to have all this information on tap.
But surely the library staff didn't go through each and every national paper every day?
Flicking through Puddephat's file, she saw that they did.
The top cutting was from the Sunday Times; underneath, she spotted items from both the Guardian and the Sun.
It was an impressive collection.
Returning to the top of the pile, she began to read the Sunday Times story.
It came from the paper's Atticus column, and was a couple of years old — it looked as if Bill hadn't yet got round to filing the latest news on Puddephat.
‘Hotheads At High Table’, the headline said, and a faint bell began to ring.
She went rapidly through the story, and remembered that she'd read it at the time.
Puddephat had refused to take his place at a formal dinner to welcome the new master of his college because he had been placed opposite Dr Theodore Sykes, a fellow member of the English faculty.
Indeed, Puddephat had scandalized other dons by storming out after claiming the place-setting was a deliberate insult.
Puddephat's anger, the paper said, could be traced to a most unflattering review of his new book, written by Sykes, in the TLS.
The cutting went on to quote from the review, which had certainly been unusually savage: ‘puerile nonsense’ and ‘unmitigated twaddle’were two of the phrases Sykes had used.
When I rang Dr Sykes [the paper's diarist had written]he agreed that the review was ‘a little harsh’, but insisted the whole affair was nothing more than ‘a storm in a port glass’.
When I got through to Dr Puddephat, on the other hand, his language was refreshingly unacademic, and cannot, I regret, be repeated in a family newspaper.
The ivory towers of Oxford look set to shake to the sounds of battle for some time to come.
The missing don certainly seemed to inspire strong passions, Loretta reflected.
She turned to the next sheet of cuttings, and began to read an article from the Sun.
Loretta would have guessed its origin even if the paper's name had not been stamped on the cutting.
‘Warning For Death-case Egghead’, said the headline mysteriously.
Oxford don Hugh Puddephat has been given an official warning by college bigwigs — go easy with the girls [Loretta read].
The warning occurred after Puddephat's name came up at the inquest into the death of an attractive flame-haired student, Melanie Gandell.
Puddephat, 37, has been told to watch his step after the girl, a 19-year-old first-year student at the college where he teaches, committed suicide.
She mentioned the dashing don in a note found in the room where she took an overdose of pain-killers.
A tight-lipped college spokesman yesterday denied there was evidence of an improper relationship between the two.
But he admitted that the college's boss, Professor James Lorimer, had spoken to Puddephat ‘to reiterate the need for constant vigilance on the part of teaching staff when dealing with impressionable adolescents’.
Puddephat, who is separated from his glamorous blonde wife Veronica, was not available for comment yesterday.
Reporters were turned away from the college, where he has lived since the break-up of his marriage, by the porter, Mr Des Koogan, a former army boxing champion.
Loretta's interest was caught.
She turned to the next cutting in the hope of finding a less lurid account of the case.
The article was not a news report, however, but one of those background features that appear on the women's pages of quality newspapers after some well-publicized court case.
It bore the name of a celebrated woman journalist and was headlined ‘A Don's  Dilemma’.
On further examination, it turned out to be a sympathetic discussion of the pitfalls facing university teachers when their students become too attached to them.
Puddephat and Melanie Gandell were mentioned in the first paragraph, but did not appear in the rest of the piece.
It was composed, in fact, of quotes from lecturers identified only by their first names, who recalled difficult situations they had quite innocently — got into.
And what about female teachers?
Loretta thought indignantly, noting that all the interviewees were male.
Doesn't it happen to us?
She passed on to the next sheet.
It turned out to be a cutting from the Guardian, and contained much that she wanted to know.
The inquest had taken place three years ago in Oxford, which explained why Loretta didn't remember the case: she had been in the middle of a six-week working holiday in Italy when it happened, writing a lengthy paper on women's fiction from 1900 to 1930.
She had seen English newspapers only on odd occasions when friends, or her then lover, came out to visit her.
The facts of the case were simple.
The girl, who was reading English at Puddephat's college — one of the first women students there, in fact — had been found dead in her room just before the end of the summer term.
The suicide note was mentioned, but not quoted; Loretta wondered if it had not been read out at the inquest.
It did not seem likely that the Sun, at any rate, would have felt any qualms about printing it in full.
Puddephat had given evidence, saying Melanie Gandell had been one of his brightest students, and he had gone out of his way to encourage her academically as a result.
He blamed himself for crediting her with a maturity she did not possess, and regretted that his attempts to assist her studies had been so tragically misinterpreted by her.
He had never thought of trying to foster an attachment which he would have considered quite improper.
The coroner passed a few remarks in his summing-up on the heavy responsibility shouldered by those placed in loco parentis, but accepted that the girl's affections had been aroused unintentionally.
The verdict, inevitably, was one of suicide.
The Herald file on Hugh Puddephat contained only two more cuttings, both considerably older than those connected with the inquest.
The first, Loretta was surprised to find, was  from a society magazine.
How diligent the library staff were, she marvelled.
It was a picture, rather than a story, and showed two people at a race-course.
‘Dr and Mrs Hugh Puddephat share a joke between the showers at Ascot’, the caption stated.
Although the man was smiling, he looked ill at ease in morning dress, while the woman's face was all but invisible under a large hat.
The final story had been cut from a newspaper gossip column in 1973.
‘An English Romance For Peer's Daughter’, Loretta read.
The headline was, it transpired, a ponderous attempt at humour.
The gist of the story was that the Hon.
Veronica Grahame, second daughter of Lord Stonybrook, had met and fallen in love with Puddephat while attending his lectures on Lawrence at Oxford.
Love had blossomed, the journalist had written without much originality, among the dreaming spires.
So he made a habit of it, Loretta thought to herself.
The knowledge that Puddephat had married one of his own students in the first place certainly threw a new light on his protestations of innocence at the inquest into the dead student.
Could this womanizing be the reason why his marriage had not lasted?
Loretta pulled herself up sharp.
Two episodes in, what was it, nine years, hardly amounted to womanizing.
Her brief encounter with the Sun had evidently had a bad influence on her.
And, in spite of the fact that she now knew a great deal more about the missing man, she still had no answer to the essential question: had she been examining the life of a victim of violent crime, or that of a murderer?
Checking that the cuttings were still in order, Loretta got up.
The one thing she hadn't done was look up Puddephat in Who's Who.
She left the pile on the desk where she had found it, and made her way to where Bill was sitting.
He had put away the Morning Star, and was contentedly butchering a copy of that morning's Guardian with a pair of scissors.
‘See your mate's in trouble again,’ he said, gesturing to the story which had sparked off her investigation.
‘Funny bugger, if you ask me.
They ain't like other people, though, these dons.
A day's work wouldn't do none of 'em any ‘arm.’
Reflecting that the librarian's opinion of academics was about as low as hers of journalists, Loretta asked politely for the current Who's Who.
‘Nicked,’ said Bill succinctly.
‘Last year's  do yer?’
Loretta said it would.
Bill ambled off, momentarily disappearing from view, and returned with a heavy volume in a red jacket.
‘There y'are,’ he said, opening the page at Puddephat's entry.
‘That's what yer wanted, innit?’
Taken aback by his affability, Loretta nodded her agreement.
Bill put down the book, and went back to his scissors.
Loretta peered at the bare facts of Puddephat's life.
William Hugh Puddephat was born in 1945 in London, and attended a direct grant school.
He was awarded his first degree by the college where he was now a fellow, spent a year in the United States, and came back to the same college to complete his PhD.
His marriage, she noted, had been childless.
The only detail that gave any clue to his character, his description of his hobbies as ‘the pleasures of Lawrence's prose and vintage port’, did little to endear him to her.
It also, she noted in passing, gave an added edge to Theodore Sykes's gibe about ‘a storm in a port glass’.
Puddephat's pompous Who's Who entry had not gone unnoticed among his enemies.
If she could think of a good reason to ask questions about the missing don among his colleagues, she might well come up with some interesting answers.
With this thought in mind, Loretta set off for Paddington.
She arrived with twenty minutes to spare before her train was due to leave but, after she had queued for a ticket, was only just in time to catch it.
She had to walk nearly its full length before finding a seat in a non-smoking carriage.
It was only when she sat down that she realized why there were several spaces: her section of the carriage contained a group of unruly Italian teenagers who were obviously well beyond the control of the two middle-aged nuns accompanying them.
She sighed, but decided that unless she wanted to stand all the way to Oxford, she had no other choice.
Unzipping her overnight bag, she took out a copy of one of Puddephat's books.
By a stroke of luck, she had spotted it on a colleague's bookshelf before lunch.
‘Take it,’ the woman had replied when Loretta asked if she could borrow it.
‘I can't make head or tail of it.’
Stowing her bag by her feet, Loretta settled down for an hour's read.
Hugh Puddephat, she discovered, had certainly moved with the times.
The book was stuffed with interminable quotations from obscure American academics who seemed to be in  the vanguard of the deconstruction movement.
Unlike the names of the French theorists who had laid the groundwork for structuralism — Barthes, Foucault, Derrida, for instance most of these names were unknown to her.
In spite of Puddephat's enthusiasm for them, she was not inspired to find out more about them.
The very name of the movement offended her.
She imagined the English departments of various American universities converted into huge breakers' yards in which was being dismantled the edifice of world literature…
Crunch…
‘There goes Milton,’ cried an associate professor, wispy hair covered by a hard hat, in the recesses of her imagination.
‘I hear the bulldozers are moving in on George Eliot Thursday,’ mouthed one of his colleagues in a satisfied Southern drawl.
She was roused from this disturbing fantasy by the arrival on the table in front of her of an Italian youth who was trying to escape the clutches of two boisterous female companions.
Loretta put down her book, grasped him by the shoulders, and heaved him back into the arms of his tormentors.
She peered round for the nuns, but they were nowhere to be seen.
Loretta guessed they had sought refuge in the buffet car.
The struggling teenagers, cheered on by their friends, were lurching un her direction again.
She stood up, clapping her hands to gain their attention.
Several surprised faces looked blankly at her, including those of the chief trouble-makers.
Loretta pointed in a deliberate fashion at the teenage boy in the excited trio.
‘Cazzo!’ she said scornfully.
This unexpected obscenity drew gasps of astonishment from the teenagers, and Loretta pressed home her advantage by threatening dire penalties in colloquial Italian if a single one of them misbehaved during the remainder of the journey.
Chastened, they settled back in their seats and talked in hushed voices until the train pulled into Reading, where they all got off.
Loretta was a third of the way through Puddephat's book when she arrived in Oxford.
She took a bus into the shopping centre, stopped to buy Bridget some flowers, and got another bus to Woodstock Road.
Although Bridget was a fellow of a very respectable college, she had sensibly chosen to live in a 1930s semi within easy reach of the centre of town rather than in college rooms.
Loretta had stayed there before, although it was more usual for her to see Bridget when the latter made one of her frequent visits to London.
The bus stopped only yards from Bridget's house and, as she alighted, Loretta saw her friend's 2CV turning into the drive.
Bridget had only just beaten her to it.
As Loretta drew abreast of the house, Bridget was locking her car door.
‘Loretta!’ she exclaimed.
‘I was afraid you'd be waiting on the doorstep.
I'm sorry I'm so late.’
‘Not at all,’ said Loretta, leaning forward to kiss her cheek.
‘You couldn't have timed it better.’
Bridget opened the front door and led the way into the hall.
‘Put your things in here for the time being,’ she said, pushing open the door to the living-room.
‘Oh God, I'd forgotten about the mess,’ she added, taking in the empty coffee mugs and sheets of paper strewn around the room.
‘We've just started a support group for women in the English faculty, and we had a meeting here last night.
Never mind, it'll have to wait.
Come into the kitchen.’
Loretta dumped her overnight case on the floor and shut the door.
In the kitchen, she found Bridget on her knees rummaging in the fridge.
‘Nothing much in here,’ she said.
‘What on earth's this?
Yuk, that should have gone out ages ago.’
She leaned across and dropped a paper bag into the kitchen bin.
‘I meant to get some food on my way home, but I got held up at college,’ she explained, examining various other articles in the fridge with distaste.
She looked at her watch.
‘I tell you what, why don't we have supper at Brown's?’ she suggested, rising to her feet.
‘Sounds fine,’ Loretta said uneasily.
Now that she was face to face with Bridget, her mind was fully engaged in a debate as to how much she should tell her friend about events in Paris.
With Tracey apparently intent on limiting his own involvement, she longed to talk things over with someone who might offer more active help; at the same time, she felt an almost superstitious reluctance to go through the story again in the kind of detail a confidante would need.
As a consequence, the question of where to eat was one that made little impression on her.
‘That's settled then,’ said Bridget.
‘I'm sorry to rush you out, but we ought to leave straight away if we're going to get a  table.
It gets very crowded in the evenings.’
Brown's was already more than half full, but Bridget and Loretta were able to find a table in a relatively uncrowded corner where an old-fashioned ceiling fan was doing an effective job in keeping stuffiness at bay.
‘I can recommend the salads,’ said Bridget, studying the menu.
Loretta took her friend's advice and then listened in surprise as, in spite of the hot weather, Bridget ordered a casserole.
‘I didn't have any lunch,’ she explained, registering Loretta's surprised expression.
‘And the temperature doesn't seem to have any effect on my appetite.’
It was a mystery to Loretta that Bridget remained so slim.
Since her own thirtieth birthday, she had noticed an unwelcome tendency to put on inches if she didn't keep any eye on what she ate.
Bridget seemed untouched by such problems.
The waiter arrived with the red wine they had ordered, and Loretta took a decision.
She was about to plunge into her story when Bridget spoke first.
‘Before you tell me what you're doing in Oxford, I must tell you my news,’ she said.
‘Have I ever mentioned a man called Hugh Puddephat to you?’
Loretta stared at her, amazed.
‘You've probably come across his work,’ Bridget went on, ‘though I'm sure you'd think it was pretentious rubbish.
Anyway, he's disappeared off the face of the earth.
And I seem to be the last person to have seen him.’
Catching sight of herself in a wall mirror, Loretta closed her mouth and waited for Bridget to go on.
It had not occurred to her that her friend might be personally involved in the business.
‘That's why I was late,’ Bridget continued.
‘Two policemen simply turned up at my rooms as I was leaving, without any appointment or anything, and insisted on interviewing me.
It was absolutely infuriating.
They made me go through the whole thing three times, though I had hardly anything to tell them.
And they kept calling me ‘love’.
Even when they left, that didn't seem to be the end of it.
They said I might have to go down to the police station and be interviewed there later in their inquiries.
They behaved as if I'd got something to do with the wretched man's disappearance.
You know why, don't you?’ she added suddenly.
Loretta looked blank.
She was still trying to take in  the fact that Bridget might be a witness.
‘That time at Greenham,’ Bridget went on.
‘I told you about it.
I sat in the road during a demonstration and got hauled off to the police station in Newbury.
They didn't charge me, but I'm on police files.
It's the same force, you know.’
It sounded plausible.
Loretta's occasional visits to the Cruise missile base had never involved her in getting arrested, but she was well aware that some police took a dim view of peace protesters.
‘But what did you tell them?’ she asked, recalling herself to the matter in hand.
‘Nothing spectacular,’ Bridget said.
Just that I saw him on a train to London a couple of weeks ago.
On the Thursday to be exact.
That's why they were so interested.
Apparently their last previous sighting was at his college the night before.
Anyway, I'd already found a seat when he jumped on as the train was about to leave.
He didn't look too pleased to see me, but then he knows what I think of his work.
There weren't many people sitting near us, so I tried to make polite conversation, but he wasn't having any.
He had a bag with him, a small suitcase really, so I asked if he was off on a late holiday.
He seemed taken aback, and muttered something about having business in Germany.
Which is odd, because he was expected in Italy on Monday, apparently.’
This point had already occurred to Loretta, who was doing some rapid calculations.
Where on earth did Germany fit into it?
Bridget had seen the missing man on a Thursday.
If Puddephat had been at the flat in Paris on Friday evening, he could hardly have squeezed a trip to Germany in between.
Or was Germany, rather than Italy, his real destination after whatever was due to happen in Paris?
She supposed it was equally possible that, for reasons known only to himself, Puddephat had been lying to Bridget.
Regretfully, she acknowledged that his behaviour on the train threw no light at all on what had happened at the flat.
If anything, it made matters worse.
She realized that Bridget was eyeing her curiously, and swallowed a mouthful of wine.
I had no idea you'd turn out to be mixed up in all this,’ she blurted out, ‘I don't know what to do.’
She paused, and then rushed on.
‘That's why I came to Oxford, you see — about Puddephat's disappearance.’
At that moment, an extremely thin waiter arrived bearing their food.
While he was putting down the plates, Loretta made up her mind.
It was as well she had ordered something that wouldn't go cold.
‘Start eating,’ she told Bridget, ‘and I'll try to explain.’
Halfway through Loretta's description of her weekend in Paris, Bridget lost interest in her food.
When Loretta finished, Bridget put her hand sympathetically on her friend's arm and said: ‘How terrible for you.
And you think…?’
‘I don't know what to think,’ interrupted Loretta.
‘I've no real proof that Puddephat was at the flat, and I'm only guessing at what went on there.
I should have gone to the French police at the time, but I didn't, and now the evidence has gone.
If Andrew's telling the truth, that is.
I'm beginning to suspect everybody.’
‘I think you're right to be wary of Andrew,’ Bridget said thoughtfully.
‘It doesn't sound as though he's involved in it, but it's as well to be careful.
And I can see the problem about going to the police.
I wonder if there's any way we can find out more without drawing attention to ourselves?’
Loretta was grateful for Bridget's assumption that she would have a part in whatever action they decided upon; she was a more reliable friend than Tracey, she thought to herself.
‘How much do you know about Puddephat?’ she asked eagerly.
‘I've read all the cuttings on him in the Herald library but I haven't yet got much sense of what he's like.’
‘Not very nice,’ Bridget said briefly.
‘An odd character, really.
Very arrogant academically, and one of the people most opposed to the women's support group in the English faculty.’
‘Wasn't he involved in some sort of scandal a few years ago?’
Loretta prompted.
‘Something to do with a girl who killed herself?’
She was keen to hear Bridget's version of the story.
‘That's right,’ her friend replied.
‘A nasty business, and the real story never came out.
The poor girl was absolutely infatuated with him, not knowing that his tastes lie in quite a different direction.
He's rumoured to be gay,’ she added, seeing Loretta's surprised expression.
‘Funnily enough, that's why the whole episode did him less harm than it might have done.
When he split up with his wife, a while before, she spread some damaging stories about him, and I think the  college was secretly quite relieved to have some evidence that he was het after all.
Not that he's the only gay don at Oxford, far from it, but in his case the rumours were about boys.
That sort of thing worries the college authorities no end, as you can imagine.
But the inquest put a stop to all that.
There was no evidence of actual impropriety, you see, but Puddephat admitted he'd been friendly with the girl and given her extra coaching.
He came out of it as someone who might have committed a slight indiscretion, no more, and a heterosexual one at that.
They were so relieved at the college that they let him keep his job.’
‘How does he get on with the other fellows?’
Loretta asked, rapidly adjusting her idea that the business of the girl's suicide had damaged Puddephat's career.
‘He's very thick with the new master, Humphrey Morris, which counts for quite a lot,’ Bridget said thoughtfully.
‘And that's odd, too.
He got into the most terrible row with one of the other fellows during the election for master a couple of years ago.
He and this other chap, a rather nice English fellow called Theo Sykes, each had their own candidate for the job when the previous master, Lorimer, retired.
They both did a lot of lobbying, which you're not supposed to do, but the college turns a blind eye to it.
There are ways and means, you see — discreet supper parties and so on.
And Sykes's man won, Morris, that is.
Puddephat was incandescent with rage, apparently.
But the strange thing is that, since then, Sykes and Morris have fallen out.
No one seems to know why.
In fact, Sykes's fellowship comes up for renewal at Christmas, and the word is he won't get it.
He claims Puddephat is behind it.’
Loretta's head reeled.
The picture that was emerging was quite different from the one she had gleaned from the cuttings.
It confirmed her view of the fallibility of newspaper reports.
‘I seem to have got entirely the wrong end of the stick this afternoon,’ she said sadly.
‘Perhaps I should start again from scratch.
I had a vague idea of trying to talk to people who knew Puddephat, but I don't know how to go about it.’
‘That's one thing I can help with,’ Bridget said triumphantly.
‘You should talk to a friend of mine who's a history don at the same college as Puddephat.
All you need is a cover story — confiding in Geoffrey is like taking an advert in the Oxford  Mail.’
Loretta laughed, and both women were silent for a moment.
‘How about this?’
Loretta said at last.
‘Suppose I say I sent Puddephat something — an outline for a book, or some notes for it — and now I'm worried about getting them back.
Yes, that's it.
I'm going to write a book on, um, the influence of structuralism on feminist literary criticism, and I'd asked his advice.’
It was brilliant, she congratulated herself.
On hearing of the don's disappearance, she'd naturally rushed up to Oxford in the hope of tracking down her precious notes.
‘Why didn't you keep copies?’
Bridget objected.
Loretta considered.
‘It's the long vacation, and the photocopier had broken down,’ she said.
‘All right, I know it's weak.
Perhaps no one will ask.
After all, we're trying to pick holes in it.
Other people may accept it at face value.
People often do silly things.’
‘You may be right,’ Bridget conceded.
Just be prepared for the odd lecture on what a foolish girl you've been.
Can you spend some time in Oxford tomorrow?
I'll ring Geoffrey first thing to see if he's free for a chat.’
The next day was Tuesday, Loretta thought, and the autumn term didn't start until Friday.
She could just about manage a day away from London.
‘That's marvellous,’ she said sincerely.
‘And thanks.’
‘It's nothing,’ said Bridget airily.
‘I saw you through your first marriage, so the least I can do is see you through your first murder investigation.’
Loretta winced.
Once they had got over the first shock, neither Bridget nor Tracey seemed able to take her story entirely seriously.
But then they hadn't seen the blood, she reminded herself.
‘You'd better eat your salad,’ Bridget pointed out.
‘You haven't touched it yet.’
An hour later, having paid the bill, the two women got up to go.
At that very moment, a waiter turned abruptly from clearing the next table and crashed into Loretta.
As the red wine from a half-empty glass dribbled down her yellow dress, Loretta reflected that bad luck is supposed to come in threes.
Eating out should now be safe for some time to come.
4
The following days papers contained surprisingly little about Puddephat's disappearance.
Studying The Times in Bridget's kitchen, Loretta found only two paragraphs about the affair.
The master of the college, Professor Morris, had issued a tetchy statement to the effect that, while it had been considered advisable to seek police assistance, there was at present no cause for alarm.
A police spokesman had been equally unforthcoming: inquiries were continuing, he said, and several leads were being followed up.
The Guardian carried much the same information.
‘Nothing new here,’ sighed Loretta.
Bridget, in the middle of making fresh coffee for herself and Earl Grey tea for Loretta, was unperturbed.
‘Give it time,’ she said, making space on the table for two large white breakfast cups and saucers.
‘I still feel we could do with another clue,’ Loretta persisted.
‘Even a small one.’
Bridget laughed.
‘What have you got in mind?’ she asked.
‘An anonymous note revealing the whereabouts of the body, postmarked from a small town in Germany?
A bloodstained dagger, buried to its hilt in the door of Puddephat's rooms?
I doubt if life is like that.
Now, just give me five minutes to drink some coffee and I'll ring Geoffrey.’
Loretta was rinsing the cups when Bridget came back from the phone.
‘It's all fixed,’ she said gleefully.
‘I told him your cover story and he swallowed it quite happily.
He even asked if you'd like to stay for lunch.
The place is buzzing with gossip, so it's an ideal opportunity.
He said to come to his rooms just after twelve.’
‘I hope I can carry it off,’ Loretta said anxiously.
Turning up at Puddephat's college to make her own inquiries was a much more daunting prospect than her leisurely visit to the Herald library.
‘My story really is a bit thin.’
Bridget sighed impatiently.
‘As you said yourself last night, people often do silly things.
And the only person who can disprove it is Puddephat himself.
If you're right about him being involved in nefarious activities in Paris, he's not likely to turn up and expose you.
Anyway, most of what I told Geoffrey is true — that you and I are old friends, and that you lecture in London.
Don't worry, I'm sure it'll be all right.’
She opened her briefcase, and started looking through the papers in it.
‘Hang on a minute,’ she said suddenly.
‘We haven't considered suicide.
Perhaps the answer is that Puddephat killed himself at the flat?’
‘Why bother going all the way to Paris to do it?’
Loretta pointed out.
‘And you're not suggesting he managed to remove his own body from the bedroom.’
‘Silly me,’ said Bridget sheepishly.
‘I'm getting carried away.’
Loretta was very nearly convinced by Bridget's confidence in her.
All the same, she could feel butterflies in her stomach when she arrived at the imposing entrance to Puddephat's college at twelve.
She soothed herself with the thought that the small deception she was about to practise was not the only reason for her attack of nerves: her own college in London, housed in a nondescript modern block, had nothing at all in common with the medieval gateway in front of her.
Although the college had been admitting female students in recent years, its outward appearance still succeeded in impressing the visitor with its austere and indefinably masculine grandeur.
The college coat of arms, consisting of two unlikely beasts locked in grim combat for possession of a narrow scroll, reposed at the centre of a stone arch surmounting heavy wooden doors.
It was intended, she supposed, to represent the struggle between good and evil over knowledge; she was heartened to observe that the effect was, in fact, faintly comic.
The college doors were firmly closed, affording entry only  through a smaller aperture, barely the size of a human being, cut into one of them.
Lowering her head, Loretta stepped through the narrow gap, and found herself looking from the shadow of the gateway across a carefully tended lawn to the far side of the college.
Tall windows stared bleakly down at her from what she guessed to be the great hall.
Before she could take in any more of the scene, a short, red-faced man bustled out from an office to her left and planted himself squarely in front of her.
‘Yes, miss?’ he demanded pugnaciously, reminding her of a sentry at a besieged garrison.
‘What were you wanting?’
His grey moustache bristled; he was so close that Loretta could make out the individual hairs.
A bell rang in her mind, and she almost laughed aloud.
‘Mr Koogan?’ she began, remembering the ‘former army boxing champion’who had shooed away the Sun reporter during one of Puddephat's previous sallies into the public print.
‘I have an appointment with Dr Simmons.
Could you direct me to his rooms?’ she asked.
Firmness, she thought, was the only way to deal with the officious little man.
Koogan was not impressed.
‘I'll just check with Dr Simmons,’ he said.
‘Master's orders.
You might be from the newspapers, for all I know.
What name is it?’
Loretta hoped Mr Koogan's experience of journalists was not limited to representatives of the Sun.
She was not too pleased at the thought of being mistaken for a reporter from the tabloid press.
‘It's Ms Lawson,’ she said, with careful emphasis on the Ms. Loretta was perfectly entitled to call herself Dr Lawson and usually did so.
But she wanted to impress upon the porter the existence of an appropriate form of address that did not reveal a woman's marital status.
She was wasting her time.
‘Miss Lawson,’ the man repeated.
‘Just wait there a moment.’
He disappeared into his cabin and, with the air of someone with all the time in the world, set about checking Loretta's bona fides.
It was just as well she had arrived early, she thought.
The college had been one of the last to open its doors to women students, and she could see why.
It was a good three minutes before Koogan reappeared.
‘Dr  Simmons has confirmed your appointment, miss.’
His voice was tinged with regret.
‘Second floor, Erasmus wing.’
He turned his back on her and retired to his cabin.
Loretta was about to knock on the window and ask for further directions, when she shrugged and gave up.
Geoffrey's rooms couldn't be that difficult to find.
Turning to the right as though she knew where she was going, she approached the wing of the building which made up the right-hand side of the square.
A door was set in the wall hall-way down and, as she got closer to it, she spotted a brass plate bearing the single word ‘Erasmus’.
Pushing open the heavy door, she began to climb the stairs to the second floor, admiring the way in which the stained-glass windows on each hall-landing cast triangles of coloured light on to the worn stone steps.
Simmons's rooms were next to the staircase, not, as she had hoped, overlooking the quadrangle, but facing away from the main college building.
Her knock was answered by a loud ‘Come in!’ and the door flew open.
Geoffrey Simmons stood in the doorway.
Small, dark, dressed in baggy corduroy trousers and check shirt, cigarette in hand, he was not at all what Loretta had expected.
Apart from anything else, he looked to be only just in his twenties.
‘Loretta!’ he exclaimed, greeting her as if she were a friend of many years' standing.
‘Come in!
Take a seat!
Well, you must be feeling sick!’
Loretta sank into an armchair with one of its arms missing, and tried to make sense of this reception.
Sick?
Why should she feel sick?
‘God, I bet you wish you'd kept copies of your notes,’ he rushed on.
‘You must be feeling a right berk.’
Light dawned on Loretta, and she launched herself into her part.
‘Absolutely,’ she said with feeling, dispelling a pang of guilt with the observation that she was certainly not presenting herself in a flattering light.
‘I feel a complete idiot.
But, then, you live and learn.’
She hesitated.
Perhaps her last remark was a bit sententious?
Simmons hadn't noticed.
‘Sherry?’ he asked abruptly.
He was already taking glasses and a bottle from a cupboard.
‘Awful stuff, this, I hardly ever drink it.’
Without waiting for a reply, he handed a generous glassful to Loretta.
Tasting it, she discovered it was actually quite pleasant.
‘Why on earth did you want old Puddephat's opinion in the first place?’ he asked.
‘Quite frankly, I wouldn't even ask his advice on how to build a hamster cage.
Since he got obsessed with this American nonsense — what d'you call it, demolition?— he's gone right off his head.
Never uses a word of less than five syllables.
He only survives here because old Humphrey's keen on him.
That's the master, by the way, Humphrey Morris.
He's an engineer, doesn't know the first thing about literature, but Puddephat makes it all sound scientific by using these very long words.
A lot of the arts fellows think Humphrey's a bit of a twit and tend to talk down to him.
But Puddephat goes on about hermeneutics and ontology, and the master pretends he understands.
Nauseating sight.
Mind you, if Puddephat has sunk beneath the waves after a heavy lunch in some little trattoria, we won't have to put up with it any more.
Look on the bright side, that's what I say.’
‘What d'you think has happened to him?’
Loretta asked, keen to keep Geoffrey's mind off his original question of why she had sought Puddephat's advice.
‘God knows,’ Simmons replied cheerfully.
‘Something pretty serious.
Term starts next week.
You can get away with a lot of things at Oxford, but disappearing off the face of the earth just before term starts is not one of them.
‘Course, if it's foul play we're talking about, Theo Sykes would be my chief suspect.
He thought he'd got a job for life when he got his old mate Humphrey in as master — they were at school together, you know — but all that's backfired pretty badly.
I don't know what they fell out over, but it must have been serious.
There's been a distinct froideur between them for months.
And Hugh saw his chance.
He's very well connected, Hugh — brother-in-law's a Tory MP and all that.
He got Humphrey on to some Royal Commission on the training of engineers, or something of the sort.
Anyway, Theo's fellowship is up for renewal any day now, and he ain't going to get it.
If I was the chief rozzer on this case, I'd have some questions to put to Theo, I can tell you!’
Simmons paused, and Loretta took her chance.
‘Is Theo…
Dr Sykes…here at the moment?’ she asked.
It was still possible, as far as she knew, that Sykes was Puddephat's victim and not the other way round.
‘Saw him at breakfast,’ Simmons said helpfully.
‘But the main question is, how can I help you get back your notes?’
‘I thought he might have left them with somebody else at the college,’ Loretta suggested weakly.
‘To get another opinion on them, I mean.’
Her heart sank as she realized what she had laid herself open to.
Would Geoffrey insist on taking her on a tour of every English don in the college?
But she was in luck.
‘Not a chance,’ Simmons said.
‘He wouldn't think anybody else's opinion worth having.’
‘Oh, dear,’ said Loretta, trying to sound contrite in spite of her secret relief.
‘It looks as if I've wasted your time.’
‘Not at all,’ protested Geoffrey.
‘I always enjoy having guests at lunch.
The food's pretty dismal, by the way.
I only eat here 'cause it's free.
One of the perks of being a fellow.
How long have you known Bridget?’
Loretta was beginning to get used to Simmons's abrupt changes of subject.
‘A long time,’ she replied.
‘About six years, I should say.
Maybe seven.
She was doing her PhD in London when I met her.
In fact it was a rather odd coincidence,’ she said, warming to her theme, ‘I was introduced to her at a party, and we got on quite well.
Then I saw an advert for a new consciousness-raising group in Spare Rib, and went along to the first meeting.
Bridget was already there when I arrived.
So we were in the same group together for a couple of years.’
Simmons looked aghast.
‘Bloody hell,’ he said, ‘Women's groups scare me stiff.
Not that I'm against them.
Not in principle.
But if any girlfriend of mine joined one, I'd have a fit.
I suppose you talk about men's willies and all that sort of thing?
No, don't tell me.
Gives me the shivers.
Let's go to lunch.’
Loretta couldn't help smiling.
At least Simmons was frank.
Tracey had at first pretended not to mind her joining the group; it was only later that his real bitterness about it emerged.
Simmons was struggling into a black gown.
‘Sorry about this,’ he said.
‘Rules.
They insist on us wearing them to every meal except breakfast.
Bloody nuisance.’
He leaned across his desk and switched on an answering-machine.
Catching Loretta's eye, he looked abashed.
‘It's just for social things, really,’ he said.
She laughed, dispelling a fantasy in which other  historians were leaving urgent messages on the machine about the foreign policy of Pitt the Younger, and, still smiling, followed Geoffrey out of the room.
Lunch was served in the great hall whose exterior Loretta had observed from the gate.
Her impression of a bleak, high-ceilinged room was confirmed when she entered: the hall took up the top two storeys of the three-storey building.
At the far end of the room, marooned on a dais in splendid isolation, sat those fellows of the college who were in for lunch that day.
Their black gowns flowed to the floor where they were frequently trampled underfoot by passing waiters.
Loretta noticed that, today at least, there were no women at table.
As they approached the dais, she became aware that an animated discussion was taking place among a group of half a dozen dons at one end of the long table.
Her heart quickened — perhaps they were discussing Puddephat's mysterious disappearance?
Simmons signalled her to an empty chair on the fringe of the disputatious group, and walked round the back of the table to take a chair opposite.
Leaning across to the fellows closest to him, he attracted their attention long enough to introduce Loretta.
Several heads nodded in her direction, then returned to the matter in hand.
A man with unfashionably long hair — it had probably been that way since his own undergraduate days, Loretta guessed — was stabbing the air with his fork.
‘No, no, no, Griffith,’ he insisted.
‘I can't let you get away with that.
Statistics, man, you're ignoring the statistics!’
Loretta began to wonder if she had been mistaken.
It didn't sound as if they were discussing Hugh Puddephat.
But, then, why was the conversation so heated?
‘Come along, Daly,’ replied a languid, fair-haired don further down the table.
‘Griffith's right.
It's only because you're a Yorkshireman yourself that you're taking that position.
Boycott probably wouldn't get into the team, never mind open the batting.
The choice is between Grace, Fry and Jack Hobbs.
Boycott simply isn't England material, old man.’
‘Aren't you forgetting Ranji?’ piped up an elderly voice from the very end of the table.
‘Sixty-two — and 154 not out in his first test against Australia in 1896.’
Loretta was disgusted.
They were arguing about cricket.
One of their colleagues had vanished in mysterious circumstances and all they could do was make up imaginary England cricket teams.
She leaned forward to address Simmons intending to remind him of the reason for her visit to the college, but he began to speak.
‘Ranji wasn't an opener,’ he said scornfully.
‘And I have to say I'm with Griffith on this Boycott business.
Now, what about Botham?’
Appearances were deceptive, Loretta concluded sadly: in spite of his youth and casual dress, Geoffrey Simmons was still very much one of the fellows.
She turned her attention to the bowl of soup which had just been placed in front of her.
It was tomato, and definitely out of a packet.
She could tell from the small lumps of matter floating on its vermilion surface.
She stirred it with her spoon without much enthusiasm.
Simmons suddenly recollected his duties as host, and broke off in the middle of a discussion about whether Botham's personality was right for the England team.
‘What's the latest on old Puddephat?’ he asked the man sitting to his left, away from the sporting dons.
‘The master's furious,’ the man replied with obvious pleasure.
‘Local paper sent a man round this morning even though Humphrey said he wouldn't see him.
Got into the secretary's office, and refused to leave.
Humphrey threatened him with the police.
He's in a right old stew.
Says there'll be television cameras next.’
The thought did not seem to disturb him unduly.
Another don joined in.
‘I hear the English faculty has been on to Humphrey already,’ he volunteered.
‘They're in a flap over who's going to take Hugh's lectures if he doesn't show up.
Prof. Wylie told Humphrey he'd have to renew Theo's fellowship — can't lose two senior lecturers at once, you know — and Humphrey just about blew a gasket.
That's why Humphrey's not at lunch.
He's sulking in his rooms.’
So Theo Sykes was already on the verge of benefiting from Puddephat's disappearance, Loretta thought excitedly.
She drew a red circle round his name on her mental list.
But surely Sykes couldn't have predicted this outcome? she objected silently.
Not if he arranged it at the most awkward time of  the year? a little voice rejoined.
The coincidence was certainly suggestive.
She wondered what excuse she might use as a pretext for calling on Sykes.
‘You're a friend of Dr Puddephat?’, she heard someone ask.
‘I was just explaining to Michael here about your notes,’ Simmons interjected, to her relief.
Lost in her own thoughts, she had missed the beginning of the conversation.
‘Not a friend,’ she said hastily.
‘I've never met him.
It's just that I'm planning to write a book which is rather in his field, and I wanted his advice.
Unfortunately, I wrote to him in rather a hurry, and didn't take copies of the notes I sent him.
The photocopier had broken down, you see,’ she added, remembering her discussion with Bridget the night before.
‘They always do,’ said the man to her right, nodding in sympathy.
It was going rather well, she thought.
‘But it can't be helped,’ she added brightly.
She'd already found out much more about Puddephat than she'd hoped — she'd even got a promising suspect in the shape of Theo Sykes — and there was no point in banging on about her non-existent book outline.
But the don sitting next to her was determined to help.
‘Have you tried Koogan?’ he asked Simmons.
‘He's got keys to everyone's rooms.
You might be lucky,’ he said, turning to Loretta.
‘Your notes might be sitting on top of Hugh's desk.’
‘Oh, I don't want to put Dr Simmons to any more trouble,’ Loretta began, anxious to avoid taking the deception any further.
But the matter was out of her hands.
‘Idiot!’ cried Simmons, striking his forehead with the palm of his hand.
‘Why didn't I think of that?
Tell you what, Loretta, we'll go and see him as soon as lunch is over.
No, I won't listen to any objections.
It really isn't any trouble.’
‘Doubt if you'll get much change out of Koogan,’ the don called Michael observed, and Loretta brightened up.
It didn't seem likely that the porter would turn out to be co-operative.
‘But it's worth a try,’ Geoffrey insisted.
‘After all, what's Loretta going to do if she can't get her notes back?’
‘Happened to me once,’ said the man sitting next to her, the one who had been so understanding about the malfunctioning photocopier.
‘Not just notes, either.
I asked my  cleaner to post four chapters of my book on Roman agriculture and she left the envelope on a bus.
Mind you, she had the decency to come and confess, and I got it back from the bus company.
But I had a very nasty moment when she first told me.’
This cautionary tale produced a moment's silence, as all those present contemplated the awful prospect of having to rewrite a large chunk of a book from memory.
Loretta's mind went off at a tangent.
Would there really be any harm in having a look around Puddephat's rooms?
She might find another clue, even if it wasn't the bloodstained dagger Bridget thought she was hoping for.
Something, for instance, to connect Puddephat more definitely with the rue Roland flat.
By the time the main course arrived — an unappetizing leg of chicken in breadcrumbs accompanied by boiled sprouts — Loretta had done a complete U-turn and was fervently hoping that Koogan would consent to lend them a key.
As soon as lunch was over, Simmons led Loretta out into the quadrangle.
Immediately, they heard raised voices and saw that the porter was engaged in an altercation with two men in trench coats.
It looked as though the men had got no further than Loretta before encountering the college's human watchdog.
As she drew closer, she heard Koogan shout: ‘You ‘eard what I said.
Out!
Out!
The master won't see you, and that's final.
I've got my instructions, and none of you newspaper people are getting into this college while I'm here to stop you.
We don't want none of you bloody vultures ‘ere.
Out!’
He moved a step nearing the smaller of the two men, who happened to have two cameras slung around his neck.
‘If you don't get off these premises forthwith,’ he added menacingly, eyeing the Japanese hardware, ‘I'll smash your effing cameras for you.’
The men exchanged glances and, apparently concluding that Koogan meant every word he said, stepped back into the street.
The porter planted himself firmly in the aperture, presumably in case they changed their minds.
Loretta turned to Simmons, feeling it was not an auspicious moment to trouble the porter with a sensitive request.
But before she could restrain him, Simmons had reached the gateway.
‘Mr Koogan,’ he began blithely, only faltering when the man turned and bestowed a look of simmering fury upon them.
It was at this point, Simmons said later, that he realized their request was bound to fail.
But he plunged on.
‘This is Dr Lawson,’ he said, gesturing towards Loretta.
‘She came to pick up some papers she sent to Dr Puddephat, and she needs them at once.
Could you just let us into his rooms so she can get them?
They are very important,’ he added plaintively.
It was no use.
‘You must be bloody joking!’ snapped the porter.
With that, he turned on his heel and strode into his cabin, slamming the door behind him.
Simmons turned to Loretta and shrugged his shoulders.
‘Well, I made a right balls of that,’ he admitted frankly.
‘Don't worry,’ Loretta assured him, disappointed though she was.
‘It was very kind of you to try.
I was afraid he was going to hit you.’
‘Oh, he wouldn't do that,’ Simmons said dismissively.
‘Hitting a fellow counts as damaging college property.’
Loretta smiled, and put out her hand to take leave of Simmons.
Instead of shaking it, however, he grabbed it and pulled her out into the street.
Spotting the two journalists huddled together in conspiratorial conversation a few yards away, he hauled her off in the opposite direction.
‘Listen,’ he said releasing her hand, ‘I've got an idea.
Puddephat's rooms are on the opposite side of the quad from mine.
They're on the ground floor, and they look out on to college land.
There's a garden going down to a stream.
They're supposed to be a smaller version of Christ Church meadows.
The windows are sash ones, dead easy to open.
No one uses the garden much after dark.
If you come back tonight, I'm sure we can open one of the windows and get in.’
‘But what if we're caught?’
Loretta asked nervously.
‘The master would hush it up,’ Simmons assured her.
‘The college is getting enough unwelcome publicity already, without charging one of the fellows with burglary.
Anyway, we won't get caught.
What d'you say?’
Loretta wavered.
She had intended to return to London that afternoon, but one more night wouldn't make a great deal of difference.
Simmons saw her uncertainty, and pressed home his advantage.
‘Ring Bridget and ask what she thinks,’ he suggested.
‘I bet she'll tell you to go ahead.
There's a phone box across the road.’
All right, thought Loretta, casting caution to the winds.
She'd put herself in Bridget's hands.
Opening her purse to look for change, she crossed the road to the phone box.
‘What shall I do?’ she asked, after explaining Simmons's proposal.
‘I think you should do what he says,’ said Bridget recklessly.
‘In fact, I'll come with you.
You never know what we might find.’
‘I don't like deceiving Geoffrey,’ Loretta said, feeling a twinge of conscience.
‘That's the least of our worries,’ said Bridget.
‘He'd be even keener if he knew what we're really up to.
Tell him we'll arrive at his rooms at eleven o'clock this evening.
There shouldn't be anyone in the garden by that time.’
Loretta stepped from the phone box, and passed on Bridget's message.
‘Good old Bridget!’ exclaimed Simmons.
‘I knew I could count on her.’
Loretta wasn't so sure.
Her trip to Paris had already involved her in an unsolved crime, very possibly a murder, not to mention withholding evidence from the police.
Was it really wise to risk adding burglary to the list?
5
The two women were slightly late in arriving at Geoffrey's college that evening.
There was no single incident that Loretta could pinpoint as the cause, merely a series of minor hold-ups; and Bridget had mislaid her car keys, causing them to set off a few minutes after the time they had agreed.
Loretta speculated to herself that Bridget's nerve was becoming a little less steady now that her own involvement in the affair was taking on a more practical aspect.
During the course of the evening, while Loretta cooked couscous for her friend, they had somehow avoided any reference to what was to happen later.
Their conversation had been unusually impersonal, in fact, and largely to do with work.
Loretta was aware that she had consumed rather more Rioja than she had intended, certainly enough to make her glad that Bridget was driving.
When they arrived at the college, it seemed even more forbidding than it had in daylight, and as she walked from the car towards the entrance, Loretta felt as though she were about to cross a threshold in time as well as space.
She could imagine dark-robed figures moving silently along the stone corridors in place of the healthy young men and women she knew to be living inside.
It was a scene straight out of The Monk, she told herself impatiently.
She was too well acquainted with Gothic literature for her own good.
Turning to Bridget, she sensed the other woman's hesitation to be as great as her own.
Firmly, she pressed the bell set into the wall beside the heavy doors.
The incongruous sound of an electric doorbell brought her back to the present.
The small door opened a fraction and a jovial face, decidedly not that of Mr Des Koogan, peered out.
‘Yes, miss?’ he greeted her cheerfully, his words wafting to her through a distinctive cloud of port.
‘Loretta Lawson and Bridget Bennett for Dr Simmons,’ she replied, her spirits lifted by the welcome contrast between the night porter and the irascible Koogan.
The door opened to its full extent, and the two women stepped through.
Loretta drew in her breath: at night, the courtyard was eerily beautiful.
Drained of its colour, the central square of grass might have been a stretch of water were it not for the absence of reflected buildings on its calm surface.
The stone buildings surrounding it seemed less solid in the moonlight, as if they might at any moment shimmer and disappear.
Bridget's hand in the small of her back reminded her gently that she was obstructing the entrance.
‘Enchanting, isn't it?’
Bridget murmured as they set off in the direction of Geoffrey's rooms.
‘It had the same effect on me the first time I saw it at night.’
Geoffrey Simmons, Loretta quickly discovered, was quite unperturbed by the prospect of the night's adventure.
When they entered his rooms, in answer to his hearty ‘Come in!’ they found him sitting in the broken armchair, surrounded by books, his feet comfortably supported by a small wooden stool.
‘You here already?’ he demanded.
‘You must be early.’
‘We're late, as a matter of fact,’ Loretta began, but Geoffrey was already in full flow.
‘Bloody second-year essays,’ he remarked, gesturing at the pile of papers in his lap.
‘Supposed to have marked them weeks ago, but never got round to it.
Dreadful bunch.
Haven't got two original ideas to rub together between the whole lot of them.
God, I hate teaching.
Mind you, I expect much the same could be said about my second-year essays if I'm absolutely honest.
I remember writing most of them with the assistance of liberal quantities of dope.
Just as well I didn't keep them.’
Loretta marvelled at Geoffrey's composure.
She wondered what it would take to make him even slightly nervous.
He seemed to be expecting her to say something.
‘Sorry?’ she replied nervously to his unheard question.
‘I didn't quite catch…’
Her words were interrupted by a triumphant shout of amusement from Geoffrey.
‘I knew it!
You've got cold feet!
Here — have some whisky.
That'll warm up the old bones.’
Common sense and terror battled within her.
Terror won, and she downed the proffered double Scotch in one go.
At this rate, she thought, she was in danger of being found snoozing gently the next morning at the scene of the crime.
Not that it was a crime, she told herself hastily.
They would be on college property, and that was somehow different — not like breaking into a stranger's house in the outside world.
She was feeling better, if a little unsteady, already.
‘Tools of the trade,’ she heard Geoffrey saying, reaching into the top drawer of his desk.
He took out a thin plastic ruler.
‘For the window-catch,’ he explained patiently as Loretta and Bridget stared at him.
‘How were you proposing to open it?’
The two women exchanged guilty looks.
They had not given the details of the break-in a moment's thought, so keen had they been to avoid the subject in the course of the evening.
‘Bloody good burglars you'd make,’ Geoffrey said scornfully.
‘I just hope neither of you ever has to turn to a life of crime.
I don't suppose you've brought gloves with you, either?
Gloves, fingerprints…get it?
Well, I suppose the police have been through the place already.
Let's hope they've got all the prints they need by now.’
Loretta frowned to herself, aware that Geoffrey was taking great pleasure in showing off his superior knowledge.
Before she could think of a suitable reply, Bridget did it for her.
‘Not all of us have the time to watch videos of Minder every weekend,’ she said crushingly.
‘I'm afraid Geoffrey has other addictions on top of his predilection for cricket,’ she added, turning to Loretta.
Geoffrey rolled his eyes dramatically and headed for the door.
‘Cheap, Bridget,’ he muttered over his shoulder, and strode off down the corridor, leaving Loretta and Bridget exchanging amused glances with each other.
Bridget pulled the door shut and they set off after him.
He led the way across the quadrangle to the wing of the college opposite his own.
Once inside, they found themselves facing a glass door, which gave on to the college garden.
Geoffrey turned the Yale lock and opened it.
‘It's  kept locked at night,’ he explained in a low voice.
Loretta and Bridget stepped on to the grass; Geoffrey followed and shut the door behind him.
‘How do we get back in?’ asked Loretta, alarmed.
‘We'll let ourselves into the corridor from Puddephat's rooms,’ Geoffrey replied.
He was pretty confident about his ability to get into the rooms in the first place, Loretta noted.
He set off along the side of the building.
The grass sloped gently away from the college towards what must be the bank of the stream he had mentioned earlier.
Loretta could not see the water, but its course was clearly marked by the graceful trees, mostly weeping willows, through which a light breeze was whispering.
For the second time that evening, Loretta felt a sense of unreality quite at odds with the purpose of her visit.
It was the setting for an assignation with a lover, she thought, picturing a cloaked figure slipping across the grass for a brief and forbidden meeting.
Not so much The Monk as Barbara Cartland.
She told herself sternly that she must shake off this tendency towards romantic fantasy.
It was a sure, if embarrassing, sign that she was feeling in need of a new lover.
But now was not the time to worry about it.
Geoffrey had stopped outside the fourth ground-floor window from the garden door — Loretta was relieved to observe a lack of lights in the rooms adjoining it — and was already slipping his ruler into the gap between the two parts of the sash window.
He turned and grinned at his companions.
‘Hope it's the right room,’ he said cheerfully.
Loretta gasped.
‘Take no notice,’ Bridget whispered.
‘He knows what he's doing.’
After a few seconds of manoeuvring, Geoffrey gave a small cry of triumph.
‘Got it!’ he exclaimed.
He pushed the bottom half of the window upwards and swung one leg over the sill.
Bridget swiftly followed.
Sweeping a nervous glance around the dark garden, Loretta joined them in Puddephat's sitting-room.
Bridget closed the window and drew the curtains together.
‘Best take no chances,’ she said.
‘Do you think it's safe to switch on a light?’
‘Don't see why not,’ replied Geoffrey, moving through the  gloom to a desk on which Loretta could just make out the shape of a lamp.
‘We can only be seen from the river, and no one 's likely to be down there at this time of night.’
The low light of the lamp made them blink.
Loretta looked around curiously, taking in the shelves of books, the beautiful — and obviously valuable — antique furniture, and the magnificent kneehole desk on which Geoffrey had found the lamp.
It stood against one of the walls of the room.
Loretta wondered why Puddephat had resisted placing it next to the window with its enchanting view.
Geoffrey was speaking again.
‘You take the desk, Loretta,’ he instructed her.
‘It's the most obvious place to find your notes, and you know exactly what you're looking for.
I'll have a root in the bedroom.’
Bridget winked at Loretta and followed Geoffrey into the other room.
It was by far the most sensible arrangement, since Geoffrey did not know the real purpose of their visit, but Loretta was seized with apprehension as soon as she was alone.
What on earth was she doing in this stranger's sitting-room? she asked herself.
What could possibly give her a clue about what had happened at the flat in rue Roland?
She had no idea what she was looking for.
She forced herself to take deep breaths.
Now I'm here, she told herself, I might as well have a look round.
Approaching the desk, she was struck by the painting hanging above it.
It was, she thought, a disconcerting choice for an object that you would have to look at every day.
She would not be able to work with such a scene constantly before her eyes.
It looked very much like a Francis Bacon, and an original at that.
Everything about the room suggested money.
Loretta wondered whether Puddephat's fellowship provided an unusually large salary, or whether the objects were a relic of his marriage.
She examined the desk, its surface entirely barren.
Was Puddephat exceptionally tidy, or had he known he would not be coming back to these rooms after his trip to Paris?
Tentatively, she opened a drawer on the right-hand side of the desk.
At once, the illusion of order was shattered.
Inside was a jumble of pieces of paper, the top one being a red demand for payment of a large telephone bill.
Rummaging through, Loretta found receipts from restaurants, postcards from friends, the stubs of several used cheque books.
She  guessed that the contents of the drawer represented several months of the missing man's life.
At the very bottom, her fingers touched what felt like a photograph.
Drawing it out, she found herself looking at a face which was striking both for its good looks and its expression of surprise.
The boy in the photograph, whose age could have been anywhere between fifteen and twenty, was staring at the camera with startled eyes.
The photo had been taken indoors and in poor light: the boy was sitting at a table, his head resting on one hand, a candle flickering nearby.
From the objects visible on the table, Loretta guessed the occasion was some sort of supper party.
Perhaps he had been caught unawares by a flashgun?
She wondered who the boy was.
One of Puddephat's students?
It really was hard to tell his age from a black and white photograph.
Whoever he was, his looks were almost, but not quite, pretty.
His fair hair was parted on one side, and a lock of it fell across his forehead.
His large eyes might have been girlish had it not been for his unusually heavy eyebrows.
There was certainly a homoerotic quality about him, and Loretta remembered what Bridget had said about Puddephat's interest in young men.
At the same time, she recognized that the photograph was exerting a considerable pull on her own imagination.
Where, she wondered, did the boy's own inclinations lie?
She shook her head and returned the picture to the bottom of the drawer.
She had no evidence to connect the boy with Puddephat's disappearance, and she was wasting time.
In any case, she would know the face again if she came across it.
The next drawer was full of scribbled notes on A4 paper, lecture notes by the look of them.
She tried the third.
Suddenly Bridget erupted into the room, calling Loretta's name in a terrifying loud whisper.
‘Look at this!’ she hissed.
‘I found it among his socks.
Sickly yellow ones, by the way.’
Loretta looked at her in bewilderment.
Bridget was holding a sheet of writing paper.
It dawned on Loretta that the latter half of Bridget's remark had been to do with Puddephat's taste in footwear, not the object she was holding.
Loretta took the single sheet of paper from her.
The thick creamy vellum was covered in a large black scrawl.
The writer appeared to have been so anxious to commit the message to  paper that the conventional opening had been dispensed with.
I am so angry I can hardly write [it began, and there was ample evidence in the shaping of the letters that this was indeed so].
Your suggestion last night was just about the most obscene thing I have ever heard.
How could you do this to me?
Since your skin is clearly thicker than even I had supposed, I am writing to make sure there is no misunderstanding between us.
The answer is no, no no.
Not now, not ever.
I never believed I could wish anyone dead, but last night changed all that.
Stay away from me, do you understand?
I want nothing to do with you.
If hell existed, it would be too good for you.
The letter was signed, with an abruptness that matched its content, simply ‘R’.
Loretta's mind went straight back to the boy in the photograph.
Had her surmise been correct?
Had Puddephat provoked this storm by propositioning the boy?
She found it hard to believe, in this day and age, that anyone would react with such loathing to a homosexual advance.
On the other hand, if it came unexpectedly, and from an admired authority figure, the boy's tutor perhaps, might it not seem like a betrayal of trust?
‘Well!’ she heard Bridget exclaim impatiently.
‘Say something!
It must be a clue.
Somebody hated Puddephat enough to kill him!’
‘I wonder,’ Loretta said hesitantly.
She did not want to show Bridget the photograph, and was angry with herself for this uncharacteristic piece of selfishness.
After all, it was Bridget's doing that she was here at all.
Her sense of fair play won.
‘I think it might be connected with this,’ she said, reaching into the top drawer for the picture and handing it to Bridget.
Her friends's reaction was less intense than Loretta's had been.
‘Nice-looking kid,’ she said.
‘But what's he got to do with the letter?’
‘He could be R,’ Loretta pointed out unwillingly.
Bridget held the picture at arm's length and studied it.
‘I suppose it's possible,’ she said.
‘But does he look the sort of person who'd sign with just an initial?’
Loretta shrugged, took the photograph from Bridget, and put it back in the drawer.
As she closed it, Geoffrey appeared in the doorway.
‘Any luck?’ he asked Loretta.
‘Apart from the hate mail in his sock drawer,’ he added, casting a disapproving glance at Bridget.
Loretta recalled why she was supposed to be in Puddephat's rooms.
‘Afraid not,’ she said.
‘No sign of my notes at all.
It looks like I'm going to have to have a go at doing the outline again from memory.’
As she finished speaking, a very loud bell began to ring.
‘A burglar alarm!’ she gasped, frozen to the spot.
Her mind filled with images of police cars, interrogations, court scenes.
Geoffrey shook his head.
‘Stop panicking,’ he commanded.
‘It's only the fire alarm.
I bet some silly bugger has set it off by accident.
Usually happens at least twice a term.
It doesn't tend to happen in the vacation, though.
Perhaps it's a real fire at long last.
Bloody rotten luck for us.’
Already, above the din of the bell, Loretta could hear doors opening and closing, feet on the move above her head.
‘What do we do?’ she asked in a loud whisper.
‘Stay put?’
‘Too risky,’ Geoffrey answered, frowning.
‘They check all the rooms to make sure no one 's slept through it.
And we can't risk being seen in this wing.
It's not as if we're near my rooms.
We couldn't be further from them.’
Loretta could see the only course of action open to them.
She switched off the lamp and moved to the window.
‘I take it they don't search the grounds as well?’ she asked, parting the curtains and throwing up the window.
She climbed out into the garden and crouched close to the wall, waiting for the others to follow.
 Geoffrey came next, grumbling in a low voice.
‘I hope you two like fresh air,’ he muttered, joining her next to the wall.
Bridget was last, gently closing the window behind her.
‘We'd better go down to the stream and hide in the bushes,’ said Geoffrey.
‘At least I'll be able to have a cigarette down there.’
He made a sudden dash for the undergrowth.
Loretta followed, becoming aware that the grass was damp beneath her feet.
Her cream shoes were far from waterproof, and already she could feel an unpleasant sensation around her toes.
When she reached the bushes, Geoffrey was spreading his jacket on the grass between the stream and a weeping willow.
He settled himself comfortably on it and lit a cigarette.
She heard the sound of twigs cracking as Bridget came up behind her.
‘Come on, you don't expect me to give up my jacket,’ Geoffrey exclaimed, in response to a disapproving look from Bridget.
‘I'm not Sir Walter Ralegh, you know.’
‘At times like this,’ Bridget said sharply, ‘I can see why I gave you the push after six weeks.
You've got the manners of a pig.
Now move over.’
Protesting, Geoffrey moved to one side as Bridget lowered herself to the ground.
Loretta crouched on the grass, looking at her friend in surprise.
She had no idea that Bridget and Geoffrey had ever had an affair.
‘There's room for you as well, Loretta, if Geoffrey is sensible about this,’ Bridget insisted.
Loretta perched herself uncomfortably on the very edge of the jacket.
The sudden intimacy of the situation was rather unwelcome.
She needed time to digest the idea of Bridget and Geoffrey having been lovers, even for a short period.
Wasn't he much younger than Bridget?
She didn't know Geoffrey's exact age, but the gap couldn't be less than five or six years.
It might well be more.
Suddenly the idiocy of these thoughts struck her.
What on earth was wrong with a woman having a younger lover?
Her reaction was a relic of her schooldays, when convention insisted that any potential boyfriend should have a head start of at least two years on the object of his affections.
She blushed at being caught out in such unthinking prejudice.
‘Well, you can't complain I'm not honest,’ Geoffrey was saying, his good humour restored by the cigarette which was now polluting the night air.
‘Far from it,’ Bridget conceded.
‘But you can take these things too far.’
They exchanged complicit smiles, and Loretta reflected that the end of the affair did not seem to have soured their friendship.
She wondered if that was one of the benefits of a younger man.
Her own affairs, always with men considerably older than herself, had not ended so amicably.
She was not even on speaking terms with Anthony Swan, the Labour MP who had accompanied her to Paris three or four years before.
And Tracey's attitude to her tended to consist of affection heavily tempered with caution.
She felt a sudden pang for John Tracey.
He might have some ideas about what she should do next.
And she would enjoy impressing him  with what she had managed to find out about Hugh Puddephat so far.
Which was, she congratulated herself, a not inconsiderable amount of information.
There was his background: his marriage, his concealed homosexuality, his involvement, whatever it was, with the Gandell girl.
Then, most significant of all, there was the letter from ‘R’.
At the time of writing that message, its author had certainly been in the right frame to oust Theo Sykes from the role of chief suspect.
If, of course, a crime had been committed.
Loretta felt deeply frustrated.
In spite of what she had discovered, she still felt nowhere near the heart of the mystery.
Once again, she found herself thinking about the boy in the picture.
Was he the author of the letter?
She hoped not.
He could be anyone — a friend's son, or a nephew.
He might even be Puddephat's own son, she thought, her imagination suddenly taking flight.
Not by his marriage, of course, but as a result of a teenage affair.
It was possible, she thought, but not very likely.
No, she could not picture Hugh Puddephat as the adolescent father of an illegitimate son.
In any case, if there was an innocent explanation of the existence of the photograph, why had it been hidden at the bottom of the drawer?
Her sense of its deliberate concealment was overwhelmingly strong-it had been placed out of sight, but in a place where its owner could easily put his hand on it.
Why?
During these deliberations, Loretta was aware that Bridget and Geoffrey were talking in low voices.
Now Bridget broke off in mid-sentence and put her finger to her lips, nodding her head in the direction of the college buildings.
A light had gone on in one of the downstairs rooms in Puddephat's wing.
A figure was briefly visible against the window, then the light went out.
This performance was repeated in the next room along.
‘Checking everyone's out,’ whispered Geoffrey.
In silence, they watched the man's progress along the length of the corridor.
When the light went out in the last room, Bridget began to get up.
‘Thank God for that,’ she said.
Geoffrey pulled her down again.
‘Not yet, idiot,’ he hissed.
‘He's got two more floors to do.
If we go back now, he's bound to hear us.’
Sure enough, a light came on in the middle floor of the wing.
At the same time, the first spots of rain  began to fall.
‘Oh, no,’ moaned Bridget.
‘I can't bear it.’
Loretta watched sadly as damp patches began to appear on her cream linen suit.
She could not have packed a more unsuitable set of garments for tonight's escapade, but then no such prospect had even crossed her mind when she was leaving London.
She shifted uncomfortably on the ground.
Geoffrey chose this moment to propose a game of I Spy, an idea which met with so marked a degree of hostility from Bridget that he lapsed into silence.
The rain cast a decided dampener on their spirits and, as it became heavier, Geoffrey was moved to make a mild complaint.
‘Lot of trouble these notes of yours have caused,’ he remarked idly to Loretta.
Consumed with guilt, she looked questioningly at Bridget, wondering whether she shouldn't tell Geoffrey the truth.
But Bridget response was a slight shake of the head, and Loretta remained silent.
If Bridget, who knew Geoffrey much better than she had realized, judged it better to conceal the real reason for their visit to Puddephat's rooms, she would have to go along with her.
It was another five minutes before her thoughts were interrupted again by Geoffrey's voice.
‘Pleasant though this is, I think it's time to call it a night,’ he announced, getting to his feet.
‘Are you sure it's safe?’ enquired Bridget.
‘No,’ he replied evenly, ‘but my clothes are so wet my skin is beginning to take in water.
If I don't get into dry clothes soon, I'll die of double pneumonia.’
Loretta and Bridget stood up to join him, bending and stretching their cramped legs to restore them to life.
Then, for the second time that evening, all three of them made their way to Puddephat's window and let themselves into his rooms.
Geoffrey went straight to the door, and pressed his ear to it.
‘Seems to be clear,’ he said, opening it.
‘Most people should be back in their rooms by now.
Come on.’
Bridget was in the corridor as soon as he stopped speaking.
Loretta followed, and Geoffrey closed the door softly behind her.
He led the way swiftly and quietly to the exit which gave on to the quadrangle.
‘Now to see if it was a real fire,’ he said with a grin, opening it a fraction.
Loretta blinked; the possibility of a real emergency, rather than a false alarm, had simply not occurred to her.
‘No, we're  OK’, he said, after a hasty glance outside.
‘How d'you know?’ asked Bridget.
Geoffrey flung open the door.
‘No fire without smoke,’ he announced, gesturing towards the peaceful courtyard.
‘Probably a fault in the alarm system.’
He looked at his two damp companions.
‘Brandy,’ he said firmly, ‘that's what you need.
Let's go and drink to a life of crime.’
They squelched off in the direction of Geoffrey's rooms and a bottle of Rémy Martin.
6
The pile of messages that greeted Loretta when she arrived at her college just after twelve next day was a sure sign that the beginning of term was only two days away.
Hanging her coat on the back of the door in her office, she observed the utilitarian nature of her surroundings with even more dissatisfaction than usual.
She disliked the stark brick walls, and the aluminium window frame, never an object of beauty, had recently acquired the additional disadvantage of being jammed shut.
She thought longingly of Hugh Puddephat's rooms in Oxford.
The Francis Bacon would have to go, of course, but it would be easy to find something more to her taste.
A simple black and white photograph perhaps?
She realized she was staring into space.
The Puddephat business was exerting far too great a hold on her; she must put her mind to all the business connected with the new academic year.
Her most urgent task was to arrange interviews with all the students to whom she was tutor.
The first-years would be a mixed bunch, some bursting with confidence, others in need of a great deal of encouragement.
The second- and third-years, who were already familiar faces, would make fewer demands on her; it was too early in the year for anxieties about exams.
Looking at the messages which had accumulated in her absence she saw the folly of rushing off to Oxford so close to the start of term and felt faintly annoyed with herself.
She usually enjoyed this part of the year immensely, but for once she was feeling quite unprepared for it.
She would just have to forget about Paris and Oxford for the rest of the day and get on with some work.
She started flicking through the messages, most of them in  the handwriting of Mrs Whittaker, the secretary of the English department.
There was to be a staff meeting the following afternoon, Loretta read, at which the new course on gender would be discussed again.
She was outraged, guessing that the objectors had carried on their fight after her departure from lunch on Monday.
It really was a bit much, she thought, to leave it until now to make trouble about the course.
The first lecture was due to take place next week.
And if the head of the English department wasn't so ineffectual, he'd have told them so on Monday.
She took out her diary and made a note of the time of the meeting.
She was determined that the new course would not bite the dust because of a rearguard action by a couple of old fogies like Maurice Webb and Henry Hedger.
She snapped shut the diary and looked at the next piece of paper.
It was a request from a colleague: he'd be grateful if she could cast her eye over an article he'd written for a quarterly journal, by Friday if possible.
Why couldn't he have asked her earlier?
Loretta wondered.
Friday was, after all, the first day of term.
She supposed she could fit it in, if it really was urgent.
The next missive was a postcard from the college library, which had acquired a book for her on inter-library loan.
Could she pick it up within forty-eight hours?
Another piece of paper simply recorded that Tracey had called the day before.
He hadn't explained what he wanted, or asked her to call back, but Loretta's resolution wavered momentarily.
It was just possible that he'd discovered something about Puddephat.
Anyway, whatever he wanted, she was keen to ask his advice on what to do next.
Her hand went out to the telephone, then drew back.
She'd been neglecting her work for the past day and a half.
Tracey could wait until the evening.
She put the note to one side, and looked at the final message.
Her heartbeat quickened when she saw that Andrew Walker had telephoned twice that morning, and would like her to return his call as soon as possible.
Had Andrew found out what had happened at the flat?
Calming down, she decided that this was very unlikely.
Unless Andrew was lying, she knew from his own lips that the evidence had vanished by the time he arrived at rue Roland.
That being the case, what did he want?
It was only three days since they had spoken, and they were not particularly close friends.
The answer suddenly came to her, and she smiled.
The most likely explanation was her offer to buy him dinner in return for the loan of the flat.
With term approaching fast, it was quite likely that Andrew was coming to London on department business, and had seen his opportunity to call in the debt.
Well, she thought, nothing would suit her better.
With Puddephat's disappearance in the news, it would not seem odd if she made a casual reference to it over dinner.
It was an ideal opportunity for her to find out whether Andrew knew the missing don, and whether Puddephat had ever had any connection with rue Roland.
And all in the course of a social event that had been set up not by her but by Andrew.
It couldn't be better.
She looked up Andrew's number in her address book, hoping he was not already on his way to London.
The phone rang half a dozen times before he answered it.
‘You've just caught me’, he said, recognizing her voice.
‘I was shutting the front door when I heard the phone ring.
I'm on my way up to town.
There's been a cock-up in the first-year timetable, and Prof. Day's summoned me to a meeting to sort it out.
Bloody nuisance, but I can't get out of it.
That's why I called, as a matter of fact.
I suppose you wouldn't be free for dinner this evening?’
Loretta's smile widened.
‘What a good idea,’ she replied.
‘Where would you like to eat?’
Andrew hesitated for a second, apparently taken aback by the ease with which he had gained his free dinner.
‘Well,’ he said slowly, judging how far his luck could be pushed, ‘I always think L'Escargot is very reliable…’
‘I'll book a table for eight thirty,’ said Loretta cheerfully.
Hang the expense, she thought rashly — her salary cheque was about to go into her account, and she hoped it would be a productive evening.
She was thrilled to be back on the trail again.
She rang the Sunday Herald number, placating her conscience with the thought that she might not have time to ring Tracey that evening after all; but when she got through to the news desk, she discovered that he had taken the shuttle to Glasgow the morning before.
It was too early to say when he  might return.
With a shrug of impatience, Loretta rang off.
She dialled his home number and left a short message on his answering-machine.
Loretta was the first to arrive at the restaurant.
A waiter led her to the table she'd booked downstairs, and left her to study the menu.
It did not take her long to work out that the meal was going to cost her considerably more than she'd saved by spending a rather miserable night in rue Roland.
Nevertheless, she was looking forward to the food.
A salad of sun-dried tomatoes to start, she thought, and then perhaps the salmon?
At that moment, Andrew hurried in, slightly out of breath.
He kissed Loretta's cheek, and sat down opposite her.
‘Let's have some wine while we think about food,’ he said, picking up the wine list.
After a quick glance, he ordered something which sounded horribly expensive.
‘You've been working too hard,’ he said, turning his attention to Loretta.
‘You look quite tired, and term hasn't even started.
What have you been up to?’
Loretta suppressed her irritation.
Up to that moment, she had been feeling perfectly well.
The black velvet dress she was wearing — the weather had changed at last— set off her pale skin and blonde hair, and she was looking forward to a new academic year.
Some people seemed to have a talent for saying the wrong thing, she thought to herself.
Or had her efforts to get to the bottom of the rue Roland mystery taken an unexpected toll on her?
She doubted it.
‘You don't look all that well yourself,’ she told Andrew with uncharacteristic malice.
‘And you've just had a holiday.’
‘No amount of holiday can compensate for the beginning of the autumn term,’ Andrew answered gloomily.
‘A new academic year, a new set of faces to memorize.
The trouble is, Loretta, that I've discovered I don't like students.
One year they've got long hair and spend their spare time reading Marx, the next they're shorn like sheep and as conservative as hell.
And whichever sort they happen to be, they always think they're the first of their kind.
What I need is a nice little research job where I can write my books and keep well away from them.’
Loretta smiled.
Any minute now, Andrew would start  talking in disparaging tones about the habits of ‘young people’, a favourite topic of his since reaching the age of forty.
She suspected that his distaste for students was stimulated not so much by their ideas as by their youth.
Perhaps she would feel the same when she reached his age.
It was not a pleasant thought, and she decided to change the subject.
‘I'm going to have the salmon,’ she announced, handing the menu to Andrew.
After a short discussion on the merits of the duck, he decided to join her; and while they waited for the first course to arrive, he regaled her with a colourful account of that afternoon's meeting in the history department to sort out the timetable.
Inexplicably, two compulsory first-year lectures had been scheduled for the same day and time, and the error had only just been noticed.
Neither of the lecturers concerned was willing to agree to a change at this late date; when one of them finally gave in, the alternative proposed by the unpopular head of department was a slot already occupied by one of Andrew's lectures.
He was an excellent storyteller and in normal circumstances Loretta would have enjoyed his acerbic comments on his colleagues' conduct at the meeting.
Tonight, however, she was keen to steer the conversation round to the subject of Hugh Puddephat.
As soon as Andrew paused for breath, she took her chance.
‘I was up in Oxford at the beginning of this week,’ she said, as casually as she could.
‘I stayed a couple of nights with a friend who lives in Woodstock Road.
She teaches English, and she was telling me about this don who's disappeared.
Hugh something, I think his name is.’
She paused, then added, ‘Hugh Puddephat, that's it.’
Was she overdoing it?
She crossed her fingers and plunged on.
‘You know lots of people at Oxford.
Have you ever come across him?’
‘Oh, yes, I know Hugh,’ Andrew said unsuspectingly.
‘We were at college together, as a matter of fact.
There was a time when I knew him quite well.
He and I and a few other people used to hang around together when we were students.
We were all gay but scared stiff to do anything about it.
This was after Wolfenden, of course, but before the change in the law.
Mind you, Hugh was always a bit different from the rest of us.
I was profoundly relieved when the law was relaxed in  1967, but I think it just added to Hugh's problems.
It took away one of the reasons he used to justify trying to suppress his homosexuality, you see.
In the end, he married one of his own students.
Partly in the hope of keeping himself on the straight and narrow — you'd be surprised how many gay men do that — and partly because he thought it would do his career a bit of good.
Veronica's an Honourable, you see.
I rather liked her, though I couldn't see how the thing would work.
She had absolutely no idea, and Hugh went out of his way to keep it from her.
That's why I began to see less of him.
After he was married, he even started making jokes at dinner parties about limp wrists and fairies.
So I gradually stopped visiting them.
They spent their honeymoon at rue Roland, by the way — Hugh was the classic brilliant but penniless academic at the time and, to do him credit, he didn't want to take Veronica's money.
Or Veronica's father's money, to be more accurate.’
So there was a connection between the flat and Hugh Puddephat, thought Loretta, her heart beating fast.
‘I suppose most of your friends must have stayed there at one time or another,’ she said casually.
‘Has Hugh ever stayed there since?’
‘Once or twice, but a very long time ago,’ Andrew said.
‘Certainly not in recent years.
Veronica used it occasionally.
In fact, now you come to mention it, I'm a little bit peeved with her.
She got in touch months ago, at the end of the summer term, in fact, to ask if she could borrow the flat.
It was a little bit awkward, because she wanted to spend a long weekend there in July, and I had to sort out the dates with Alex to make sure they didn't clash.
She came and collected the keys, and that was the last I heard from her.
The keys came back through the post, without even a thank-you note.
I don't even know whether she used the flat, or whether she changed her mind and didn't go for one reason or another.’
He paused, and then shrugged.
‘I'd completely forgotten about that.
Perhaps it was Veronica who spring-cleaned the flat?
Though it's no more in character for her to do it than it is for Alex.
After a year or two of keeping house for Hugh, she put her foot down and said it was ridiculous not to use her money.
Ever since then, she's had a cleaning lady and a  gardener.
I can't quite picture Veronica down on her knees with a scrubbing brush.
Don't get me wrong, Loretta,’ he added, ‘It's not that I don't like her.
But I have always felt rather uncomfortable in her presence.
And that's Hugh's fault, not hers.
When he introduced me to her, just before the wedding, he sort of…well, he didn't come out and say it, but he got the message over that he didn't want her to know I was gay.
So I've always felt in a false position where Veronica's concerned.’
Loretta was only half listening.
Had Veronica's visit to the flat in July — if she had indeed made one — anything to do with what had happened there in September?
She felt sure there must be a connection, but at the moment she couldn't see what it was.
Perhaps she should engineer a meeting with Veronica?
She decided to try a different tack.
‘What d'you think has happened to Hugh?’ she asked.
‘I've no idea,’ Andrew admitted.
‘I supposed he'll turn up sooner or later.
I think the most likely thing is that he's had some sort of accident.
He may be sitting in a hospital bed somewhere in Italy at this very moment, wondering who he is and why he knows all these long words like hermeneutics.’
He paused, a puzzled look on his face.
Fearing that he was going to ask why she was so interested in Puddephat's disappearance, Loretta rapidly changed the subject.
In any case, she'd probably got as much out of Andrew as she was going to.
The subject of rue Roland did not come up again in the course of the evening until Loretta was stepping into a taxi for Islington outside the restaurant.
‘Oh,’ she cried, pausing by the door of the cab, ‘I've forgotten to bring your keys.’
‘Never mind,’ said Andrew.
‘They're only the spare set.
Wait till the next time I see you.’
Loretta climbed into the taxi, and headed for home.
First thing next morning, her telephone rang.
It was Tracey.
‘Did I wake you up?’ he enquired innocently.
‘There was a message from you on the tape when I got back last night.
I thought it might be urgent.’
‘Not this urgent,’ said Loretta, looking at the clock on her bedside table.
It was seven thirty.
‘I was only returning your  call, as a matter of fact.’
She was mildly irritated, well aware of what Tracey was up to.
Her reticence about certain areas of her private life irked him, and he occasionally found an excuse to ring early in the hope of catching her unawares.
Resisting the temptation to call his bluff by pretending someone was with her, she asked how he had got on in Glasgow.
‘Wild goose chase,’ he said grumpily.
It appeared she had touched a raw nerve.
‘All the fault of the news desk.
They insisted on me going up there to see this chap who was supposed to have proof of a fiddle being carried out by a bunch of telephone operators at one particular exchange.
It would have been quite a sexy story if it was true — lots of money involved.
But the crucial thing he hadn't told us was that his girlfriend was one of the operators involved in the ring, and he'd just had a big row with her.
That's why the story sounded plausible in the first place — he knew enough about the operation to string us along.
He'd even been inside the building, and could describe who sat where.
I only began to smell a rat when he couldn't come up with the documents he claimed to have.
He said he'd put them at a friend's house for safe keeping, and the friend just happened to have gone away on holiday.
I took him out for a boozy lunch, and in the end he admitted he'd made the whole thing up.
By then, of course, I'd wasted two whole days in Glasgow.
And it's too late to put together the story I really wanted to do this week.
I told the news desk they should send someone else, one of the junior reporters.
They've got to learn that this business is plagued with fantasists and people with grudges.
It's an occupational hazard of investigative journalism.
How's your investigation coming along, by the way?’
Loretta swallowed her distaste at Tracey's cold-bloodedness.
She disliked the casual way in which he made decisions profoundly affecting other people's lives — choosing whose tale of woe should be front page news, and whose story deserved nothing more than the wastepaper bin.
But she needed his help.
‘I've found out a lot,’ she said, ‘and I'm very keen to talk it over with you.
The trouble is that term starts tomorrow, and I'm rather tied up with work.
Are you free at the weekend?’
Tracey suggested meeting for a drink when he finished  work on Saturday evening.
‘What about going to a movie?’ he added, asking if she'd seen a French film which had opened in London a couple of weeks ago.
She hadn't, and they agreed to meet at seven.
Loretta put down the phone with a sense of unease, wondering if she'd done the right thing.
It meant a delay of two more days before deciding what to do next, and she was reluctant to wait so long.
But it couldn't be helped.
The beginning of the autumn term was, apart from exams, her busiest time of year.
Her discovery in Paris couldn't have happened at a worse time from that point of view, and she would just have to accept it.
Frustrated, she picked up that day's Guardian and looked to see whether there were any stories about the search for Puddephat.
She found nothing, although she didn't know whether to put this down to a lack of success on the part of the police or the massive coverage afforded to the hijacking of a wide-bodied jet over Italy.
The presence of a minor American film star among the hostages had prompted more than usually exhaustive coverage of the event, and several columns were devoted to a blow-by-blow account of the aircraft's comings and goings.
Putting the paper to one side, Loretta told herself that she would have to put Hugh Puddephat out of her mind until Saturday.
Loretta arrived punctually at her office next day at ten o'clock.
The pattern of the first day of the autumn term was fixed; the first-years, who had arrived at their halls of residence the day before, came to the department in the morning to sign up for various optional courses.
At eleven, they split up into small groups and assembled in the rooms of the lecturers whose courses they had chosen.
Just after eleven, Loretta was handing out reading lists to the dozen students who wanted to attend her seminars on Virginia Woolf when there was a knock at the door.
It must be a latecomer, Loretta thought to herself, calling, ‘Come in.’
The door opened, and Mrs Whittaker put her head into the room.
‘A Mr Tracey is on the phone,’ she said.
‘He wants to speak to you urgently.
I've explained that you're tied up until twelve, but he wouldn't take no for an answer.’
The secretary's features clearly showed her disapproval of Tracey's  behaviour.
It was an unwritten rule in the department that teaching sessions were not to be interrupted by phone calls, especially not private ones.
Loretta stared at the woman for a moment, thoughts racing through her head.
Tracey was well aware of the rule; something must have happened.
Realizing that not only Mrs Whittaker, but twelve newly arrived first-year students, were waiting for her in expectant silence, she pulled herself together.
‘Please tell him I'll ring him on the dot of twelve,’ she told the secretary.
‘And I'm sorry you've been troubled.’
She didn't know how she was going to contain her impatience, but it would not do to make an enemy of Mrs Whittaker.
And she did have a responsibility to her students.
But what on earth could have happened?
As soon as the last student had filed out of her office, Loretta picked up the phone.
It was still switched through to the secretary's office, and it took an infuriatingly long time to get a line.
She was holding her breath when she finally got through to Tracey's extension.
‘What's happened?’ she demanded, without preamble.
‘They've found the body,’ he told her, equally blunt.
‘Body?’ she gasped, a wave of nausea passing through her.
In her mind, she was back at the flat in rue Roland, a jumble of bloodstained sheets confronting her.
‘Puddephat,’ Tracey added, dispelling all doubt.
‘It came up on the PA tapes an hour ago.
You know, the Press Association teleprinter.
You've seen it in the corner of the office.
The police announced it this morning.’
More images whirled through Loretta's head — the figure she had seen in the bed, a body being dragged to the door, herself in handcuffs waiting to board the ferry.
Or would they fly her back to Paris?
She had been right, and she had done nothing about it!
But I didn't know, she argued back, picturing all too clearly the disbelief on the policemen's faces.
And there was my mother to think about, she pleaded.
You couldn't expect…
She pulled herself together, and asked a question.
‘Where did they find him?’ she asked weakly.
‘They haven't said officially,’ Tracey said, ‘but I called a mate of mine at the Yard as soon as I heard.
He's making some inquiries, and he's going to ring me back.’
At that  moment, Loretta heard the sound of another phone ringing.
‘That's probably him,’ Tracey said.
‘I gave him another extension number in case we were talking when he rang.
Look, can you meet me at lunchtime?
The pub opposite the office in half an hour?’
Loretta agreed, and put the phone down.
The sour taste in her mouth made her retch a couple of times, and after a moment, she got up and walked out of her office to the coffee machine.
She fumbled for change and pressed the button for black coffee.
Hating it, she drank half and left the rest standing in its cup on a window sill.
She went back to her office, put on her coat, and went to find a taxi.
Tracey was waiting for her in the pub.
‘Read that while I get you a drink,’ he said, handing her a piece of paper which she recognized as PA copy.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked, putting his hand on her arm.
‘You look absolutely green.
I think you need a brandy.’
Loretta didn't argue.
As Tracey made his way to the bar, she put the story on the able in front of her.
A police investigation is under way in two countries after the identification of a body in Paris as that of Dr Hugh Puddephat, the missing Oxford don [she read].
The body, which was discovered in the city yesterday morning, was identified through fingerprints.
No papers or personal items are believed to have been found with it.
Details of how Dr Puddephat died have not yet been released, but police say foul play is suspected.
They have no idea what Dr Puddephat was doing in France at the time of his death.
He was last seen in England a few days before he was due to attend an important conference in Italy.
A spokesman for Thames Valley police, who have been investigating the don's disappearance, said that two detectives would be flying to Paris today to continue their inquiries.
The story ended with a quote from Professor Morris, master of Puddephat's college, who said he was ‘devastated’ by the news.
Des Koogan would have his work cut out to keep at bay all the reporters and photographers heading for the college, Loretta thought with the ghost of a smile.
Tracey returned with her brandy.
She drank it at one gulp.
‘Good  God, that was a double,’ he said.
‘You are in a bad way.
Are you sure you want to hear any more?’
‘Yes,’ Loretta said flatly.
‘I can't just pretend it hasn't happened.’
The warm feeling induced by the spirit made her aware of how cold she had been since hearing the news.
‘Tell me everything.’
‘All right,’ said Tracey.
‘On your head be it.
It's not very nice.’
He sipped his own drink, which looked like another double brandy.
Perhaps he was as shocked as she, but more skilled at concealing the fact.
‘Because they knew Puddephat was supposed to be going abroad,’ Tracey began, ‘the cops put out a message through Interpol.
To be on the safe side, they sent it to several countries.
There was some confusion about what his real destination was, apparently.
Nothing happened until yesterday, when an unidentified body turned up in Paris.
The French police ran a check on fingerprints, and found they'd got Puddephat.
The Yard released the news this morning.’
‘Why is Scotland Yard?’ involved Loretta interrupted.
‘I thought it was being investigated by Thames Valley police.’
‘It is,’ Tracey said patiently.
‘But the Interpol office is at the Yard.
Anyway, as I was saying, that's all they're admitting publicly.
But I've got the inside story from my mate.
Off the record, of course.’
A thought occurred to Loretta, and a look of alarm passed across her face.
‘Does he know about me?’ she asked anxiously.
‘No, don't worry,’ Tracey said.
‘I told him we were thinking of putting someone on to the story, and needed to know if it was worth following up.
I didn't mention you at all.
Now, about where the body was found.
D'you remember a church in rue Roland?’
Loretta considered the question.
‘I can't picture it,’ she said, ‘but it could be at the far end from the flat.’
‘That must be it,’ Tracey agreed.
‘And they've been having some restoration work done on it.
Some local worthy died and left some money, apparently.
They closed it while the really major stuff was going on, and it opened again last Sunday.
So the builders have gone, and all the old biddies turn up in their Sunday best to say their Hail Marys, or  whatever it is they do.
And there's this smell.
At first they think the builders have messed up the drains.
So they swing a bit of incense about, and wait for the workmen to come back and investigate.
But by yesterday, it was pretty bad.
So they search the church, and there it is.
Puddephat's body hidden in the altar.’
Loretta stared at him, appalled.
The picture he had painted was so vivid that once again she felt as if she were about to be sick.
Tracey, on the other hand, seemed to have cheered up considerably.
He even appeared to be enjoying himself.
Loretta reminded herself that telling stories was part of his job, and he had probably heard much worse than this in his time.
‘One of the odd things about it is that he was wearing brand-new clothes,’ he added.
‘You know, those blue things that French workmen always wear.
Whoever killed him got rid of his own clothes and put them on the body afterwards.’
‘So he was murdered?’
Loretta asked miserably.
‘Oh, yes,’ said Tracey.
‘No doubt about that.
A frenzied attack, my mate said.’
Pushing this thought aside, Loretta asked another question.
‘But how did he get from the flat to the church?’
‘Well, assuming he didn't put himself there, which is unlikely since we know what you found at the flat, someone must have carried him there,’ Tracey replied.
‘That's one thing the police have no idea about.
And they know nothing about the flat, of course.’
'But how can I go to them now?’
Loretta cried, sensing the implied criticism in his tone.
‘They'll never understand why I didn't go to them in the first place.
God knows how many offences I've committed!
D'you want to see me in prison?’
‘All right, don't jump down my throat,’ Tracey protested.
‘I'm trying to help you.
I can see your problem perfectly well.
I've got one myself, if it comes to that.’
Loretta looked blank.
‘Here am I,’ he explained, ‘with inside information about a very good story, and I can't use it because of where it comes from.
It's not a very happy situation for either of us.’
‘Selfish pig!’
Loretta snapped.
‘Has it occurred to you that I nearly disturbed the murderer — that I might have been killed as well?
And you just think about your wretched paper!’
They glared at each other across the table.
‘All right, I'm sorry,’ Tracey said.
‘Why don't you tell me what you found out in Oxford?’
Calming down, Loretta outlined what she had discovered about the dead man.
‘I'm astonished, Loretta,’ Tracey said when she described the raid on Puddephat's rooms.
‘You should be a journalist yourself.
In all my years on newspapers, I've never gone as far as breaking and entering.
But it sounds as if it's paid off.
He certainly made a few enemies.
There's the Sykes chap, and R, whoever that is.
And they're only the ones we know about.
The question is, was either of them in Paris that weekend, or was it somebody else we don't know about?
That's equally likely, you know, when you think about it.
And what about his wife?
She doesn't sound too keen on him, though I don't know if she counts as an enemy for our purposes.
If you want my advice, I think I'd wait a day or two before doing anything.
See what turns up.
My contact at the Yard may know more by the end of the day.
What d'you think of that?’
To Loretta the suggestion was a reprieve.
She turned down Tracey's offer of another drink, and agreed to speak to him again that evening.
Then she excused herself and went in search of a strong cup of tea.
When she left college at a quarter to five, Loretta was still feeling tense and restless.
For once, she was reluctant to go straight home to Islington.
On the way to the tube station she passed a cinema where an American comedy was about to start.
On impulse, she turned into the foyer and bought a ticket.
Her mind was not on the film, however, and she left after an hour.
When she arrived home, the phone was ringing.
She picked it up, expecting to hear Tracey's voice.
Instead, she found herself talking to Bridget.
She sounded excited.
‘Geoffrey just got hold of me,’ she said.
‘The police have taken away Theo Sykes!
They came for him this afternoon, Geoffrey says.
There was the most tremendous row — Sykes refused to go with them at first, and the master was brought in to persuade him.
Geoffrey thinks he's going to be charged with the murder.
You do know about the body, don't you?’
Bridget asked anxiously as Loretta remained silent.
‘Oh, yes, I know about the body,’ Loretta said, still trying to take in this new twist of events.
‘But why have they arrested Sykes?’
It turns out he was in France at the time of the murder,’ replied Bridget.
‘So it looks like it's all solved already.
Aren't you relieved?
This means you won't have to go to the police after all.’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Loretta, realizing that her reaction was proving a disappointment to Bridget.
‘I suppose I'm a bit shocked by it, that's all.’
Arranging to call Bridget the next day, she rang off.
At once, the phone sounded again.
This time it was Tracey.
‘Looks like you're off the hook, Loretta,’ he began.
‘They've got him.’
‘I know,’ said Loretta.
‘I've just heard.’
‘Who told you?’
Tracey asked indignantly.
‘I've only just found out myself.’
‘Bridget rang,’ Loretta explained.
‘But do tell me what you know.
I'm sure you've got far more details.
How did they get on to him, for a start?’
‘Ferry tickets,’ Tracey told her, pacified.
‘As soon as the ID was confirmed yesterday, the Thames Valley boys started going through their files.
They had a rough idea of when the murder took place from the state of the body — not exact, but within a day or two.
When they first interviewed Sykes, on Monday this is, he told them he was staying at a cottage in the Lake District entirely on his own for the first two and a half weeks in September.
The cottage belonged to friends, he said, but they were diplomats and happened to be in Syria.
Just out of curiosity, a bright young DC ran the names of some of the witnesses through the Sealink computer this morning.
And guess what?
Sykes went to Paris a couple of days before you did, and came back on the Monday.
When the cops went to see him again this afternoon, he flatly refused to say why he was there, where he stayed, or anything about the trip.
So they pulled him in.
They think it's only a matter of time before he breaks.
According to my contact at the Yard, the theory is that he met Puddephat by chance, and saw his opportunity.
They don't know how Puddephat got there, by the way.
He hasn't shown up on any  of the ferry company computers, or any of the airline ones, for that matter.
They checked right at the start of the inquiry.
It looks like he may have travelled under an assumed name, God knows why.’
‘But why would Sykes kill Puddephat?’
Loretta asked.
‘I know he didn't like him, but surely that's not enough?’
‘You're forgetting the business of Sykes's fellowship,’ Tracey pointed out.
‘Sykes stood to gain by Puddephat's death.
With Puddephat out of the way, the English faculty were on the spot.
They were a fellow short, and the start of the autumn term is a terrible time to get a replacement.
With Sykes about to go at Christmas as well, they were really up the creek.
They've been putting pressure on this chap Morris to renew Sykes's fellowship, and the clincher is he was going to do it on Monday.’
‘I'm not a hundred per cent convinced,’ Loretta said thoughtfully.
‘And why did your friend tell you all this?’
‘It's off the record again,’ Tracey explained.
‘They're likely to charge him over the weekend, so Gerry was tipping me the wink there's no story for us.
And there isn't, not with a charge pending.’
Loretta thanked Tracey, and settled down on the sofa with a new book about Jane Austen.
She persevered for fifty pages before admitting that she hadn't taken in a word.
7
Loretta's bedroom was a large room on the top floor of her maisonette in Islington.
It had stripped floorboards with pastel rugs dotted on them, and white walls.
It also contained the piece of furniture in which she took most pride — a Victorian brass bed that she polished lovingly every three months.
Loretta regarded the room as a refuge from the outside world and, in spite of her discoveries, she was fast asleep next morning when the buzzer on the entryphone sounded in the hall a floor below.
Putting a hand out for the clock, she found it was only a quarter to eight.
She was on the verge of ignoring the summons, on the reasonable assumption that the visitor had pressed the wrong buzzer, when it sounded several more times.
So insistent was the noise that she padded downstairs in her nightshirt and picked up the handset.
‘Yes?’ she said, yawning audibly.
She could not imagine who might want to see her at this time on a Saturday morning.
‘Police, miss,’ said a businesslike male voice at the other end.
‘Sorry to bother you.
Can I come up for a moment?’
Astonished, Loretta pressed a button, which released the door at street level.
Listening intently for the sound of feet on their way up the stairs, she could detect the movements of only one person.
She stood rigid, fighting down a feeling of panic.
How had they got on to her? she asked herself.
Surely Tracey hadn't given her away?
She wondered again how many offences she had committed since failing to go to the police in Paris.
At least they couldn't know about her visit to Puddephat's rooms.
Or could they?
She was about to find out.
Opening the front door of the flat, she came face to face with an out-of-breath uniformed policeman.
There were no stripes  on his jacket so presumably he was a constable.
She was surprised that they hadn't sent at least a detective.
He also looked rather young.
‘Miss Lawson?’ the visitor began, his eyes sliding away from her face.
Loretta hesitated, but decided against getting into the Miss or Ms argument at this time of day.
As she confirmed her identity, she noticed that the policeman was blushing.
A flash of intuition told her that he was embarrassed by her attire.
His discomfort gave her confidence.
If he insisted on turning up when she was almost certain to be in bed, he could hardly complain about her nightshirt.
‘Come in,’ she said, stepping back and waving him into the flat.
The constable entered the hall and hesitated, nervously removing his helmet.
Loretta led the way into the drawing-room and settled herself in an armchair.
If there was going to be trouble, she might as well make herself as comfortable as possible.
As the young man perched on the edge of the sofa, she took the bull by the horns.
‘I can guess why you're here,’ she began, ‘I just hadn't expected you so early.’
‘I'm sorry miss, but the station has been trying to get hold of you for several days,’ he interrupted.
‘You never answer your telephone.’
‘That's because I'm at work,’ Loretta said shortly.
He was as bad as the pair who called on Bridget, she thought impatiently.
Didn't he know that millions of women worked?
Then the significance of what he had said came home to her.
They had been trying to contact her for several days.
That meant they had connected her with Puddephat's disappearance before the discovery of the body.
But how?
Loretta was deeply perplexed.
‘Well, where do you want to start?’ she asked, bracing herself for the questions to come.
‘Do I have the right to call a lawyer?’
Now it was the policeman's turn to look astonished.
‘It's not usual in a matter like this, miss,’ he said.
‘I don't want to stop you, but if you send off a cheque this weekend, that'll be the end of it.’
He fished inside his jacket and pulled out an envelope.
‘All the details are in there,’ he added, handing it to her.
‘Miss Loretta Lawson, that is you, isn't it?’ he went on, seeing her hesitate.
Light was beginning to dawn on Loretta, and the relief was so great she almost laughed out loud.
‘That's right,’ she said.
‘You must excuse me, Officer, I'm still half asleep.’
She was opening the envelope as she spoke.
Inside was a summons for non-payment of a parking ticket.
She had completely forgotten about it until now.
‘Thanks very much for coming.
How rude of me, I should have offered you some tea or coffee.’
He demurred at once, and she surmised that he was as keen to leave as she was to see the back of him.
She promised to get out her cheque book as soon as he left, and saw him out.
Closing the front door, she leaned  against it, a hand to her throat.
She felt faint when she thought how near she had come to disaster.
She certainly needed a cup of tea, even if her erstwhile visitor didn't.
When the Guardian arrived half an hour later, she plucked it from the letter-box with impatient hands.
The discovery of the body had made front-page news, in spite of the continuing saga of the hijack, and one of the features staff had put together a hasty obituary on an inside page.
There was nothing about the arrest of Theo Sykes but that might be because the news had broken too late.
The front-page story lacked most of the details with which Tracey had supplied her, and amounted to little more than a rewritten version of the PA copy she had seen.
Just in time, she remembered to switch on the radio for the eight-thirty news on LBC.
The headlines included a row between two Conservative MPs over remarks one of them had made about the weight of the Princess of Wales, an attack on the Prime Minister by a junior bishop in the Church of England, a house fire in Cardiff, and the discovery of a woman's body in South London.
The inquiry into Puddephat's murder did not feature at all.
She wondered if there had been some procedural delay in charging Theo Sykes.
Or perhaps police press officers did not work at weekends?
She must check with Tracey.
She remembered she had agreed to go and see a movie with him that evening.
The original purpose of the meeting — to discuss her discoveries in Oxford, and ask his advice on what to do next — had been overtaken by events, but she had nothing else to do that evening, and Tracey was usually good company.
She looked at the clock.
Saturday was the one day on which he seemed to arrive early at the Herald office, but she doubted whether he would have got there yet.
She made a mental note to ring him  later.
She took a couple of cookery books from a shelf in the kitchen, and sat down at the dining-table to look through them.
She had invited several friends to lunch the next day, and she had given no thought to what to cook.
She was writing out a shopping-list when the phone rang.
It was Tracey.
‘About tonight,’ he said.
‘I suppose you won't want to see me now your little mystery's been cleared up?’
Loretta knew that tone of voice.
Tracey was in one of his self-pitying moods, and expected her to do something about it.
These depressions were usually connected with his job; she guessed he was still irritated by his wasted trip to Glasgow and consequent lack of a story for the next day's paper.
Saturday was the busiest day of the week at the Herald office, and Tracey hated having nothing to do while his colleagues got their stories on to copy paper, consulted lawyers and argued with sub-editors.
Nevertheless, her heart sank at the thought of spending an evening with him in his present state of mind, and she was tempted to invent a sore throat in order to get out of it.
But he had been very helpful over the Puddephat business, she admitted to herself, and his moods were unpredictable — he might be on top of the world by the time he arrived at the cinema.
‘I'm still keen if you are,’ she said brightly, pretending she had not noticed anything was amiss.
‘By the way, I've just been listening to the news.
There was nothing about Sykes being arrested.’
‘I don't think he has been arrested,’ Tracey said, diverted from his problems.
‘As far as I know, he went along voluntarily.
After some persuasion, that is.
But I expect they'll charge him some time today.
My contact at the Yard isn't working over the weekend, so I'm afraid I can't find out much for you.
If you keep listening to the radio, you'll probably hear any news as quickly as I do.
So where shall we meet tonight?
At the cinema?’
They agreed on a time, and Tracey rang off.
So Sykes had not actually been arrested, Loretta mused.
She must have misunderstood Tracey last night when he rang to say that Sykes had been taken away.
Or was it Bridget who had said something about an arrest?
She wished she knew more about police procedures.
If the police were sufficiently confident of their case against Sykes, surely they would not  hesitate to take him into custody?
Nevertheless, Tracey still seemed convinced that a charge was imminent.
Perhaps the question of whether or not Sykes had been arrested was only a technicality.
She made her way upstairs and ran a bath.
Lying in the water, she considered the evidence against Sykes again.
He had been in Paris at the time of the murder.
He had lied to the police as to his whereabouts, even before the body had been discovered.
He disliked the dead man, and stood to gain professionally by his death.
It still seemed far from conclusive.
Loretta wondered if the police had found other evidence about which Tracey had not been told.
That seemed the only possible explanation.
If they hadn't, she was far from happy.
What about the letter from the mysterious ‘R’?
And why had Puddephat's wife suddenly borrowed the keys to the flat in rue Roland only a couple of months before he was murdered there?
Then there was the business of the dead girl, Melanie something.
Loretta wished she knew more about that.
Climbing out of the bath, she dried herself, and dressed in black ski pants and a thick jersey knitted by her mother.
The weather had changed abruptly from unseasonably hot to unusually chilly, and most of her shopping needed to be done outdoors in Chapel market.
Then she wrote out a cheque in payment of the forgotten parking-ticket, put it in an envelope and went out.
Walking the half-mile to Chapel market, she turned over and over in her mind the many questions about the murder that remained unanswered.
The case against Sykes looked weaker by the minute.
As she made her way from stall to stall, Loretta remembered her promise to ring Bridget.
She would welcome her friend's view on the current state of the case.
She hurried her way through her shopping, returned to the flat, and rang Bridget's number.
There was no reply.
She piled a week's dirty clothes into the washing-machine, and sat down with a book.
At regular intervals, she listened to the news on the radio.
It was not until three o'clock that there were any developments.
By now, several more MPs were embroiled in the row over whether or not the Princess of Wales was dangerously underweight, and the death toll in the Cardiff fire had risen to four.
Puddephat's murder was the last item in the bulletin.
‘Thames  Valley police have confirmed that a man is helping with inquiries into the murder of Dr Hugh Puddephat, the English lecturer whose body was identified in Paris earlier this week,’ the newsreader reported.
‘The man, who has not been named, was taken to police headquarters in Oxford yesterday afternoon.
A senior French detective is on his way to question the man, a spokesman said.’
That was all.
Loretta guessed there were legal reasons for the terse nature of the item.
But at least it provided a possible explanation for the delay in charging Sykes.
She had quite forgotten that the French police were involved in the inquiry.
Even so, she would still like to mull the thing over with Bridget.
She dialled her friend's number again.
‘I've just seen the local paper,’ Bridget said when she answered.
‘It doesn't say much.’
Loretta passed on what she had learned from Tracey.
‘I'm not at all happy about it,’ she finished.
‘I see what you mean,’ Bridget said.
‘When Geoffrey rang last night, I assumed they'd got more on him than that.
But I don't see what you can do about it.
Even if you went to the police now, your story doesn't shed any light on who did it.
All you know is where it happened.’
‘That's true,’ said Loretta.
‘But I have this feeling I ought to do something.
I wish I could find out about R, for instance, but I can't think of a way to do it.
I wonder if there's any way of finding out more about the girl who killed herself — Melanie Gandell, that's her name.’
‘Couldn't Tracey help with that?’
Bridget asked.
‘Or perhaps I could find out something through faculty records.
Tell you what, I'll have a stab at that on Monday morning.
At least I'll be able to tell you where she came from.
Though I'm not sure how that helps you.’
‘I think it's a matter of stumbling around in the dark until we find a clue,’ Loretta said gratefully.
‘The other avenue I could try is a bit of research into Puddephat's wife.’
She told Bridget about Veronica's odd behaviour over the Paris flat.
‘But I haven't been able to think of an excuse for getting in touch with her,’ she admitted.
‘If you have any bright ideas, do let me know.’
Loretta felt more cheerful after her chat with Bridget, slightly less at the mercy of events.
Her next call was to Tracey.
‘Are you busy?’ she asked when she got through.
‘Quite,’ he said warily, sensing she was about to make a request of him.
‘I just wondered if you could look in the library for me’, she explained.
‘I've seen the articles filed under Puddephat's name, but I didn't look under Melanie Gandell.
There might be something in there I've missed.’
‘What's the point, Loretta?’
Tracey asked irritably.
‘The police have just confirmed they're holding Sykes.
It's only a matter of time before they charge him.’
‘Yes, I heard it on the radio,’ Loretta agreed.
‘But I'm still not happy.
Come on, John, humour me.
It'll only take you five minutes.’
Reluctantly, Tracey gave in.
If he found anything of interest, he said, he would bring photocopies with him to the cinema.
Loretta was paying for the tickets at the cash desk when she felt a hand on her shoulder.
She turned, and found Tracey beaming at her.
‘Loretta,’ he said affably.
‘I hope I haven't kept you waiting.’
In contrast to the last time she had spoken to him, his mood seem positively sunny.
She soon found out why.
‘I'm off to Berlin tomorrow,’ he explained.
‘Great story.
It's so good, I can't even tell you about it.
So I mustn't get to bed too late.
And by the way, here are your cuttings.
I still think you're wasting your time.
I should be charging you for all this research.’
Loretta held up the tickets.
‘That's why these are on me,’ she said.
‘I'm afraid I can't afford professional rates.’
Tracey laughed, and put his hand under her elbow to guide her into the cinema.
As he turned towards the smokers' seats, Loretta stopped and headed in the opposite direction.
‘Come on, Loretta,’ Tracey complained.
‘I can't sit through a whole film without a cigarette.’
Loretta was unmoved.
It was an argument they had had before, and one which she invariably won.
Grumbling, Tracey followed her to the non-smokers' seats.
There was no time to look at the cuttings he had given her, and Loretta put the envelope in her bag.
For the next two hours she was absorbed in the film, which turned out to be as good as she had hoped.
Tracey, on the other hand, dit not like it; they had an amicable disagreement about its merits on the way to a nearby pub.
I can't stay long,’ he warned her as she carried their drinks to the table where he was sitting.
‘But I can give you a lift home.
My car's just round the corner.’
Loretta was surprised and touched.
‘There's no need to do that,’ she protested.
‘It's still quite early.
I can take the underground.
It's miles out of your way, and you need an early night.’
‘I thought you might ask me to stay,’ Tracey said hopefully, instantly dispelling her feeling of gratitude.
‘We are still married, after all.
And we're both at a loose end.
Come on, Laura for old times’ sake.
'He cast her a look which, she guessed, was calculated to suggest a combination of nostalgia and affection.
It didn't work.
‘We agreed when we separated that we wouldn't behave like this,’ Loretta replied in aggrieved tones.
It was just like Tracey to take unfair advantage of her attempts to remain on friendly terms with him.
She dashed off her orange juice, and stood up.
‘The best thing you can do is go home and tuck yourself up with a hot-water bottle,’ she advised, pulling on her coat.
‘I suppose your feminist friends would be proud of you,’ Tracey said sarcastically.
‘How to get rid of your unwanted husband in one easy lesson.
And after all the running around I've done for you in the last couple of days.
You've got no heart, that's your trouble, Loretta.
If anything happens to me in Berlin, I just hope you'll be sorry.’
Loretta sighed.
‘Don't be such a baby,’ she said witheringly.
‘It'll probably be a wild goose chase, just like your trip to Glasgow.’
Having delivered this Parthian shot, she stalked off to find a taxi home.
Sunday's papers, including the Sunday Herald, reported that an unidentified man was still being questioned in connection with Puddephat's murder.
No developments were reported on LBC that morning, and Loretta had to switch the radio off when her friends arrived for lunch.
After the meal, someone suggested a walk on Hampstead Heath, and that turned into tea at a small patisserie close to where Loretta had parked her  car.
It was after six when she got home and started clearing up the detritus of lunch.
When she had finished, she sat down at the kitchen table with the envelope Tracey had given her the night before.
Inside, there were four sheets of paper, each of them a photocopy of a newspaper cutting.
Three were familiar; she recognized the Sun headline, ‘Warning For Death-case Egghead’, and the more subdued headlines from the Observer and the Guardian.
Loretta guessed Tracey had simply copied the entire contents of the file on the dead girl.
For a moment, she thought she had wasted his time.
Then she saw that the last cutting was new to her.
It was a long report of the inquest on Melanie Gandell which had appeared in the Daily Telegraph.
The story, which mentioned Puddephat by name, should have appeared in his file, but she had been right to doubt the efficiency of the Herald's library staff.
Glancing down the columns, she immediately discovered some new information: Puddephat had been accompanied at the inquest by his wife, she learned with surprise.
Surely they had been separated, and on bad terms, by the time of the inquest?
But the paragraph that interested her most concerned Melanie Gandell herself.
‘Formal evidence of identification was given by the dead girl's aunt, Mrs Lucretia Grant, who travelled to the inquest from her home in Herefordshire,’ the story said.
‘Miss Gandell's parents died in an air crash in 1968, when she was five.
She was an only child.
Her mother was the talented young painter, Livia Gandell.’
Poor Melanie, Loretta thought to herself.
The girl's short life had been dogged by tragedy.
She felt a surge of anger towards Hugh Puddephat.
How could a man in his position take advantage of so vulnerable a creature as Melanie Gandell?
She read the paragraph again.
She wished she knew more about painting; the name of Melanie's mother meant nothing to her.
But at least she now had the name of Melanie's aunt.
It was a nuisance that the Telegraph was so vague about her address — she wasn't even sure whether Herefordshire still existed as a county — but perhaps Bridget would have more exact details for her next day.
And Melanie's aunt might be important if Loretta was going to pursue this line of inquiry: presumably it was she who had brought up the girl after her parents' death in the plane  crash.
Not that Loretta had yet come up with an excuse to contact Mrs Grant, even if she acquired a proper address, but that problem could wait until after she spoke to Bridget.
With that thought, she returned the cuttings to their envelope and put it away in a drawer of her desk.
There had been no more news about the murder inquiry by the time Loretta arrived at her office on Monday morning.
She was tied up until lunch with yet another department meeting but, after a sandwich in the refectory, found herself with a clear afternoon.
Returning to her office, she wondered if she should phone Bridget, but decided to leave it until later in the day: the first-years would be arriving at Bridget's college in the middle of the week, and her friend would be as tied up as Loretta had been the week before.
Just before five, it occurred to her that Bridget might have forgotten her promise to check Melanie Gandell's address, and she dialled the number of her college rooms.
She found Bridget in a state of great agitation.
‘I was just going to ring you,’ she said.
‘You were absolutely right.
Theo Sykes didn't do it.
Geoffrey's just been telling me all about it.
The police have made a dreadful mess of it.
Poor Theo, he's escaped a murder charge, but his career here is finished.’
‘What's happened?’ asked Loretta impatiently.
‘Well,’ said Bridget, ‘they held him all weekend, and tried everything they could think of to make him confess.
He didn't.
But he went on refusing to say anything at all about what he'd been doing in Paris.
Then, last night, the master's wife came home after a weekend away.
She went on Friday morning, you see, so she'd no idea Sykes had been taken in.
As soon as she found out what had happened, she went straight to the police and told them everything.
She's been having an affair with Theo Sykes, and it turns out they were in Paris together at the time Puddephat was murdered.
She told them this in confidence, because the master didn't know — he suspected, apparently, which explains why he went off Theo, but they'd always denied it.
She gave them the name of the hotel where they'd stayed, the lot.
Of course, they had to let him go.
Then this morning, the police were all over the college again and, by  lunchtime, the master knew.
Geoffrey says nobody knows whether they let it out accidentally, or were getting their own back on Sykes for wasting a whole weekend.
But there was a terrible scene between the master and Theo Sykes.
Apparently you could hear them shouting all round the college.
And poor old Mary Morris, how must she feel?
Geoffrey saw her put a couple of suitcases in her car and drive off.
So it looks as if she's left the master, as least for the time being.’
‘Trust John to be out of the country,’ Loretta said wistfully.
‘He was beastly to me on Saturday night, and it would give me great pleasure to tell him I was right all along.
Oh, dear,’ she added, a new thought striking her, ‘it doesn't give one great confidence in the police, does it?’
‘It certainly doesn't,’ said Bridget.
‘And, if you want to carry on looking into it yourself, I've got Melanie Gandell's address for you.
Have you got a piece of paper?’
Loretta had.
‘It's a village in Somerset.
A place called Buckland Dinham.’
She spelled it out for Loretta.
‘The actual address is Cherry Cottage.
There didn't seem to be a phone number.
Our records are not brilliant, I'm afraid.’
‘That's odd,’ said Loretta.
‘I've been looking through the cuttings on the inquest again, and she was identified by an aunt who lived in Herefordshire.’
‘Perhaps she moved just before Melanie died,’ Bridget suggested.
‘As I was saying, the administrative people in the English faculty are not particularly efficient.
Didn't the newspaper give the aunt's full address?’
‘Unfortunately not,’ said Loretta.
‘And her surname is Grant — there must be thousands of people with that name in the county.
Perhaps I should concentrate on Somerset first.
Assuming Melanie's aunt did move from Cherry Cottage, she may have left a forwarding address with the new owners.’
‘Let me know if I can help,’ Bridget offered.
‘I'm rather busy during the week, but things will calm down by the weekend.’
Loretta thanked her.
‘I'll be in touch,’ she said.
‘First of all, I need to sit down and work out a plan of campaign.’
8
Loretta looked at her watch.
It was ten past five.
She had agreed to have a drink with the deputy head of the English department after work, which gave her a bit of time.
Taking a clean sheet of A4 paper out of a drawer, she divided it into three vertical columns.
At the top of the first, she wrote ‘Melanie Gandell’.
In the second column, she filled in the address Bridget had just given her — Cherry Cottage, Buckland Dinham, Somerset.
The third column she left blank.
Underneath Melanie's name in the first column, she wrote ‘Lucretia Grant’.
It was an odd combination of names, she reflected; an unhappy juxtaposition of the unusual and the mundane.
In the second column, she wrote the word ‘Herefordshire’ with a question mark.
She returned to the first column.
‘Veronica Puddephat’, she wrote, and put her pen down.
She was horribly short on even the most basic information about the people she wanted to speak to.
The third column, which she had reserved for telephone numbers, was so far entirely blank.
She wondered how she could fill in some of the gaps.
If Melanie's aunt had moved from Cherry Cottage, the phone number would no longer be listed under Grant.
There was no way of knowing who lived there now.
But wait a minute…what if the cottage had belonged to Melanie herself?
Been left to her, perhaps, by her parents?
It was perfectly possible that one of Melanie's relatives — a cousin, maybe — had inherited it.
She picked up the phone and dialled Directory Enquiries.
‘Somerset,’ she told the operator.
‘It's a village called Buckland Dinham.
The name is Gandell.
G-A-N-D-E-L-L.
No, I'm sorry, I don't know the initial.’
She drew a blank.
There were no Gandells at all in the directory that included the village.
As a long shot — just in case Lucretia Grant owned two homes — she also checked the name of Grant.
Still no luck.
The column for telephone numbers of Melanie's family would have to remain empty for the time being.
She moved on to Puddephat's wife.
Andrew Walker was bound to have Veronica's address and telephone number but a request for them, so soon after she had been asking questions about the woman's husband, might well arouse his suspicions.
There must be another way of finding out.
She thought back to Puddephat's Who's Who entry.
She was pretty sure the only address listed was that of his college.
That was no help.
But she had only checked in a very recent volume.
What if she were to look in earlier editions?
She congratulated herself on her improving powers of deduction.
Only a few weeks ago, she would have been stumped by now.
If the college library stocked Who's Who, her task would be easy.
A quick phone call confirmed that it did.
A few minutes later, she was standing in front of a shelf stacked with yearly editions of the book.
At random, she lifted down the volume for 1977.
She quickly found Puddephat, William Hugh.
His address that year was the Red House, Hallborough, Oxon.
There was also a telephone number.
Loretta noted both in the back of her diary, and put the book back.
She checked 1980.
The address remained the same.
She tried 1981.
The only address shown was that of the college.
The marriage must have broken up some time in 1980.
She hoped Veronica Puddephat had not moved out of the Red House after the separation.
Feeling pleased with herself, Loretta went back to her office.
She filled in the columns next to Veronica's name, and stared thoughtfully at the piece of paper.
All she needed now was an excuse to contact her.
She was disappointed to find that nothing came immediately to mind.
How much easier it would be if she were a newspaper reporter, like Tracey, she thought.
It was the perfect excuse for ringing up complete strangers and asking all sort of personal questions.
But did she dare impersonate a journalist?
No, she didn't.
It would only take one phone call to blow her cover.
She wondered if  she could stage an apparently accidental meeting with Veronica.
She could not think of any means of doing it without involving Andrew.
She was still no further forward.
Perhaps the best course was simply to come clean — to explain how she came to be involved in the case, and enlist Veronica's help?
Loretta was not enthusiastic.
It would mean putting herself in the hands of a complete stranger, a stranger who might even be involved in Puddephat's murder.
After all, Veronica's request to use the flat in rue Roland two months before the murder, and the odd business with the keys afterwards, remained unexplained.
Now there was an idea!
Veronica had been to the flat: wasn't it possible she might have left something behind which Loretta could claim to have found?
A moment's thought told her it wasn't.
Andrew was not even sure that Veronica had used the flat.
It sounded as if her plans had changed at the last minute and, embarrassed by all the trouble Andrew had gone to on her behalf, she had taken the easy way out by returning the keys without a message.
But what about Puddephat himself?
How about telling Veronica she had found something in rue Roland which belonged to her husband, and asking if she could return it?
That was a much better plan.
She mulled over what the object might be.
She remembered the book she had found in the flat, but rejected it.
It would have to be something of value to justify her going to all this trouble.
A wallet?
But a wallet would contain all sorts of personal items which she couldn't get hold of.
The same went for a diary, or an address book.
Then she saw the major snag with the whole idea.
The point was that she — and the killer-were the only people who knew Puddephat had been to the flat at all.
If she went to Veronica with this story, she might as well tell her the complete truth.
It was back to square one.
She wondered if she should consult Bridget.
After all, Bridget had put her in touch with Geoffrey, and Geoffrey had got her into Puddephat's rooms.
Loretta pushed her hair back from her face with a cluck of impatience.
What an idiot she was!
What was wrong with the excuse she had used to Geoffrey: that she was trying to retrieve a set of her own notes from Puddephat.
There was no reason why she should know that Veronica was separated  from her husband.
She could simply ring Veronica — no, it would be better to go and see her — and explain her supposed problem.
If she had come all the way from London, the woman was hardly likely to turn her away.
It was simple!
How soon could she do it?
Loretta took out her diary, and looked at her schedule for the week.
She could just about manage Thursday, she thought.
But that was no good — what if Veronica worked?
It would be safer to try over a weekend.
Saturday looked clear.
It would also be better from the point of view of traffic — she hadn't yet looked up Hallborough on a map, but she guessed she would need her car to get to it.
It wasn't until Thursday that it occurred to Loretta that if she was going near Oxford, she might as well call in on Bridget.
She might even be able to stay at her friend's house on Saturday night.
That evening, she rang Bridget at home, and explained what she was up to.
She was very welcome to stay on Saturday night, Bridget said, although she herself was going to the Oxford Playhouse.
‘Why don't you stay Sunday as well?’
Bridget asked.
‘I'm having a little party for my tutees.
Geoffrey will be there as well, and a couple of my postgraduates.’
Loretta was able to refuse, mindful of a 10 a.m. lecture on Monday, when Bridget added: ‘I'll tell you who else is going to be there.
The mysterious R. At least, it turns out it isn't R.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Loretta interrupted.
‘I'm not following this.’
Bridget knew how important it was to find the author of the letter.
Why hadn't she got in touch with Loretta straight away?
It didn't make sense.
‘His real name is Jamie Baird,’ Bridget explained patiently.
‘He's in his second year, and Puddephat was his tutor last year.
Although the second- and third-years don't officially come back until next week, Puddephat's tutees have been called back early so they can be allocated to new people quickly.
I've got him.
The faculty's worried about the effect on their studies, you see.
I've taken three of them, and one of them is this Jamie Baird.
The name meant nothing to me, of course, but I recognized him as soon as he walked into my room this morning.
I realized then that we'd been barking up  the wrong tree.’
Loretta's baffled silence prompted Bridget to a further attempt at elucidation.
‘Remember the photo, the one you found in Puddephat's rooms?
And we thought the boy in it was R?
Well, he isn't.
He's called Jamie Baird.
Now d'you see?’
‘But why didn't you tell me sooner?’
Loretta demanded.
‘Even if this boy, Jamie, didn't write the letter, he might know who did.
Who R is, I mean.
I must talk to him!’
‘So come to my party on Sunday,’ Bridget said.
‘He'll be there.
Though I don't know why you think he's so important, now we've discovered he isn't R. Just because he was Puddephat's tutee, it doesn't mean he knew him terribly well.
We all have a couple of dozen tutees — surely you're not planning to interrogate every one of Puddephat's?’
‘Of course not,’ Loretta said impatiently.
‘You're forgetting where we found the photograph.
It was hidden at the bottom of a drawer, remember.
You can't tell me there isn't something odd about that.
Either Jamie Baird was particularly close to Puddephat, or Puddephat wanted him to be.
That's what makes Jamie worth seeing.
This is a terrific piece of luck, Bridget.’
‘I'm not convinced,’ Bridget said.
‘There could be other explanations for the photograph.
Perhaps Jamie dropped it on a visit to Puddephat's rooms, and Puddephat put it in a drawer until he saw him again.
But I'm not trying to dampen your enthusiasm.
What time shall I expect you on Saturday?’
Two letters were lying in the hall when Loretta got up on Saturday.
She studied the envelopes as she wandered into the kitchen to make breakfast.
One contained the proofs of an article she had written for an academic journal; she scanned the contents of the envelope briefly and pinned it to her noticeboard to be dealt with on her return from Oxford.
It took her a moment to recognize the handwriting on the second envelope and when she did, she put it down while she plugged in the kettle and took a croissant from the breadbin.
She had a good idea of what the envelope would contain, and she was already feeling faintly irritated.
She placed the croissant under the grill, and sat down to open the letter.
It was written on House of Commons notepaper, and folded around a duplicated sheet of paper.
‘Dear Loretta,’ she read, ‘I've just come back from an official trip to Italy, and I squeezed in a visit to a peace camp while I was there.
I thought the enclosed would interest you.’
Unfolding the notice, she found it was a call to Italian women to demonstrate at the NATO base where the camp had been set up.
She turned back to the letter.
The rest of the message consisted of a single word: ‘Dinner?’
She raised her eyebrows.
Last weekend Tracey had tried to resurrect his relationship with her, now it was Anthony Swan.
You had to give Anthony top marks for persistence, she thought to herself.
She had told him in no uncertain terms, on more than one occasion, that she wanted no more to do with him.
Yet every six months or so he found another excuse to get in touch with her.
She supposed you had to be pretty thick-skinned to be a Member of Parliament.
She screwed up the letter and dropped it into the kitchen bin.
She had not replied to any of his earlier messages, and she would not respond to this one.
She knew that if she kept the note, she might be tempted.
She had liked Anthony a great deal and, at this distance in time, the attractions of her affair with him were easier to remember than the drawbacks.
The latter had included, she reminded herself sternly, his insistence on secrecy, her guilt at deceiving his wife, and the discovery that he was simultaneously conducting two other clandestine affairs.
She was glad she had a busy weekend in front of her, and little time to brood.
An hour later, she climbed into her Panda and set off for Oxford.
Hallborough was five miles north-west of the city, and she thought she should be there by noon.
It was a beautiful autumn day, clear and cold, and she swept along the M40 listening to a tape of Grace Jones on the cassette player.
As she approached the Princes Risborough turn-off, and the section of the road which cuts through high chalk cliffs, she changed the tape for a glorious version of Tosca.
She was filled with a sense of well-being which augured well, she thought, for the success of her journey.
Hallborough turned out to be a picturesque Cotswold village with one main street.
Loretta drove slowly, peering from side to side for a glimpse of the Red House.
If it lived up to its  name, she thought, it should stick out like a sore thumb among the warm, yellowish stone of the other buildings.
She saw three public houses and a shop selling papers, but nothing that looked a likely candidate.
The houses began to peter out, and eventually stopped.
Loretta decided she had gone far enough, and used the beginning of a farm track to turn the car in.
Back in the village, she pulled up outside the paper shop, which turned out to double as a general store, and went in.
Her friendly enquiry as to the whereabouts of the Red House was met by a hostile stare from the woman behind the counter.
Nonplussed, Loretta explained that she had driven right through the village without finding it.
The expression of the shop assistant was making her most uncomfortable.
Finally, the woman appeared to relent.
The house, she admitted grudgingly, could be found by driving through the village and taking a narrow turning to the left.
Loretta would be able to recognize the road by the high hedges which flanked it.
She thanked the woman and returned to her car.
For a fleeting moment, she wondered if the woman might have given her deliberately wrong directions but, shrugging the thought away, she started the car and turned back in the direction from which she had just come.
About two hundred yards from the village, she spotted the turning.
The road was wide enough for only one vehicle at a time, and she hoped she wouldn't meet another car.
The tall hedge to her left suddenly gave way to a low brick wall, and she found herself driving past the Red House.
Her assumption had been correct: its identity was as apparent from the colour of the bricks as from the nameplate on the gate.
She stopped, then reversed back a few feet until she could turn into the open gateway.
Her heart leaped into her mouth, and she paused.
It was one thing imagining the scene from the comfort of her London flat but quite another to find herself going through with it.
It occurred to her that she didn't even know that it was Veronica's house; why on earth hadn't she checked Directory Enquiries to make sure she was still living there?
She heard the sound of another car behind her, and saw that she was blocking the narrow road.
She turned into the drive of the Red House, and brought the car to a halt close to the front door.
The house was more modern than she had expected — at a guess, she thought it must have been built between the wars.
It was large and double-fronted, and conspicuously well kept.
The front door was painted a shiny black, and the brass knocker gleamed spotlessly.
There was no sign of a bell.
Loretta got out of her car, walked up to the door, lifted the knocker and rapped timidly.
Disliking the tentative sound she had made, she knocked again more forcefully.
She listened intently for signs of life, but heard nothing.
She stepped back and looked over the house.
The windows stared blankly back at her.
It occurred to her for the first time that there was no sign of a car, apart from her own.
It seemed unlikely that anyone would choose to live in this out-of-the-way place without some form of transport — if she hadn't been so nervous, that would have occurred to her earlier, she thought wryly.
She concluded that Veronica Puddephat, if this was indeed her house, was out.
She got back into her car, backed carefully out of the drive, and headed for Hallborough again.
She spotted a telephone kiosk, and stopped to look in the telephone directory.
There wasn't one, and the phone was out of order except for emergency calls.
Loretta swore under her breath.
After her reception in the village store, she was not keen to go back with further questions to establish that Veronica still lived in the Red House.
As she left the phone box, she looked up and down the street for other shops.
There were none to be seen.
All she was left with were the three pubs.
The nearest, the Queen's Head, was very much a brewery's idea of what a traditional English pub should look like.
Its sign consisted of a portrait of a woman's head, styled in what she guessed was intended to be Tudor fashion.
It might be any of the wives of Henry VIII, or Elizabeth I, or even Mary I. There were coaching lamps on either side of the main door, and uncomfortable rustic tables in front of the windows.
On the other hand, it did have a sign saying ‘bar-food’, and Loretta realized she was quite hungry.
She went inside, and was relieved to discover she was one of the first customers.
She never felt entirely at ease on her own in pubs.
Restaurants she didn't mind, but in pubs she always felt too much at the mercy of predatory men.
Here, however, she was alone apart from a couple of men seated on stools next to the bar, and a yellow Labrador slumbering at their feet.
A handwritten menu stood on the bar.
She studied it while waiting for someone to appear and serve her.
She rejected the beef curry with rice as too much of an unknown quantity — full of apples and curry powder she suspected — and decided on the steak and kidney pie with chips.
Nobody could do very much to a steak and kidney pie, she thought.
A barmaid appeared, a woman in her mid-twenties with streaked blonde hair and tight jeans.
Loretta gave her order, intending to tag her question about Veronica Puddephat on the end, but was baulked by the woman's suggestive banter with the two men seated at the bar.
Taking her glass of wine to a table near the fire, she decided the question could wait until her food turned up.
The fire, which turned out to be the real thing and not the gas imitation she feared, gave out a welcoming warmth.
Loretta took the Guardian from her bag and settled down to read it.
She paid little attention when the door opened, and two more customers came in.
It was only when they reached the bar and addressed the barmaid that Loretta began to take notice.
‘Mornin', love.
Two pints of your best, and have one yourself,’ one of them said in a loud voice.
As the woman behind the bar began to pull the pints, he went on.
‘Wonder if you can help us, love.
We're looking for a Mrs Puddephat, lady who lives in the big red house down the road.
Seems to have been some sort of mix-up.
My mate and I've come all the way from London to see her, and she seems to have gone out.’
‘Friends of hers, are you?’ asked the barmaid.
‘That's right,’ agreed the man in the raincoat.
‘There's been some sort of misunderstanding, that's all it is.
You don't happen to have seen her, do you?’
To his obvious surprise, the barmaid failed to rise to these friendly overtures.
‘Some mistake,’ the woman said, plonking the second pint down on the bar.
‘Gone to Spain for a couple of weeks, she has.
P'raps she forgot you were coming?
That'll be one pound sixty-eight.’
She put the money in the till, walked to the other end of the bar, and began ostentatiously polishing glasses.
The two newcomers exchanged glances, and picked up  their beer.
After a few half-hearted sips, one of them made a great show of looking at his watch, and put his glass down.
‘Well, looks like we've had a wasted trip,’ he said with patently false bonhomie.
‘Might as well get back on the road.
Thanks, miss.’
The two men left, closing the door noisily behind them.
‘Here, Sandra,’ said one of the regulars sitting at the bar, ‘first I've heard about Mrs P. going off to Spain.
Seems a bit queer, with the body only just being found, an’ all that.
You sure that's where she's gone?’
' 'Course not,’ said Sandra, a huge smile on her face.
‘She hasn't gone anywhere, not to my knowledge, anyway.
I saw her in the paper shop this morning.
I'm just sick of reporters tramping in and out, wanting to know her business.
He must be the tenth this week.
You can tell 'em a mile off.
They all wear those macs, and flash their money about.
Bloody vultures.’
Loretta breathed a hug sigh of relief.
She had been quite taken in by Sandra's invention.
It also explained the hostility her questions about the Red House had aroused.
It had not occurred to her that the newspapers might still be on the trail of Puddephat's widow.
Now that she started to think about it, she could guess what they were after.
‘Murdered Don: Tragic Wife Speaks’, perhaps.
Or even ‘My Heartbreak, By Peer's Daughter’.
She applauded the barmaid's methods of getting rid of them.
As a bonus, she had got the information she needed without having to ask for it.
She put down her newspaper as Sandra brought over the steak and kidney pie.
It looked all right, although Loretta thought the china dish it came in was a bit unnecessary.
Much cheered, she bit into the first forkful.
The crust was piping hot, and the innards lukewarm.
A microwave oven, Loretta guessed.
She was on the verge of complaining to the barmaid, but decided that she was not all that hungry after all, and at least the chips were hot.
They would see her through until the evening.
When she had finished eating, she wondered what to do next.
She might as well try Veronica's house again, although she was disturbed to find that she was on the same track as  hordes of newspaper reporters.
Being pestered by the press was hardly likely to put Veronica in the mood for unexpected visitors.
But it could not be helped.
She returned to her car, and drove back to the Red House.
As she drew abreast of the drive, she saw that a car was parked next to the front door.
Two heads swivelled to peer at her, and she recognized the reporters from the pub.
She accelerated hastily, and drove on.
She was amazed by the men's persistence.
Presumably the house was still empty, and they were staking it out.
Loretta decided she would have to abandon her attempt to see Veronica for the rest of the day.
As soon as she could find a convenient place to do so, she turned the car and headed back towards Hallborough.
As she passed Veronica's house, she noticed that one of the men had got out of the green Maestro and was making his way round the back of the building.
Surely they wouldn't go so far as to break in?
She spotted the out-of-order phone box and drew up beside it.
She had never before contacted any of the emergency services, and she was surprised by how long the operator took to put her through to the police.
Without giving her name, she supplied them with Veronica's address, and the information that she had just seen two men acting suspiciously in the garden.
A patrol car would be sent to the house immediately, a policeman said.
Loretta got back into her car and drove off towards Oxford.
She hoped the police would give the two journalists the hard time they deserved.
She was woken the next morning by Bridget, who appeared in her room carrying a cup of tea and a copy of the Sunday Herald.
‘Good play?’,
Loretta enquired.
She had gone to bed by the time Bridget returned from her trip to the theatre the night before.
‘So-so,’ said Bridget.
‘I had my doubts about the woman who played Ophelia.
She was too healthy for my liking.
But look at this.
Your husband's been having a busy week.’
She passed Loretta the paper.
‘I heard him being interviewed on the news a few minutes ago,’ Bridget added.
‘Talk about a dog with two tails.’
Tracey's picture byline glared at Loretta from the front page; had he really intended to look so fierce, she wondered, or was it an attempt to hide his embarrassment?
‘Top East German Spy Exposed’, the headline read.
So that was what he'd been up to in Berlin, Loretta thought.
No wonder he hadn't been keen to tell her about it.
He was well aware of her view that spy stories were Boy's Own Paper stuff, not worthy of a moment's serious attention.
‘The Sunday Herald has obtained evidence that a British diplomat working in our consulate in West Berlin is a spy,’ the article began.
It went on to describe Tracey's confrontation with the unfortunate man, and his subsequent disappearance, presumably over the border into East Germany.
‘Defence sources in Britain say the man may have done incalculable damage to the NATO alliance before his exposure last week,’ Loretta read.
There was even a blurred picture of the man shutting the door in the face of the Herald photographer.
‘Why bother?’
Loretta asked Bridget, shaking her head.
‘We do it, they do it, they're just a bunch of public schoolboys playing games.
And I'd like to know how John got hold of the story in the first place.
Talk about trial by newspaper.
I just hope his source is more reliable than the Yard chap who told him confidentially that Theo Sykes killed Puddephat.’
‘Talking of Puddephat, there's an article about him on page five,’ Bridget said.
‘But I don't think there's anything in it that we didn't know already.’
Loretta turned the page.
‘Nice picture of the college,’ she remarked.
‘Oh, so that's what Puddephat looked like.’
A close-up of Puddephat's head was inset into the main picture.
It showed a wide face, the cheeks slightly puffy — from over-indulgence of some sort?
Loretta wondered.
The hair was dark and longish, falling forward over one eye.
‘That's a rather flattering picture of him,’ Bridget said, looking over Loretta's shoulder.
‘He usually looked a bit seedier than that.’
‘You're right,’ said Loretta, a moment later.
‘There's nothing new here.
I'll have to try Veronica again this afternoon.
I just hope she's in this time.’
Anxious not to interrupt Veronica's Sunday lunch, Loretta waited until three to set off for Hallborough.
On the way, she ran through the speech she had prepared in her mind.
It wasn't as convincing as she'd like, but it would have to do.
Anyway, there was no guarantee that she would find Veronica in.
When she arrived at the Red House, a large Citroën was parked at the top of the short drive.
It was empty, and there was no other car in sight.
Loretta parked neatly behind it, and walked nervously to the front door.
She knocked twice.
Almost at once, she heard footsteps.
The door opened very slightly, and a woman peered out.
‘Mrs Puddephat?’, enquired Loretta.
‘If you're a reporter, you can just go away!’ the woman said peevishly.
Loretta was horrified.
‘I'm not, really I'm not,’ she said urgently.
‘I am sorry to bother you, and I'm honestly not from a newspaper.’
Was the woman going to shut the door in her face?
‘Who are you then?’ she asked, opening the door a fraction wider.
Her tone had softened slightly.
‘My name's Loretta Lawson, and I lecture in English at London University,’ Loretta explained.
‘I came to see you about some notes I sent your husband.
I know it's a terrible time for me to turn up on your doorstep, but I only want to speak to you for a moment.
Please,’ she added.
The woman looked her over.
‘You don't look like a reporter,’ she admitted.
‘I suppose you'd better come in.’
She stood back, allowing Loretta to step into a wide hall.
‘This way.’
Loretta followed her into a spacious drawing-room, and seated herself in a chair to one side of the tiled fireplace, while Veronica took the chair opposite.
‘Now, how can I help you?’ she asked.
Loretta launched into her story, at the same time covertly taking stock of Hugh Puddephat's widow.
Veronica was in her mid-thirties, she guessed, and her clothes were good rather than fashionable.
Her dark blonde hair was cut into a short, feathery style, which had been popular a few years ago.
All in all, her appearance was what would be described as ‘classic’ by the type of women's magazines read by Loretta's mother.
The one exception was her glasses, whose frames were a startling pink — perhaps an attempt to liven up her image?
If so, it hadn't quite worked.
When Loretta stopped speaking, Veronica remained silent for a minute.
Then she took a deep breath.
‘How did you get this address?’ she asked.
Loretta was prepared.
‘I rang the college, but they weren't much help.
They said everything to do with your husband was in the hands of the police.
I'm afraid I persuaded the woman I spoke to to give me this address.
Don't blame her, it's my fault for pressing her.’
‘I see,’ Veronica said.
‘You obviously didn't realize I was separated from my husband?’
Loretta had the grace to feel uncomfortable, if not for the right reasons.
‘I didn't,’ she mumbled.
‘I'm very sorry.
If I'd known…’
She let the rest of the sentence trail off.
‘I'm afraid you've had a wasted trip,’ Veronica said.
Her tone was surprisingly sympathetic.
Loretta wondered what to do next.
The only thing she could think of was a request to use the lavatory, but that would tell her little beyond the colour of Veronica's bathroom suite.
Unwittingly, Veronica came to the rescue.
‘The least I can do is offer you some tea before you set off,’ she said.
‘Do you prefer China or Indian?’
‘Indian please,’ Loretta said gratefully.
While Veronica was absent, presumably in the kitchen, Loretta looked about her.
Most of the furniture was mahogany, and antique.
An upright piano stood against one wall, a row of framed photographs on top of it.
Loretta didn't dare go over and examine them.
The upkeep of such a house would require a substantial income, she thought to herself; she remembered that Veronica came from a wealthy family.
At that moment, Veronica returned, setting a tray on a small table which she moved in front of the fire.
She smiled brightly at Loretta and apologized for the lack of food in the house.
‘All I've got are these,’ she said, waving one ringed hand towards a plate of Bakewell tarts.
‘And I can't claim to have made them myself.’
She spoke as if she were admitting to a considerable lapse of manners on her part.
Loretta, who could not remember when she had last baked a cake, was quite taken aback.
‘You've told me who you are,’ Veronica continued, ‘so I ought to introduce myself properly.
My name's Veronica.
Some people shorten it to Ron, my husband mainly, but I can't say I like it.
Ron Puddephat always sounds like the manager of a second-division football club to me.’
The cup and saucer rattled in Loretta's hand.
She was  astonished by her own stupidity.
It was hard to see why such an obvious solution to R's identity had never occurred to her.
She perched her cup on the edge of the table, thinking hard.
What on earth had Hugh Puddephat done to provoke such passionate hatred in this well-mannered woman?
That was only one of dozens of questions she wanted to ask Veronica.
But she must proceed carefully.
Apart from anything else, Veronica — as author of the letter — must now be a prime suspect.
Loretta's attempt to work out her next move was interrupted by Veronica's voice.
‘What sort of things do you teach?’ she queried.
‘I do envy you.
I used to think about an academic career when I was a student.
That was before I got married, of course.’
She spoke as though the two things were entirely incompatible.
‘I was very fond of Jane Austen and Fanny Burney at one time,’ she went on.
‘But then, of course, I met Hugh.’
At one of his lectures on Lawrence, Loretta recalled, thinking back to her afternoon in the Herald library.
She couldn't help thinking that Austen was a lot more up Veronica's street than Lawrence.
Perhaps the marriage had been an attraction of opposites.
She wondered which parts of her own teaching schedule might interest Veronica.
‘I'm teaching a course on Virginia Woolf at the moment,’ she hazarded.
‘That's with the first-years.’
‘Oh, To The Lighthouse,’ Veronica said with a marked lack of interest.
‘I never really got anywhere with her.’
‘Next term I'm going to be teaching part of a course on the influence of gender on style,’ Loretta added, again to little response.
‘And I'm writing a book on Edith Wharton,’ she said desperately, doubting whether Veronica would have heard of her.
But she had scored an unexpected success.
‘Edith Wharton,’ Veronica repeated in reverential tones.
‘Do you know, The House of Mirth is my favourite book.
Do tell me all about it.’
It was a way of gaining Veronica's confidence, Loretta thought, launching into a description of the work she'd done so far.
She wondered when it would be safe to steer the conversation back to Veronica.
‘Did you ever think about doing postgraduate work?’ she asked, when there seemed to be a suitable lull.
‘Well, no, not after Hugh and I became engaged,’ Veronica said awkwardly.
‘And I don't suppose I would have been bright enough.’
Oh! thought Loretta.
How women lack self-confidence!
It was rare to hear a man expressing such views.
She was willing to bet Hugh Puddephat had never suffered similar doubts.
Suddenly Veronica's eyes lit up, and she leaned forward.
‘But I have been thinking about taking a course,’ she said.
‘I haven't told anyone else yet, but I'd like to do something practical, like social work.’
She hesitated, as if expecting Loretta to pour scorn on the suggestion.
‘I help in a home for handicapped children three days a week,’ she added.
‘As a volunteer, of course.’
So Veronica didn't support herself, Loretta noted.
as if reading her thoughts, Veronica hurried on.
‘I don't…didn't, I mean, take anything from my husband,’ she said defensively.
‘I absolutely refused to take a penny from him when we split up.
I have a trust fund.’
Loretta waited hopefully, anxious to hear more about Veronica's relationship with Puddephat.
But Veronica had stopped short, perhaps embarrassed by making these revelations to a stranger, and Loretta had a distinct feeling that she was expected to go now.
‘I'm sorry,’ Veronica said, beginning to get to her feet.
‘It's very rude of me to burden you with my troubles.’
‘Not at all,’ protested Loretta, desperately trying to think of a ploy to delay her departure, and failing.
‘I'm afraid I'm feeling rather low,’ Veronica explained, leading the way to the front door.
‘I've been pestered by reporters for days, and it really is getting on my nerves.’
‘I'm not surprised,’ Loretta said, without thinking.
‘There were two of them in your garden when I came to see you yesterday.
I was so appalled by their behaviour that I called the police.’
She stopped suddenly.
She hadn't mentioned that she'd paid a previous visit to the house.
Wouldn't Veronica think it suspicious that she had gone to the lengths of calling two days running?
‘You called the police?’
Veronica asked.
Her face broke into a smile.
‘Then I've got a lot to thank you for.
They were here when I arrived, and they'd caught one of those chaps taking  pictures through the kitchen window.
They took him and his friend off to the police station.
I'm very grateful.
And I haven't even been able to help you regain your notes.’
‘It doesn't matter,’ said Loretta, grateful that her unpremeditated action the day before had made a good impression on Veronica.
She took her chance.
‘Look, why don't I give you my phone numbers?’ she offered.
‘You're welcome to give me a ring if you're feeling overwhelmed.’
She was killing two birds with one stone, she thought  cheerfully : she really did feel sorry for Veronica, and keeping in touch was the only way she'd find out more about the woman's relationship with her husband.
She handed over the numbers, and said goodbye.
As she got into her car, she pushed away the worrying question of what she would do if she found evidence that implicated Veronica in the murder of Hugh Puddephat.
9
The wardrobe in Bridget's spare room had a full-length mirror inside one of its doors.
Loretta picked up a straight black skirt from the bed and stepped into it.
Peering over her shoulder into the mirror, she adjusted the waistband until the back split was dead centre, and did up the zip.
Turning round, she folded up the collar of her black T-shirt experimentally and, liking the effect, fastened a double row of pearls around it.
She rummaged in the open jewellery box on the bed, and took out a pair of large drop earrings which she had bought in Liberty's the week before.
Each consisted of a green glass stone in an oval setting.
As she passed the wires through her pierced ears, she was aware that the earrings were much heavier than she was accustomed to wearing.
Glancing at the mirror, she decided the effect was worth it.
She would need all her self-confidence tonight.
It had been a difficult afternoon, and she was not sure she was up to an evening of trying to extract information from Jamie Baird.
Relaxing a little, she told herself that having discovered the identity of R, it was not so essential to grill him after all; but on the other hand, there was still the matter of the concealed photograph to be explained.
Well, she would play it by ear.
She looked at her watch: half past seven already.
The doorbell had sounded several times while she was changing and, as she descended the stairs, a hum of voices was audible from the drawing-room.
She opened the door and hesitated on the threshold, allowing herself time to take in the scene.
She never felt comfortable on entering a room full of strangers, and she hoped Bridget would be near at hand.
Instead, Geoffrey  Simmons surged forward to greet her, enthusiastically planting a kiss on her cheek.
‘Great to see you!’ he exclaimed, taking her arm and propelling her into the room.
He stood back and looked at her.
‘You're looking pretty glamorous, I must say,’ he said, his voice carrying across the room.
‘Mind you, we didn't part in very auspicious circumstances, did we?
You were looking like a drowned rat after our little foray into Puddephat's rooms.
Bloody hell, we didn't know what we were letting ourselves in for.
There we were, messing around with his things, and all the time he was dead as a doornail in Paris.
I wonder if they're keeping him in the morgue, by the way?
I always think there's something sinister about that expression.
The Paris Morgue.
It sounds like something out of a horror film.
You expect the attendants to look like Peter Cushing.
Quite appropriate in the circumstances, of course.
The rumour going round college is that the body was in a right old mess.’
At this point, a young woman who'd been sitting on one of Bridget's sofas jumped angrily to her feet and shouted at Geoffrey.
‘Stop it!
Stop it!’ she shrieked.
‘How can you?
Have you no feelings?’
She slumped back on to the sofa, burying her face in her hands.
Her long blonde hair tumbled artistically about her person.
A figure moved across from the dark corner in which he had been having an earnest conversation with a black boy, and sat down next to her.
He rested a hand on her shoulder, and spoke softly, ‘Come on, Gilly, he wasn't thinking.’
His hair was darker than it appeared in the picture, and he looked older, but Loretta had no difficulty in recognizing Jamie Baird.
‘Well, I certainly seem to have put my foot in it,’ said Geoffrey, breaking the uncomfortable silence that had fallen on the room.
‘Gilly was one of his favourite students,’ said a small woman with an American accent who was standing in front of the french windows.
‘She's taken it pretty hard.’
‘You haven't?’ asked Loretta, struck by the woman's offhand tone.
She moved across the room, away from Geoffrey Simmons.
‘I'm a graduate student,’ the woman answered.
‘I've seen  his type before.’
There was a nicely judged degree of contempt in her voice, Loretta thought; it implied that the speaker had quickly got Puddephat's measure, and didn't intend to waste any more of her time on him.
‘The guy was a schmuck, if you want my  opinion ,’ the woman added.
‘He has, sorry, had, a considerable reputation,’ Loretta reminded her, curious to hear more.
The American rose to the bait.
‘He had a loud voice, a wide vocabulary, and a big line in sarcasm,’ she said.
‘Some people, kids particularly, mistake that for originality.
What I'm interested in is ideas, and I didn't think much of his, or his opinions.
He was the sort of guy who jumped at every opportunity to make you look small.’
She put on a passable imitation of a BBC accent.
‘The English novel, Miss Chester?
You want to talk about the English novel?
Oh dear, I think you'd be more at home in Dr Sykes's little classes.
In my opinion, the only interesting developments in literature in the last ten years have taken place in East Germany.
Of course, one needs German to understand what the author is trying to do.’
Loretta laughed.
She could imagine Puddephat saying these lines.
‘The more I hear about him, the less I like him,’ she admitted.
She was about to introduce herself when Bridget made a dramatic entrance into the room, bearing a steaming bowl of punch on a tray.
Her arrival, and the exclamations of admiration that greeted her, succeeded in defusing the last of the tension caused by Geoffrey's tactless remarks.
‘Can I get you some punch?’
Loretta asked her companion.
When she accepted, Loretta moved across the room and helped herself to two glasses.
‘I'm Loretta Lawson’, she said, returning and handing one of them to the American woman.
‘I lecture in English at London.
I met Bridget when she was doing her PhD.
Are you one of her students?’
‘Evelyn Chester,’ the woman replied.
‘I'm doing a doctorate and yes, Bridget's my tutor.
Loretta Lawson, I know that name.
D'you write for Fem Sap?’
‘That's right,’ said Loretta, with a little glow of pleasure.
‘I'm on the editorial collective, as a matter of fact.’
‘I read your article in the last issue,’ Evelyn said.
‘I thought  you made some pretty good points.
I heard from Bridget there's some kind of row going on about masculine endings.
Where d'you stand on that?’
The conversation had taken an unexpected turn, thought Loretta, gathering her thoughts.
‘I suppose I have to say I'm a conservative,’ she admitted.
‘I think language has to evolve slowly.
I mean, I don't object to sensible changes — saying chairwoman when it's appropriate, for instance.
But I think the problem with French, say, is on a bigger scale.
I don't think you can impose wholesale changes overnight.’
Evelyn's face became animated, and she shook her short brown hair.
Drawing a packet of cigarettes out of her shoulder bag, she lit one and put it to her lips.
‘But if you're a feminist, the whole idea of masculine verb endings including the feminine is a complete joke,’ she protested.
‘It's an insult.’
‘Oh, I wouldn't argue with that,’ said Loretta.
‘Where you and I probably differ is on the question of what to do about it.
What some women are suggesting at Fem Sap — abolishing masculine endings overnight — just seems to me the wrong way of going about it.
All it will do is alienate a lot of women who aren't radical feminists, and open us up to ridicule from our enemies.
And we've got plenty of those.’
‘You're not telling me you're afraid of ridicule, Loretta?’ enquired a familiar voice at her elbow.
Loretta turned to find that Geoffrey Simmons had been listening to the conversation.
She was far from delighted to see him.
It was only thanks to the scene made by Gilly that his admission about their visit to Puddephat's rooms had gone unnoticed.
Bridget hadn't been exaggerating when she warned her of his lack of discretion.
‘Of course I don't like being ridiculed,’ she said sharply.
‘And I think anyone who pretends otherwise is just indulging in macho posturing.
The point is that sometimes it can't be avoided — there are some issues which are so important that you have to take a stand and say to hell with how people react.
But sometimes it's better to keep a low profile.
To make changes slowly, and carry the maximum number of people with you.’
It really was rather tedious, she thought, having this kind of discussion at a social gathering.
Looking round  the room, she wondered how to escape from Geoffrey.
He, it seemed, was not in the least put off.
‘In other words, Loretta,’ he said, poking her in the ribs with his elbow, ‘you're a gradualist!’
His tone suggested he'd caught her out in some minor misdemeanour, Loretta thought angrily — putting penny coins in a parking meter, or dodging fares on the underground.
She decided to extricate herself with dignity.
‘A thirsty gradualist,’ she said firmly, holding up her empty glass.
Smiling at Evelyn, and ignoring Geoffrey, she made her way across the room to the punch bowl.
It was already empty, apart from the odd slice of orange stuck to its sides, and she decided to try the kitchen.
The only occupants of the room were a couple of young men who were sitting at the table, smoking Turkish cigarettes.
Loretta guessed that Bridget, a non-smoker like herself, had banished them there.
Listening with half an ear as she examined the cluster of bottles on the draining-board, she caught the names of several authors and concluded that they were discussing contemporary novelists.
‘My sister gave me a book by this woman Anita something, the one that won the Booker prize,’ she heard one of them say.
‘Brookner,’ interrupted the other.
‘That's it,’ the first speaker agreed.
‘She said it was all the rage at her school, and she'd got an A minus for her essay on it.
It was all about a woman who goes on holiday to a hotel in Switzerland.
I've never read anything so dreary-I gave up half-way.’
‘I'm surprised you got that far,’ said the other.
‘I can't see the point in her books at all.
You might as well watch a documentary about depressed women on Channel 4.
What about Martin Amis?
Have you read him?’
‘Oh, yes.
I see him as a sort of spiritual descendant of Norman Mailer, just as Mailer took on the mantle of Lawrence — in fact I wrote an essay on that very subject in my last term at school.
‘Scuse me, but I think you'll find the wine's run out,’ the speaker added, having just registered Loretta's presence.
Mumbling a reply, Loretta opened the fridge and peered  inside.
She remembered that Bridget had put a couple of bottles of white in the freezer compartment at the last minute.
She drew one out, grumbling silently to herself.
Public school twits, she thought, an old prejudice welling up in her.
Their accents alone were enough to drive anyone mad.
Thank God her college wasn't yet fashionable enough to attract more than the odd one or two.
How on earth did Bridget put up with them?
She picked up Bridget's corkscrew and examined it.
It was not a design she had encountered before.
‘Can I help?’ asked a voice just behind her.
Turning, she found herself confronting Jamie Baird.
Lost in her condemnation of the two young men at the table, she had not heard him come in.
‘I wasn't implying you couldn't do it yourself,’ he added hastily, seeing her expression.
Realizing she was still frowning, Loretta put on a smile.
It was a nuisance, she thought, that Jamie had come upon her unawares.
She had not yet decided how to deal with him.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘My mind was elsewhere.’
She handed over the corkscrew.
‘Listening to those two?’ he asked, nodding towards the table.
Loretta blushed.
‘I'm afraid so,’ she said, glancing towards them.
They were, she saw with relief, still deep in conversation.
By now, they'd moved on to Hemingway.
‘Typical pseudo-intellectuals,’ Jamie said in a low voice.
‘At heart, they're no different from the other public school type the rugger-bugger sort, the ones that follow daddy into the services.
They both have an unshakeable confidence in the rightness of their own opinions.
This lot are the public schools’ great concession to modernity.
Now we don't need so many generals and governors, they let some of them read a few books.
As long as they're the right sort of books, of course.
I know what you're thinking,’ he added.
‘I sound just like them myself.
But I'm not.
You shouldn't hold my upbringing against me.
I'm doing my best to cast it off.’
His tone sounded genuine, but Loretta was quick to spot what looked like an inconsistency.
‘Then why did you come to Oxford?’ she demanded.
‘Why not break with tradition altogether and go to Leeds, say, or London?’
Jamie hesitated for a moment, leaning forward to fill her glass.
‘Family reasons,’ he said shortly, putting the bottle down.
The atmosphere between them had suddenly become frosty.
Loretta chided herself for her tactlessness.
Although Jamie was no longer as vital an interviewee as she had once thought, it was silly to antagonize him.
She could hardly follow up the exchange they had just had with a question about his relationship with Puddephat.
Casting around for a safe topic, she remembered that she had not introduced herself.
‘My name's Loretta Lawson,’ she said, doing her best to look relaxed.
‘I'm an old friend of Bridget's.’
‘Jamie Baird,’ he replied flatly, his good humour not fully restored.
‘And you knew Hugh Puddephat too, didn't you?’
Loretta blinked.
How did Jamie know?
And, more importantly, what did he know?
He did not keep her in suspense.
‘I heard that chap Simmons say something about you getting into Hugh's rooms,’ he explained.
‘You know, the small dark chap who's a don at my college.
I didn't really understand what he was on about, to tell you the truth.
But it made me think you must have been a friend of Hugh's.
He was my tutor, you see, that's why I'm interested.’
Loretta silently cursed Geoffrey.
His indiscretion had not gone unnoticed, after all.
‘Oh, that,’ she said, attempting lightness.
There was nothing to worry about, she told herself.
Jamie had no idea of her real motive for searching the dead man's rooms.
She smiled ruefully.
‘I'm afraid it's a rather discreditable story,’ she said.
‘In my defence, I should say it happened before the body was discovered.
I wouldn't have dreamed of doing it if I'd known he was dead.’
She launched into a brief account of her visit to Puddephat's rooms, leaving vague what she had done there and making much of the fright she had got when the fire bell went off.
Just to be on the safe side, she kept Bridget out of it altogether.
‘So it was all a waste of time,’ she ended brightly.
‘No sign of my notes at all.’
‘I always thought Hugh was very lucky to have those rooms,’ Jamie said.
‘You won't have appreciated it at night, but the view over the gardens is breathtaking.
Not that I cared much for the way he kept them.
That dreadful picture — you must have noticed that?
It's an original, you know.’
‘I guessed it was,’ Loretta agreed.
‘Not my taste either, I must admit.’
She remembered the violent daub over Puddephat's desk.
‘And nothing else to look at,’ Jamie went on.
‘Not a single photo of his family or friends.’
Loretta's ears pricked up.
There was something funny about his tone of voice, almost as if he were asking rather than telling her.
The photograph, she thought, in a flash of intuition.
He knows about the photograph.
He's trying to find out if I saw it.
Convinced she was on to something, she felt emboldened.
‘How did you get on with him?’ she asked, taking a sip from her glass to avoid looking directly at his face.
She didn't want to give anything away.
Jamie paused.
‘Gosh,’ he said at last, ‘that's a difficult one.
To be absolutely honest, I was in a rather awkward position.’
He stopped, and Loretta looked up.
Was she imagining it, or had a look of caution entered his eyes?
He glanced towards the two students at the table, and lowered his voice.
‘I don't know how much you know about Hugh's private life, but the fact is he had rather a crush on me.
It really got very difficult.
It took me a while to take in what was going on, of course.
When I first arrived, and he seemed interested in me, I was rather flattered.
I mean, I was just an obscure first-year, and he went out of his way to encourage me.
But after a while I began to think there was more to it than that, and I didn't know how to handle it.
He was always inviting me to little supper parties and so on, and it became so noticeable that other people began to make snide comments.
I wasn't imagining it, honestly.
I don't have any delusions about myself.
But I didn't know what to do.
He was my tutor, after all.
I couldn't risk falling out with him completely.
So, although I'm sorry he's dead, I'm rather relieved to have Bridget this year.’
‘I'm sure you are,’ Loretta said warmly, congratulating herself on her powers of deduction.
She had been right in her assumption about the photograph — she was sure now that it had been taken at one of those supper parties, and without prior warning.
Even though the episode had nothing to do  with Puddephat's death, her intuition had not led her astray.
She was so pleased with herself that she had no qualms about adding: ‘D'you have any theories about his death?
Any idea who might have wanted to kill him?’
It was worth a try, she thought.
It was still possible that Jamie knew something she didn't, without realizing its significance.
But Jamie shrugged.
‘Your guess is as good as mine,’ he said.
‘I'd been trying to see as little as possible of him towards the end of term.
My last interview with him was very brief.
Do you want some more wine?’
Loretta nodded, only slightly disappointed.
Watching him refill her glass, she noticed he had unusually long fingernails for a man.
All in all, she thought, flicking her hair back from her face, he was quite an unusual person.
His clothes — a Fair Isle pullover and collarless white shirt — were quaintly old-fashioned.
His attitude to public schools, on the other hand, was anything but traditional.
‘Loretta,’ he said suddenly.
‘That's not a name you hear very often.
Is it after Loretta Young?’
‘No,’ she admitted, surprised by the abrupt change of subject.
‘I thought perhaps your mother had seen The Call of the Wild as a child, and liked the name,’ he explained.
‘You know — Loretta Young and Clark Gable?’
Loretta looked blank.
She had never heard of the film.
‘Loretta Lynn then?
No, of course not, she's too young for you to have been named after her.
So where did it come from?’
Loretta felt herself blush.
‘I got it from a novel I read at school,’ she said, looking down and shuffling her feet.
‘I can't remember what it was called, or who wrote it.
But it stuck in my mind.
I was christened Laura, you see,’ she added, in a rush of confidence, ‘but I never liked it.
And when I left home for the first time, it suddenly occurred to me that there was no reason why I shouldn't change it.
So I did.’
She tailed off, embarrassed.
She did not very often tell this particular story.
But Jamie's smile was friendly.
‘How very enterprising of you,’ he said.
‘And it's certainly very memorable.
Loretta Lawson.
In fact, I'm sure I know it from somewhere.
Maybe something you've written?’
Loretta's mind flew back to her conversation with the  American postgraduate earlier in the evening.
Surely she hadn't found another reader of Fem Sap?
The journal's subscription list proved its readership to be overwhelmingly female.
After an initial flurry of outraged interest from male English dons and undergraduates, it had gone on to be studiously ignored by them.
But then Jamie, as she was finding out, was no run-of-the-mill student.
‘Yes, that's it,’ he exclaimed, confirming this view.
‘You wrote an article about Eliot in a feminist magazine I picked up in Blackwell's.
All about how he was a bit of a shit, and you couldn't get it out of your mind while you were reading The Waste Land.
Very refreshing after listening to two terms of this death-of-the-author stuff.’
Loretta glowed with pleasure.
The evening was turning out to be much more enjoyable than she'd anticipated.
‘I've just finished a piece for the January issue,’ she said.
‘It's on women characters in books about the Holocaust.
I don't know if you've read any of them.
Things like The White Hotel and Sophie's Choice?’
‘Oh, those,’ Jamie said dismissively.
‘They're just the sort of things your friends over there would like.
Absolutely riddled with misogyny.’
Loretta opened her eyes wide.
This was precisely her own conclusion, but Jamie was the first man she'd met who agreed with her.
She was about to pursue his remark when she felt a hand on her arm.
Turning, she found Bridget, accompanied by a black student she had noticed earlier.
‘There you are,’ she said to Loretta.
‘I've been wanting to introduce you to Edward all evening.
He's one of my PhD students, and he's writing a thesis on Virginia Woolf.’
Jamie waited politely until these introductions were over, and then excused himself.
Trapped, Loretta had no choice but to give her attention to Bridget and Edward.
‘You were deep in conversation,’ her friend said curiously.
‘We were talking about misogyny,’ Loretta said firmly.
There was a suggestion in Bridget's tone she did not want to respond to.
‘I thought Jamie would be more cut up about Hugh Puddephat,’ Edward said idly.
‘Hugh always had a little group of favourites, an in-crowd so to speak,’ he explained to Loretta, ‘and Jamie was definitely one of them.
He seems to have got over the shock pretty quickly.’
‘A remarkable recovery,’ drawled a young woman who had just joined the group.
‘After all, they were very close friends.’
Her meaning was unmistakable.
Edward recoiled slightly.
‘D'you ever have a good word for anyone, Natasha?’ he enquired coldly.
Loretta bit her tongue.
It was none of her business what people thought of Jamie Baird.
She turned to Edward and, ignoring the girl called Natasha, asked a question about the progress of his thesis.
The first guests began to leave an hour or so later.
Loretta had wandered back into the drawing-room, and was chatting to a classics don who taught at the same college as Bridget.
Out of the corner of her eye, she could see Jamie in conversation with two people she didn't recognize.
She was trying to engineer her escape from the classics lecturer when Jamie made his way over.
He waited for the other woman to finish what she was saying, and then smiled shyly at Loretta.
‘I have to leave now,’ he said, ‘or I'll miss my lift.
But I enjoyed talking to you.
I hope we'll meet again some time.’
His tone was a little stiff, and Loretta was not sure what to read into it.
Disconcerted, she said goodbye, and watched him leave the room.
‘I suppose I ought to be making tracks as well,’ said the classics don.
‘I've got a department meeting at nine o'clock tomorrow morning.’
In a very short time, the only relics of Bridget's party were the empty glasses perched on every horizontal surface in the drawing-room, and Geoffrey Simmons, who was displaying not the slightest inclination to leave.
Bridget flopped on to a sofa, stretched her legs out, and groaned.
‘What a mess!’ she said, surveying the scene.
‘Did they really have to trample crisps into the carpet?’
‘Why don't you sit there and have a rest, while I clear up?’ suggested Loretta.
Bridget sat up straight.
‘I won't hear of it,’ she said.
‘You and Geoffrey are my guests.
I've got a very nice bottle of dessert wine I put in the fridge an hour ago — I know you like  Muscatel, Loretta.
Come and get some clean glasses.
You two can have a quiet drink while I sort through the debris.’
Loretta was about to protest at this arrangement — she had not yet recovered from her irritation with Geoffrey — but decided it would be more diplomatic to follow Bridget into the kitchen.
Although Geoffrey appeared to be absorbed in a book he had picked up, she had no doubt that he had at least one ear open to the conversation.
As she left the room, it struck Loretta that he was being uncharacteristically quiet; perhaps he had had too much to drink?
Closing the kitchen door, she turned to Bridget.
‘Look, I know Geoffrey's a friend of yours,’ she began, ‘and I admit he's been very helpful, but I'm really quite angry with him.
His behaviour earlier on was absolutely awful.
I didn't even have time to say hello before he was telling the whole room about us breaking into Puddephat's rooms.
And then he made all sorts of tactless remarks about the state of the body.
So it would be much better if you left the washing up to me, and went and had a drink with him yourself.’
Bridget was looking affronted.
‘I think you're being a bit harsh,’ she objected.
‘I know he's indiscreet, but he doesn't do it out of malice.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Loretta.
‘But that doesn't affect the outcome.
There was quite an unpleasant scene before you came in with the punch.
You were lucky to be in the kitchen at the time.’
‘From what I heard afterwards,’ Bridget said dismissively, ‘Gilly was behaving like a drama queen.
Right over the top.
After all, she didn't know Puddephat that well.’
‘Well, I'm giving her the benefit of the doubt,’ said Loretta.
‘If one of my lecturers had been murdered, I wouldn't like to hear someone gloating about the details.’
‘Now you're overreacting,’ Bridget said.
‘I'm sure Geoffrey wasn't gloating.
It was just thoughtlessness.’
She adopted a more conciliatory tone of voice.
‘You and Geoffrey got on very well last time you met.
He can be very amusing, you know.
You could do a lot worse.’
In a flash, Loretta realized what was going on.
‘Is this your own idea, or is Geoffrey in on it?’ she demanded.
‘The trouble with you, Bridget, is that you can't help interfering.
If  I want to start an affair with someone, I'm perfectly capable of doing it without your assistance!’
She stopped suddenly, wondering if she was being unfair to Bridget.
If it had been Jamie Baird who was waiting for her in the drawing-room, would she have been so angry?
She pushed the idea away.
It was preposterous.
What about the difference in their ages?
Geoffrey Simmons was evidently not the only one who had had too much to drink.
Irritated with herself, she took her annoyance out on Bridget.
‘I suppose this is the real reason why you wanted me to come to your party?’ she asked.
‘Not at all,’ Bridget said coldly.
‘If you cast your mind back, you'll remember that it was your idea to come to Oxford this weekend.
I just happened to know that Geoffrey was keen to meet you again, and you do seem to be at a loose end at the moment.
I though I'd kill two birds with one stone.’
Loretta saw the justice of what Bridget was saying, but was able to respond only with ill grace.
‘All right,’ she muttered.
‘I dare say you meant well.
But I'd rather you didn't try to run my love life.’
What on earth had got into her, she asked herself?
Bridget was one of her closest friends.
Leaning forward, she kissed the other woman lightly on the cheek.
‘It was a nice party,’ she said, more grudgingly than she intended.
In the hall, she paused at the bottom of the stairs, torn between her desire to escape and good manners.
Good manners won.
She opened the door to the drawing-room, hoping there was not going to be another scene.
Her anxiety was unfounded.
Geoffrey was slumped in an armchair, head on chest, a book about to fall from his hands.
From the sound of his rhythmic breathing, Loretta could tell he was fast asleep.
Her good humour somewhat restored, she stifled a laugh: however much he had wanted to see her again, Geoffrey's enthusiasm had not lasted the course of the evening.
Closing the door gently, she went upstairs to bed.
10
The next morning was an absolute disaster.
Loretta's hopes of a conciliatory chat with Bridget over breakfast were dashed by the fact that she had set her alarm clock for half an hour later than she had intended.
There was time only to grab a piece of burnt toast before jumping into her car and setting off for London.
As soon as she drew up to the roundabout at the top of Woodstock Road, she found herself in traffic which stretched as far as the eye could see, and when she switched on the car radio, she discovered that the only sound it would make was an assortment of squeaks and crackles.
Fiddling with the tuning knob made no difference, and a glance to the left told her what had happened: someone had stolen the aerial.
She let out a sigh of impatience.
It had not occurred to her that the car would be vulnerable while parked in Bridget's front garden.
It was a bad start to the morning, and the rest of the day lived up to its promise.
She arrived in central London so late that she had to park in the street outside the English department, with not a free parking meter in sight.
By the time she finished her lecture and came out to move it, one of the wheels had been clamped.
The rest of the morning was wasted on the business of getting the car released, and paying through the nose for the privilege.
The car spent the afternoon in a car park nowhere near her office, and she arrived home reflecting that her weekend in Oxford had been an expensive one.
What she needed, she decided, was a chat with Bridget.
She would apologize for her behaviour the previous evening, and ask her advice on what to do next.
She had, after all, been  successful in making contact with Veronica Puddephat, although the meeting had raised as many questions as it had answered.
What had Puddephat done to his wife to provoke the loathing expressed in her letter to him?
And when had the letter been written?
Loretta was convinced it was recent.
Why would anyone keep such a letter unless they were still considering a response to it?
And, above all, did it have anything to do with his death?
They were not the sort of questions she could ask on so brief an acquaintance, but she was unable at present to think of an excuse that would allow her to get to know Veronica better.
And then there was the business of Jamie Baird — no, she thought, that was something she didn't feel able to talk to Bridget about.
He had nothing to do with the case, and in the cold light of day she was rather ashamed of her unexpected fascination with him.
She would eat first, she decided, dropping her bags and coat on the sofa, and then ring Bridget at home.
She picked up the phone to ring the Chinese takeaway in Caledonian Road, and discovered the line was dead.
It seemed a fitting end to the day.
It proved impossible to get British Telecom round to fix the phone until Thursday afternoon.
Loretta decided to put off her chat with Bridget until it was mended — it might be a lengthy conversation, and she preferred to have it out of office hours.
On Thursday, she left a key with her downstairs neighbour, and arrived home to find the key and a note on her kitchen table.
The phone was working again, the engineer had scribbled on the back of an envelope, and he was very sorry he had broken the table lamp standing next to it on the coffee table.
Loretta let out a wail, and rushed to the drawing-room.
Her favourite lamp, a white Art Deco figure of a woman, had been reduced to a neat heap of pottery shards.
She sat down and was about to indulge in a fit of angry tears when the phone rang.
‘Yes?’ she demanded, snatching it up.
There was a moment's silence, and then she heard an unfamiliar voice.
‘I'm sorry, I think I may have a wrong number,’ it said.
‘I wanted to speak to Dr Lawson, Dr Loretta Lawson.’
‘That's me,’ Loretta said, in a friendlier tone.
It wasn't the  woman's fault that her lamp had been broken.
‘This is Veronica, Veronica Puddephat.
You came to see me on Sunday,’ she added, in case Loretta had forgotten.
‘I'm so sorry, Veronica, you caught me at a bad moment,’ Loretta said apologetically.
Her heart was beating fast.
She was not going to have to invent an excuse to ring Veronica after all.
‘The phone's been out of order all week, and the man who came to mend it has broken a lamp I was very fond of.’
‘Aren't they the giddy limit!’,
Veronica sympathized.
‘The trouble I've had with British Telecom…but that's not the reason I phoned.’
She hesitated.
‘Look, I know this is the most awful cheek, but you did say I could ring you.
I do hope you won't mind me asking you.’
‘Go ahead,’ Loretta encouraged.
Things could not be going better.
‘I've got to come up to London to see yet another policeman,’ Veronica explained.
‘A French one this time.
Some terribly important person from the Sûreté — is that right?
I don't understand the French police system.
At any rate, it's apparently vital that I see this chap.
He did offer to come to Oxford, but I said I'd rather do it in London.
It's the thought of going through it all again, you see, it's so upsetting…
And I wondered if you'd be very kind and have tea with me afterwards.
I'm sure you're very busy, and I know I shouldn't really ask you, but we could meet somewhere near your office…’
She tailed off.
‘What a good idea,’ Loretta said warmly, trying to keep the excitement out of her voice.
Here was her chance to find out exactly what the police were up to— it sounded as if they might have a new lead.
Why else would a senior French policeman come all the way from Paris to see Puddephat's wife?
The Oxford police must have interviewed her several times already.
And, she thought with relief, if new evidence had turned up in France, it might mean that Veronica had had nothing to do with her husband's death.
The best possible solution, as far as Loretta was concerned, would be for a total stranger to be revealed as the murderer.
‘When do you have to see him?’ she asked.
‘I've provisionally arranged it for tomorrow,’ Veronica  answered.
‘I tried to get hold of you last night, but the phone wasn't working.
And I didn't want to trouble you at work.
But I can probably change the appointment, if it's inconvenient.’
‘Not at all,’ Loretta assured her, running through Friday's timetable in her mind.
‘I'm free in the late afternoon, if that's any good.
Or in the evening.’
‘Why don't we have tea at the Waldorf?’
Veronica suggested.
‘Would four thirty suit you?’
Loretta said that it would, and Veronica rang off.
The Waldorf, Loretta thought to herself.
It was a name she associated with 1930s tea-dances.
What a strange world Veronica inhabited.
And a lonely one, she reflected.
How sad that Puddephat's widow should have no one to turn to at a time like this.
Surely she must have some friends?
Or was a separated woman still an outcast in Veronica's circle?
What she needed was the support of close women friends — a women's group, in fact.
Perhaps she should buy a copy of Spare Rib, and see if it still carried adverts for consciousness-raising groups.
She smiled to herself.
The idea of Veronica Puddephat joining any sort of feminist group was entirely incongruous.
On the other hand, some women were capable of the most startling changes.
Loretta paused.
She had been on the verge of persuading herself that her motive for seeing Veronica was simple altruism.
It wasn't.
Sorry as she might feel for her now, she had contacted Veronica with the aim of finding out more about her husband's killer.
And, at this stage, it would be quite wrong to rule her out as a suspect.
She sighed, and remembered she had been on the verge of phoning Bridget when Veronica called.
It would be good to talk over her feelings about Veronica Puddephat with her friend — and she still hadn't apologized for her bad temper on Sunday night.
She dialled Bridget's number, and let the phone ring for ages.
There was no reply.
She would have to try again later.
Bridget was out all evening, and next morning something happened which drove thoughts of her out of Loretta's head.
An envelope, addressed in handwriting she didn't know, arrived in the post: inside, she found a photocopied article  from a back number of an American academic journal, and a postcard reproduction of a painting by Klimt.
Turning the postcard over, she saw Jamie Baird's name and college address printed in capitals above a short handwritten message.
‘I came across this today, and thought it would interest you,’ it said.
It was signed simply ‘Jamie’.
The article, which she had not seen before, appeared to be an attack on Fem Sap and, by extension, most female English dons.
It looked, she thought, very much like an excuse to get in touch with her.
He must have got her address from Bridget.
Perhaps her behaviour on Sunday night had not been so foolish after all.
A sensation she had not felt for months — of muted excitement and expectation — went through her.
After all, where had caution and convention got her?
She had had a husband and lovers older than herself, and each affair had been fraught with problems.
Wasn't it possible that a man of Jamie's age might be more able to cope with her feminism, her academic success?
Loretta paused.
She was reading an awful lot into one small postcard.
Yes, it did reveal an interest in her, but was she right in thinking it was a sexual one?
She ought to proceed with care.
She put the card down, and pondered as she made a pot of tea.
Perhaps the best way to go about it was to take his message at face value.
She could send him a proof of the article on the Holocaust she had written for Fem Sap.
Then it would be up to him to make the next move.
A moment's thought led her to reject this course of action.
That was precisely what women had done in the past — sit back and wait for men to make the running.
There must be some way she could make an approach without incurring too great a risk of rejection.
She was pouring a cup of tea when the solution came to her.
As a member of the editorial collective of Fem Sap, it was part of her job to commission occasional articles.
She could ring Jamie and suggest that he write something for it.
Apart from providing her with an excuse to respond to his card, the idea in itself was a perfectly good one.
His attitude to those languid undergraduates at Bridget's party, and to writers, was not a conventionally masculine one.
She would do it that very evening.
Loretta arrived first at the Waldorf that afternoon, and was astonished to find a thé dansant in full swing to the strains of the Palm Court orchestra.
After being shown to a seat on the balcony, she spent a fascinated five minutes watching three couples on the sunken dance floor.
She had had no idea that such events still took place.
No one else seemed to find the scene incongruous, and Veronica passed no comment on it when she arrived.
‘I'm sorry I'm late,’ she said, taking a seat opposite Loretta.
‘I've had the most frightful afternoon.’
She rummaged in a Gucci handbag and took out a small bottle of aspirins.
‘My head is absolutely pounding.
Tea for two, and a glass of water,’ she commanded, catching the eye of a passing waiter.
‘You do want something to eat?’ she asked, turning to Loretta as if she had just remembered her manners.
‘They do very good sandwiches.’
It was too late to refuse.
Loretta watched in awe as the waiter returned with plates of muffins, scones, and cucumber sandwiches with their crusts cut off.
It was, she thought, like taking part in a TV adaptation of an early Agatha Christie novel.
‘How did you get on?’ she prompted, when Veronica showed no sign of referring to her visit to Scotland Yard.
‘Have there been any developments?’
Veronica put down the knife she was using to butter a muffin, and looked at her.
‘Absolutely none,’ she said peevishly.
‘Would you believe it?
It was just the same thing all over again, except that this time it took twice as long because of the interpreter.
You'd think they'd have the wit to send someone who could speak English.
When did you last see your husband, did he have any enemies, who did he know in Paris?
I keep telling them I was separated from Hugh, and they just don't seem capable of taking it in.
It was frightful.
As a matter of fact, one of the men from Scotland Yard, a very nice inspector, told me on the way out that the whole thing was a waste of time as far as he was concerned.
A matter of protocol, apparently.
The French police don't like co-operating with the Yard, and they insisted on sending this chap over.
I wish I'd known in advance.
I was quite convinced they'd have something to tell me.
What have they been doing all this time?’
Loretta shared Veronica's sense of frustration.
So much for her hope that the Sûreté would turn out to have solved the case for her.
And, on top of everything else, she had no way of knowing whether Veronica was telling the truth.
Had there been other questions Puddephat's widow didn't want to talk about?
She wondered whether the detectives on the case had made the link between Veronica and the letter in her husband's sock drawer.
She couldn't even be sure they knew of its existence, since the note was still there on the night of her own illicit search.
Of course, that had taken place before anyone knew that Puddephat had been murdered.
The police must surely have carried out a more thorough examination of the rooms since the discovery of the body.
These wretched imponderables, Loretta though angrily.
Every time she seemed to be on the verge of making some sort of breakthrough, new questions came up.
She could at least make the best of her meeting with Veronica, though.
‘When did you last see your husband?’ she asked, picking up one of the queries the police had put to her.
Veronica brushed it aside.
‘Ages ago,’ she said vaguely.
It was clear that this was not what she had come here to talk about.
Loretta gave in, for fear of antagonizing her.
‘So you've had a wasted trip,’ she said sympathetically.
She would allow Veronica to direct the conversation for a while, and see where that led her.
‘No’, Veronica said slowly.
‘As a matter of fact, they did have some news.’
She stopped, suddenly sounding tearful.
‘They said they were finished with Hugh's body — that I was free to arrange the funeral.’
She paused again ‘Oh, God,’ she muttered, fumbling in her handbag for a handkerchief.
Finding one, she dabbed at her eyes.
‘It's going to be awful,’ she said wretchedly.
‘They say the formalities are over, so he can be brought over and buried.
But I haven't the faintest idea what to do.
I've never had to arrange a funeral before.’
‘What about your family?’
Loretta asked cautiously.
Veronica's father was Lord Somebody-or-other, she reminded herself, and didn't the aristocracy go in for rather grand affairs?
They must be able to help.
‘Daddy's the last person I'd go to for help,’ Veronica said  bitterly.
‘He was fit to be tied when I separated from Hugh, and he seems to blame me for the whole thing.
And Mummy won't do anything that upsets Daddy.
I'll just have to get by on my own.’
Ignoring her own discomfort at hearing a grown woman use such childish titles, Loretta detected that Veronica's last statement was not so much an act of defiance as a cry for help.
‘Why don't we make a list of things that have to be done?’ she suggested practically.
The task of organizing her grandmother's funeral had fallen to her a couple of years before and, although the present situation was bound to be more complicated, she had a fair idea of the steps Veronica would need to take.
She drew a notebook out of her bag, and began to make a list.
By the time they had finished tea, Veronica seemed much more cheerful.
She paid the bill, which seemed outrageously large to Loretta, without batting an eyelid.
‘You've been such a help,’ she said, brushing aside Loretta's half-hearted attempt to make a contribution.
Remembering the other woman's private income, Loretta made only a faint protest.
Winning Veronica's confidence to the point where she could ask direct questions about her husband's death looked like being a slow job, and Loretta's bank balance would not stand many trips to establishments like the Waldorf.
In fact, it might be as well to be ready in advance with her own suggestion of a rendezvous next time Veronica called.
It wasn't just a matter of cost.
Loretta, who was ignorant of the etiquette attached to these affairs, had been on tenterhooks throughout tea in case anyone should ask her to dance.
Her education had not included much in the way of ballroom-dancing.
At least she had one thing to be thankful for, she consoled herself, seeing Veronica into a taxi in the Aldwych: she was in no doubt at all that Veronica would be in touch again.
She would not be forced to invent further spurious reasons for contacting the victim's widow.
She just hoped she would be spared a pressing invitation to his obsequies.
Loretta had assumed that she would have to leave a message for Jamie with some college functionary, and wait for him to  ring back.
To her surprise, the phone was answered by someone who volunteered to go and see if he was in.
A couple of minutes later, she heard footsteps approaching at the other end of the line.
Her heart beat faster.
‘Hello?’ said Jamie's voice.
‘It's Loretta Lawson,’ she said lightly, in case the messenger had not passed on her name.
There was nothing to worry about, she assured herself.
The suggestion she was about to make was entirely reasonable.
If he didn't respond, all she had to do was ring off.
‘Your note arrived this morning,’ she went on, ‘and it gave me a rather interesting idea.
Remember what you were saying on Sunday evening — about misogyny, and the kind of attitudes instilled in boys at public schools?
Why don't you write something about it for Fem Sap?
It could be about particular authors who've been through the public-school system, or even about the way the system works at close hand.
What d'you think?’
There was a pause.
‘I'm very flattered you should ask me,’ Jamie said slowly.
‘But aren't there two rather obvious objections?
For one thing, I'm an undergraduate.
I haven't produced a single piece of writing of lasting value in my life.
And for another, I'm not a woman.’
His tone was cool.
Loretta could not decide whether he was genuinely unenthusiastic about the idea, or whether it was the alienating effect of his upper middle-class accent.
‘If that's all you're worried about, there's no problem,’ she said.
‘Fem Sap has never recognized the sort of hierarchy which says that only published authors, or professors of literature, have something worth saying.
I admit that the vast majority of contributors are women, but this is one occasion when the article I'm thinking of could only be written by a man.
When women write about misogyny, they do it from the standpoint of victims.
You'd be tackling it as someone who was brought up to perpetuate it.
On the other hand,’ she said, careful to allow him a way out, ‘I quite understand that you might be too busy to take on work that's well outside your syllabus.’
There, she'd got it all out.
What happened now was out of her hands.
‘All right, you've convinced me,’ Jamie said suddenly.
‘But I think we ought to talk it over first.
Just so I know exactly  what I'm doing.’
‘Of course,’ Loretta said, taken aback by his abrupt acquiescence.
‘I suppose the difficulty is going to be finding a time in the next couple of weeks when we're both free.’
‘Why wait?’
Jamie asked recklessly.
‘Are you busy tomorrow?
I could come to London in the afternoon.’
With a slight sense that things were moving faster than anticipated, Loretta admitted that she had no firm plans for the next day.
‘Why don't you come to my flat?’ she suggested.
‘Say about three?’
Jamie asked whether she could make it slightly later, giving him time to finish an essay that should have been completed during the summer vacation.
Loretta agreed, and gave him directions to her flat.
After she had put the phone down, she felt in a daze.
She had been convinced at first that it had all been a mistake, that she had indeed misread the unspoken message contained in the postcard.
But now Jamie seemed, if anything, even keener than she that they should meet again.
Perhaps, she thought, deciding there was no point in worrying about it, he was simply nervous.
She went over to her bookshelves, and began to look for books that Jamie might find useful in writing his article.
Saturday morning mail brought a postcard from Germany.
‘Too tied up for sight-seeing’, Tracey had written, ‘so can't tell you much about what Berlin is like.
Everything is ludicrously expensive — thank God the Sunday Herald is paying my expenses.
More revelations this weekend.
Cheers, John.’
As an afterthought, he had scribbled another line at the bottom: ‘Any luck with the Gandell girl?’
Shaking her head over Tracey's capacity for self-absorption, Loretta reflected that she had not yet made any progress in her attempt to track down Melanie Gandell's relatives.
To be fair, it was not an easy task; her only clue to date was the address in Somerset.
She did not even know whether the occupants of Cherry Cottage had any connection with the dead girl.
And if Melanie's family had moved, would the new people be able, or willing, to pass on information about their whereabouts?
It was a long way to drive on the off-chance that something would come of it.
She could  address a letter to ‘the occupier’, but so impersonal a request might well go unheeded.
She wondered whether she should ring Bridget — she still hadn't spoken to her since leaving Oxford on Monday morning — but, with Jamie's visit imminent, she shied away from the thought.
She did not want to talk to her friend about Jamie, and she did not trust herself to hold a lengthy conversation with Bridget without mentioning his visit.
She decided to think about it later.
Turning over Tracey's postcard, she found a striking picture of a bombed church.
She propped it up on the mantelpiece, and went to the kitchen.
She had been invited to dinner on Sunday evening by another member of her women's group, and she had promised to take a pudding.
Taking a bag of soft white ricotta cheese from the fridge, she set about making a budino Toscano.
It was just before five when the buzz of the entryphone announced Jamie's arrival.
‘Come up,’ Loretta called gaily, pressing the button to release the street door.
Now he was here, she felt unexpectedly at ease; maybe it was because she was on home territory.
She opened the door, and found him huddled in an overcoat, hands deep in pockets, a red scarf thrown carelessly around his neck.
‘You look frozen,’ she exclaimed, stepping back to let him into the hall.
‘Come in and get warm.’
‘The train had no heating,’ he said, blowing on his gloveless hands.
‘I'm sorry I'm late.
We stopped for half an hour in Reading to wait for a connection.’
He took off his coat, and handed it to Loretta.
‘I was going to bring you some flowers,’ he said awkwardly, ‘but the flower stall was closed at the station.’
‘Never mind,’ she said, charmed by the thought.
She led the way into the drawing-room, and pointed to a pile of books and journals on the floor.
‘I've found mounds of stuff for you,’ she said.
His attention was elsewhere.
‘A real fire,’ he said admiringly, going straight to it.
‘Do you have them often?’
‘It's the first one this autumn,’ Loretta admitted, ‘but I usually have them at weekends in the winter.’
Switching on  her surviving table lamp, she knelt on the sofa and closed the curtains.
‘What would you like to drink?’ she asked, turning back to Jamie.
‘I can offer you tea, coffee, or whisky if you'd rather.’
‘Whisky,’ he said.
‘It's one of the many things I acquired a taste for at school.
Illicitly, of course.’
Loretta smiled.
Watching Jamie out of the corner of her eye while she poured whisky for both of them, she reflected that it was all going very well.
He was sitting in the armchair to one side of the fire, still warming his hands.
The Fair Isle pullover had given way to another in pale blue and the firelight struck almost red notes from his hair.
Handing him his drink, she sat down on the sofa.
‘Now, about this article —’ she began.
Jamie interrupted her.
‘I hope you don't think this is rude, but there's something I want to ask you,’ he said.
Surprised, Loretta waited.
‘ It's about those notes you sent Hugh.
It's just something I don't understand,’ he added, his earlier awkwardness returning.
‘The thing is, what made you ask his advice?
Hugh was scathing about any form of non-structuralist criticism, particularly if it came from a feminist — I should have thought you and he would have had absolutely nothing in common.
So why did you do it?’
His brown eyes slid away from Loretta's.
She was not as disconcerted as she had expected to be.
For an awful moment, she thought that Jamie had found out something about her real connection with Puddephat.
But this was a question she could handle.
She managed a rueful laugh.
‘I can see why you're puzzled,’ she said.
‘So was Bridget when I first told her about it.
I'm afraid it's another story which doesn't reflect much credit on me — I seem doomed to show you the worst side of my character.
Anyway, it's all a matter of department politics.
There are two professors in the English department where I work, and in the last twelve months, one of them has got very keen on structuralism.
I know he's a late convert, but he's not the only one.
He's put a lot of pressure on people like me to take it seriously.
It means I'm in a rather difficult position — the department's under pressure to make cuts, and I haven't got tenure.
You know what that means?’
‘That you can be sacked,’ Jamie nodded.
‘More or less,’ said Loretta.
‘There is a possibility that this chap will move to another university next year, but for the time being I've had to look for a way to take the heat off.
I decided to draw up a proposal for a book which would attempt a synthesis of structuralist and feminist ideas — not with any enthusiasm, and with the hope that it would never actually get done.
But to show how willing I was, I sent the outline to Hugh Puddephat.
I though it would sound good at department meetings to say I'd consulted him.
I was so uninterested in the damn thing that I didn't bother to keep a copy.
That's why I panicked when I heard he was missing.
The last thing I wanted was to have to write the outline again.
But now it looks as though I'll have to.’
She stopped.
Was Jamie convinced?
As far as she could tell, he wasn't looking suspicious.
‘Poor old you,’ he said sympathetically.
‘Another victim of Thatcherism.
I had no idea university politics were so cut-throat until I came to Oxford.
I suppose there must have been a time when it wasn't like this?’
Loretta agreed.
The part of her story about the pressure of Government cuts was true, and it seemed a long time since she'd existed in a world that wasn't penny-pinching.
‘I take it you're not a Tory?’ she asked, deftly moving the conversation to safer territory.
Jamie laughed.
‘Certainly not,’ he said.
‘I'm proud to say I'm the first member of my family to join the Labour Party.
My mother's in despair — says she can't look her MP in the face when she meets him at Church.
She's your archetypal Tory lady, always holding jumble sales to raise funds, all that sort of thing.’
Loretta smiled, picturing the consternation in the Baird household at the prospect of a Socialist in the family.
Reluctantly, she put the image aside.
‘We really should talk about your article,’ she said.
‘Shall I tell you my thoughts about it?’
Jamie was in the middle of a story about a disagreement he'd had with a master at his school over the A-level English syllabus when the phone rang.
It was Judy, the woman who had invited Loretta to dinner the following evening.
‘Could  you arrive a bit later than planned?’ she asked.
‘I've promised to take Elinor and one of her schoolfriends to the zoo, and I'm worried about getting back in time.’
‘Of course,’ said Loretta.
‘Shall I leave it till after eight to be on the safe side?’
‘As long as it won't ruin your pudding,’ Judy said gratefully.
‘It's not something dramatic like a soufflé, I hope?’
Loretta laughed.
‘Far from it.
It's something cold, and it's already sitting in the fridge.
See you about eight thirty.’
She put down the phone and turned back to Jamie.
He was looking slightly alarmed.
‘Gosh, I'm terribly sorry,’ he said.
‘I didn't realize you were going out to dinner.
I'm holding you up.
Look, I'll go at once.’
He was already gathering together various pieces of paper.
‘Wait a minute,’ cried Loretta.
‘You've got it all wrong.
It was tomorrow night I was talking about.
I'm quite free this evening.’
Jamie brightened up.
‘In that case,’ he said, ‘how about having dinner with me?
I'm absolutely ravenous — I missed lunch, and there was no buffet car on the train, as well as no heating.
Are there any reasonable places to eat near here?’
‘There's a very good pasta restaurant at the bottom of the road,’ Loretta admitted, trying to conceal her enthusiasm.
‘Shall I ring and see if they've got a table in half an hour or so?’
They arrived early enough to consume a vast spaghetti carbonara and a litre of house wine before the little Italian place became crowded.
‘Shall we get some more wine?’
Jamie shouted above the noise, holding up the empty carafe, but before Loretta could answer, a waiter showed two more people to their table.
‘Do you mind sharing?’ asked one of the new arrivals, a woman in her thirties.
Loretta looked at Jamie.
‘Let's go back to the flat,’ she suggested.
‘There's plenty to drink there.’
They left the table to the newcomers, and got their coats.
As they opened the street door, a blast of cold air hit them.
‘I think we'd better run,’ said Jamie, taking her arm.
Heads down, they set off at a fast trot which lasted until Loretta twisted her ankle.
‘These shoes aren't made for running,’ she laughed, checking her high heel to make sure she hadn't broken it.
‘I could carry you,’ Jamie offered, half seriously.
Loretta refused with a laugh, and they continued at a more sedate pace.
As she led the way upstairs to her flat, it occurred to Loretta that she was feeling slightly light-headed.
‘More wine?’ she asked, throwing her coat carelessly on to a sofa in the drawing-room.
‘Or do you want to go back to whisky?’
She noticed that Tracey's postcard had fallen off the mantelpiece, and put it back.
‘From my ex-husband,’ she explained.
‘He's in Berlin at the moment.’
‘Whisky would be very nice,’ said Jamie, taking off his overcoat.
‘Shall I put some music on?’
He knelt down in front of her stereo system.
‘Traviata,’ he exclaimed, picking up a cassette.
‘My favourite opera.’
As Loretta handed him his drink, the room filled with the sound of high violins.
She leaned forward to turn the volume down, muttering something over her shoulder about the neighbours.
She felt his arms around her waist, and turned to face him.
‘Do you want to stay?’ she asked, still sober enough to be anxious that there should be no misunderstandings.
Jamie smiled, and kissed her.
Daylight breaking through the hastily closed curtains at her bedroom window woke Loretta next morning.
Surfacing from sleep, she blinked as she noticed Jamie's head on the pillow next to her.
He was still asleep, and she lay in pleased contemplation of his face for several minutes.
Then, sliding carefully out from under his outstretched arm, she slipped out of bed.
Wrapping herself in the pink kimono hanging on the back of the bedroom door, she went softly down the stairs to the kitchen.
She filled the kettle and leaned back against the sink, waiting for it to boil.
She realized she was humming a pop song to herself, and blushed.
The kettle switched itself off, and she peered in a cupboard for a rarely used teatray.
When she returned to the bedroom, Jamie was awake.
Neither of them spoke.
She put the tray down beside the bed, and sat down with her back to him to pour the tea.
His hand caressed her shoulder, and she smiled.
‘Are you interested in breakfast?’ she asked, handing him a  cup of tea.
‘There isn't much food in the flat, but I can go to the Asian shop round the comer.
They have things like sausages and bacon.’
‘Sounds wonderful,’ he said.
‘But why don't you let me cook it?
Tell me where the shop is, and I'll go.’
After an amicable wrangle, they agreed that they would get dressed and go shopping together.
‘We can have showers later,’ Loretta promised.
Jamie was already pulling on his trousers; Loretta rummaged in her dressing-table drawer for clean socks to wear with an old pair of trousers.
‘I'll meet you in the hall,’ Jamie said.
‘My coat's still in the drawing-room.’
Loretta finished dressing and was about to leave the room when she caught sight of the unmade bed.
Force of habit compelled her to stop and straighten the quilt.
As she got to the bottom of the stairs, Jamie emerged from the drawing-room.
The smile froze on Loretta's face as she caught sight of his expression: his eyes were wide and staring, like those of a cornered animal.
‘I've got to go,’ he blurted out, skirting past her to the front door.
‘I've just remembered…something's come up…’
His look was almost one of revulsion.
He wrenched open the front door, and was out of the flat before Loretta could speak.
‘Jamie, wait —’ she began, but he was already slamming the door behind him.
For a moment, she was rooted to the spot.
What had come over him?
Everything had been going swimmingly only a moment before.
Fighting back shocked tears, she ran to the front door.
She was just in time to hear the street door slam, two floors below.
She ran down the first flight of stairs, and then turned and dragged herself back to the flat.
Feeling as though she had been punched in the stomach, she staggered into the drawing-room and sank on to the sofa.
Their empty glasses were still on the coffee-table, reminding her of the night before.
Why had he looked at her like that?
She hadn't coerced him in any way.
He had been as eager as she.
A thought struck her, and she leapt up to peer into the mirror over the mantelpiece.
Had he changed his mind about her in the cold light of morning?
She looked tired, she thought, pushing her hair back from her face, but not  markedly different from the previous evening.
Not enough to make him suddenly aware of the difference in their ages.
Her eyes stared back at her from the mirror, aghast.
She was behaving like a reader of Woman's Own.
If Jamie was the sort of man who cared that much for looks, he wasn't worth having.
She sat down again, hugging herself with both arms.
A second explanation occurred to her, one she liked no better than the first.
‘After all, they were very close friends,’ a voice repeated in her head.
She recognized it as that of the girl Natasha at Bridget's party.
She had believed Jamie when he told her that Puddephat's passion for him was not reciprocated.
Had she been right to do so?
Wasn't it possible that his sexuality was much more ambivalent than he had let on?
He wouldn't be the first homosexual man to go to bed with a woman in the hope of proving he wasn't gay.
The thought made her shudder.
Huddled on the edge of the sofa, she stared sadly into space.
Her right hand crept up to cover the lower half of her face, as if to protect it.