

Part Two
DAY FIVE
08:00–12:00
Blake continued to walk through the fog-shrouded streets.
The moon provided little illumination.
Women stood at the corners of buildings, dressed in wide, bright dresses and adorned with garish make-up.
They were touting for trade, crying out ‘Want some business?’ or ‘Want some love?’at the men and groups walking through the fog.
He didn't fancy asking the street prostitutes for directions out of Whitechapel.
A few of the men were dressed in quality suits with top hats and canes; they moved quickly, keeping their faces to the ground.
Blake's slow walk appeared to unnerve them.
It was an eerie atmosphere.
Apart from the occasional siren from the boats on the Thames, Blake could only hear the sounds of footsteps on the cobbled steps.
In the distance he could hear a woman's heels catching on the cobbles as she ran to keep an appointment.
He stood listening to the footsteps coming closer to him.
He couldn't tell direction in the fog.
It was as if the sounds were rising and falling with a supernatural air current.
He heard a scream, some distance away.
He stopped and walked forward.
A sailor appeared in front of him, holding two women in his arms.
The sailor had a scar across his face.
His arms were muscular and adorned with Chinese tattoos.
He was out for a good time, which might well involve finishing the evening with a fight.
One of the women screamed.
They were drunk.
‘Watcha mate,’ said the sailor.
Blake realized he was standing in their way.
‘I'm sorry,’ he replied, moving over to the gutter.
Both women laughed at him.
‘Just watch it,’ the sailor warned, threatening the poet.
Blake moved to the side.
He was swallowed up in the fog.
He couldn't clearly see the buildings or tell how things had changed since he was last in London.
The fog covered everything with a layer of mystery and fate.
There were taverns with dozens of people singing loudly.
The people looked like thieves and liars.
These places were to be avoided.
The windows, smudged and grimy, let out a little light.
The bars seemed like candles attracting moths from the dark.
Blake felt the money in his pocket.
He needed to be somewhere warm.
He needed to eat some food.
He had seen a number of figures dressed in blue, patrolling the streets.
He thought they were the local militia.
He asked a street trader, who said they were the police, London based law officers.
They were trying to catch Jack the Ripper.
He obtained directions on how to leave Whitechapel.
And then Blake heard something.
It was a whistle.
That damn tune!
The stranger had arrived in this world.
‘Doctor!’ he shouted.
There was no reply and the whistling continued.
Blake screwed up his eyes, trying to peer through the fog.
He couldn't tell whether the whistler was moving away from or towards him.
Blake moved from the Old Nag's Head, through a courtyard, and found himself in a long alley.
He thought he could see a figure moving in front of him.
The figure turned left.
Blake followed.
Another alley.
The figure seemed to be speeding up.
Not running though.
‘Doctor, stop!’
Blake shouted.
A right turn, and then another left.
 Labyrinthine alleyways  criss-crossing and intersecting.
They were narrow, high-walled and difficult for two people to pass in.
Somewhere in the distance he could hear the infuriating whistle.
But he'd lost sight of the figure.
At one point Blake found himself on a main street and saw two policemen outside a baker's shop.
He needed to find the stranger.
Up an alleyway.
He might have been here before.
He  stopped.
There was something else in the alley.
He heard the scuffle of feet.
Was that breathing?
Although the fog played tricks, he was sure there was someone close by, trying to control their breath.
He was about to shout ‘Doctor’ when it dawned on him.
He was alone, in a deserted alley, with someone or something unknown.
He gulped and felt sweat falling down his brow.
The breathing was steadier.
Blake was unable to move.
His eyes were becoming accustomed to the dark.
He couldn't see anybody in the alley.
But there was a glint!
Something was reflecting the half-light in the alley.
It was a knife!
‘Oi!’ a voice broke the silence.
A policeman was standing at the other end of the alley.
‘Stop!’
Blake looked.
He saw a figure moving towards him, and felt himself pushed, with great force, into a wall.
The policeman was blowing a shrill whistle.
The sound of footsteps receded into the fog.
Blake had been pushed to the floor.
The policeman stood over him.
‘What happened?’
‘I don't know,’ replied Blake.
‘He had a knife.’
‘Jack?’
‘I was trying to find a friend,’ Blake explained.
‘I see.
And what's your name, sir, and where are you from?’
‘My name's Blake, William Blake.
I'm from Piccadilly.’
‘I dare say, sir, that you could find a ‘friend’ in Piccadilly.’
‘What?
No, you don't understand.’
‘I understand very well, and may I suggest that you return to Piccadilly.
I think you've had enough excitement for one night.’
‘Yes.’
Blake thought this seemed to be a good suggestion.
He could do with a warm bed.
The policeman carried on walking, following the figure.
Blake dusted his coat and returned to the main alleyway.
The Old Nag's Head.
He hadn't gone far.
He would like a drink.
Perhaps they would accept his old currency.
He entered the bar.
Solid wooden door.
The place was heaving.
People of all shapes and sizes.
Numerous sailors, East Europeans, Chinese, ladies of the night, various thugs and drunkards.
The bar quietened.
Blake felt that everyone was looking at him.
He moved through the crowd as the noise restarted.
Shouting, arguments and a young woman singing ‘Daisy’.
He went to the bar.
Coloured glasses stood on the shelves.
A man with a Lancashire accent served him.
‘What can I do for you, sir?’
Although the bar didn't strike Blake as a place where the customers would be called ‘sir’ he thought they recognized a gentleman.
‘I have a problem with money.
Is this any good?’
A few men at the bar were watching him and seemed to be laughing at him.
‘Sir's money is good here,’ the barman said, glancing at the coins.
‘What would sir like?’
The group of men were finding this even funnier.
‘Beer.’
The barman walked away and filled a tankard.
Blake was content for the first time in days.
The barman returned, smiled, and threw the liquid over his face.
‘Would sir like another drink?’
The men found this uproariously funny.
Blake glimpsed the looking glass behind the bar and saw what they found amusing.
His clothes were filthy, covered in dirt and blood.
His hands, face and hair were stained with a peculiar sand.
It looked like he hadn't washed for months, and had deliberately slept in the worst hovels every night.
He didn't want to contemplate what he smelt like.
This was why they had all been calling him ‘sir’.
He looked like the worst kind of tramp.
He took out his watch to show the barman.
‘I am desperate for a meal and a drink.
Will this cover the cost?’
‘Are you stupid?
Give it here.’
The barman seized the  watch.
‘There's so many bobbies out there.
Who did you rob for this?’
‘It's my watch,’ Blake protested.
‘Yes.’
The barman gave the watch a cursory glance.
‘It's old.
I'll give you half a tankard of beer and some bread.’
‘Fine,’ Blake replied.
The barman seemed surprised.
Blake sat down on his own at a small table.
The bread contained flour maggots but it was food.
The drink tasted like ambrosia.
Blake couldn't remember the last time he had sat down.
He was very tired.
As he sat he felt he was falling into a deep slumber.
The characters in the bar seemed to be moving with slow jarring motions.
The tavern was silent.
The customers were carrying on their conversations.
There was a figure, standing at the door.
It had a top hat, cape and medical bag.
Blake couldn't see the face.
The figure walked through the crowd.
They couldn't see him.
He was holding a knife!
It was glinting.
Blake couldn't move.
He tried to prise himself off the chair, as the figure moved towards him.
Blake heard laughter.
A tart at the bar.
She was carrying drinks.
She was going to walk into the figure.
It turned and snarled.
The blade flashed up and down.
The drinks fell.
Glasses smashed.
A red liquid oozed over the floor.
No-one else in the tavern noticed.
Blake tried to shout.
He could only hear the distant sound of police whistles, screaming for help.
‘The Ripper has struck again.
She's dead.’
Blake opened his eyes.
A woman stood at the tavern door, shouting at the crowd.
There was a mixture of panic and curiosity.
Part of the pub's clientele stood and then didn't move; others ran outside to the scene of the murder.
There was no-one singing now.
An awed hush had swept the tavern.
Even those remaining were listening to the drama unfolding outside the hostelry.
Blake drunk the last drops of his beer and left.
The woman, undoubtedly a common prostitute, was  sitting on the floor.
She was shaking and crying.
‘It's terrible.’
Blake walked past her.
There was chaos outside, with people milling around the dead body.
A policeman ran past the poet trying to get to the crowd before it became an unruly mob.
Blake could feel the anger.
There were cries of ‘Hang the bastard’.
But it was all show.
Even the men were frightened of Jack the Ripper.
Smash!
A stone was hurled and broke a window.
‘Let's get him!’
Blake was shoved.
A fight had broken out.
Berner Street.
The police were trying to keep people away from the body, but they were outnumbered and the crowd jostled to get a look.
There were thirty or forty people with more arriving all the time.
Blake tried to see but the people had formed a barrier preventing him from seeing what was on the ground.
What he glimpsed appeared to be a body covered with a blanket.
And then he heard a voice.
‘Out of the way, out of the way, I'm a Doctor.’
The Scottish accent seemed to come from the other side of the crowd.
And then he saw a folded umbrella, pointed into the air, moving into the centre of the chaos.
Light brown jacket, question mark shirt, without a hat.
It was that idiotic man from hell!
Blake had to talk to him.
Why had Blake arrived seventy years later than planned, and how was he going to return home?
A hush descended over the crowd.
The Doctor had pulled the blanket off the body.
A woman screamed, another fainted.
‘My God,’ said a drunken sailor, sobering up quickly.
The body lay in a bizarre position.
Its arms were outstretched and its legs laid neatly together.
It looked like it had been crucified.
Although it wore a dress, the person was unrecognizable as the face had been skinned.
He could hear the Doctor explaining the injuries to a policeman.
The Doctor looked fascinated, explaining the  nature of the injuries and the implements which could have caused them.
‘There are parts of this body missing,’ the Doctor said, finishing the medical examination.
‘Sorry I couldn't have been more help.’
The Doctor started to walk away.
The policeman's hand fell on to his shoulder.
‘Sir, I think you could still be of assistance.
If you could come with us.’
‘I can't.
You know how it is.
Plane goes in ninety minutes.
Have to book in.’
The policeman had not let go of the stranger.
‘Unhand me.’
The Doctor was raising his voice.
‘I am a personal friend of Queen Victoria.’
Another scuffle broke out and the crowd started to shove and fight.
Someone fell over and others collapsed on top.
Blake glanced at the policeman.
His arm was outstretched but the Doctor had gone.
The policeman was amazed, looking excitedly around him.
From the back of the crowd, Blake could see the shuffling figure of the stranger walking down the street.
The stranger was swinging his umbrella and whistling that infuriating tune.
Blake began to follow him.
The raft was moored by the side of the river.
It had been badly damaged in the rapids.
Bernice and Spike had left the jungle.
In front of them lay marshlands.
At the edge of the marshes four tall trees stretched up to the heavens.
Spike decided that they should continue on foot.
He could repair the craft but said he was unwilling to do so.
Bernice sat by the raft.
Her clothes had been wet through.
She had taken them off and Spike had squeezed the water from them.
The extra power in his mechanized hands had acted like a mangle.
The clothes were creased but were now dry.
Although aware he was an android, she had thought for a few seconds before removing her clothes.
But it was the same as drying her hair in the nude, with an electric hair dryer.
The mechanical man had shown no interest in her body.
She appreciated the lack of prejudice about her being a woman.
His body was suffering.
Although he showed no pain, Bernice could tell that his strength was seeping away.
He was having problems raising his left arm and he couldn't twist his head.
They had stopped because of his need for rest.
Bernice couldn't see what he thought he would be able to do even if they did catch up with the shapechangers.
He stood.
It was time to go.
His periods of rest were growing longer.
He indicated for her to stand.
She cried out.
She had been bitten.
Two ants were attached by their pincers to her left arm.
Their bodies throbbed.
‘Get them off me, get them off!’ she shouted, in extreme pain.
Spike grabbed both ants with his fingers and squeezed the heads until the bodies fell away.
The pincers remained stuck to the skin.
‘They need to be cauterized,’ Spike said calmly.
He pulled out a small laser from his belt.
‘This will hurt.’
She nodded.
He moved the flame to her arm.
It burned.
She flinched.
The pincers fell off.
Burn marks remained on her arm.
She had been watching the legion of black ants moving along the plain.
There were thousands of them, each about five millimetres long.
They had large savage pincers protruding from their mouths.
They moved as one, with different mutations on each side of the army and another type, at the head of the travelling mass, to clear away obstacles.
She looked at her arm.
‘Any poison will have been destroyed.
Do not worry.’
‘Thanks,’ she said.
‘We must move.’
She watched the ants attack a small shrew, moving with one mind to overpower and strip it of its flesh.
The opening assault resulted in the destruction of the advance unit but they kept attacking in waves until their purpose was achieved.
‘Why do they throw their lives away?
Do you think they know that they're going to die?’
Bernice asked, as the ants swarmed over their prey.
‘They are a whole being.
They are not concerned for their individual lives.
The words life and death have no meaning for them.
They will carry on moving, adapting and surviving as one single-minded being,’ Spike replied.
‘Is that what it's like to be a mechanical man?’
Bernice asked.
‘No.
You are right in that we serve.
Our life has no meaning other than serving our controllers.
We are perfect machines built to defend colonists on frontier worlds.
But this existence is unimportant.
When our life systems are terminated we will again return to the Prime Mover.
That is what distinguishes our lives from those of insects.’
Spike held a foot above the insect army and stamped down on to the ants.
He killed hundreds of them.
Bernice could see mangled bodies, struggling and dying.
The army kept on moving.
‘When they swarm they destroy all in their way.
They must be wiped out, exterminated, before they can destroy us.
Come, let us go,’ Spike said.
Spike walked on top of the ants whilst Bernice tried to avoid stepping on them.
‘They are parasites.
Ignore them,’ he said.
She wondered if Spike had saved her life.
She was his enemy yet he had helped her.
Machines!
She didn't understand them.
‘Hold on!’
Bernice shouted.
Spike was moving further away.
‘Come on, wait for me.’
The banging continued.
Ell wasn't going to answer.
Perhaps it was the military.
If so, answering the door was a dangerous option indeed.
If she believed in the Prime Mover she would be praying.
But she didn't.
She closed her eyes.
After a few minutes she opened them again.
She couldn't fall asleep.
She looked around the hopper.
The charts and the paperwork lay scattered around.
She had to think of an answer.
She couldn't stay here.
She must find…
She controlled her thoughts.
She couldn't let them into her mind.
She looked again at the hopper's clock.
She had been inside for a day.
The red death probably surrounded the ship.
There had been no sound outside for ten minutes.
They might have gone.
If they hadn't, perhaps they would help her.
No.
They would be suspicious of her.
Unless…
She smiled.
A bomb!
Ell, control your thoughts!
Perhaps…
She slid over to the control panel.
There was a self-destruct mechanism on the craft.
She laughed.
DAY FIVE 12:00–16:00
The door opened.
Ell jumped as the hopper was consumed in a huge fireball.
Flames were all about her and all she could see was a harsh yellow light.
She had gone blind.
And then a sound, as if she had been standing next to a huge thunderclap.
She knew she had to keep moving, but she lay on the ground where she had landed.
The unbearable heat; she felt her clothes and her hair on fire.
Could it be worth this pain?
‘Help me,’ she whimpered.
As she screamed, she felt arms grab hold of her and pick her up off the floor.
Arms she hadn't let herself expect.
It had worked.
She was being carried.
She closed her eyes and passed out.
The Imperial Palace symbolized the freedom and unity of the Nicaean Federation.
It was situated several kilometres outside the city and sprawled across three hundred acres.
The white marble, turrets, and drawbridges were an elaborate and picturesque disguise for the most secure, well-defended building in the Althosian system.
Justice Police officers guarded the approaches and overflew the barren land between the main road and the palace.
Since the civil disobedience began, the palace had also been surrounded by armoured carriers and remote crowd-control vehicles.
The Archon had retreated behind the security apparatus.
Although nominally in charge, control was slipping from his grasp.
He was now preparing his speech to the Academy, due to meet in eight hours' time at the behest of the military.
Although unfounded rumours were circulating that the military planned to declare martial law, Carlson knew a full scale military conflict was already unfolding on Byzantine.
Initial reports indicated hundreds had been killed when a military unit had been stoned by a hungry and unruly mob.
The Archon's speech could be the last breath of civilization and order.
The motorcade journey from the capital had been quiet.
Motor scooters had flanked General Kopyion's hovercar.
The security police had also blocked off the streets in the downtown area of the city.
Kopyion's car was the third car.
The major, in the fourth car, was trying to see his wife.
There was no-one around.
He could just see boxes, litter blowing in the wind and rats scavenging for food.
Suddenly, there was an explosion.
The lead car was on fire.
It veered out of control, swerved across the road and crashed into a shop front.
Carlson could hear machine gun fire rattling outside; although antiques the weapons were still able to kill and maim.
He picked up the radio handset.
The radio crackled.
‘This is Major Carlson.
Keep on moving.
Do not stop.
Outriders three and four pull out and await reinforcements.
This is Carlson to Security HQ.
The motorcade is under attack.
Car one, I repeat, car one has been hit.
Unable to tell whether it was a primitive missile or a land mine.
We are carrying on.’
As they sped away, Carlson could see three or four figures around the car, shooting automatic guns into the flaming vehicle.
He sat back.
The capital was soon behind them.
They arrived at their destination.
The automatic barriers rose up and the cavalcade swept through to the Palace.
The radio reported that when the back-up unit had arrived the block of shops was on fire.
The Fire Brigade had been dispatched.
There were no signs of the terrorists, although a house to house search would be initiated.
The two Justice Police officers travelling in the ambushed car were dead.
The chaos was spreading.
Carlson had never been permitted to visit the Palace before.
He entered.
The androids had to wait outside.
The corridors seemed to run for miles.
But like much on Nicaea, appearances could be deceptive.
He didn't know why General Kopyion had asked him to attend the meeting with the Archon.
The civil unrest was not his department.
He had nothing to contribute to the discussion.
Kopyion was quiet, his thoughts elsewhere.
Carlson thought of his wife.
He had used the police computer network and discovered his wife had volunteered for nursing duty.
The stupid bitch!
Why didn't she stay out of this.
It was not going to be safe out on the streets.
She could find herself shot.
A quick movement, a phrase uttered out of line.
He should be with her.
Kopyion looked at him.
A look which frightened Carlson.
It seemed the general was reading his mind.
‘You're worried about your wife?’
Kopyion asked.
Carlson nodded.
‘Yes, but how did you know?’
‘There's no mystery.
You checked her whereabouts on the computer.’
Carlson sighed.
‘She's volunteered for nursing duties.
She's staffing a volunteer ambulance, driving round the city, responding to situations.’
‘Is that a problem?’
Kopyion asked.
‘She might be injured.’
‘Yes,’ Kopyion said.
Carlson didn't feel that this was the best way to end a conversation.
He would have preferred reassurance that she'd be safe.
Kopyion never understood.
He seemed incapable of basic pleasantries.
He wouldn't understand why his deputy was upset.
They entered the throne room.
Around the Golden Throne was a mural depicting a magnificent sun sending its rays across the heavens.
Carlson thought about how the heart of the Nicaean Federation was a fake.
This whole building was merely a hologram.
Nicaea and the Federation worlds were bankrupt.
The majority of public spending went on the security apparatus.
The Archon was talking to his daughter.
She was about nine years old, with shoulder length black hair and wearing a pale nightdress.
She sucked her thumb.
The Archon saw them enter.
He kissed his daughter on the cheek.
She left the room after a vague promise he would see her later.
‘Kopyion,’ the Archon said, walking over to the police officers.
Kopyion bowed his head and the major saluted.
‘I serve,’ said Carlson.
The Archon ignored him.
‘What have you found out?’ the supreme ruler asked.
‘Nothing,’ Kopyion replied.
‘He has friends in high places…’
The major was puzzled.
What were they talking about?
’…
I have received an official request from the Grand Council for the antique dealer to be freed,’ the Archon continued.
‘Who is it signed by?’
Kopyion asked.
‘Your friend — Academician Brown.’
Kopyion nodded.
‘Do you have enough evidence to hold him?’
Carlson looked at Kopyion.
The antique dealer?
Had they come out here to talk about the murders?
That would explain why he had been invited, but there was a revolution going on.
Was no-one interested?
‘We have nothing,’ Carlson said.
‘I understand you knew the second victim, Annalisa Sellen.’
The Archon stared at the general.
‘She was a member of your Justice Police and involved in a security operation at the time of her death.
Is this true?’
Kopyion shrugged his shoulders.
Carlson was astonished.
He hadn't known this.
There was much he was not aware of in security operations, but the general had placed him in charge of the inquiry.
He  had interrogated the suspect.
Yet he hadn't been told this highly relevant fact.
‘You must let him go,’ the Archon instructed.
‘I have also received complaints about the damage caused to his shop by your bully-boys.
General, you must temper your men's enthusiasm.’
Kopyion nodded.
‘In only three hours I will be delivering the most difficult speech of my life.
Our Federation's survival depends on diplomacy.
If the military or those dark-age fools were to take the initiative, we would be doomed.’
The Archon returned to sit on his throne.
He was tired.
People seemed to be living on the edge of their nerves.
The major had seen many walking around with blank stares, communicating in monosyllables.
‘I have also received communication from your friend Brown.’
He stressed your friend.
‘He intends to ask me about ‘Pandora's Box’ in the Assembly.
How did he find out?’
Kopyion didn't reply and the Archon continued talking.
‘Is there any progress on retrieving the missile?’
‘No,’ Kopyion said.
The Archon looked furious but the general had no more to tell him.
At the best of times, General Kopyion was not informative; he did not trust people, and gave away as little information as possible.
Kopyion turned to walk out.
‘Kopyion, I have not dismissed you,’ the Archon stated.
The general stopped.
‘I want the antique dealer freed today.
Your energies would be better employed in concentrating on the riots and the panic unfolding on this planet.’
The general asked, ‘May I go now?’, then walked off, not waiting for an answer.
‘I serve,’ the major said, saluting the supreme ruler of the Nicaean Federation.
The Archon ignored him, stood up and shouted at the disappearing figure.
‘You will never make Archon.’
The major followed his commanding officer down the corridor.
The marshland was barren with little vegetation and no visible life-forms.
The soil was dry and firm underfoot.
They passed by a series of layered rocks.
Bernice was fascinated by rock formations.
They were unusually powerful visions of the natural beauty of the universe, and they acted as a reminder of her place in the cosmos.
She was thirty-one; they were millions of years old.
Spike was ahead of her.
‘Come on, will you,’ she muttered.
‘How did I get into this, Doctor?’
She frowned.
She was talking to herself again.
She remembered wandering around a boyfriend's house talking to herself, and then discovering him sitting in the lounge.
He must have thought she was mad.
‘Mind you, sometimes I think I'm mad,’ she said.
She couldn't see Spike.
He'd crossed over the rocks.
In her way there was a pool of mud.
She didn't have time to walk around it.
She stepped forward and couldn't move.
The mud was up to her knees.
She struggled.
She was sinking.
It was quicksand.
‘Calm down and think.
Now remember Benny, the more you struggle the sooner you'll be swallowed up,’ she said to herself.
There was nothing to grab on to.
She couldn't stretch out and touch the sides.
There was only one thing for it.
Bernice Summerfield needed the metal man.
‘Spike, Spike!’ she shouted.
She waited a few seconds and shouted louder.
‘If you don't come I'm going to start panicking.’
She had sunk to her waist.
She would drown within a few minutes.
She could no longer feel her legs.
‘Help me, metal man!’
She was anxious.
Her throat would never produce a sound again if she shouted any louder.
‘Help!’
She heard a sound.
He was standing behind her.
She turned.
‘Get me out…’
It wasn't Spike.
A figure stood in front of her.
Her eyes  were dazzled.
She couldn't make out his features.
He seemed to be wearing a dark-coloured suit.
‘May I help?’
He spoke without a trace of an accent.
‘No, it's all right.
I'm quite happy.
I do this sort of thing for relaxation.’
He seemed to be smiling.
‘If you're sure?’
The mud was half way up her chest and her arms were waving in the air.
‘Help!’
She shouted for Spike.
Where was the toaster when you needed him?
‘He can't hear you,’ said the man.
‘If someone doesn't help you in a few minutes you will die.’
She wasn't making it easy for him to rescue her.
But she wasn't into strange men suddenly appearing and offering to save her life.
What did he want in return?
Suddenly she felt a jolt and her body was submerged underneath the mud.
She couldn't see, and her mouth and nose were covered by the slimy, cold substance.
Her arms stuck into the air, waving goodbye to the world.
Why did she have to be so difficult?
‘For God's sake, get me out of here,’ she tried to shout, but ended up with a sound like blowing bubbles in the bath.
She felt her arm being grabbed, and slowly she was pulled from the quicksand.
She coughed, and tried to wipe the mud from her face.
‘You took your time.
Not seen anyone drowning before?’
Stop it.
Stop it, Benny.
Give the man a chance.
He handed her a survival bottle of water.
She poured its contents over her head.
‘Sorry.
I don't come within an inch of losing my life every day.
It's done funny things to my head.
Thanks.’
She couldn't see the stranger's face.
The light behind him blinded her.
‘Who are you?’ she asked.
‘You should not be here, child,’ he replied.
She stood up.
Grief!
She was covered in mud.
She looked a mess.
‘Now you tell me!’
Bernice replied.
‘What are you doing here?’ he asked.
‘The sixty-four thousand dollar question.
It's an old Earth programme.
Never mind.
What am I doing here?
First of all the Earth cooled, and then along came these little amoeba, then there were the dinosaurs…
’ She stopped.
Her facetiousness was not going to win her any friends.
‘As I said, the mud has messed up my mind.
Our ship, the TARDIS, isn't working.
It stopped, ceased to function.
We crash-landed here.
The Doctor and I were trying to discover why.’
‘The Doctor?’
‘Yes.
He disappeared.
We were walking through the forest.
One moment he was there and then…’
‘He was gone.’
She tried to look at his features.
‘I don't want to be rude, but who are you?
I don't let any Tom, Dick or Harry save my life.
What are you doing here?’
She had to work on her politeness.
The Doctor had told her that many times.
You don't have to aggravate people.
She could hear a voice, calling her.
‘Where are you?’
It was Spike's voice.
He was looking for her.
‘I'm here, over here,’ she shouted.
Bernice turned to the man.
‘It's my…friend.’
The man stood there.
She turned away to shout to the android.
‘Remember…the Empire that Never Ended,’ the man said.
She looked back to ask what he was talking about.
He had disappeared.
She had been talking to him only a few seconds before, but he was gone.
It wasn't possible for him to have vanished like that.
Second time this week, she thought.
This world has got some answering to do.
Brown sat at his desk.
He was preparing a detailed set of reference papers for the emergency session of the Academy.
He expected the Archon to make a rousing speech, denouncing the forces of ill-reason and pleading for a suspension of the conflict, pending negotiations.
But it  would all be lies.
The military were firmly in control of the government, and the Freedom parties would not be allowed a voice in any discussions.
Ever since the Seven Planets had become an independent Federation, the smaller planets had been struggling to break away from Nicaea.
The men in power continued to bleed the Federation dry.
People were desperate for food, yet the Academy had done nothing to help.
Brown was becoming angry.
His doctor had warned him about his heart.
He needed to keep calm.
The vidphone flashed an incoming message.
He switched the machine on to receiver mode.
The screen wavered.
The state of the infrastructure was exceedingly poor.
Roads, communications and power were government dominated monopolies, and failed to provide the necessary service.
The picture cleared.
It was the antique dealer.
He had been arrested by the Justice Police and his shop had been virtually destroyed by the security officers.
‘Brown?’ the antique dealer asked.
‘Yes, Mr Mann.’
‘Can I speak?’
‘Yes, it isn't an open line.
Our conversation will be electronically scrambled.’
‘I was phoning to thank you for getting me out of police headquarters.’
‘Yes,’ replied Brown.
‘I think General Kopyion knows.’
‘Knows what?’
‘About the conspiracy,’ Mann said.
‘I realize that charade of tearing your shop apart was to discover if you had ‘friends’.
But we're both suspects.
Me, a known Freedom Party sympathiser and you, a black marketeer.’
‘But no-one has been arrested.
We were expecting most of the main opposition leaders to have been imprisoned,’ Mann stated the obvious.
He was nervous.
Brown couldn't tell whether it was from the day spent in police custody or the general tension electrifying the population.
‘I think you're overestimating Kopyion.
General Bourbollon's troops are gathering around the capital; he's prepared to cross the Rubicon.
Even if the Academy is ‘allowed’ to meet, we'll find ourselves under house arrest.’
‘The people would rise up,’ Mann said excitedly.
‘No.
If the military could provide them with bread and circuses, then the people would be content.
And then Bourbollon, that indolent fool, would launch military expeditions to retake the other five planets.
There would be full-scale nuclear war.’
‘Sir.’
Mann didn't respond to the nightmare scenario.
‘Forgive me.
You have the William Ashbless poetry.
Shall we make another appointment?’
Brown asked.
They arranged to meet at eleven o'clock the next evening.
Brown severed the phone link as Mann continued to thank him for his release from detention.
He returned to his paperwork.
He thought of the threat from the military.
Bourbollon was a fool.
Another one trying to prevent the Federation descending into chaos; he would be no more successful than the Archon.
In front of the Althosian system lay only eternal darkness.
Brown looked at a photograph of his wife on his desk.
She had been so beautiful.
This was how he remembered her, rather than as the cancer-pained rag doll he had nursed until her death.
Her optimism, her joy of life in those last hours, had nourished the medical staff.
He held her hand as she died.
But it all meant nothing to him.
We are merely animals, creatures that are brought kicking and screaming into this world and then die.
There is no more.
He slammed his clenched fist into the desk, and began to cry.
Was there a supreme God, or was He powerless, subject to the machinations of a higher force in this universe?
The Doctor had walked into the fog.
Blake stayed at a distance, following him along the Victorian streets.
What  was the stranger intending to do?
The Doctor pulled the half-eaten apple out of his pocket and began to consume it.
His walk was aimless; he kept changing direction.
He was lost!
He pulled out a coin from his pocket and flipped it into the air.
He was obviously moving left or right depending on the fall of the coin.
The Doctor stopped in front of a warehouse alongside the Thames.
A river barge was moored nearby, and a host of characters were busily unloading its contents, dairy products from the Kentish farms.
The Doctor placed the remainder of the apple in his mouth and proceeded to eat the core, stalk and pips.
It was time for Blake to re-acquaint himself with the stranger.
‘Doctor,’ Blake said, walking up to him.
‘Hmnn.
Oh, hello…’ the Doctor replied, not able to tell who was bearing down on him in the fog.
‘It's Blake,’ he said.
‘What?
My good man, it's marvellous to see you.’
The Doctor shook Blake's hand as if they were long lost friends.
‘Now what can I do for you?’
Blake didn't know if he should hit the Doctor.
‘Doctor, this is 1888.
It is seventy years later than when I should have arrived.’
‘Yes.’
The Doctor was pensive.
‘How long have you been here?’
‘About five hours,’ Blake replied.
‘Yes, as I thought.
I was seconds behind you, entering the hole, but I've only just arrived.
This means that where we were doesn't exist in the space or time of this universe.
How do I explain it to you?’
He looked around and, seeing the cheeses, walked over to them.
‘Imagine our universe is a huge cheese, and where we were is another cheese.
Are you following it so far?’
Blake had initially wondered if the Doctor was being deliberately obtuse.
He thought it more likely that the Doctor was an escaped madman, probably an entertainer from Bedlam, wandering around, attempting to persuade the world his madness was the truth of life.
‘I'll carry on.
These cheeses are situated together, and  it's possible to move from one cheese to another.
These cheeses have their own identity, and nothing about one cheese changes the nature of the other cheeses.
Do you see?’
‘No.’
Blake stared at the stranger.
The Doctor looked puzzled.
‘My friend Isaac Newton managed to explain the concept of gravity by talking about an apple.
I seem to have failed to describe parallel universes by using cheeses.’
‘The next thing you will be telling me is that the moon is made of green cheese,’ Blake snarled.
‘No, young man.’
‘Young man?
I am fifty-four.
You are but two-thirds of my age.
‘I'm over a thousand years old,’ the Doctor replied.
Sometimes when the Doctor spoke he told the truth, equally often it seemed he spoke lies and evasions; he was a trickster.
The dockers unloading the barge were looking over.
They were obviously concerned that he and the Doctor were planning to rob them of their livelihood.
Blake indicated to the Doctor that it would be sensible to move on.
The Doctor was preoccupied, thinking of old times.
‘William,’ he said, and then as an after-thought added: ‘You don't mind if I call you that?’
‘No.
What's your name?’
‘I don't remember.’
An obvious lie, but the Doctor had not meant to offend.
‘I left my own planet centuries ago.
My people, the Time Lords, are a remarkably dull race.
They sit around all day and ponder.
The most technologically advanced race in the universe, and all they do is seek knowledge.
They do nothing useful.’
The Doctor's conversation made little sense to Blake.
He wanted to be returned to his own time.
‘There's a vague memory in my mind.’
Blake was about to agree, but the Doctor continued, ‘I don't have a name for it.
There's a blank.
I thought it; was a dream…eyes looking at me.
But then, back there in the desert, It knew what was in the void.
It knew and I didn't.
The Time  Lords of Gallifrey…’
The Doctor rapidly changed the subject.
‘Do you play chess?’
‘Yes.
Not very well, but I play,’ Blake replied.
‘I feel that I'm playing a game with someone, and I don't know the rules or the stakes.
Perhaps the Time Lords are right.
Stay out; don't become involved.
More and more often I don't see what good comes from my involvement.’
Blake directed the stranger away from the Thames towards the hustle and bustle of the East End.
Children were playing and throwing a ball for each other to catch.
The ball flew towards the travellers, and one of the street urchins collided with the Doctor.
The traveller put out his hands and saved the child from falling on to the ground.
‘Cheers, mate,’ the child said, picking up the ball and running to his friends.
Thomas looked at the woman.
She was beginning to stir.
Her face creased with pain.
The ball of fire had licked her body.
He wondered who she was.
She had run from the exploding craft and collapsed.
He had picked her up and carried her from the flames.
She was now feeling the ground underneath her back.
She stopped moving and appeared to be listening.
The only sound she'd be able to hear was the crackling of the fire.
Slowly, she opened her eyes.
She looked at the burnt-out hopper and the forest savaged by the cataclysmic explosion.
The red weed bordered the site of the devastation.
It was moving closer.
She moaned, ‘This nightmare continues.
Is there no escape?’
Her body was thin and underdeveloped.
Short brunette hair exposing a dry and poor scalp.
Her skin was covered in eczema.
She might have been pretty once, but not any more.
She looked undernourished and ill-kept, like most of the population of Nicaea.
She looked at him.
She had blue eyes.
‘And who are you?’ she asked.
‘I'm Thomas.
Second Lieutenant of the Fourth Tactical Wing of the Justice Police of Nicaea.’
‘An android!
You're not going to kill me are you?’ she whimpered.
‘No.
What happened?’
‘A bomb.
I don't understand,’ she said.
‘Tell me, what are you doing on this forbidden world?’
Thomas had to consider whether this was one of the shapechangers.
However, the shapechangers had not travelled to this planet in a space hopper.
Although there had been no evidence on their computers of the shapechangers' craft being on the planet, it had been monitored heading towards this unwelcoming world.
General Kopyion had ordered that the criminals should not be stopped in deep space due to the risks of the nuclear device being detonated.
Thomas felt that if this was one of the shapechangers then it would have transformed itself into a creature which would have been untouched by the explosion.
He was not certain; he would not trust the woman until he knew more about her presence here.
She sighed, said, ‘Don't ask,’ then continued to tell him about her husband, his experiments, his painful and sudden death, and the bomb aboard the craft.
She was tired, and her conversation wandered off into comments on the animal life, the river and her nightmares.
She asked what he was doing on the planet.
He weighed up what he needed to tell her about the shapechangers and theft of the nuclear device.
In the end, he said that he was the only survivor of a four man crew of Killer-type androids sent here to annihilate two criminals and return an object to his controllers.
‘If you're a programmed Killer, why did you save my life?’ she asked.
It was a weakness.
She was right in that he should have either let her die or executed her.
He could not let anyone stand in the way of the mission.
‘I am retribution, created to carry out the task of destroying those that would threaten the security of the  Seven Planets.
I'm a perfectly engineered Kill machine, which will carry out its orders until they've been implemented or I've been destroyed.
If you get in my way then I'll destroy you.
Until then, you have the right to be protected.’
Thomas was sure the other androids would have rescued her from the burning ship but, discovering she was not part of their mission, would then have executed her.
He felt there were too many unknowns.
He was more concerned about the red weed, currently spreading over the surface of this world.
He looked at the bomb site.
The weed had taken hold of the space craft.
The sound of the fire had ceased.
And the flames had stopped.
He could still see the red shape of burning flames, but they were frozen in time.
It looked like a blaze photographed with a filter that transformed everything into shades of the same colour.
He could see that the weed was moving towards them.
‘We must go,’ he said, pointing at the encroaching paralysis.
As he started to walk away, she stood up.
‘By the way, my name is Ell,’ she shouted after him, and then to herself, ‘and I need your help…’
The space station had plummeted from the sky thousands of years before, scattering debris over many kilometres.
The impact had caused a massive explosion which had ravaged the planet.
Hundreds of kilometres of forest and vegetation had been scorched.
Now nothing grew on the plain.
The huge, metallic object was basically intact.
It was about five miles round and must have resembled a spinning top, floating above this anonymous planet.
The symbol of a lost civilization which had walked this way when the cosmos was still young.
The khthons showed no interest in the ancient relic.
Swarf shouted for them to speed up.
Time was catching up with them.
Chopra had not told the shapechanger that his brother was dead.
The shapechanger's body had been enveloped  by the force suffocating the planet.
Chopra felt it happen.
There was no pain.
It was the beginning of the end.
Chopra stared at the space station, trying to pick up the memories of a past age.
And then It sensed him.
It knew he was there.
Chopra staggered, and slumped on to the floor.
He had looked into the other world, and he had been caught peering through.
He looked up at the sky and saw two eyes staring at him.
A yellow face, bloodshot eyes, and the feeling of incredible age.
It was close but far.
It had waited.
And now It knew him.
‘No, no,’ he whispered.
As he cowered on the ground, a small insect ran from the space station.
Chopra saw it out of the corner of his eye.
He watched it head towards him.
It was the size of a beetle, but mechanical.
Apart from its legs it resembled an old fashioned typewriter with a carriage and Qwerty keyboard.
There was a piece of paper sticking up from its back.
He bent closer to read it.
‘Whom Gods destroy they first send Mad.’
The typewriter made a clicking sound and then ran towards the space station.
Chopra watched it disappear.
The stars moved across the emptiness of space.
Brown sat looking through an ancient telescope at the clockwork precision of the galaxy.
His top-storey apartment had a glass dome which allowed him to sit watching the falling stars.
Before an important meeting he usually sat for an hour staring deep into the void, reminding himself of man's place in the cosmos.
He tried to empty his mind of all thoughts, preparing for what only the most naive would fail to see as the last meeting of the Academy.
He had taken a couple of tablets of synthesized dope.
He couldn't relax, though.
He had tried to contact General Bourbollon, but all vidphones were ‘temporarily out of action’.
He thought that either the military were arresting all the leading dissidents and had cut his communication links with the outside world, or the rebels had succeeded in crippling the vidphone network.
Looking out of his window he could see the once beautiful Nicaean capital in flames.
Every few seconds the sounds of shots and explosions broke the fragile silence.
The door alarm sounded.
He had visitors.
It was his turn.
He wondered whether to stand and fight.
An antique revolver on display in his bookcase had not been fired since he had purchased it.
What good would it do?
He flipped a switch and the front door opened.
He hadn't checked how many had come to arrest him.
A single set of footsteps echoed up the stairs.
He wondered if there was something he should be doing.
‘Brown?’
A familiar voice.
‘Kopyion,’ he said, surprised.
‘You were expecting someone else?’
Kopyion replied.
‘No.
I didn't think….’
‘I've come to escort you to the Academy,’ Kopyion said.
Brown still seemed uncertain.
‘My troops are downstairs.’
‘I thought, with the vidphones not working…’
‘Temporary power failure,’ said Kopyion.
‘Yes.’
‘Have you got everything you need?’
Kopyion was dressed in skull cap and black cloak.
He sounded more matter of fact and tired than he had during their last contact.
He walked to the telescope and looked through the eye piece.
Brown looked at the old man.
They had spent so much time together, but hardly knew each other.
‘I like watching the stars,’ said Kopyion.
‘Have you ever read any of the old Earth literature, postulating what it would be like out in space and in the future.
Would it be a time of wonder, or would it be the old conflicts continued?
Would mankind enter a new phase of evolution?
I suppose we have entered a new phase.
We and the machines now rule the galaxy,’ Brown continued.
‘But when you walk the streets you still pass the prostitutes, the drug takers, the street scum and the  unpleasant smell of poverty.
What has our technology created?’
He had been thinking.
What were the forces at the heart of human darkness?
He had sat and formulated his final speech to the Academy.
Soon it would be a different life.
Kopyion pulled a jar of dates from his pocket and with a wooden fork took one out and began to chew it.
‘On medieval Earth they used to label maps with ‘Here Be Dragons’.
An old idea, that beyond a certain point you just find hideous monsters,’ Kopyion said.
‘I agree, technology hasn't liberated mankind.
But nature isn't an intricately wrought machine.
Machines are our tools.
They're not our saviours.
We all serve the great plan.’
‘And what is the great plan?’
Brown asked.
‘The Book says we're all the children of Adam and Eve, tainted by the fruits of original sin.
But I think there's a more powerful force in this universe than the Prime Mover.
We're all children of the Serpent, the spawn of the Form Manipulator.
That would explain why there is still war and death.’
Kopyion shook his head.
‘Time…’
Brown picked up his papers.
Kopyion stood in the corner of the room, away from the light.
‘When I look around me I see the Maelstrom.
I remember that the Form Manipulator will try and deceive.
This is all appearance,’ Kopyion said.
He walked towards the stairs.
‘Kopyion,’ Brown shouted after him.
The old man turned.
‘I'm sorry for burdening you.’
Kopyion sighed and walked down the stairs.
The major patrolled the outside of the Academy building.
The Justice Police had sealed off the streets and were only allowing in members of parliament who agreed to be body-searched.
Carlson had been ordered to prevent the civil war exploding in the parliament building.
Riots were increasing over the capital, and communications had been broken with the other two major cities  of Nicaea.
He'd heard rumours that the military were planning to declare martial law.
Satellite reports confirmed that over three hundred armoured carriers were parked around the perimeter of the city; large sections of the capital were blacked out and quiet after hours of gunfire and arson attacks.
He watched the parliamentarians arrive, and then walked into the old building.
The Academy was a riot of colours, a babble of voices, and a host of opinions.
It had once stood for all that was right and true in the Seven Planets.
Debate had occurred, and democracy had appeared to govern in the interests of all.
But the annexation of the other planets of the Althosian system had left Nicaea economically and morally bankrupt.
Although originally based on the Greek ideal of Philosopher Kings, the mixture of academics, priests and the military actually led to decision making designed only to protect sectional interests.
Carlson understood the feelings of the rebels; he thought it unlikely any of their issues would be dealt with here.
He could see that all the interest groups were doing was shifting the balance of power, leaving some more powerful at the expense of others.
He had once believed in the perfect system.
Now he didn't believe any system was perfect.
There were reports about groups of ordinary people taking to the streets, holding hands, approaching armoured carriers and calling for peace.
He didn't feel that there would be anyone here speaking for them.
Academician Brown arrived.
He nodded to Carlson as he walked into the hall.
Was the Academician laughing at him?
The murders might have a political motive.
The major was aware that the main suspect had been freed on the orders of the opposition leader.
He had checked on the computer but couldn't find any other link between the two men.
A group of people applauded as Brown entered.
The radio reported that the air transporter, carrying the Supreme Leader of the Nicaean Federation, had landed.
As the Archon entered, a silence descended over the gathered parliamentarians.
He walked through the crowd and to his throne.
He requested that the people pray.
‘May the Prime Mover protect us under his divine providence.
And may peace and harmony return to a troubled people.
I serve.
Today we gather to make a decision about the future of our planet.
Our future.
We make a collective decision, together, for peace or for strife.
We must bury our differences and work together.
If we cannot then we shall all lose.
My people, I do not feel powerless.
None of us should feel powerless.
We have the future in our hands.
Let our children remember this day.’
The Archon sat down.
It would be a formality for a representative of the Assembly to ask the Archon to propose the opening motion.
Brown stood and requested that he be allowed to speak.
The Archon agreed.
‘As a known representative of the people, I denounce this Assembly.’
A wave of shock went through the hall.
This was not the speech the Archon had been expecting.
‘The people demand the formal dissolution of the Nicaean Federation, massive cutbacks in the military — who should only exist to defend our world against the encroachment of outside interests — and a redistribution of food and clothes to all peoples of this nation.
Starvation and cold are the main agendas today.’
There was no applause.
The military sat silent.
The major looked over their benches.
General Bourbollon was missing.
The old general was a traditionalist who believed in the rule of authority, and was well known for his right-wing views.
If the military were to seize power under Bourbollon, the clampdown would be fierce.
The Archon rose to address the awaiting masses.
However, a priest stood on the floor of the parliament and  refused to yield before being allowed to speak.
The power struggle went on for about a minute, then the Archon sat down.
He was not expecting this display of outright defiance.
The priest wore a cowl over his head.
Although his voice failed to carry as far as those of the Academicians', there was no possibility of failing to recognize the message.
‘It is Time.
The beginning of the End, when the forces of Light battle the forces of Darkness.
Those who do not stand with us and fight, align themselves with the Enemy and will be annihilated with the forces of Darkness.
This is a holy war, and only the Prime Mover can decide who lives and who dies.
The creatures of Darkness have declared this war.
They have seized our children; they have attacked our villages.
We have stood by and allowed them.
The Hunters must be destroyed, and the liberals and voices who fail to support the Chosen Path must be annihilated.
I call on you all to line up…’
The priest threw back his cowl.
His head was shaved, and he had diagonal lines of green and red painted down his face.
He held his arms in the air and crossed them above his head.
‘War, war, war!’ he shouted.
The other priests also stood and removed the cowls from over their heads.
Male or female, all were shaved and painted.
One by one, in unison, they began to chant:
‘War, war, war…’
The major looked away.
He felt sadness.
Nicaea was in a state of civil war and there would be no turning back.
DAY FIVE 16:00–20:00
As daylight filtered through the sea mist, the hostile and uncertain London of Blake's future began to take the more reassuring form of a busy port.
The night creatures which had drifted through the streets were no more, and the market stalls and poverty-stricken beggars took on the more comforting image of a capital apparently little changed since Blake's day.
Cockneys, Irishmen, Poles, Jews, Chinamen; all milled around the streets.
The familiar odours of onions and fat, roasted coffee and decaying fish drifted towards the Thames.
It had been less than two days since he had met the Doctor, and he had had little rest.
The stranger was pacing around.
He seemed burdened with melancholic thoughts and dark visions as he wrestled with his pursuing demons.
He talked about the murder victim sprawled across the pavement, and then wandered off into a conversation about a comedian called Ken Dodd.
As they walked, Blake heard the Doctor talking to himself, counting numbers quickly as if trying to catch himself out.
Blake asked him about Jack the Ripper.
The Doctor explained that in the late nineteenth century there had been a series of unsolved murders committed in the East End of London.
By one man, it had been said.
He had become known as Jack the Ripper.
The police initially reported that he had a knowledge of surgery and, due to a message scrawled on a wall over one of the victims, it was suggested that he belonged to a secret organization, the Freemasons.
Over the years various suspects had been identified as the killer, including members of the Royal Family.
Blake had no interest in this bloodthirsty subject; he wanted to return home.
‘Where do we start unravelling a mystery?’ the Doctor asked.
Blake was understandably puzzled.
‘The beginning,’ he suggested.
‘No.
The answer is in the question.
It's where the mystery unravels.
It only becomes a mystery because we notice that there are too few facts to draw a conclusion.
It's a mathematical shape.
How do we solve a murder mystery — return to the scene of the crime or,’ the Doctor stopped and pointed his umbrella to a nearby building, ‘explore that…’
‘Whorehouse?’
‘Yes,’ the Doctor said, smiling with an inane grin.
‘We go back to the scene of the crime.’
‘No,’ the Doctor said.
‘We enter that building.’
The Doctor marched towards a Georgian building which bore all the signs of being a sailors' brothel.
Blake was not averse to entering such places, but could think of a number of things he'd prefer to do at this time.
‘Why?’
Blake shouted.
The Doctor didn't stop, but shouted at the top of his voice for all to hear:
‘Because this is a game.
And I don't want to play…’
The brothel resembled an old abandoned house with the scuttle of rats across the floorboards and the moth-eaten curtains.
A fat whore looked uninterested, and told the travellers to follow her.
Blake muttered he'd rather not.
The Doctor said ‘Madam’, cocking his hat with respect.
There was a smell of lemon juice about the place, although the cleanliness of the establishment was in doubt.
The whore sniffed and tried to walk with a ladylike gait; she seemed a little drunk and occasionally stopped to pause for breath.
Her red dress had not been made to walk in and had seen better days.
She led them down a narrow corridor and into a comfortable lounge.
Three young women sat around the edges of the room; they looked bored and a little cold in their scanty bodices.
Another couple of girls, who looked  about ten or eleven, were playing marbles; they saw the strangers enter, stopped their game, sidled over and forced tired and dead smiles.
‘Excuse me.
I want a little information,’ said the Doctor.
‘You what?’ said the fat whore.
The Doctor went over to the marbles, found a jack and started to play a solitary game.
‘Flocihilipilifaction,’ the Doctor said, stressing all the syllables.
One of the girls walked over to the time traveller and smiled a genuine welcoming grin.
‘I once played this with Kublai Khan,’ he said.
The girl knelt down and began to play a game of marbles with the Doctor.
Blake looked at the other girl; her eyes were dead.
Long ago she had retreated from all the suffering into her own world.
‘What's all this about?’ the whore asked.
‘This ‘ere ain't no doss house.
We want money for your pleasure.’
Blake was embarrassed.
The Doctor continued to play marbles, oblivious of the protestations of the woman.
‘If you just want to look, then you can get lost.
I'll get some men folk and they'll see to you.’
‘I'm hungry,’ said the girl.
The Doctor pulled money out of his pocket and handed it over.
There was a handful of notes, of different denominations and a variety of origins.
The whore went to take them from the child.
‘Leave her alone,’ the Doctor shouted in a dark and ominous tone.
The whore backed off, cursing the travellers.
The women sitting around the room had begun to stir once they had seen the money.
‘Sir, your pleasure,’ a whore said to Blake.
The Doctor talked quietly to the child.
‘'When I was a child I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things.
For now we see through a glass, darkly: but then face to face: now I know in part; but then I shall know even as also I am known.’'
‘Corinthians, thirteen eleven’ Blake said.
The Doctor nodded.
‘A pastor I knew used it as the basis of his final sermon, before facing his greatest fear.
We must never abandon the child in all of us.’
The Doctor stood and walked over to the women.
He looked at them carefully.
‘I'm looking for Jack the Ripper,’ he said.
The women sniggered.
The other girl who had been talking to Blake walked over to the Doctor.
She told him crudely what services were on offer, and the cost of each.
Her eyes never left his face.
He was becoming more and more angry.
He stared at her.
‘Let's go,’ he said to Blake.
The girl playing marbles didn't even look up as the travellers left.
The other girl laughed.
Blake needed to run to keep up with the indignant Doctor.
Outside, the poet turned to the Doctor and raged at him.
Why had they gone into that building, asked a stupid question and then left?
It didn't make sense.
The Doctor stopped and answered simply, ‘I thought they'd help.’
He looked puzzled and uncertain.
Blake told him that his actions made no sense, and that if he had been genuinely interested in uncovering the mass murderer his methodology would have to change.
The Doctor muttered that he knew best and that life was rarely logical.
Outside the brothel a coach and horses was pulling up.
The coach was a polished jet black with golden initials engraved on the side.
Two thoroughbred stallions panted heavily as if driven at some pace.
Although the passengers were concealed by drawn curtains, an unpleasant thug dressed in a coachman's uniform could be seen dismounting from behind the reins.
The thug ignored the two travellers.
His appearance was sufficiently unusual, together with the aristocratic coach, to stop Blake in his tracks.
The coachman resembled a carnival strongman, with well-developed muscles, a bald head and an oriental moustache.
The Doctor pushed Blake but the poet failed to move.
The near side curtain opened slightly.
The sight made Blake look away.
A pale face, a shock of white hair and pink staring eyes.
An albino!
As the travellers walked away the strongman carried the huddled figure into the brothel.
A cloak concealed his body from prying eyes.
The Doctor showed little interest in the events.
He was still smarting from his encounter with the child prostitute.
‘Why?’ he barked.
‘I'm so powerless.’
They walked from the brothel through the streets and arrived at the Thames.
They stood on the banks and looked across at the blanket of fog coming from the river.
The Doctor bought some roast chestnuts and both nibbled at the snack.
Blake sat on the ground while the Doctor hung over a wall, listening to the boats pass on their way to the sea.
‘Doctor, tell me about Gallifrey,’ Blake said.
The Doctor recited: ‘According to legend, the people of Gallifrey had supernatural powers.
We could read minds.
We lived in a period of superstition and dread.
And then a great scientist, Rassilon, led the people into the scientific age.
He overthrew the Pythia, who with her ancestors had ruled for an eternity.
She cursed Gallifrey; a deadly plague ravaged our planet.
‘We discovered time travel, but my people just sit and watch the events of the universe without getting involved.
We are scientific geniuses but we do nothing.
Look around you.
What the Time Lords could have achieved…’
The Doctor was wistful.
Blake repeated, ‘According to legend?’
The Doctor said, ‘There's a saying on my planet, which roughly translates as ‘never trust a Time Lord’.’
‘Even you?’
‘Especially me.’
The Doctor was becoming thoughtful again.
‘I have lost my innocence.’
‘We all grow older,’ Blake said, ‘but you are a sad man.
Humanity is struggling…’
‘Against what?’
‘Its own nature, the fall from grace, the eating of the  fruit of the knowledge of good and evil?
Whatever interpretation you put on it we are trying to maintain progress,’ Blake continued.
The Doctor looked extremely confused.
‘I remember Jo Grant.
She was so young and fragile.
She left me.’
He looked at Blake and smiled his idiotic grin.
‘She was a companion of mine four regenerations ago.’
He started to look panicked.
‘I wonder where Bernice is.
We have to get back to that planet — she's in grave danger.’
The Doctor threw the remaining roast chestnuts, which he'd barely touched, into the river.
He marched off into the heart of Whitechapel.
Blake was becoming tired of the stranger's mood swings.
Although he sometimes wondered if the Doctor was dangerous, he needed him to return to his own time.
Suddenly, the Doctor stopped, frantically searching his pockets.
Blake was beckoned over to the stranger.
‘My sonic screwdriver is missing,’ the Doctor said.
‘So?’
‘It must have been the child who bumped into me.
If such advanced technology were to get into the wrong hands, it could change the history of this planet.’
‘It might not do,’ Blake volunteered.
‘We must get it back,’ the Doctor barked.
Striding together the Doctor and Blake returned to the murder scene.
Blake hoped that his companion was not still wanted as a suspect.
The atmosphere of the East End was not as unpleasant as in the night hours, but there was an air of threat and intimidation.
The Doctor talked about ‘the police’ as having little control, and ‘as yet’not having a scientific methodology to investigate crimes.
Blake was the first to notice that they were being followed.
He saw about a dozen street ruffians trailing them through the streets.
They were unwashed and unkempt, with tattered shirts and holey knee-length culottes.
‘Not Baker Street Irregulars,’ the Doctor said cryptically.
‘Is the boy who robbed us there?’
‘I think so,’ Blake said.
‘Good.
We'll buy the screwdriver back.’
‘What?’
Blake shouted, as the Doctor headed towards the criminals.
He could see the small figure pulling bank-notes out of his pocket, trying to explain why he wanted his machinery returned.
Why couldn't he walk off and leave the Doctor?
Blake suspected that he was not the first person who had asked himself that question or had come to the same irrational conclusion.
Blake walked over to his travelling companion, still arguing with the street gang.
‘You can have the money, and if you return the piece of machinery I won't be angry.’
Suddenly the criminals launched an attack on the time traveller.
Blake managed to stop the first punch reaching its mark, but soon realized that he was also a target and a dozen people lashing out at him and his companion were not good odds.
He ducked and dived.
A fist crashed into his mouth.
A shadow.
He looked up and saw a wooden stave falling towards his head.
As he collapsed he saw the Doctor being pummelled by the mob.
Blood was pouring from the side of the Doctor's face.
‘Doctor,’ Blake groaned and lost consciousness.
Ell had difficulties walking through the jungle.
Although she was by no means fit, needing sporadic rests to catch her breath, the effects of the explosion were less than Thomas had expected.
Apart from burn marks on her clothes and hair, the only noticeable effect of the explosion was a dried, strained voice and occasional coughing, due to breathing in the smoke.
He felt the odds on anyone surviving such an explosion were extremely low.
He was more concerned about the red weed paralysing the planet.
This whole world was being plunged into a dreadful silence.
Even the birds which had swarmed across the sky had disappeared.
Ell continued to worry about why her husband had been sent by the Academy to the planet.
Why had there been a bomb aboard their ship?
None of this made sense.
He had no answer and wished she would concentrate on  the problems at hand.
She apologized for slowing him down and twice advised him to leave her.
Although Thomas felt her husband had been stupid to bring a woman like this to the planet, he did not intend to abandon her to the mercy of the hostile environment and the murderous shapechanger.
The jungle remained dark and uninviting.
Even without the woman, progress would be slow.
The jungle floor was covered in vines and growths which attacked the feet, impeding movement.
He found his foot stuck in a branch and he bent to free himself.
The ground rose underneath him.
Ell screamed.
A huge snake was unravelling from a tree, sliding along the forest floor.
His left foot was trapped beneath the moving snake.
The creature was dark green and about seven metres in length.
It hissed and moved its head to within a few centimetres of the android.
It appeared to be trying to hypnotize him.
The body of the creature began to wind around him.
Although Thomas didn't know whether it was poisonous, the creature surely had enough power to squeeze the life out of him.
Ell was shouting hysterically.
He had to keep his arms free as he needed them to keep the snake from suffocating him.
Thomas plunged his arm deep into the creature's mouth and then forced his fist upwards through the larynx.
The snake began to choke as it tried to swallow his arm and simultaneously dislodge the obstruction from its windpipe.
Its body thrashed and collided with a tree.
Thomas shut his eyes and hung on with all his might.
After a struggle the creature stopped breathing.
Thomas pulled his arm out of the mouth.
His arm was broken in a number of places.
He stood breathing heavily and holding his arm; wounded but in no pain.
‘What the…’
Ell shouted, pointing at the snake.
She looked shocked, but not about the dead body.
She walked over and kicked the snake.
It didn't move but Thomas could clearly see what she was pointing at.
Over the  ground lay circuits and microchips.
Small pieces of electronic equipment had spilled out of the snake.
It was mechanical.
They spent several minutes examining the artificial creature.
Near the head was a small imprint, ‘Mirage Enterprises’.
Thomas looked at her.
The corporation that manufactured the androids had also made the snake.
This didn't make any sense.
‘I was wondering why everything seemed so familiar.
We're millions of miles from Earth, yet many of the animals and birds are slight variations of long extinct creatures from the home world.’
Ell looked around.
‘Is anything real?’
She walked over to the tree the creature had crashed into.
There was a hole in the bark.
Inside were wires.
‘This whole planet is a fake.
My husband was right that nothing could exist on this planet.
Now, android,’ she looked at him, ‘why would the corporation create an artificial world and then ban anyone from visiting?’
He looked at her, opened his mouth to reply and wished that he had an answer.
Blake opened his eyes once more.
The sooner he and the stranger parted company, the happier he would be.
His head ached.
He looked around.
He and the Doctor were tied up.
They appeared to be in a dungeon.
The Doctor was shuffling and trying to untie the knots which fastened his arms behind his back.
‘Don't worry,’ the Doctor said.
‘I trained with the great Harry Houdini, escape artist extraordinaire.’
Blake closed his eyes but kept being kicked by the Doctor, attempting to escape from his bonds.
The dungeon reeked of mould.
It was poorly lit, with burning torches hanging from the walls, casting long shadows across the cold floor.
Blake's eyes gradually focused on the indistinct objects positioned around the room.
An altar stood in the centre of the room in the middle of a chalk circle.
It was draped with a black cloth and embroidered with a gold pentagram.
An ancient chalice  and a ceremonial knife stood on the altar.
In the corner of the room a hen was squawking in a wooden cage.
Blake realized that they were to be part of some evil black magic ceremony.
There was the sound of a gong in the distance.
A door opened.
Thirteen figures entered.
Each wore a different animal mask; goats, pigs, horses, many unrecognizable but all hideous, grinning and mocking beasts.
The figures wore dark robes and carried small incense burners.
The final entrance was that of a huddled figure who needed to be carried into the room.
It wore a goat's mask, with a single horn growing from the forehead.
‘Doctor,’ Blake interrupted the stranger, who was still trying to escape from the rope.
He apparently hadn't noticed the figures filing into the room.
‘Can you get us out of here?
Now?’
The Doctor looked up.
‘The problem is that I learnt this trick whilst tied up and submerged in a barrel of water.
This is a little harder.’
A tall, sculpted chair was brought into the room and placed before the altar.
Shapes of naked half-men half-beasts writhing in some hideous dance were carved on to the mahogany chair.
The goat's mask figure was lowered on to the chair.
It signalled for the visitors to be pulled to their feet.
Neither of the travellers resisted.
The figure removed its mask.
It was the albino.
‘I am interested in you,’ the albino said.
Blake was drawn to the staring pink eyes.
The albino pulled out an object, barely visible in the dark.
‘What is this?’
‘Do we get a number of guesses?
Animal, vegetable or mineral?’ the Doctor replied.
He was forcefully kicked in his stomach, and bent over groaning with the pain.
‘This object was taken from you by my servants.
Do not try to deceive me.’
‘It can be of no use to you.
I demand it back,’ shouted the Doctor, recognizing his sonic screwdriver.
‘Tonight the Fellowship meet to celebrate the return,’ continued the albino.
‘We have already sacrificed one unbeliever today.
As the time draws nearer more shall perish; their blood will —’
‘Oh no,’ the Doctor said.
The albino stopped talking.
‘Do you know what he's talking about?’
Blake asked.
‘The usual tired cliches.
Any moment now he's going to tell us that we're going to be sacrificed,’ said the Doctor.
A couple of blows rained on the crouching Time Lord.
Blood poured from his mouth.
'— mark the return of the true masters.
More and more will die to celebrate their glory.’
‘No!’ the Doctor stood up, and shouted at the top of his voice.
‘After all, why should our victims always be female?’ the albino asked.
Blake and the Doctor were pulled into the centre of the circle.
The albino was handed a small ornate chest full of white powder.
He placed a small amount of the substance in his hand and one by one the worshippers knelt down and licked it like hungry animals.
The followers danced around the room, chanting in Latin.
Blake recognized the Lord's Prayer spoken backwards.
They were in the middle of a hideous ritual, and they were the sacrificial victims.
A time to die.
The albino began to recount a guttural and frenzied incantation.
The Fellowship disrobed and stood naked.
The hen was taken out of the cage, held up and its throat cut.
Blood dripped into the chalice.
The life fluid of the dead bird was drunk.
The atmosphere was strange.
Blake sought a word to describe this nightmare.
Blake thought the burning incense could have been a hallucinogenic drug which was altering his perception.
The people bounding around the room appeared to be  transforming, taking on the shape and form of the animal masks they were wearing.
The Fellowship wore medallions around their necks.
Due to the speed of movement and poor visibility it was difficult to see exactly what was carved on the amulets it looked like worms, curling around each other.
‘Tell me, what is this?
Is this a symbol of power?’ the albino spoke quietly.
‘You are all fools.
What you're doing is celebrating the forces of Evil,’ the Doctor shouted.
‘You're inviting into your lives a negative force, welcoming that which tempts us all, but transforming that emptiness, that jealousy, that hatred into a living, breeding monstrosity.
I know there are terrible things out there, but that isn't an excuse for giving up on that which sustains us in this life.
Although there are things that thrive on chaos and misery, we don't have to.
We can make a choice between struggling on or surrendering forever to the forces of death.’
‘We do not agree with your slave morality,’ the albino spoke to the time traveller.
Blake looked around.
Animals appeared to be bounding and bellowing around the room.
The dungeon had taken on the squalid smell of the cave back in hell.
Strange couplings and odd noises were rising out of the performances in the dungeon.
The chanting had taken on the form of animal howls and disgusting collections of words screamed out by the blood-frenzied mob.
In the corner of the room a weird mist seemed to be forming.
Blake shook his head to make sure he wasn't falling asleep.
He wasn't.
The followers were calling up a half-glimpsed nightmare.
Blake tried to look away.
A vile-smelling monstrosity was beginning to take shape in their prison.
It looked like a bird with slime-encrusted feathers, three or four foot tall, standing in a pool of blood drifting across the floor.
‘Don't look,’ shouted the Doctor.
‘It's a hallucination — It can't come through here.
Although we're near a hole in time there's no way it can escape into our universe.
Yet.
These are just fanatics who follow the path.’
‘Are you sure?’
Blake shouted.
‘No,’ the Doctor replied.
The Doctor ran from the centre of the room loosening his hands as he fled.
He had remembered what the escapologist had taught him!
He grabbed a flaming torch and wielded it in front of him.
One of the Fellowship moved too close to the flames and a bull's mask went up in flames.
Screams of pain and ecstasy rose from the wounded man.
The man fell against the altar, trying to remove the mask from his face.
His hands burnt.
The fire caught and spread across the ceremonial cloth.
It was an almighty conflagration.
The wooden beams and ceiling were crackling in the extreme heat.
Another of the Fellowship slowly moved towards the battling Time Lord.
It was the strong-armed man.
Blake launched his fifty-four year old body at the lumbering figure.
As the strong-armed man turned towards him Blake hit him in the stomach.
The Doctor shouted at him to get out.
The fire was spreading.
The robes left in the circle were the next casualties of the flames.
‘Get out,’ the Doctor shouted again.
He bounded over to the chest containing the strange white powder.
He picked it up and threw it into the flames.
He moved over to the dungeon door to prevent anyone from escaping.
‘Doctor, you've got to let them out,’ Blake shouted.
‘No,’ he replied.
Blake could hardly breathe and felt that he was going to faint.
‘You go,’ the Doctor said, opening the door.
The air rushed in, creating a fire ball.
Blake was thrown down with the force of the implosion.
Fire raged all around him.
The heat was overpowering.
He picked himself up and staggered down a corridor.
He glanced back.
The fire was creeping along the corridor behind him.
He couldn't see anything in the room and couldn't hear  any shouts or screams.
All he could see and hear was the fire.
All those in the room must have perished.
He carried on, eventually finding his way to the street.
He collapsed outside an old warehouse.
He saw that the building itself was on fire.
And so perishes the Doctor.
He was going to miss the funny little man.
He bent his head to the ground, trying to catch his breath as he listened to the warning bells of the horse-drawn fire engines, heading to the inferno.
‘Day 5,18 hours, 36 minutes and counting…’
The Dragonslayer had been receiving signals from the unnamed planet.
Unknown to the androids, it had the ability to monitor their life functions and activities.
The signals indicated that one of the shapechangers had been terminated.
The more serious threat of the expanding red weed had taken over as the immediate concern of the controllers.
There were now only forty-eight hours left until the craft carried out its programmed instructions.
Unless it received an abort message from Nicaea its self destruction would be like the force of a sun collapsing, wrenching this star system apart.
Time continued to tick away.
‘Day 5,18 hours 37 minutes and counting…’
Darkness was again falling.
However, the London skyline was lit up with the huge warehouse fire.
Blake felt people gathering around him and staring at the warehouse now transformed into a burning pyre.
The police were trying to keep the crowd away from the fire.
However, as Blake was splashed with water he realized that many of the people had come to help put out the fire.
He watched as buckets were passed from the river.
Dockers and warehousemen were trying to drown the fire with what were effectively thimble-fulls of water.
Hundreds of people were lined up.
He didn't know if they would succeed, but it showed that, even here, there  were people prepared to work together for the common good.
He felt something touch his leg.
And again.
He lashed out with his hand but to no effect.
Another tap.
‘Come on.
We'd better move before too many questions are asked.’
The Doctor stood in front of him waving his umbrella.
He had a serious expression on his face and there were no signs that he had just escaped a raging inferno.
He smiled and held up his sonic screwdriver with childish glee.
‘I reclaimed it.’
‘How?’
Blake asked.
‘How what?’ the Doctor asked.
‘Your clothes are untouched.
You don't look like a man who's just escaped from a fire.’
‘I told you.
I was trained by Harry Houdini.’
‘But as I remember, you were submerged in a barrel of water.’
‘Yes, but it was on fire at the time.
Didn't I mention that?
Anyway, we need to get back to the other world.’
Blake stood.
Crowds of people were rushing the other way, towards the conflagration, to try to stem the fire before it spread to the other wooden buildings by the river.
The Doctor and Blake walked down an alleyway heading back to the entrance to hell.
The Doctor appeared to have an innate sense of direction.
The houses all looked alike.
They were three storeys high, hardly six foot apart, with broken windows repaired with paper and rags.
Whitechapel reminded the poet of a scene from Dante's Inferno .
His body wasn't going to take much more.
He desperately needed sleep and a decent meal.
After about ten minutes the Doctor turned to Blake and said, ‘Where do you think we go now?’
‘You're lost?’
Blake raged.
The Doctor smiled.
‘Shall I toss a coin?’
‘No,’ Blake shouted, hobbling away from the Doctor.
Suddenly he heard something, and looked up.
From the darkness in front of them Blake could see a black shape bounding towards them.
Its movements were deliberately slow and mannered.
‘A demon,’ Blake shouted.
Initially he saw only one of the hideous creatures, but more of the demons appeared out of the darkness, loping into the alley.
Blake couldn't say whether the creatures were pursuing them or had their own sinister reason for haunting this part of London.
‘Come on,’ said the Doctor.
‘We need to follow them.
They've come through the hole in time.
They're Hunters, scavengers around holes in time.
Don't worry, they're not demons I promise you…’
Although Blake didn't know whether to believe the Doctor, he walked with the Time Lord, following the hideous apparitions through the streets of Whitechapel.
After about ten minutes, they found themselves back where they'd first arrived in Victorian London.
Several of the demons disappeared through the hole.
Others flew up the sides of houses.
They latched on to walls and remained motionless.
Blake turned to the Doctor.
‘We'll go through together this time.’
The Doctor nodded.
They matched their stride and stepped into the hole together.
Blake took a last look at Victorian London.
An infernal machine.
The cold sweet smell of the British countryside swept over the poet.
Blake looked around.
The Doctor had fallen on to plush green grass.
This was neither hell nor Cambridge, 1811.
The recognizable form of the monolithic slabs of Stonehenge stood in front of them, guarded by futuristic troops.
A light drizzle cast a threatening hue over the day.
‘Stonehenge?’
Blake asked.
The Doctor looked up.
‘I don't know.’
The soldiers' battle garb was different from that of the armies in Blake's time.
Here they were all in uniform and  all carried weapons.
This army tried to outfit all its soldiers.
Dark green jacket and trousers, and a hard hat.
The travellers were noticed.
A soldier pointed out the strangers to his commanding officer.
A four-wheeled vehicle was dispatched.
Blake couldn't see any form of power and assumed this was a machine-driven contraption.
What do you think?’
Blake asked.
‘I think we're probably where we shouldn't be.’
‘Yes.’
Blake had realized that the Doctor somehow always managed to find situations where his presence started events, causing ripple effects like a pebble thrown into a pool.
The machine stopped in front of them.
Three soldiers faced them.
Blake didn't recognize the uniforms or the rifles.
The soldiers' expressions were business like.
‘Hello,’ said the Doctor.
A gun was placed to his forehead.
‘United Nations Intelligence Taskforce,’ a soldier said.
‘You are trespassing on government property.’
The Doctor raised his arms into the air.
‘I surrender.’
DAY FIVE 20:00–24:00
On the vidscreen a priest was eulogizing about the next life.
The staring eyes and wild appearance — with the shaved, painted head — drew the viewer's attention to the discordant painful message.
The occasional broadcasts had been taken over by the priests with their simplistic message of all-out war with the Hunters and, the more disturbing subtext, of the people needing to repent and place their fate in the hands of the Prime Mover.
Academician Brown sat at his desk.
The vidscreen image once again went blank.
He wondered if this would be the last time.
He looked across at General Kopyion.
Their world had been taken over by an insanity.
The return journey from the Academy had been quiet.
They had passed lone people wandering around, screaming at the moon.
Mobs hunted in packs, smashing windows and looting goods.
Kopyion had sat opposite him in the hovercar, contemplating the momentous events unravelling on the planet.
Brown felt desperation.
He had spoken to a world no longer able to listen.
He had seen a man being chased by two Riotsville hoodlums.
They had cornered him in an alley.
A light from the upstairs window of a nearby house had come on.
It had shone on the thugs who had turned and run.
Brown thought about how lucky that man had been.
The armoured carriers had started to move through the city, to ‘restore calm’.
There were no reports of any response to this show of force.
However, at this time of night most people would be asleep, and a response would only be felt in the cold light of day.
Kopyion walked around the room.
He picked up an old ornament: a serpent winding itself around a globe; an appropriate image.
Brown felt that Nicaea was now descending into the chaos he felt inside himself, that had torn him apart since his wife's death.
He wanted to scream and shout, beat the wall and call down the forces of destruction.
Why wouldn't these feelings go away?
He looked at Kopyion, loitering as if he wanted to say something.
Brown spoke first.
‘It's all over.’
‘Why?’
Kopyion asked.
Brown was puzzled by the enigmatic figure.
He didn't know how to reply to the open-ended question.
After a few moments' silence Kopyion shrugged his shoulders and walked off, down the stairs.
His footsteps echoed as he left.
Brown was alone, again.
Carlson felt sick.
The ride in the air transporter had been bumpy due to air missiles fired in their direction.
The missiles were military equipment and confirmed that the army had descended into chaos.
As they flew over the capital, returning the Archon to the Imperial Palace, the sight below was of units of soldiers fighting hand to hand battles with other military units.
General Bourbollon obviously could not count on the support of the entire military.
Carlson was aware of conflicting reports: that Bourbollon had been assassinated earlier in the day; that he had committed suicide rather than face capture by freedom fighters.
Neither report was confirmed.
The streets were rife with rumour and fear.
Armoured carriers had taken up positions in the east of the city but the western approaches seemed to be still subject to heavy fighting.
The Archon looked tired and drawn.
He stared out of the craft and looked at the insect sized life forms below.
He told the major he feared that in retiring to the palace he was imprisoning himself and would never be able to escape back to the real world.
The major wanted to return home, curl up with his wife, and lock the door.
The high-speed craft made quick progress to the safety of the Palace.
Android security police guarded the area.
They checked the two men as they left the air transporter.
The major walked to the main door.
The Archon's young daughter stood waiting for her father.
‘Daddy, daddy,’ she shouted, throwing her arms around him.
She was carrying a small doll.
He held his daughter in his arms and kissed her.
The major smiled.
‘Daddy,’ she asked, ‘no-one will take my dolls away, will they?’
‘No,’ replied the Archon.
‘We're safe here.’
The major watched them walking down the corridor, holding hands.
Bernice had tried to explain to her android companion about the man who had saved her from drowning in the quicksand.
He gave no reply but hadn't believed her.
She didn't believe it.
A man, whose face she had been unable to see, had suddenly appeared, pulled her out of the shit, and then disappeared.
In twentieth century slang, this planet was ‘doing her head in’.
She kept close to Spike, making sure he didn't wander out of her sight.
They were moving towards the space station.
For over five kilometres they had seen debris and signs of an ancient fireball which had scorched the earth.
The station resembled the early Earth Pioneer space stations which had been built outwards from the home planet to the stars.
They had helped the refuelling and restocking of colonists' ships fleeing the overpopulation, radiation and ozone poisoning.
However, this was ten times the size of the Terran designs and had been built centuries before man had even discovered fire.
She looked at Spike.
He too was curious.
She asked if they could explore the craft.
He nodded in agreement.
She knew that it wasn't desire for the acquisition of knowledge that drove him, but the programmed need to find the bomb.
He must suspect that the bomb, or the other shapechanger, could be found within the station.
‘You don't still think that I'm one of the shapechangers do you?’
Bernice asked.
‘I don't know what to believe,’ he replied.
‘You fool.’
Bernice went to slap him on the back.
He responded with lightning reflexes, turning to grab her hand.
She stopped, and he completely missed grabbing hold of her.
He hadn't much longer before he ceased to function.
She felt angry.
She didn't know what about.
Perhaps the sight of his body visibly aging in front of her.
We all have to die, she thought.
But this seems so purposeless.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘No, I am sorry,’ Spike said, with a vague embarrassment.
‘I did not know….’
She walked towards the craft.
She didn't look back at him.
The klaxons were sounding.
Bells were ringing and lights were flashing.
The major ran through the front door of the Palace, heading for the throne room.
The air carrier had returned him as quickly as possible.
At the entrance, androids saluted him.
He replied falteringly with the customary, ‘I serve’.
He passed the little girl.
She was in her nightdress, bare legs and large slippers.
She didn't have her dolly.
She was standing in the corridor, crying and alone.
She was saying repeatedly, ‘Daddy’.
He wanted to stop and hold her, but carried on.
The corridors of the Palace were otherwise empty.
He entered the throne room.
Various androids guarded the door.
The room was hectic.
Flashlights indicated the taking of photographs.
Some security police were measuring distances; others were looking for clues.
They seemed faintly absurd.
Initially, he couldn't see the body, and then he noticed the tell-tale blanket draped over a shape on the floor.
He walked over and pulled the blanket off the body.
The Archon was dead.
He had been crucified on to the floor and, like the last victim, had been alive when this  had occurred.
There was a terrible look of horror on his face.
Carlson replaced the blanket over the dead man.
This had been the supreme ruler of the Althosian system.
The major was sweating.
He thought it was because of the heat.
He looked around.
People were milling.
They had investigated many murders before, but this was not a murder; this was the destruction of the entire planetary system of government.
There was no natural successor to the Archon.
It would have been down to the Academy to appoint the next ruler of the Seven Planets.
The Academy was defunct.
There was no hope.
The room radiated a complete emptiness.
Suddenly, the major noticed General Kopyion sitting in a corner of the room, watching him.
In a daze, Carlson walked through the crowd and up to his senior officer.
‘I…’ he began to say, then stopped, unaware of who exactly it was he was now pledging allegiance to.
‘How long have you been here?’
Kopyion didn't answer.
His eyes stared into the room.
‘Sir, what happens now?’
Kopyion turned to look at him.
‘Get the alarms turned off.
I'm getting a headache.’
‘Sir.’
Carlson stood facing Kopyion.
He didn't know what to say.
He just wanted to go, find his wife and return home.
‘Who's done this?’
‘I gave you an order, major.’
‘Sir,’ he replied, wandering off to find the alarm controls.
The weather was deteriorating.
Salisbury Plain had changed little since Blake's day.
Open green pastures and the distinctive monoliths gathered together in a circle.
Blake had stopped off in Salisbury one fierce night, some two hundred years before, and had wondered about the purpose of the stone circle then.
Some argued that it was a druidical sacrificial place of worship; others that it was a gigantic cosmic clock.
Blake was not surprised to be told by the Doctor that its origin and purpose remained unknown.
The fresh air made a welcome change from the polluted Victorian London atmosphere.
But the skies were darkening and the rain was pouring down over the fields.
The Doctor and Blake had been escorted to a small workman's shed.
They were not locked in, but a guard was posted outside to make sure they didn't escape.
The Doctor explained to the colonel apparently in charge of the troops that he was the scientific advisor for UNIT.
He suggested that the military man could contact either a Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart or a Brigadier Bambera for clarification of his position.
He added that it had been some years since he had been back in England.
The colonel had gone off to contact Geneva.
The travellers were not told why the military had cordoned off part of Salisbury Plain and were arresting anyone who strayed into the exclusion zone.
Blake found being a passenger in the mechanical ‘land-rovers’, with their noise and billowing fumes, frightening.
The pace of life seemed much quicker.
People were running around, bellowing orders, and there was a constant chattering of ‘radios’ and military equipment.
‘I'm worried,’ said the Doctor.
‘You told the truth?’
Blake asked.
‘Yes.
But this is my favourite place in the universe.
From all my travels, and my journeys across the galaxies, I always return to this country, in this time zone.
And now it's under threat.’
‘It is so peaceful here.’
Blake wondered why a man who could choose anywhere and anytime in creation would pick twentieth century England.
‘There have been invasions before on this ‘insignificant’ little planet.
But this is something terrible.’
The Doctor stared into an inner space.
‘You're beginning to regain your memory?’
Blake asked.
‘No.
It's because of the void in my mind that I'm worried.’
He changed the subject.
‘Do you ever have the feeling that we're being watched?’
‘No,’ Blake lied.
‘We all need our own security.
Somewhere safe.’
The Doctor had again been taken over by his thoughts.
Blake felt it was like the muse which inspired him, and dictated from a hidden recess that he must write and what he had to write.
The colonel returned.
He was in his late forties, dash of red hair, full moustache, six foot four and Highland accent.
He had contacted UNIT HQ and had confirmed that for a period in the 1970s and 1980s there had been a scientific advisor to Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart.
A wanderer, an iconoclast, whose mind had only been matched by his eccentricity.
The colonel said that he had received extraordinary instructions.
It did not matter what the man looked like, but he should be listened to.
If the Doctor was present it meant there was an extreme danger to this planet.
Blake was amazed at the discussion and how these men could talk about a whole planet in one conversation; in his day it was not unusual for a conversation to centre solely on one part of London, and only in times of war was England ever considered as a single entity under threat.
The Doctor had explained that in 1969 a man had walked on the moon; that unmanned space flights to other stars had been sent out in the 1970s and towards the end of the twentieth century manned space flights had visited other planets in the solar system.
The Doctor and his companion were led across a field to an archaeological dig.
Colonel Philips explained that they had thought initially that they had discovered a danger similar to that which had caused the Hob's Lane disaster.
A group of men and women in multi-coloured coats had dug a hole in the ground, which the military had then sealed off.
Blake couldn't understand what they were doing.
The explanation that they were looking for bones and relics of ancient races puzzled the poet.
Who cared?
The colonel explained that the reason for the exclusion  zone would become clear once they saw what had been found in the excavation.
The Doctor whistled a short, sharp sound in disbelief.
The excavation was over a mile round and about twenty foot under the surrounding land level.
‘What the hell is it?’
Blake asked.
Inside the excavation were the bones of some huge creature.
It looked like a dragon, or some type of crocodile.
It appeared to have had wings, and a number of spikes sticking out of its back.
If this was one creature, it had stood over half a mile high.
‘Is this a dinosaur?’
Blake remembered the much smaller pterodactyls which had attacked them in hell.
‘No.’
They were joined by the chief archaeologist, Professor Roberts.
He was a small stubby man with glasses and a trimmed dark beard.
He was smoking a lethal smelling cigarette.
The colonel introduced him to the Doctor.
‘And your name, sir?’ the colonel asked.
‘William Blake.’
‘No relation to the poet?’ the archaeologist asked.
‘What poet?’
Blake replied, not familiar with any other poet with his name.
The archaeologist explained that the skeleton's place in the soil strata and its size meant that it was not a dinosaur.
‘A long time ago…’ muttered the Doctor quietly to himself.
‘Colonel, you must destroy this now.
Destroy the skeleton, pulverize the bones.
Now!’
He had begun to shout.
‘But Doctor, this is an extraterrestrial life-form, many thousands of years old.
Look around the remains.
There are clearly the signs of a huge fire.
This creature crash-landed on our planet many thousands of years ago.’
The archaeologist was excitedly describing his theories.
‘If this thing flew through space, is millennia old, is many miles in size, then you can have no idea of its power.
You can't even know if it is dead.’
‘What?’ the colonel replied.
‘I can see it's dead.’
‘No, you can see it's lying dormant.
There are a number  of species in the universe which don't suffer death as you understand the concept.
You must destroy it,’ shouted the Doctor, ‘before it's too late.’
Colonel Philips shook his head.
‘No, Doctor.
My orders are for this skeleton to be taken to the Natural History Museum in London, where scientific tests will reveal more about its true nature.
I'm very surprised your attitude is that we should cover it up and hide it away rather than try and elucidate its value for science.
You are a scientist.’
The book lay on the table in front of them.
Brown was too excited to pick it up.
He had ordered the William Ashbless poetry over a month ago, and now it had finally arrived.
He had made some artificial coffee, with added caffeine, and treated the antique dealer to a rare cup of the banned drink.
Members of the Academy turned a blind eye to the black marketeers, because the Seven Planets needed food and supplies and the corporations wouldn't trade with independent worlds.
The black marketeers also smuggled in cultural items, originating in the much-desired late twentieth century, for the rich collectors who invariably held positions of power on the planet.
Mann was tired, and still thanking the Academician for managing to free him from the security police.
He had travelled across the city from the suburbs to the apartments of the ruling elite.
He told Brown that he had seen some soldiers breaking into a shop, stealing worthless electrical equipment and shooting the protesting store owner.
Looting had become a serious problem and there were no food shops which had any stocks left; most were burnt out and vandalized.
He had also caught a glimpse of a gang of young kids from Riotsville moving through the streets, looking for some action.
He avoided them and carried on.
Near the residential apartments he had seen an exploded armoured carrier, and more dead soldiers.
Explosions and gunfire from the east side of the city suggested an attempt to  retake the civilian centres was underway.
However, the military were not having much success so far.
Brown was happy.
The book was all he had been waiting for, and all was going according to plan.
The book of poetry had been produced from real trees and the pages had a feel of genuine paper.
The cover was made of leather and went back to the days when mankind used animals for food and clothing.
He smelt the book.
‘The value of this book is beyond money,’ said Brown.
‘The book is so rare.’
‘It would be unheard of to damage such a priceless antique.’
Brown smiled.
‘The police didn't touch it.
They left it in the shop.’
‘You've done well,’ Brown said to Mann.
He tore the cover off the book.
Inside were three narrow bags full of a white powder.
He picked up a letter opener from his table and slipped the blade into one of the bags.
Some of the white substance fell on to the floor.
He sniffed and tasted the substance.
‘Are you going to join me?’ he asked, going to a drawer to collect a pipe.
Mann nodded.
The pipe was filled with water, heated over a blue flame and a small quantity of the substance placed in.
They took it in turns to breathe in the smoke, as the substance sizzled with a malicious delight.
Mann sat back on his chair, closed his eyes and began to dream.
Brown started to giggle to himself, put his feet up on the sofa and waited for the images and feelings to take possession of him.
Out in space, through the sea of darkness, a rainbow of colours was exploding.
Unimaginable shapes were swirling and lapping the shores of distant worlds.
And then a bright light pulling forwards, hurtling through fiery reds and burning yellows; shadows of violet cast over undiscovered star streams.
The speed was intense, but it was a  feeling of being every shape and object within view; of being all of creation at once.
Brown knew that the universe was his own imagination, and that he just had to send thoughts and entire galaxies and peoples would no longer exist.
He shouted out, in a low deep voice, that he was the Lord of Creation.
He could see the sounds turn into dancing musical notes.
He would have his vengeance on this meaningless universe, and in the banality of his imagination he would wipe out humanity.
He would exorcise the anger from within himself, and destroy.
His vision was starting to cloud over, and take on a red tinge.
No, this is not the way it should be!
He wanted to be happy.
But the anger and the fear were taking possession of him.
‘Aaaarghh…’ he screamed out.
He was not alone in his dreams.
Where was he?
Who was he?
The red death had taken over all in front of him but there were shapes moving towards him.
There were teeth all around him, snapping and gnawing.
Intense close-ups of hideous faces; eyes staring, hundreds of eyes; sometimes they resembled dragons, other times worms.
They had a putrid smell and faces of beasts.
Brown sat up off the sofa.
He was soaked in sweat and shivering.
He felt the things were still there, in the room.
He was frightened, more frightened than ever before.
A shape moved on the other side of the room.
It was a shadow cast by the single lamp in the room.
The curtain was swaying; the breeze of the open window.
Mann lay still on the chair.
Brown stood up and went over to see how the antique dealer was feeling.
He was completely still.
‘Mann,’ he said quietly.
There was no reply.
He repeated his words and touched the body.
Mann's head rolled to the side.
Brown pushed him again.
There was a wet feel to the body.
Brown's hand was covered in something.
He looked closer.
Blood was pouring from th  antique dealer's chest.
Brown felt the forehead and opened the eyelids.
Mann was dead.
Brown examined the dead man's chest.
He had been shot.
And then he heard a rustling sound.
He stared into the dark recesses of the room.
There was a figure standing in the corner by an open window.
The sound of a gun being cocked; whoever it was had got hold of his antique gun.
‘Listen, whoever you are —’ He was interrupted as the gun was fired three times.
He felt the first bullet tear into his chest and was thrown against the wall.
DAY SIX 00:00–04:00
The major walked around the room.
There had been two more murders.
The victims lay dead in the apartment.
Although many people were being killed daily, in the civil war, this was an unusual crime.
One of the victims was the opposition leader.
The other victim was the main suspect in the ritualistic murders.
Apart from the identity of the second victim there seemed to be no connection with his investigation.
Last night's murders had not been bizarre slayings.
Both victims had been shot a number of times by an antique revolver known to have belonged to one of the victims.
The gun was missing.
After his speech the night before in the Academy, Brown had become an extremely unpopular figure amongst the ruling elite.
His assassination was predictable, although how the murderer passed by the android security guards had yet to be explained.
Carlson could think of no reason why Bulbir Singh Mann should be the target of assassins; presumably he had been in the way.
Although Carlson felt there was some connection with the chaos and anarchy erupting over the Althosian system he was sure none of the Freedom Party supporters would have devised such a ruthless method for annihilating the elite.
He wondered if Brown had been murdered by the military.
Carlson looked over the Academician's desk.
An almost finished game of snakes and ladders was laid out amongst top secret briefing papers.
One of the counters had fallen down a snake to the bottom of the pit.
Kopyion looked at the sprawled body of the Academician.
‘Cover it up,’ he ordered one of the androids.
Carlson had been wondering for some time what was actually going on.
Kopyion had expressed a great deal of interest in these killings but had not passed on all the information available to him.
Even now, with Nicaea descending into a maelstrom of violence and recrimination, the head of the Justice Police was concentrating his energies on a series of grizzly murders.
General Kopyion showed little interest in the events of the civil war, even with confirmed reports of a hovertrain being hijacked and two female Academicians having their homes broken into and being raped by soldiers.
Carlson wondered if Kopyion knew which side he was on, and was trying to remain neutral in the conflict.
The major pointed to a white substance on the floor.
‘What do you think it is?’
He bent over to scrape some of the substance off the floor.
‘Don't touch it,’ warned Kopyion.
‘Whatever it was, it came from this book.
See, the cover has been forcibly removed.’
Carlson showed his superior a torn book which had been thrown into the waste disposal.
‘It's drugs,’ said Kopyion.
‘Mann is a black market dealer who it's believed has been smuggling drugs into Nicaea.’
‘What?
You didn't mention this before.’
Carlson was increasingly irritated with his superior officer.
‘You aren't the only member of the Justice Police,’ Kopyion replied in a cold, dry manner as if rehearsing a speech.
‘We've been investigating this drug ring for some months.
Annalisa Sellen was one of the undercover officers responsible for the operation.
It was believed someone from the Academy was helping Mann with the finance and distribution of the drugs.
We've discovered who that was.
I suggest the investigation is now closed.’
Kopyion walked off.
He stopped to let the body of his friend Brown be taken past him.
As the stretcher passed by he pulled back the blanket.
He uttered something under his breath, let the blanket drop, and hobbled down the steps.
Carlson watched him.
There were many questions which the general had failed to answer in his summary of these crimes.
Who had killed Brown?
Where were the drugs now and what was the purpose of the ritualistic murders?
The investigation was far from over.
Torrential rain was drowning the countryside.
The Doctor and Blake sat on the side of a hill watching the bones being carried from the archaeological dig to a large mechanical transporter.
Due to their weight and size the ancient fossils were handled with military precision as they were placed inside the monstrous fire-breathing cart.
Blake was very wary of the snorting machine which his travelling companion described as a ‘juggernaut’.
The machines made their own bilious sound which drowned the natural noise of the Earth.
The Doctor stood up, taking in the distant sights of the great plain.
Blake recited the two lines of his poem, ‘Milton’.
‘And did those feet in Ancient  times ,
Walk upon England's mountains green?’
Rain ran down his face.
He had not imagined, when he'd written the poem four years before, that he would ever be standing here, thinking of the Fall of Man.
The archaeologist was directing the loading of the bones.
The Doctor walked over to him.
The rain made the lifting slippery and dangerous.
‘Why did you start digging here?’ the Doctor asked.
Roberts looked nervous but kept a fixed smile.
‘You were looking for the creature,’ the Doctor realized.
‘You knew it was here.’
Roberts walked away.
‘How?
How could you have known where it was?’
The UNIT soldiers continued to load the bones.
The task took some considerable time as each bone was labelled according to a blueprint held by the archaeologist.
The Doctor paced around the excavation measuring the depth and imprint of the relics.
He seemed to be looking  for something.
Blake suspected that it was a strand of memory.
‘This is all wrong,’ he shouted out, as the doors of the juggernaut were sealed.
Bernice had never been down so many corridors before she met the Doctor.
It appeared to be an occupational hazard, walking down dark and dingy — or even brightly lit — corridors, waiting for strange creatures to pounce out at unexpected moments.
She was actually becoming quite blase about the dangers lurking on their travels.
She walked through the space station shouting, ‘Yoohoo, we're here’, and opening long-forgotten cupboards and going ‘Boo’.
Spike looked at her as if she was a complete idiot.
The space station was dead.
It was a broken hulk, millennia of dust particles covering the displays and floors.
A complex lighting system had once worked, but now the only illumination was from the gaps in the roof which allowed streams of sunlight to pour through into the empty, lifeless environment.
There appeared to be miles of corridors intersecting, criss-crossing and going nowhere.
Certain parts of the station seemed to have been attacked and ripped apart.
Most of the handles and doors had been removed, and mounds of bones seemed to be in their place.
Spike said that it looked like Hunters had attacked the craft.
‘What are Hunters?’
Bernice asked.
‘They are a hostile race of parasites, which raid unprotected interplanetary craft, attack lone colonists, abduct small children and animals,’ Spike said.
‘The Justice Police's main task is to protect the colony worlds from these creatures.’
‘You've met these creatures?’
Bernice asked.
‘Yes.
Many times.
I once had to have a leg replaced when a couple of Hunters tore mine off.
I once defended a small village on Trieste from over a hundred of these things.
There were twenty people, including children, in  this new colony, and they were all slaughtered.
When we first arrived the Hunters existed in far greater numbers, and were suicidal in their assaults on some of our military attack ships; they were controlled, though.’
Bernice didn't like the sound of this.
‘Controlled?’
‘Bacteriological weapons.
They wiped out the majority of them.
Within a couple of years only a few hundred of them survived.
Unfortunately, they have continued to breed.’
Bernice looked again at the bones.
‘What are they like?’
‘Big, hairy, wings and lots of teeth.
In hand to hand combat it would take two, perhaps three, androids to subdue just one of them.
And I say subdue.
I am like a David to their Goliath.
We need advanced weaponry to destroy them.’
‘Friendly creatures, then?’
Bernice asked.
‘It is said they can smell blood many kilometres away.’
Spike sounded terribly bitter in his description of the Hunters, as if he had a personal stake in their destruction.
‘Out here on the frontiers of space there are many dangers.’
Spike carried on walking down the faceless, uniform corridor.
The initial radio message had beggared belief.
An aeroplane, carrying over five hundred passengers, had reported that they were under attack.
On the slow descent to Bristol airport a creature had attached itself to one of the wings.
Two more of the creatures hovered around the craft, walking over the wings and flashing their teeth at the hysterical passengers.
They then began to play a game which involved tearing pieces off the aircraft and hurtling them at each other.
Passengers were screaming and shouting.
Blake could hear the pilot demanding advice and assistance, knowing that it would never come.
UNIT had been routinely monitoring the signals in the area and had picked up the SOS messages from the passenger aircraft.
The ground control asked the crew to describe the creatures — bat-like, horrible — and then the  sound went dead.
The plane had gone into a steep descent and an explosion ripped the air.
Blake and the Doctor travelled with the UNIT personnel, in two landrovers, towards the crash site.
The juggernaut followed behind at a more respectable pace, through the waterlogged Wiltshire countryside.
The torrential rain made driving hazardous.
They had been heading back towards London when the strange conflict in the sky had been picked up by UNIT.
Blake knew that the creatures were the spawn of hell.
It was the voices coming from the little boxes, and the concept of man flying between America and England in a few hours, that he found difficult to grasp.
The Doctor's vague descriptions of bits of wire conducting sound waves through the air, and speed allowing gravity to be defeated, only succeeded in confusing the poet.
He knew the Doctor was trying to be helpful, but it was all too unbelievable.
The landrover ride made him feel nauseous.
Travelling at a speed of a hundred miles an hour made him worry that he would leave the safety of God's Earth.
He closed his eyes, and thought of the nature of the world, the past and the future.
The world of the twentieth century was more alien to him than the more recognizable vision of hell.
The journey finished at the fallen aircraft.
Although parts were scattered over the surrounding fields, the main body of the plane had landed in one piece.
The Doctor said it was a miracle that the pilot had managed to steer the plane down at all.
In a field in the middle of the countryside, ambulances and fire engines, with droning sirens and flashing blue lights, watched helplessly as the demons continued to attack the half-destroyed plane.
Passengers screamed, but the Hunters, now increased in numbers to twenty or thirty, flew down and sank their claws and teeth into the injured and dying.
The colonel ordered his men to line up and commence ‘rapid fire’, but the twentieth century weaponry failed to combat the creatures.
They treated it as a game.
As the creatures soared up and down, their laughter began to take on an eerie and mournful tone.
The juggernaut arrived.
The soldiers escorting it used their weapons to help destroy the creatures.
Men and women from the ambulances risked their lives to rescue tormented souls.
Some were immediately picked up by the demons, whilst others managed again and again to risk their lives before falling to the persistent attacks of the creatures from hell.
Blake wanted to go and help, but was stopped by the Doctor.
‘We have to go,’ the Doctor said, pointing to the juggernaut.
Blake looked at the traveller with surprise.
The Doctor had no intention of intervening to prevent further loss of life.
‘There's no more we can do,’ the Doctor hinted at an apology.
‘We must return those bones to the otherworld.’
The traveller strolled off towards the juggernaut.
The soldiers had moved closer to the aeroplane, desperately trying to fight the flying demons.
‘Can you drive one of these?’ the Doctor asked.
‘No,’ replied Blake.
‘Never mind, I've always wanted to have a go.’
The Doctor's response gave the poet no confidence, but choice was limited; he either went along with the Doctor or he remained behind.
It was the lesser of two evils.
‘Going somewhere?’
The archaeologist appeared from the back of the juggernaut.
He was smiling, but holding a gun out in front of him.
His eyes seemed glazed over and the smile was stretched and impenetrable.
‘There's no point in me explaining what you've actually got there, is there?’ the Doctor asked.
The archaeologist shook his head.
‘No.’
‘And you're going to do all in your power to prevent us taking the remains of this creature,’ the Doctor continued.
The archaeologist nodded.
As he did, the Doctor moved forward, and with a lightning speed knocked the  gun out of the archaeologist's hand with his umbrella.
The Doctor leapt forward and became entangled with the archaeologist.
As they fought, the archaeologist's shirt was torn, revealing a medallion hanging around his chest.
It was a similar medallion to those worn by the Fellowship in Victorian London.
A worm curled around the globe.
The gun had landed within a few inches of Blake.
The poet picked it up and handed it over to the Time Lord.
‘Come on,’ said the Doctor.
Blake climbed into the cab, followed by the Doctor.
The archaeologist didn't move.
‘There is no escape,’ the archaeologist barked.
The juggernaut started with a cough and splutter, was thrown into gear and began to move off down the narrow road.
The archaeologist ran in front of them and stood in the middle of the road.
He wasn't going to move.
The Doctor threw the juggernaut into second gear and advanced.
Still no move.
The archaeologist had no intention of moving.
As the truck was about to hit him, the Doctor turned the steering wheel sharply and drove along the hedge, avoiding the cursing figure.
Blake took a last look at the soldiers using highpowered explosives against the demons.
It was a blood-bath, with few of the passengers still alive, and the forces of order and reason badly outnumbered.
Soon all the passengers and soldiers would be dead.
The archaeologist stood watching them with that fixed grin, staring into their souls.
‘Don't worry,’ said the Doctor.
The juggernaut was building up speed and, looking down, it was easier to see where the road was clear and safe to travel.
The juggernaut passed uneventfully down the country lanes back to the hole in space and time.
Blake felt tired and sick.
He found it difficult to see what progress had been made since his time.
What was the future of the human race?
He looked at the Doctor, concentrating on trying to steer the mechanical transporter.
He looked like he was enjoying it, although he kept making mistakes, forcing the juggernaut to shudder and shake to a standstill.
‘What is going to happen, Doctor?’
Blake asked.
‘About what?’
‘The demons.’
‘They'll return back to their own world once they've had their fun.
No-one will ever acknowledge what's happened today.
The Earth has been visited many times in its history, but it's all been covered up.
The bodies of the victims will be burnt or lost,’ the Doctor said in a matter of fact manner.
‘And us?’
‘Just have hope…’
The juggernaut thundered through the countryside, returning to Salisbury Plain.
The Doctor found the porthole to the otherworld almost instinctively.
He slowed the lorry down and ground to a halt.
‘You don't have to come,’ he said.
Blake nodded, knowing there was no choice.
‘What's there?’ he had to ask.
‘My past…’ said the Doctor, putting the juggernaut into gear and driving into the hole.
The journey was almost at an end.
The dark castle lay within an hour's walk.
Although Swarf indicated all was going according to plan, Chopra knew this was not true.
He sensed the deadness paralysing the planet, could feel the chaos and destruction unfolding on the distant worlds of the Althosian system.
He could not tell if there was any connection between the events on this minor planet and those on the outer worlds.
However, he knew of the sacred prophecies.
The Dark Times were again descending over the universe.
He didn't need to throw the stones.
The message was the same, again and again.
The collapse.
Swarf stood over him.
The dwarf wanted to move on.
‘I see beyond the veil of illusion,’ Chopra said.
‘No,’ Swarf replied.
‘You do not believe in the supernatural?’
‘No.’
‘Then what do you think is the purpose of life?’
Swarf changed the subject.
‘Tell me of my brother.’
‘He is…’
Chopra could think of nothing more to say.
‘Dead?’
Swarf roared.
‘I am sorry…’
‘Then he failed and I wasn't told.’
Swarf struck him across the face and grabbed the stones.
He clenched his fist and crushed them.
He threw the pulverized contents into the air.
Chopra stared.
His stones, destroyed.
How would he survive without them?
The shapechanger grabbed Chopra's hair and pulled him off the ground.
‘I feel an emptiness,’ Chopra said.
‘You must beware.
It is a paralysis spreading across this world.’
Swarf ignored him.
‘Where are the androids and the women?’
‘They are close by,’ Chopra spluttered.
‘I can feel one of the women and an android within a kilometre of our position.
They are walking through the space station.
I can see through her eyes.
But they are not the enemy.’
The shapechanger dropped him on to the ground.
He screamed, and his body was ripped open and transformed into a jet black bird.
‘I will join you at the castle.
I have some unfinished business.
Nothing must stop us now.’
The bird squawked and launched itself skywards.
Chopra watched the bird fly up to the heavens.
Bernice still had a feeling of being watched.
She was jumpy and had at one point been startled by her own shadow.
She had the feeling that someone or something was watching her every movement.
She remembered when she was younger and had received religious indoctrination at school.
There was always this idea that people lived on in some form after death, looking after you.
She had liked that idea, and  thought somehow that her mother kept a watchful eye on her.
‘Hello, again,’ said a voice.
She looked up.
She had wandered off again.
Her mysterious saviour had returned.
She felt close to him, although she couldn't quite see his features or his choice of clothes.
‘What are you doing here?’ he asked.
‘I don't know.’
She hadn't thought of a reason for her being here.
She had followed the android hoping that the Doctor would reappear and save them.
‘I'm looking for the Doctor.’
‘The Time Lord?’
‘Yes.
Did I tell you that?’
The figure didn't reply.
‘What are you doing here?’ she asked.
‘I'm protecting you,’ he replied.
‘From what?’
‘The shapechanger.’
She was puzzled.
This wasn't the type of conversation she particularly enjoyed.
‘What are you talking about?’
‘Tell me about your journeys,’ the figure said.
‘Look, I'd rather not.
Spike!’ she shouted out.
‘Listen, it's not that I don't trust you, but…
. Spike!’
‘He can't respond.’
‘Oh my God!’
Bernice shouted, as it dawned on her what was going on.
She ran down the corridor.
And another corridor.
Why do all these corridors look alike?
‘Spike, Spike!’ she shouted.
And then she heard a noise.
It sounded like a body being thrown against the wall.
‘Spike, I'm coming,’ she shouted.
She turned the next corner.
She ran.
Spike lay propped against a wall.
A green liquid was pouring from his broken and battered body.
He had been terminated.
Standing over him was a lizard-like creature, dark  green, two legs, tyrannosaurus-featured head, and a huge tail which had inflicted most of the damage.
The tail swung again and banged the android's head against the wall.
Spike's head fell forwards and hit the floor.
‘What do I smell?’ the shapechanger said, turning towards her.
‘You bastard,’ she shouted.
It looked at her.
She was now the prey.
Its body began to shuffle up the corridor towards her.
She ran.
She opened the first door off the corridor.
Another door lay on the other side of the room.
She ran over and pulled the door.
It was locked and not budging.
She pulled as hard as she could.
Damn.
She'd have to go back.
She turned.
It was there in the doorway, sprouting tentacles from its tree-like chest.
It stepped through the door and the tentacles started to slide along the walls towards her.
She glanced around the room.
It was empty apart from a few chairs and a couple of tables.
She had to defend herself somehow.
She picked up one of the chairs.
The tentacles were sliding closer to her.
She wielded the chair in front of her, trying to parry the approaching menace.
As the creature moved within five metres of her, she held on to the chair with both hands and ran straight at the creature's unprotected stomach area.
However, instead of driving the chair into the lumbering reptile, which would stop her impetus, she sidestepped, jumped past the creature and carried on running to the door.
Back in the corridor she ran to Spike.
He was dead.
Well, you're on your own now girl, she thought.
She looked down at the body and felt sadness.
‘Woman,’ the thing shouted.
She ran.
Turning the next corner she saw a hole in the roof, where the sunlight was streaming in.
Hearing the slithering sound behind her she jumped up and pulled herself through the roof.
It was a tight squeeze and she  tore her jacket.
She lay on the roof looking through the artificial skylight.
The creature was coming closer.
As it moved beneath the hole it stopped.
And then she saw a strip of her jacket stuck on the jagged edge of the hole.
The creature was right below her, and if it looked up…
. She would have to lean over.
It's now or never.
She stretched over and pulled the material off the torn metal.
It turned towards the roof.
She stared at it and held her breath.
It wasn't moving.
One of the tentacles began to move up and pushed through the hole.
And then there was a sound from somewhere else in the space station.
It hadn't seen her.
The tentacle retracted quickly.
The creature slithered away down the corridor.
She saw the creature disappear and she breathed again.
After a few moments she climbed down to the space station and ran off in the opposite direction to the shapechanger.
‘Check to you, but it's not mate.
Not yet anyway,’ Bernice said to herself.
Part Three
DAY SIX 04:00–08:00
The red weed was taking possession of the surface of the planet.
As Thomas watched, he saw the raging torrent of the river turn into a glacier of red ice, frozen in time.
The trees and shrubs wavering in the wind had stilled and now resembled a child's Plasticine world.
It reminded him of when he had guarded a colonial nursery, after an unexpected attack by Hunters had resulted in the abduction of two small infants.
The class had seen their friends carried off to a certain death.
He had looked at the children's modelling and their puzzling drawings of oversized objects — single, primary colours and minute figures dwarfed by the chaotic world around them.
The children didn't talk about the kidnapping, but kept glancing out of the windows and stopped trusting the adults who looked after them.
The weed was only a few metres from where Ell had slept.
It was now creeping over to the edge of the escarpment.
Thomas looked over the marshlands which showed no sign of impending doom.
He was sure it was only a matter of time.
On the final part of their walk they had passed by numerous strange and wondrous animals which had been frozen as they ate, slept or strolled.
There was no pain or suffering, just the overwhelming image of the red death.
They had also seen migratory birds in the sky directly above the paralysis, suddenly stop and remain suspended in the air.
This fate could well await them.
Military training provided androids with a range of survival skills including the basic knowledge of how to make a shelter and a parachute.
As many of the battles with the Hunters were either fought on inhospitable and barren  asteroids or in the upper atmospheres of colonial planets, both pieces of knowledge were essential for survival.
He had adapted the parachute design to produce a homemade hang-glider.
Gliders were regularly used by androids in battles with Hunters.
However, the gliders were usually fitted with a range of Kill weapons to give the android the extra edge.
This glider looked sturdy enough, but he couldn't be certain that it would return to the ground safely.
He had prised apart various parts of the forest around them to build the glider.
The artificial trees were constructed from metal and hard plastic; with his superhuman strength he had bent the materials into the necessary shape.
To produce a sail he had ripped apart his military uniform.
Ell looked with horror at the makeshift glider.
She didn't like flying.
Thomas said that he was going and if she wished to remain behind, then that was up to her.
‘You're all I've got,’ she said, resigning herself to her fate.
The glider wasn't built for two.
He strapped Ell in.
He would cling on to the craft and try to steer it.
He ran off the cliff and leapt into the air.
The weight of the glider and the woman slowed him down, but he could feel the warm air currents.
The glider rose up into the atmosphere.
Ell screamed.
The skies around them were dark and oppressive.
He closed his mind for a silent prayer, but his thoughts kept returning to the danger that he and the woman now faced.
He looked again at the woman.
She was clinging desperately to the hang-glider.
The glider circled the escarpment and was carried with the warm air currents into the upper atmosphere.
Ell was in the wrong place and he felt sorry for her.
His mind was still trying to work out the puzzle she had set him.
She had asked him about the planet.
Why were some of the objects around them fake?
Some of the  trees, the vegetation and the animals were mechanical creations of Mirage Enterprises.
He could sense the Form Manipulator working to disguise the real world around him.
He must place his trust in the Prime Mover.
This was not the time for prayer.
He could not concentrate.
He nudged Ell.
She opened her eyes and cursed him for disturbing her silent thoughts.
He was in pursuit of the shapechanger.
As the only android left the success of the mission was down to him.
Ell looked from the glider to the escarpment.
‘I'm not sure I can manage this.’
He didn't need to see the look on her face.
Her body was trembling with fear.
After the death of her husband, and surviving the destruction of her only means home, the woman had difficulties keeping up with him.
If they had climbed down the side of the escarpment he had no doubt that she would not have made it.
Sometimes she seemed a little too useless.
She screamed again.
She had seen something.
Thomas had thought at first that it was a shadow.
But now he was certain — there was a Hunter in the skies with them.
He could hear the wings cracking, like whips beating the air.
He couldn't turn round.
‘Look,’ he shouted to her.
‘The entire escarpment is covered with the red weed.’
As she looked down he felt a tug at the upper sail, and saw a flash of a wing.
It had come in for the attack.
A face suddenly lunged at him, its teeth bared.
He heard a loud tear.
The sail had been bitten in two.
The Hunter's razor sharp teeth now turned their attention to him.
He felt the incisors sink into his arm.
He pulled on the simple steering mechanism and the glider turned in the air.
The Hunter had been left behind.
The flapping remained in the distance.
They had escaped!
Suddenly the air currents grabbed the craft.
With the torn sail he was powerless to regain control of the glider.
He felt the glider pulled towards the plain.
They were  tossed and turned upside down.
The earth rushed towards them.
He pulled the controls to direct the glider back into the atmosphere.
His strength could do nothing against the tempest throwing them out of the heavens.
Ell was screaming again.
The ground loomed and certain death faced them in a matter of seconds.
The dark castle was forbidding, standing alone and mysterious on the marshy plain.
The smell of damp and the whisper of cobwebs combined to create an eerie, haunted feeling.
Small fires burnt in torches hung along the walls, adding the smell of acrid smoke, and flickering shadows to the already inhospitable atmosphere of the alien edifice.
Black slabs of indeterminate material had been used to construct the ancient castle.
A castle of memories.
Chopra had felt ill at ease since entering the strange domain.
The journey across the marshland had seen three khthons swallowed in the quicksand.
There were now only seven alive.
Chopra's visions still continued to trouble him.
The khthons had finished the journey on their own.
Swarf had gone to finish the murderous task his brother had failed to accomplish.
However, Chopra had felt nothing.
He could still sense the young woman close by, and felt no change in the plan mapped out in the cosmic game of life.
He had no understanding of the purpose of life.
He accepted the grand design and his insignificant part.
It was enough that he should receive food and shelter most nights; many of his family had not been so lucky.
The huge doors of the castle had been open.
The shapechangers had left the planet only a few days before, having prepared the castle for their return.
At the exact centre of the castle lay a vast, bare courtyard.
Pillars ran around the circular enclosure, and the myriad corridors all seemed to disappear off to an elaborate pattern.
The centrepiece of the courtyard was a deep well.
Directly above this the courtyard roof had a large  pentagonal opening through which could be seen the stars, hanging above them in the heavens.
Around the well was an incongruous array of advanced mining machinery and laboratory equipment to analyse and synthesize drugs.
The most advanced electronic equipment of the age.
The khthons laboured and connected ‘Pandora's Box’ to the machinery.
Chopra supervised the dismantling of the missile and the removal of the unstable core.
The energy force throbbed.
The mining equipment was lined up over the shaft.
The drill would be lowered downwards.
Chopra still did not know what was being excavated, or why they had stolen the most powerful thermonuclear device ever created.
He knew that he didn't want to explore the castle.
He was trying desperately to keep memories at bay.
His thoughts were interrupted.
The shapechanger was approaching; he was hot and bothered and, for the first time, Chopra had access to his mind.
The shapechanger sensed him and cloaked his thoughts.
Chopra had felt pain; the pain of mere existence.
He had also seen into the mind.
The dwarf entered.
Chopra contemplated what he had seen: a series of disconnected limbs squirming and fighting in what appeared to be a pool of mud.
The image meant nothing to him, but appeared to have great significance for the shapechanger.
The khthons bowed their faces to the floor and moved out of the shapechanger's way.
The dwarf revelled in their timidity and dread.
He picked on one, demanding the results of the current analysis.
The khthon stumbled over the response; Swarf just laughed.
‘One per cent,’ Chopra repeated, trying to divert attention from his friend.
‘Excellent,’ replied the shapechanger.
‘Soon now….’
He could feel no pain, but his frame was broken and useless.
Spike knew that he was within a few moments of termination.
His memory was failing him.
He remembered  the attack by the shapechanger, his body tossed against the wall of the space station.
The woman's face staring at him, her footsteps as she ran off and the stench of the multi-tentacled creature were all a blur as he lapsed in and out of consciousness.
His vision was impaired, with his sight deteriorating to monochrome, out of focus images and then a series of dots and hiss.
He wondered if he could hear any more.
His last moments.
He retched, and bile from his stomach poured from his open mouth.
He couldn't close his eyes.
But it didn't matter anymore.
And then he sensed someone or something standing next to him.
He felt a warmth.
He could turn his head, and he could see!
It looked like a white light.
But there was a figure standing there.
It was the Prime Mover.
He smiled…and everything faded away.
The ground had rushed up before them but they had survived.
Thomas groaned.
He had taken the full force of the fall but had managed to control the descent well enough to make a controlled crash landing.
He felt proud of himself.
The only damage was a sprained leg.
He had managed to fight on with worse injuries.
Ell had scraped her shins and there was a nasty wound dispensing blood over the marsh.
There was a smell of methane, and his sensory equipment indicated an over abundance of hydrogen and nitrous monoxide.
The air was breathable for his travelling companion, but would cause problems if it was necessary to run.
Marshland swept towards the horizon for kilometres, interrupted by the castle in the distance and, a little closer, the remains of a space station.
The brown muddy plain had sparse vegetation, most of which appeared to have been burnt away in a centuries old holocaust which had dried out and cracked most of the mud.
Thomas suspected  this was caused by the fuel rods from the space station exploding on impact with the surface.
Ell was quiet.
She found the marching pace tiring and her clothes would not be recommended for military training, but she rarely complained.
Night would be falling soon on the planet.
He looked at Ell and her muddy face.
He smiled.
But his thoughts were elsewhere, as he still couldn't understand why the Academy would send anyone down to this class D planet.
Why was Ell's husband authorized to come to this place to carry out tests on the atmosphere and water?
More puzzling was why the Justice Police had not been informed.
They continued their journey.
There would be answers soon.
The major was shocked.
He had been escorted to the market area of the capital.
The air force had launched an attack with chemical weapons.
The sight was appalling.
Dead bodies lay on the streets.
Men, women and children desperate for food had been systematically annihilated by the burning toxins.
A cursory count established the initial death toll to be about seventy.
So far, another two hundred and thirty had been taken to the nearest hospital, although few were expected to survive the next twenty-four hours.
Screams and desperate cries for help filled the streets.
The crawling and wriggling carcasses had been the innocent victims of the chaos taking possession of their world.
He stood powerless.
He couldn't do anything to help them.
He had come to find out more about the antique dealer.
But there were no shops any more.
They had been looted and torched.
Fires were burning over a third of the city.
He couldn't find the answer to the girl's death.
He realized that he didn't know her name.
She wasn't a person.
Just a victim, a statistic.
He felt the pain of her parents.
The Form Manipulator was at work.
Trying to conceal  and sow the seeds of discontent.
Carlson remembered the passage in the Book which talked about the Form Manipulator trying to break down the power of love.
‘Evil cannot exist where there is love,’ said the Book.
‘And this universe is the battleground.’
Who knows why certain people are called up to join the Prime Mover?
It must be part of a plan.
People don't just die.
The Book tells of a purpose.
But one unknowable to ordinary people.
Perhaps the Form Manipulator was trying to influence all those around the victims to give up their faith.
Despair.
The void.
He tried to ignore the pain.
‘John,’ a voice called out.
He turned to smile.
It was involuntary.
He could hear his wife.
‘I love you,’ she said.
He couldn't see her.
Around him the volunteer nurses and doctors were tending the sick and the dying.
But he couldn't see her.
‘Melanie,’ he shouted.
He walked over to one of the nurses.
Had she seen Melanie Carlson?
The woman shook her head.
She'd been out with an earlier crew.
She hadn't come out with them.
She was wrong.
He'd heard her talk to him.
He carried on walking through the bodies, looking at the nurses.
She wasn't there.
He must be hearing things.
‘John.’
He heard it again.
But louder, clearer.
‘Melanie,’ he shouted back.
'…love you…' said the voice.
‘I know, I know,’ he shouted.
And then he saw her.
She lay on the floor where she'd fallen in the gas attack.
Her face and hands were blistered.
She wasn't moving.
He was glad about that.
She wouldn't have suffered too much.
He knelt down and held her hand.
‘Don't do that, you'll burn yourself,’ barked a nurse.
‘Go away!
Go away!’ he shouted back.
The nurse shuffled away.
He put his arms around his wife and held her face to his.
‘I love you,’ he said.
DAY SIX 08:00–12:00
Carlson returned to the Justice Police Headquarters.
The patrols around the perimeter seemed more nervous and aggressive.
He'd received a number of reports suggesting that the secret police were losing troops as, fearing the end was at hand, they were leaving their posts and returning to their families and homes.
This would soon leave only the androids protecting the security state apparatus.
And him.
He'd nowhere to go.
The building was quiet.
It seemed to be abandoned.
He'd planned to storm up to General Kopyion and demand to be told what the Justice Police were doing to prevent further bloodshed.
But Kopyion was not in his office.
The vidscreen monitor on his desk was alive and chattering with images.
He took a quick look.
It appeared to be an old two-dimensional film presentation; an old fashioned oil-driven military vehicle was speeding across a verdant green field.
Is this how the head of the security police was passing his time?
An amulet, featuring a worm curled around a globe, was also on the general's desk.
He picked it up.
It seemed an odd thing for the general to possess.
His thoughts went back to his wife.
He couldn't forget.
The body thrown on to the ambulance.
He clasped her hand.
His skin had burnt, and he said goodbye.
He didn't know why he had returned to Police Headquarters.
Things didn't seem to matter anymore.
He thought about the words in the Book.
Just words.
He wanted his loved one.
The mother of the first victim had slapped his face.
He felt alone.
He left the general's office and proceeded to the vaults, full of the secrets of the Seven Planets.
There were no android security guards to stop him.
The door was locked.
His staser would burn the lock out.
A bolt of high energy ripped a hole in the door.
He went into the room and walked past the rows of documentation too secret to be placed on computer disc.
He didn't know what he was looking for.
He had to blame someone.
But who?
This place had all the answers.
He walked around picking up files, looking at them and then throwing them on to the floor.
He grabbed hold of one case of files and pushed it over.
‘Halt!’ a voice ordered.
The major turned.
Two androids stood at the door, pointing their weapons in his direction.
How had they known he was here?
He looked at them.
And then at the chaos of the vault.
The room looked as if it had been torn apart.
Had he done this?
And then he heard the automatic alarms.
The warning alert must have been sounding since he had broken into the room.
What had he done?
‘Throw down your weapons or I shoot,’ shouted one of the androids.
He put his hands into the air.
Kopyion sat at his desk looking at the major.
The androids had pulled the shaking and distraught officer from the wreck of the room and taken him directly to their controller.
Kopyion looked faintly bemused.
He dismissed the androids and turned to face Carlson.
‘I don't know why I did it,’ Carlson said.
And he didn't.
Kopyion poured him a drink of wine and offered him a date.
‘No, I don't want them,’ he replied abruptly.
Kopyion chewed a date and filled his glass of wine with mineral water.
‘Why don't you do something!
Why can't you stop it!’
Carlson realized he was shouting.
‘Make it go away?’ the general asked.
‘Yes.’
Carlson tried to steady himself.
‘How?’
‘I don't know.
Have you been out there?
They're slaughtering each other.
I've come from the market.’
He paused.
He didn't know how much to say.
‘There are bodies stacked up where the airforce, for some godforsaken reason, launched an attack with chemical weapons on a civilian crowd…’
‘They called it ‘a mob’,’ Kopyion reported.
‘What's going on?’ the major asked.
Why is there death?
Why did she have to die?
‘I've checked all the recent reports from our agents, and do you know what I found out?’
‘Nothing,’ Kopyion said.
‘You found out only what you already knew.
We're keeping an eye on gangsters, black marketeers and revolutionaries.
You found out that we're monitoring the ranks of the military, Academicians and priests.
We have produced thousands of pages of reports.
All of which say absolutely nothing.’
‘Yes.’
The major stared at his superior officer.
‘It's just madness out there,’ said Kopyion.
‘Stop it then!’
Please stop it!
Make it go away!
‘I can't.’
Kopyion fell silent.
‘I want to re-open the investigation into the ritualistic murders.
You said there were drugs involved.
Someone must have killed Brown and the antique dealer…’
‘These murders again….’
‘Yes.
I think there's a connection with what's happening on Nicaea.’
‘Such as?’
Kopyion asked.
There is an answer.
There must be an answer.
‘There's a plot, a highly organized attempt to overthrow the government, by a select group of the elite,’ said Carlson.
‘The investigations so far have shown no evidence of  such an elaborate organization,’ Kopyion seemed to answer before he'd finished.
But the commander was not dismissing his views.
His eyes seemed to be trying to assess how much he knew.
Perhaps Carlson was becoming paranoid.
A lot had happened.
‘The reports are bland and could have been doctored.’
‘A conspiracy theory,’ said Kopyion.
‘No.
More than that,’ Carlson replied.
‘What are you suggesting, then?’
Kopyion asked.
‘That these events are all linked.
The priests are saying this is the predicted last battle across the face of the universe, when every man must choose,’ the major looked intently at Kopyion, ‘between good and evil.’
‘I do believe there is a great design, and that Good and Evil are inextricably linked in a metaphysical battle across space and time.
I also believe that people are capable of bad, sick and harmful actions.’
‘Then what do you see as causing the chaos on this planet?’
‘What do you see?’
Kopyion asked, picking up the amulet.
He ran the chain through his hand.
‘Armageddon is the only explanation,’ Carlson shouted.
He didn't know if he meant it.
But there had to be a word, an explanation.
He had lost everything he had loved.
He couldn't be powerless.
He had to do something for her.
Anything.
‘Let me re-open the murder inquiry,’ the major begged.
‘No.’
The major left the room, punching the wall.
He was angry.
His fist was bruised but he punched the wall again.
He could feel a knot in his stomach twisting, creating a painful stabbing feeling in his guts.
He found it so difficult to concentrate.
He had to do something.
The murders were the key to unravelling the chaos on the planet.
Why couldn't the general appreciate that?
It was so simple.
He was going to wait in the corridor until Kopyion  came out, and he would confront him.
Until then he would just blend in with the walls.
Bernice continued to walk through the endless corridors.
The space station was an empty hulk.
Most of the craft had been cannibalized and ripped apart.
There were no clues to its original purpose.
The remains of the machinery indicated a technology far in advance of Earth.
What had happened to the once mighty race which had built this superior piece of engineering?
Her thoughts drifted back to Spike, the metal man, who had been killed less than an hour ago.
She felt ashamed that she had left him and made her own escape.
She had enjoyed travelling down the river with him.
She remembered her parents, lost long ago.
All she had were her memories.
And then she stopped.
She heard a sound.
A door being pulled open.
Whispers.
Two people talking.
Damn!
The other androids!
She had forgotten about them, but they were still after her.
She couldn't identify the direction of the sounds.
The sounds echoed around the station but the other life-forms could be anywhere in the myriad corridors.
She stood still.
Where was she going to go?
Even if she left the station there was nowhere to go to.
The shapechangers were not going to offer her any protection.
She was so tired.
She desperately needed sleep.
They would never find her if she crawled into a cupboard and hid away.
She could sleep for a thousand years.
As she looked for a hiding place she could hear the voices increasing in volume.
She caught a few words: marsh, explosion, death.
Nothing that enlightened her.
She had to escape from here.
They were too close.
She tried to walk faster.
She was too tired.
Her muscles ached.
She realized that she wasn't walking in a straight line and was unsteady on her feet.
She began to run and fell over.
‘Come on, come on,’ she said to herself.
‘Bernice, this isn't a good idea, you've got to move.’
The voices were close behind her.
She had to move.
Just a little further.
With all her strength, she forced herself to stand and threw herself around the corner.
She ran headlong into a woman.
The woman fell over and Bernice collapsed on top of the struggling body.
An android stood over her.
If this was death then she would stare it in the face.
Although she had run out of steam and no longer cared whether she lived or died, there was no way she was going to give up.
With all her energy she clenched her fists and drove them between the android's legs.
It hurt her arms but had no effect on the android.
He picked her up and threw her a few metres down the corridor.
‘It's just me and you,’ she said to herself.
The android was ignoring her, talking to the woman.
He was asking if the woman was all right.
He then turned his attention to her, lumbering over.
He was about two and a half metres tall; naked muscular chest and short dark hair.
He was dragging a damaged left leg.
‘Hey, I'm not a shapechanger.
I'm not…’ she shouted.
Perhaps the louder she shouted the more he would believe her.
He stopped.
‘Kill me, but I'm not who you're looking for.’
‘This banned world is crowded with unwelcome visitors,’ he said.
The android appeared to accept that she wasn't his target.
Bernice told him that she and her friend, the Doctor, had crash-landed on the planet.
The Doctor had disappeared.
She and Spike journeyed down the river until they arrived at the space station.
Spike had been killed in an attack by one of the shapechangers.
‘Spike survived?’ the android asked.
‘Until the attack,’ she replied.
‘Now I know I am alone,’ he continued.
She discovered Thomas was one of the androids who had tried to kill her earlier, and the woman was the wife of a scientist sent to the planet to analyse the water.
She listened to their stories of a red paralysis slowly expanding over the planet.
The weed seemed to stop time within its  boundaries.
She was also told that some of the creatures and vegetation on the planet were not real, but the product of a Nicaean corporation.
The woman didn't seem interested in meeting her.
She seemed a little jealous.
Bernice could understand that.
She had felt possessive of Spike's help and company.
Ell wasn't unfriendly to Bernice.
Ell talked to her and offered her support, but with it there was a feeling of coldness.
Thomas and Ell seemed to make a good couple.
Both of them rarely talked.
She wanted to go back home and he wanted to fulfil his mission and destroy the shapechangers.
He was similar to Spike in build and single-mindedness.
Bernice was tired.
She wanted a rest, and some hot food.
Thomas needed to catch up with the shapechanger.
There was no time for respite from the task at hand.
She followed the android outside.
Ell was talking about life on Nicaea: the vidscreen soaps, her simple typing job and her small apartment.
Bernice looked her over; a pale-looking creature.
Although Bernice could understand her wish for peace and quiet, Ell must be joking saying that she would prefer to be back home.
Thomas was eager to continue to the castle where the one remaining shapechanger could be found, and his mission completed.
Bernice's escape from the planet was looking less likely.
She looked again across the plain.
A red glow was rising from the marsh.
Night had also started to fall.
She thought about the TARDIS.
Would the red weed affect the time machine?
Even if it didn't, how would she get back to the ship?
‘I need to find the Doctor,’ Bernice said.
She had been thinking more about her companion since the death of Spike.
‘It looks so beautiful,’ said Ell.
‘But that beauty is death,’ replied Thomas.
They all looked at the spreading crystal world.
Suddenly Thomas pointed up to the sky.
‘We've got visitors.’
Bernice saw creatures flying in the sky about two kilometres away.
They seemed to be dropping hundreds of metres, unfolding their wings, then rising with the air currents into the upper atmosphere.
They made a sound like hysterical laughter as they played their games.
Ten of them had landed on the burnt-out branches of the witch trees and were silhouetted against the fiery red death.
They looked like demons from mediaeval Earth folklore.
‘What are they?’
Bernice asked.
‘Hunters…
’ Ell replied.
‘Right,’ Bernice said, remembering what Spike had told her about them.
‘We've got to get out of here,’ Thomas said firmly.
He began to move off towards the castle.
Bernice could see thirty or forty of the Hunters hovering in the skies.
They seemed to be amassing in the heavens.
‘Yes.’
She turned to find her companions had already begun the final march to the castle.
She ran after them.
‘Hold on.’
The major followed Kopyion into the radio communications room.
As the major entered, a lone police officer stood to attention.
Carlson felt it unnecessary to return the customary military salute.
He was trying to grasp the events going on around him.
Kopyion, appearing not to notice him, continued collecting messages, reading through them quickly and then shredding them.
The major felt there was too much going on in his head.
The images of the dead bodies in the streets kept taking over his mind and seeping into his everyday thoughts.
He didn't feel like eating, and even breathing had become a painful labour.
He found his body shaking again.
He had considered that he was having a heart attack; that would explain the pains in his side and the hot and cold sweats tormenting him.
The chatter of the machines was increasing.
The sounds were becoming uncomfortable.
‘Sir,’ he said to the general.
Kopyion stared at him.
‘I think you should go home,’ said Kopyion.
‘What's happening?’
He felt so powerless.
‘The priests have ordered all their followers to pray for the Prime Mover's eternal mercy.
A couple of Hunters were captured and torn apart by the hysterical mob.
Many people were killed.
In a frenzy, followers ran along the streets screaming, shouting, attacking anyone.
These are the final days…’
‘I didn't think you believed,’ Carlson said.
He slumped on to the floor, curling into a ball.
Kopyion stepped around him.
‘It is time…’
‘What are you going to do?’
Carlson asked.
‘A long time ago I lost this arm,’ Kopyion ran his hand against his left shoulder, ‘on the unnamed planet.
Now I must return there.
That's where the secret to all of this lies.’
‘I don't understand,’ said Carlson.
‘No,’ Kopyion replied, returning to his office.
The castle was bathed in a flickering light.
The core of the missile had been strapped into place.
The mining equipment had powered up and was descending into the depths of the shaft.
‘Sixty three per cent,’ Copra said, reading out the machine dials.
Swarf looked pleased and hobbled around the courtyard, laughing to himself.
His plan was obviously to process enough drugs to flood all human-occupied space.
But where was the source of the substances?
Chopra thought of his training in the occult world.
How his powers had been used by slave traders, who had murdered the rest of his family, and then by the T'Ka drug cartel.
He had smoked simple compound narcotics, to accept the veil of illusion, but had never experimented with the  more complex chemical compounds.
They did things to the mind.
You felt you had entered new worlds and discovered all that it was necessary to know about life.
It was all a deception by the Form Manipulator.
The reality of things was hidden from ordinary folk like him.
They were just pawns in the grand design.
Swarf thought he knew, but he too was being controlled.
The images of the bodies wrapped around each other in mud had stuck with the shapechanger all his life.
Chopra had glimpsed into the mind and understood; an understanding which had only recently come to him, as his body aged and his life-force drained away.
It was Time.
The one dimension that could not be controlled.
The endless drift from the past to the future.
The shapechangers had sought to control their lives with their willpower, able to transform their bodies into any form, but they were still prisoners of this mortal, finite universe.
And then he could hear Them calling again….
Chopra had to keep his mind in order.
There were too many things trying to break into his thoughts.
The place was haunted.
Chopra could sense ghosts drifting around the castle.
Voices and wispy figures haunted this place.
He could hear them in the rooms above.
And the noises!
Why had he to suffer them?
They had waited.
Not for him.
For the other.
The other.
The hovercar sped through the capital.
Most of the city was aflame, and bitter fighting had taken over the downtown suburbs.
The major looked out of the car.
Riots and looting had destroyed most of the retail and industrial areas.
Although there were occasional shots in the direction of the bulletproof car, the crowds ignored the Justice Police commander.
Carlson was glad that he couldn't hear the sounds of the chaos.
The images of the victims of the chemical attack stuck in his mind.
How could people do that to one another?
To his wife.
Melanie.
General Kopyion was quiet.
It had taken Carlson some time but he believed that he had finally worked out who was responsible for the ritualistic murders on the planet.
The answer had been staring him in the face.
It was Kopyion, his commander-in-chief, who had killed or ordered the deaths.
This would explain why Kopyion was not making any efforts to control the anarchy let loose across Nicaea.
He was making an attempt to become the Archon.
Kopyion was going to leave the planet and return with ‘Pandora's Box’, the ultimate weapon.
He would order the androids to suppress all dissent and extinguish all opposition, and then return to become supreme ruler of the Althosian system.
The major had thought about it.
He could throw his lot in with the Lord General, and perhaps become a governor of one of the colony worlds.
Or he could stop him.
He had to stop him.
The images of the dead came to his mind and he knew that he had to stop Kopyion.
Democracy, for all its faults, should continue.
That was the reason for the declaration of independence from the Earth corporation.
That was the reason he'd come out here.
He held her hand.
Goodbye.
Carlson felt more reassured as they arrived at the hoverport.
Androids saluted the car.
They had taken the area from the rebels and were defending it on the orders of General Kopyion.
Kopyion left the car and walked towards the space hoppers.
Carlson said to the driver and the security guards that Kopyion wished to be left alone.
He walked on his own to his final destination.
Kopyion had tried to persuade him that he did not need to come to the hoverport.
But Carlson was insistent.
He had a job to do.
He had no doubts that the androids would kill him once  his crime had been discovered.
He felt a tear in his eye.
What had happened to his beloved world?
What would happen to it in the future?
He was the only one who could stop Kopyion now.
Perhaps he would be remembered for that.
It didn't matter.
He remembered his oath, that he would ‘serve’.
The hopper was apart from the others.
There was something about it that seemed different, but he couldn't tell what it was.
Kopyion was kneeling as if in prayer.
Kopyion turned.
He seemed calm, almost as if he had been expecting his deputy's treachery.
‘I asked you not to come,’ Kopyion said.
‘General…’ the major said.
‘It was you.
You committed the murders.’
Kopyion looked at the staser pointed at him and stood to face the major.
‘It's been staring me in the face,’ Carlson continued.
‘You're ill, put the weapon down,’ Kopyion replied.
‘Don't come any closer,’ the major shouted.
Kopyion continued to approach him.
‘I mean it.
Stop!’
As Kopyion walked towards him, Carlson ordered him to stop, aimed his weapon and fired it at the general's shoulder.
The general flew backwards with a look of shock on his face.
He held his shoulder.
‘You killed all those people.
Why?’
Carlson asked.
Kopyion bounded forward and slammed his arm against Carlson's chest.
The staser fell.
Kopyion punched Carlson in the face and then in the stomach.
The major was winded.
The old man had more power than the major expected.
The experience of war had not left him.
Kopyion dodged a fist and threw another punch at his solar plexus.
The major fell on to the ground.
Kopyion pulled out the old revolver stolen from the Academician's apartment and moved over the fallen figure.
The major saw a coldness in the old man's face.
He saw Kopyion stand over him, pull back the safety mechanism of the revolver and put the barrel directly over his forehead.
‘I'm sorry,’ said Kopyion.
He pulled the trigger.
DAY SIX 12:00–16:00
The otherworld lay in front of them.
The harsh desert was exposed and yellow, but there was no heat or sign of any change in the climate.
Diamonds and rare jewels were strewn across the floor as if they had been there for millennia.
The juggernaut continued on its journey.
The travellers had been driving for six hours, and as the meter in the cab had been showing a steady sixty miles an hour, they must have covered over three hundred and fifty miles.
But there was no sign of any sentient life or activity.
The smoke poured up towards the horizon and they were no closer to arriving at their destination, wherever and whatever that might be.
They drove past an elephant wandering around lost, looking confused and desperate for food.
At one point they also passed a beached whale squirming in the desert.
The Doctor did not appear surprised, and the journey continued, wordless.
Blake found the continuous stark colours and the bare, uninhabited world disturbing in a way he could not identify.
There was a feel to the world unlike anything he had come across back in England.
The Doctor had talked about a drug being in the atmosphere which created a feeling of unnatural well-being, but there was something else here.
‘You know something more than you are telling me,’ Blake said to his companion.
‘This is all an illusion.
This machine should have run out of petrol many hours ago,’ said the Doctor, sounding as if he did not want to be interrupted.
He wanted to be left to himself.
Blake decided that his thoughts were not welcomed by the time traveller.
He sat back in the motor vehicle as  the Doctor noticeably increased the speed of the journey.
The juggernaut bucked and the poet held on to the side to prevent himself being thrown around.
He momentarily closed his eyes.
It was difficult to tell the passage of time, but when Blake opened his eyes they appeared to be within reach of the rising smoke.
He must have been asleep for hours.
He looked behind and saw the desert stretched out.
‘How long have I been asleep?’
Blake asked.
‘What is time?’ the Doctor replied enigmatically.
The juggernaut was approaching the origin of the smoke.
Thousands of slaves, naked and in pain, were breaking rocks and moving the rubble in long columns towards the burning embers of a huge pyre.
Slave masters strode through the crowds of men and women whipping them if they slowed down or showed any interest in the travellers.
‘Cuj ach,’ one of the slaves begged, breaking free and looking towards the travellers.
Although his chains still held him tight, the slavers grabbed him and burnt him with searing irons.
He screamed and then was silent.
‘Ach n'kai,’ the Doctor muttered to himself.
Closer to the smoking fire, Blake could see that the colours of the flames varied with the different amounts of crushed rocks thrown on to the pyre.
‘Chemicals?’
Blake asked.
The Doctor nodded.
The slaves continued to pound away.
They seemed demoralized and miserable, operating an endless mechanical process.
As the travellers continued their journey, they passed a number of open mines.
At each one slaves carried out rocks and deposited them in piles.
The rocks were also found lying on the ground.
‘Doctor,’ Blake interrupted his travelling companion's silent thoughts.
The Doctor did not acknowledge him.
‘I have made a study of the Fall, how men challenged the Gods in their search for knowledge and were banished  from Eden.
I believe the story in the Bible — and other holy books — is a myth, but based on a simple truth.’
The Doctor did not reply immediately.
There seemed to be a tear in his eye.
‘As I've travelled the universe, I've come across the myths of many planets.
They all share certain elements in common.
One of those elements is the story of an all-powerful race who tried to conquer and destroy Creation.
A race banished from this universe.
The myths of Gallifrey talk about nameless horrors infesting our universe which were only defeated through the might of the Time Lords.
‘I didn't think it was real.
But then on my travels I met a vampire which had escaped a great war with the Time Lords of Gallifrey.
‘The High Council had kept it a secret.
I didn't know why.
I still don't know why.’
Blake listened as the Doctor tried to explain the confusion in his head.
‘What is happening here?’
Blake asked.
‘I think that It is once again preparing an attack on our universe.
Not just the crazed fanatics who follow It, but It and Its legions,’ the Doctor replied.
‘Vampires?’
‘Hideous, half-glimpsed nightmare creatures.’
‘Does It have a name?’
Blake asked.
The Doctor pondered.
‘Yssgaroth…’
Blake repeated, ‘Yees-gar-oth?’
‘A word used by frightened children to describe nameless, formless horrors which await you in the fog, or around the next corner.’
The travellers were heading out into the empty desert.
The Doctor stopped the juggernaut.
He said that he wanted to inspect the rocks on the ground.
He left the vehicle and moved over to the rocks.
He kicked one, and it disintegrated into a white powder.
He rubbed some of the powder in his hands, sniffed it and threw it back on to the ground.
Blake went to pick up a handful of the substance, but the Doctor kicked it out of his grasp.
‘You must leave it alone.
Don't touch it.’
‘What is it?’
Blake asked.
‘It's an addictive, hallucinogenic drug.
Throughout the universe it's known as ‘Dream B’.
Its followers used the drug in their hideous rituals in Victorian London.
I didn't think it was known on Earth, not yet…
. I've visited future worlds which have been devastated by the drug, where the young people have been completely wiped out by this substance.’
Suddenly, as they talked, arrows started to rain down on them, landing uncomfortably close to the two travellers.
The Doctor ran for cover, grabbing the poet's sleeve and pulling him to the side.
The attack was aimed at the motor vehicle.
As Blake lay on the floor, he watched the arrows soaring into the air, about a hundred yards away, and then falling towards their target.
Whispers of smoke were visible on the arrows.
Twenty flaming arrows hit the juggernaut.
The cab caught fire.
‘Down,’ the Doctor shouted, pushing the poet's head into the sand.
As Blake wriggled, he heard the sound of an explosion and felt a rush of cold air.
Blake looked up.
The juggernaut was in flames.
They were not going to escape from hell in the twentieth century craft.
A dozen figures stood up, cheering.
Their faces were painted to look like skulls.
They ran over to the two prostrate travellers, and danced insanely around them.
They were armed with bows and arrows, were all male and had shaved heads.
They jumped up and down, signalling wildly.
Occasionally they would beat on their chests, sit on the ground and then stand up.
Their eyes darted excitedly around.
The Doctor was nodding, as if in agreement.
‘What are they saying?’
Blake asked his companion.
‘I've no idea.
It sounds like gibberish to me,’ the Doctor said.
The figures moved around them, waving their arms in a coordinated movement towards each other.
And then Blake heard music.
It sounded like a mouth organ.
The  figures were dancing.
He thought that this was extraordinary.
He turned to the Doctor.
The Doctor was holding a harmonica, tapping his feet and playing a piece of music he called ‘Jimmy Crack Corn’.
The traveller's music captured a feel of adventure yet sorrow.
‘It's called the Blues,’ the Doctor shouted, taking a pause for breath.
Blake looked on astonished.
He thought they should be trying to escape, not entertaining the enemy.
The musical interlude went on for ten minutes and finished with the mad figures collapsing on the ground.
The Doctor smiled cheerfully, waved and walked off.
‘Come on,’ the Doctor said under his breath.
‘And smile.’
Blake followed.
‘Be be be,’ one of the figures said, standing up.
‘No, we've finished,’ said the Doctor.
‘Be be be.’
Another figure stood, looking far from friendly.
He walked over to the Doctor, waving a knife at the traveller's throat.
‘Well, if you insist,’ the Doctor said.
‘Be be be.’
The figure put the knife at the Doctor's throat.
The skull figures grabbed hold of the travellers.
‘A most unappreciative audience,’ the Doctor said.
They walked for about an hour before arriving at their destination.
However, the Doctor was happy as they were brought directly to the industrial centre of the world.
Blake didn't know how much longer he would survive.
The journey was unbearable; marching along with the chattering fools, and the Doctor more interested in the past of his people.
They arrived at a huge dome.
The structure appeared to have been built into the air, with scaffolding and support systems running up towards the sky.
Thousands of slaves marched in step.
The slave masters ran around, punishing anyone who slowed down or became disobedient.
Drums beat to mark the rhythm of the work.
However, within fifteen minutes of their arrival, the speed increased twice.
A number of silos were positioned about a mile from the structure.
They appeared to contain tons of Dream B. Bapputchin delivered further supplies.
Blake noticed the demons flying overhead.
‘What is the building?’
Blake asked.
‘A bridgehead,’ the Doctor replied.
The Cun wandered round, trying to buy bodies.
They continued their bloodthirsty chatter, as they identified the weak and the injured and went over to negotiate a purchase price.
‘Death will be very welcome,’ Blake said.
He was tired and, seeing all the pain, felt a quick death would be more inviting a proposition than a hot bath.
The Doctor turned to him.
‘You don't understand.
There's no death here.
These slaves have been here thousands of years.
They've been digging for the chemicals, been tortured and crucified, again and again.
There is no welcome release here.
There's just pain, and more pain.’
‘Why don't they revolt?’
Blake asked.
‘Where is there to go?
They're trapped here.’
A Cun walked over to take a closer look at the two travellers.
It hissed and spat in their faces.
It wiped the spittle, trying to clean off the dirt.
It shook its head and walked away.
After much discussion, the Cun traded a bag of raw meat in exchange for the travellers.
The Cun sniffed around them.
One particularly gross creature walked alongside them with its stomach rumbling.
Blake said to his companion that he should take a last look at the hole in time, and their escape.
The Doctor pointed elsewhere.
One of the Cun seemed to be in an argument with a jackal-creature which the Doctor said was a ‘Galk’.
Four Galks stood listening to the conversation.
They were twice the size of dogs and stood erect on their hind feet.
The Cun appeared to be reticent about arguing with them.
Eventually a Cun bowed and indicated for his brethren to follow him; the others snarled at the Galks  and walked away.
Blake began to follow them, but the main Galk stood in his way.
As the Galks led them into the desert, the travellers could see the Cun arguing with the skull people, trying to reclaim their raw meat.
The Galks moved with a slow, pronounced movement.
‘Hello.
I'm the Doctor and this is William Blake.
The poet, you know,’ the Doctor said, trying his simpleton act.
It didn't work.
The Galks ignored him.
‘Any chance of some food?’ the Doctor asked.
After about fifteen minutes they arrived at their destination.
A throne stood in the middle of the desert.
The throne was made of gold, and sparkled with a multitude of jewels.
The Galks untied the travellers, bowed to the throne and retreated.
The poet and the time traveller stood alone in the desert.
‘I think we're about to meet our hosts,’ the Doctor said.
Blake stared at the empty throne.
There seemed to be something happening; his vision was misting over.
And then in front of them appeared a small lamb.
He smiled.
The lamb bounded on to the seat of the throne and turned to face them.
‘I hope you are all right, gentlemen,’ it said, in a high, squeaky voice.
‘Thank you,’ said the poet.
The Doctor remained silent.
‘I want to help you escape from this terrible place,’ said the lamb.
Blake felt comfortable because the lamb offered to return them home.
‘I don't believe you,’ the Doctor shouted.
Blake looked at him.
What was he talking about?
Why was he being so rude?
‘Doctor, he is trying to help,’ Blake explained.
‘No.
You might be able to influence my friend, but I won't believe you and I will stand up to you.
There's nothing you can do,’ the Doctor continued.
A long tongue came out of the lamb's mouth as it licked its lips.
It laughed to itself.
‘Doctor, you fail to go along with my charade.
That upsets me.
Don't you realize that I can inflict billions of years of exquisite suffering and pain on you,’ the lamb said.
The Doctor started to scream.
He held his head as if his brain was exploding.
‘Don't you realize, Time Lord.
We are returning to your paltry universe.
And nothing can stop us now!
Abandon all hope…’
The Time Lord fell on to the floor and the pain ceased.
The lamb bounded around laughing and then disappeared.
The throne was empty.
And then Blake felt the ground tremble.
It was like an earthquake.
The desert was shaking around them.
The sands started to rise up like a cloud of dust.
‘What is it?’
Blake started to ask, and then he saw.
From around the throne, something was unravelling its body.
It was hundreds of feet long, initially resembling a huge snake uncoiling itself.
The skin was covered with a wet, dripping substance.
He could also see bits of horns or wings down the side.
Could this thing fly?
Blake couldn't believe that this was one creature.
It seemed many of these things were squirming around together.
And then there was the smell of rotting flesh.
He felt he was going to…
. And then he vomited.
The stench was overpowering.
‘Doctor, what's your plan?’
Blake asked.
‘After much consideration, and examining all the options, I suggest we — run.
Now!’ the Doctor shouted.
Blake agreed with his companion, and beat a hasty retreat back to the hole in time.
It never occurred to him that he was too tired or ill.
He had to run for his life.
‘Don't look back, just run,’ shouted the Doctor.
The travellers' flight took them across the desert.
‘We must destroy the hole and prevent them returning to our universe,’ the Doctor said.
‘Isn't that what the Time Lords tried to do and failed,’ Blake replied.
‘And anyway, there are many of these holes from which the monsters could escape into our universe.’
‘We can't give up,’ the Doctor said.
Blake needed to rest.
He turned around and slowed down, seeing no sign of the monsters.
The Doctor didn't seem tired and continued to run.
‘Don't stop,’ he shouted, running on ahead.
Blake sighed, and ran to catch up with his travelling companion.
He had lost his watch back in Victorian London and so had no clear idea of time; it may have taken minutes or hours to get back to the hole in time.
There were thousands more slaves now, working to finish the bridgehead.
They marched in columns, ten slaves wide.
Thousands moving as one together.
As one slave put his left foot forward, so did several hundred others.
Hunters were gathering over the dome.
Hundreds of the creatures hovered in the air, swooping down in mock delight.
The air was full of their squawking.
Blake looked around.
‘How are we going to get out of here?’
‘We're not,’ said the Doctor.
‘We have to stop them.’
‘There are two of us, and hundreds of thousands of them,’ Blake said.
‘I admit the odds aren't in our favour.’
The Doctor smiled.
‘But we must do something.’
He moved up to a slave.
The slave didn't even glance at him.
The slave looked fifty, with pale battered skin, hopeless eyes and an emaciated, run-down body.
Thousands of similar slaves worked all around them.
The Doctor tried to communicate with the slave in English, but received no response.
‘A'sleek, m'jn ta omo,’ the Doctor said.
Hearing the ancient Gallifreyan language, the slave slowed down in his work.
He looked at the Doctor and spat in his face.
He moved off, continuing his heavy work.
The Doctor looked sad and tired.
Blake shivered.
As the Doctor continued his efforts to communicate with the slaves, Blake noticed the Galks  talking to the Cun.
A Galk hit a Cun across the face and then tore into it with savage teeth.
The Galks left the injured Cun and began to walk amongst the slaves searching for the travellers.
The demons noticed the injured body and began to fly over the struggling figure.
‘The Harpies of destruction,’ Blake said.
‘Time is running out,’ said the Doctor.
‘What?’
Blake asked.
‘I didn't want to come back here.
Somehow, I knew what existed here went back to the ancient history of my people.
To a time when all seemed ideal.’
The Doctor smiled again.
‘I wanted to run away, to hide, but I had to return to this lonely, meaningless place.’
The Doctor joined a slow moving column of slaves, carrying concrete slabs over to the dome.
He moved down the column.
He smiled, said ‘hello’ and then unexpectedly stuck out his foot and tripped up one of the slaves.
As the slave stumbled, so did another, and then another.
The whole column proceeded to fall on to the ground.
The Doctor darted over to a pile of broken rocks.
He pulled out his sonic screwdriver.
The screwdriver emitted a loud, incessant scream.
Blake shook with the pain.
Smoke started to pour out of the mounds, and the crackling of small fireworks sounded from inside the stocks of Dream B. The Doctor filled his pockets with the rocks.
The Galks saw the time traveller, lowered themselves on to all fours, and bounded across the desert.
The Doctor ignored them, climbing up the scaffolding to the roof of the dome.
Blake followed the Doctor.
‘What are we doing, Doctor?’
Blake asked.
‘Sabotage.
We'll set fire to the rocks up here and create a huge explosion.
It will stop the Yssgaroth for a few hours….’
‘And kill us in the meantime.’
‘I'm sorry, I can't think of anything else,’ the Doctor replied.
Blake had a good view of the world from the roof of the dome.
From where they stood, everything seemed to  be smaller.
He could see people and creatures on the ground below, and in the distance shapes moved under the desert sands.
The Yssgaroth were sliding underneath the surface of the earth towards them.
The Doctor had filled his pockets with Dream B. He pulled out the rocks and placed them in small piles.
‘What's the purpose of the dome?’
Blake asked.
‘To transport It and Its forces into our universe,’ the Doctor said.
‘We've moved through the hole in time.
So have the Hunters.
Can't the monsters too?’
Blake asked.
‘Obviously not,’ the Doctor replied, trying to prevent the rocks slipping down the roof of the dome.
His footing was precarious.
‘Doctor, what are you going to do?
The powder isn't going to have any effect on the dome.’
The Doctor replied in a drifting Scottish accent.
‘I know, but we have to do something.
We have to…’
As he spoke, he lost his balance and he fell.
He tumbled through the air and stopped.
He started floating to the hole.
Blake was astonished, and found himself moving towards the Doctor.
Blake felt that he was standing on something.
He stretched out his arms but had no room to manoeuvre.
He was in a cage.
An invisible cage.
Blake struggled, but to no avail.
The cage moved away from the dome and towards the hole.
‘No, I need to stay,’ the Doctor shouted, desperately.
They were powerless to resist.
The invisible cage removed them from the otherworld.
DAY SIX 16:00–20:00
A red glow radiated from the depths of the shaft.
They were up to 78 per cent full power.
The breakthrough would occur in eight hours.
The khthons were waiting and praying.
Chopra moved between them, calming their fractious nerves.
He could sense an immense power enveloping the planet, and knew his death was only hours away.
The visions continued to haunt him.
He had tried to sleep, but the horrific apparitions surfaced out of the recesses of his unconscious and frightened him.
The shapechanger was inspecting the operation.
Although he was pleased that they had managed to set everything up on time, he continued to mutter about the remaining android being alive, threatening them from somewhere on the planet.
Chopra sensed the two women were together and within a kilometre of the castle.
There was something else with them.
He suspected that this was the artificial man.
Although he told Swarf about the visitors, the shapechanger refused to listen to his worries about the red death.
‘It is the Empire that never Ended,’ Chopra said.
‘You're still preaching death and destruction.
Your people are so morbid.
If the exploration of the galaxy had been left to the khthons, we'd all still be living in caves,’ Swarf said.
‘And so we should,’ Chopra replied.
That had been their perfect existence before the empire builders had come in their tall ships.
The universe was about to be plunged again into eternal darkness.
The khthons had known that the Earth colonists would one day re-awaken the Elder Gods; they would come to this planet and open the gates of their imprisonment.
Many khthons were butchered when the imperialists first arrived.
As a race, they had prayed for death before the return of the Monsters.
The myths of their people told how the Elder Gods had broken through and laid waste to the cosmos.
Only through the sacrifice of a distant people had the Old Ones been vanquished, and order been returned to the universe.
The khthons had known that it was not over and they waited, sheltering in their cave world, for the storm to return.
This was all a veil of illusion.
Chopra wished he didn't possess the sight.
The imperialists carried on their day-to-day life, and he felt sorry for them.
They did not understand, but theirs was a simpler existence.
The pain hit him.
All the way down his left side.
He slipped on to the cold floor.
He tried to breathe steadily, but the noises from upstairs disturbed him.
Ghosts walked the castle and screamed out in panic.
White figures glided overhead.
They were trapped, screaming for help and mercy.
He could see them in chains, walking in bloodied battle armour through the ancient corridors.
And then the torture instruments — used by the Servants of the Old Ones — tore off flesh, inflicted pain and maimed their captives.
Chopra wanted it to stop.
But there was no escape from the strange visions haunting this place.
The weird feasts, insane dancing and animals copulating in the dirt…
…and the Monsters.
He let out a scream.
The invisible cage imprisoned them.
The Doctor had railed against the unseen forces which had abducted them, but to no avail.
The travellers had been transported through the hole in time to their place of capture.
They could see only darkness from the invisible bars of their prison.
They were obviously in a dark room, but where in space or time was unknown.
Blake lay on the floor of their cell.
This provided a welcome relief from the constant travelling of the last three days.
The Doctor was less impressed.
He was seething  with anger.
Blake tried to persuade him that there was little he could have done anyway, but the time traveller would not agree.
He would have found some means of stopping the Yssgaroth.
The poet suspected that the Doctor was trying to deal with his confused thoughts about the past.
The Doctor would pace around, shaking his head, trying to say something that was stuck in his throat.
‘Why?’ the Doctor exploded.
There was no response.
The sunlight was deteriorating.
It would be nightfall soon.
Bernice shivered.
She had been looking at the castle for the last hour.
Perhaps it was here that ogres and giants used to lure their victims.
As they approached the castle they realized that the advance of the red weed was increasing in speed.
Most of the surrounding marshland had fallen to the crippling infection.
Thousands of the Hunters flew in a hysterical dance over the ascending chaos.
Behind her, there was just the stillness.
She felt a coldness inside her and did her best to remember the happy times of her childhood.
She again remembered the fishing and the picnic.
The events of her childhood that she could really call happy.
She recognized the coldness inside her as also present inside the Doctor.
The funny man who had found her on a distant planet and had treated her as a human being.
He hadn't tried to get her drunk or rape her.
He wandered the universe, searching for something.
He called it truth and justice.
In a rare moment of self-disclosure, he had talked about wanting to go up to God and ask ‘why?’
He hadn't explained whether he actually believed in the existence of God, or what he was going to seek the reason for in his meeting with the almighty.
She laughed to herself.
Why was she on this distant planet, trying to discover how the Althosian civilization was destroyed?
The Doctor had offered her a journey to see some of the beautiful sights of the universe.
She thought that someday she  would settle down.
There had to be an escape.
Although Bernice had been dealt a few rough cards in her life, she still thought that there could be something better.
She had coped so far.
They were now a kilometre from the castle.
They were trying to sneak up and gain entry without being seen by the shapechanger.
Thomas had a mission, to destroy the missile and prevent the shapechanger from carrying out his criminal activities.
Bernice saw a little creature run in front of them.
It looked like a typewriter.
But that was stupid.
They continued to walk on, through dried mud and stinging grasses.
And then she saw the creature again.
It appeared behind a clump of dead plants, ran over and stopped five metres from them.
Another smaller one appeared and shot past the stationary one, chattering madly to itself.
Suddenly it saw them and also stopped.
It retreated slowly.
‘What are they?’
Bernice asked.
‘I don't know,’ Ell replied.
Bernice moved over to the creatures.
She held an arm out, saying she meant no harm.
The creatures backed off.
She stopped, waited, and continued towards them.
The little one made a shrill noise and ran back into the desiccated bush.
It tried to hide itself.
Bernice approached the larger of the two.
It was a typewriter, and had a piece of paper sticking out of its back.
The paper had writing on.
‘Bernice.
This is the Doctor.
Do not believe anything you see.
You are in great danger.
Remember the Alamo.’
She had been joined by her two travelling companions.
She looked at them.
‘I thought he was dead,’ Thomas said.
‘Perhaps he is,’ said Ell.
‘No, he's very much alive,’ said Bernice.
This made her a lot happier.
Somewhere the Doctor was alive, and watching out for her.
She giggled and walked over to the other machine.
The Doctor would have some answer to all of this.
She peered at the smaller typewriter's message:
‘The other printer is not telling the truth.
They are trying to deceive you but you are safe at the moment.
The Doctor.’
‘Useful information,’ said Ell.
Thomas picked up the larger typewriter.
He stood on the smaller machine.
It smashed, and machinery scattered over the ground.
As the larger machine struggled the android pulled it apart.
Its legs continued to move even when the body was removed.
Thomas grunted that they had wasted enough time and must continue on their journey.
He walked off.
They were less than a quarter of a kilometre from the castle.
The slope up to the castle was winding and steep, and where they now stood was cast in shadows.
Suddenly, Thomas put his finger to his mouth, beckoning the others to be quiet.
He had heard something.
There was a slight movement close to their position.
Small, wizened men with parched skin and hairless bodies appeared around them.
There were six of them.
All carried small hand weapons.
Thomas lunged at two of the enemy.
Even with his injuries he managed to connect with his targets.
Both creatures collapsed with broken necks.
Bernice threw herself at another of the creatures.
The creature's weapon fired but missed her.
She threw a punch and hit the creature in the mouth.
‘What are they?’
Bernice shouted.
‘Khthons,’ Thomas replied.
‘They're the native life form of the planet Trieste.’
‘We've got a fight on our hands,’ said Bernice.
Ell didn't move.
She shouted at her companions, pointing towards the marshland.
Bernice looked.
Although there was a clear path from the space station to the castle, the red death was within metres of their position.
It had enveloped the marshland.
A creature lunged forward.
Thomas moved, knocking it into the red weed.
The creature staggered for a few seconds and turned to scream.
There was no sound and no more movement.
It had petrified and been frozen in space and time.
The other creatures screeched nervously, but they weren't running away.
Above them, Hunters swarmed in increasing numbers.
They seemed to be laughing and mocking the battle going on below.
‘Give up, just give up,’ Ell shouted.
‘We've got to get inside the castle.
We don't have time to stand and fight.
Bernice, please!’
Thomas stood still.
He was controlling his body and was ready to explode and attack the khthons.
Bernice looked at him, and shook her head.
Ell was right.
She moved over to the android and touched his arm.
‘We don't have a choice,’ she said.
She walked towards the khthons putting her arms up.
Ell followed.
The khthons were in control and waved their guns as if they had captured the travellers.
Thomas shouted, ‘No!’
However, there was no point, and he raised his arms in surrender, following his companions.
They entered the castle.
The dank corridors led to a courtyard.
The four khthons pushed them as if hurrying to return to safety behind the walls of the castle.
The captives' hands were bound with thick metallic rope.
Bernice could see Thomas trying to prise his hands apart, but his broken arm proved to be a burden.
The shapechanger was waiting in the centre of the castle.
A huge drill had been lowered into a shaft in the ground.
The drill was screaming and an intense heat was rising from deep inside the shaft.
Khthons ran around, checking the operation and the equipment.
The dwarf sat on the floor, guiding the operation.
Swarf turned to face Bernice.
He was snarling.
‘We meet again.
And you are now here to witness my greatest triumph.’
Bernice looked around the mediaeval castle.
Hideous gargoyles stared down from the comers of the room, and a clammy dampness seemed to cover the black walls.
Swarf hobbled over.
His body squelched as he moved.
The khthons held on to their prisoners.
The shapechanger smiled.
He spat as he talked.
‘Chopra, tell me what is in their minds.’
Another khthon came forward.
His gait was unsteady and he seemed to have difficulty focusing on them.
He moved over and stared into Bernice's eyes.
She could feel a strange tugging, almost like an itch inside her head.
The khthon was trying to explore her thoughts.
He moved along, apparently looking into her companions' minds.
He coughed.
‘The darkness is taking over,’ Chopra said.
‘I read their minds.
There is something terrible out there.
The red weed.
The paralysis that has crept over the planet.
I sense it is within a kilometre of the castle.
They surrendered because they were more frightened of what is out there than in here.’
The shapechanger walked over to Bernice and stood in front of her.
His breath stank.
‘Put them in the dungeon.’
Thomas struggled.
Chopra added, ‘This one will kill you.
He is programmed to retrieve the missile and annihilate you.’
Swarf laughed.
‘It is already too late.
The missile has been dismantled.
Take them away.’
The khthon looked strangely at Ell.
Bernice wondered why.
But she had other worries.
The khthon said, ‘But what about the red weed?’
‘We'll seal off the castle.
We'll be safe in here.’
Bernice looked at the khthon.
He didn't believe the shapechanger.
He nodded politely, but his whole body language indicated that he didn't agree.
At that moment Bernice was very afraid.
It meant that the criminals were not in control.
She had thought the shapechanger was in control of what was occurring on the planet.
But it wasn't true.
He thought that they could simply close the doors and everything would be all right.
They were manhandled towards the mighty front door.
The khthons had been ordered to seal off the castle from the unknown forces.
The door stood over ten metres high and was made of a silvery metal.
Three khthons pushed  the door shut.
The sound of the door being closed reverberated around the silent corridors of the castle.
Bernice looked at her captors.
They were frightened.
And they were all trapped.
Part Four
DAY SIX 20:00–24:00
Darkness had fallen.
The lights flickered.
The three khthons shivered with uncertainty.
Further into the depths of the castle, Bernice saw the walls were draped with ancient standards, crumbling into dust.
She stopped for a moment.
Ell looked at her.
‘What is it?’
Bernice stared at a faded yellow cloth, hanging from the ceiling.
A gold pattern was woven into the material.
She thought she recognized the design.
‘I don't know,’ Bernice replied.
One of the khthons pushed her.
She turned to hurl abuse at the creature.
‘You…’
She stopped herself.
It was frightened.
Not of her, but of the castle.
It was on edge.
Eerie sounds echoed around the passageways.
Thomas said nothing.
His attempts to break free had failed.
The corridor ended.
A narrow stairwell wound like a corkscrew into the dungeons of the castle.
The steps were well worn.
The torches flickered and occasionally blew out, plunging the descent into a shadowy darkness.
The old stones reeked of damp.
Bernice felt nauseous.
The khthons were chattering nervously.
Suddenly they stopped.
A long groan drifted up the steps.
A deep, mournful sound.
She looked in front of them and couldn't see anything.
The khthons stirred and continued into the darkness.
His memory had failed.
He couldn't remember how he came to be here.
His body felt that it had been in a  terrible accident.
His mind scanned his body functions.
His legs and back were broken in numerous places.
Three of the fingers on his right hand were undamaged, but both arms had been crushed.
Whatever had done this to him had great strength.
His brain was half destroyed.
His thinking was not logical.
Random images were pouring into his mind.
The figure standing over him.
And the shapechanger!
He remembered the battle aboard the space station.
He had tried to prevent the creature from finding his woman companion.
He didn't know if he had succeeded or failed.
His body had been thrown against the walls.
His life-force had drained away.
What was he doing here?
He should have been terminated.
His internal clock indicated that his energy levels were at zero.
However, that part of his brain may have been damaged and unable to give an accurate reading.
He tried to open his eyes.
His face was paralysed.
His external sensors seemed to be partially operable.
He had no sense of taste or smell, but his hearing was working.
What was he going to do now?
He had to retrieve ‘Pandora's Box’.
His programming offered no alternative but to continue his mission.
Perhaps it was this that kept him alive.
His over-riding sense of purpose.
Even with his body almost destroyed he had to continue until his life-functions were terminated or his mission was carried out.
Silently he prayed.
The Prime Mover must be able to offer him some hope.
He had no sense of time.
His body lay broken and discarded.
And then he heard a sound he recognized.
A sound he knew too well.
The flapping of wings.
He could not tell how many of them there were.
But Spike knew that he was surrounded by Hunters.
He tried to open his eyes again.
Slowly, the left eyelid opened.
It was worse than he had imagined.
Three of the Hunters were prodding his legs.
They had obviously discovered some scrap to take with them, and it was him.
‘Please kill me, please,’ he begged.
But no words came  from his mouth.
His eye was the only part of his body that he could move.
One of the Hunters looked over the android's body; its demonic face staring down at the android's features.
It stared at the good eye moving frantically in its socket.
It moved forward, stretching out a scaly finger towards the android's eye.
It hissed, and one of its fellow creatures also came closer to have a look.
The other Hunter hissed.
The first Hunter then lunged forward and grabbed hold of Spike's chest.
With its powerful arms it threw the android over its shoulder.
Spike lay over the Hunter's back, facing the ground.
The Hunters moved with a distorted slow-motion gait through the corridors of the abandoned station, occasionally taking off and flying a few metres.
And then they were outside.
But it was an atmosphere vastly different to when the android had entered the space station.
His sensors must have been more badly damaged than he had originally thought.
A timeless red glow seemed to radiate all around.
A stygian gloom had fallen over the world.
The colour reminded him of the paintings of hell by the mediaeval painter, Ferdinand Breughel.
His mind was not working.
Perhaps he was dead.
The Hunter's wings began to strike the air, and the creature levitated off the ground.
The other creatures also began to fly, and soon they were all airborne.
There were hundreds of the Hunters, darting and soaring through the air.
Spike closed his eye and again lost consciousness.
Blake opened his eyes.
His slumber had not been at all restful.
The Doctor had been pacing around the invisible prison, punching at the walls and muttering to himself.
Blake had tried to advise him to relax, and when that hadn't worked had shouted at the Time Lord.
The Doctor sat at the other side of the cell, sulking.
The poet wondered how much longer this would go on.
He missed the simple luxuries of life, from soap to a  regular meal.
His dreams had all been about home.
If he d had a paper and a pencil he might have continued his epic composition, or drawn sketches, but he had had no opportunity in this strange land.
He had picked up on his travels that the future history of Earth was not the progressive revolution which he and many others had imagined.
He felt a vague disappointment which he couldn't put into words.
‘Doctor,’ Blake said.
His companion ignored him.
‘What are we going to do now?’
The Doctor stood and walked over.
‘I don't like computers,’ ranted the Doctor.
‘What?’ said Blake.
‘We're imprisoned at the moment by a computer defence programme.’
‘I don't understand,’ Blake said.
‘A computer is like a mechanical human brain which carries out various specific operations.
This whole planet is controlled by a vast defence system.
This is what stopped the TARDIS in mid-flight…’
‘Defending what?’
Blake asked.
‘The entrance to the hole?
My memories?
I don't know.’
The Doctor took the sonic screwdriver out of his pocket.
‘I've been trying to unlock the doors of the cell using this device.
I've escaped from many places with this…’
Blake looked at the exasperated face of the Doctor,'…but this computer can predict what I'm going to do.
Everything I try to do it counters with more tortuous and convoluted traps.’
Blake nodded.
‘Then we have to wait.’
The Doctor turned around without acknowledging the poet's statement.
‘I'm not a children's plaything to be toyed with,’ he shouted.
‘Do you hear me, whoever you are…’
There was no reply.
‘It's quite interesting, Doctor,’ said Blake.
‘Do you know that in the mythology of Earth the concept of freedom only came into existence after male and female ate  of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.
They were then cast out of the Garden —’
‘I haven't come here for a history lesson,’ said the Doctor.
‘Did you also eat of that tree?
Did you rebel?’
‘I was loyal to the Time Lords.
To my people.
But they prognosticated.
They pondered.
They observed.
Do you know the literal translation of the word ‘Gallifrey’ is ‘they that walk in the shadows’.
That's their problem.
They know everything and yet they know nothing.
I left Gallifrey because I was bored, and because of something that happened, a long time ago…’
Blake listened as the Doctor's tones became quieter and more restrained.
For the first time since he had met him, Blake felt compassion for the old Time Lord.
‘The myths of Gallifrey tell of the Dark Times.
They tell of an army of warriors who fought a terrible war.
Against a race of Monsters.
Hideous creatures from another universe.
A legendary figure, Liall a Mahajetsu, led an army of warriors for millennia, in distant battles across the cosmos.
At the end of the apocalyptic conflict there were no survivors.
All the warriors were dead.
‘There are no records.
It's a story now told only to children.
‘The repository of knowledge, the Matrix, doesn't even refer to the war.
Even memories are lost in the mists of time.’
‘And the Time Lords don't have a record of these Monsters?’
‘The Yssgaroth are a story to frighten children.’
The Doctor was thoughtful.
‘The Time Lords seem to have a secret.
A secret which they have tried to hide.
Is that possible?’
‘Yes, I'm afraid it is.’
The Doctor looked intensely at the poet.
‘Do you ever feel alone?
Very alone…’
The dungeon stank.
Bernice sat in the comer of the room writing in her diary.
The khthons had untied them and left a torch before locking the dungeon door.
She tried  to ignore the stench but found her thoughts continually returning to her physical situation.
Although she knew no amount of imagination would take her away from this prison, for fleeting moments she did manage to escape into her book.
Thomas was silent.
Ell looked uninterested but not scared.
Bernice was trying to describe the Nicaean woman to her diary.
It must be odd, she thought, for a stranger to be suddenly caught up in these life or death struggles.
It was part of Bernice's life.
As she was about to tell herself that she enjoyed this lifestyle, she realized this was not true.
The sound of footsteps echoed down the stairs and along the passageway.
The door was unlocked.
A khthon bent down and slid a tray across the floor.
The door was closed.
On the tray were a jug of tepid water, a plate of raw bloody meat and two mouldy lemons.
Bernice couldn't face eating any of the uncooked or rotten food.
However, Ell moved quickly over and picked up the raw meat.
She crammed the meat into her mouth and a glob of blood trickled down the side of her face.
Bernice thought the woman's eating habits were repulsive, and turned away.
And then she heard it again.
The sound of scratching behind the wall!
It was as if something was trying to break into the room.
Perhaps it was rats.
She thought about moving from the corner.
But outside the moaning had started again.
Although they had decided that it was a drill motor, Bernice's imagination turned it into all sorts of monsters.
Ell had finished eating.
She sat looking bored and didn't seem perturbed about the noises around them.
No imagination, Bernice decided.
‘Come on you two, we've got to do something,’ Bernice said.
‘What?’
Thomas asked.
‘We're in the lion's den.
We've got to make our move,’ Bernice tried to explain to him.
Thomas moved to the  door and slammed his arms into it.
The door wasn't even dented.
‘This dungeon has been built to hold mightier things than us.’
Thomas shook his head.
‘Maybe.
But we have our intelligence.’
Thomas looked blankly at her.
‘You can't give up,’ Bernice continued.
‘I'm a machine, constructed for one purpose — to serve my masters.
I've been programmed with memories and tactics for use in various conflicts…’
‘So what?’
Bernice asked.
‘I don't have the knowledge to escape,’ said Thomas.
‘Don't be stupid,’ Bernice retorted.
‘I'm a machine.’
Thomas turned away.
Suddenly, all the sounds were drowned out by the whining and screaming of the huge drill.
It was like the sound of fingernails being dragged down a blackboard.
‘It sounds like the drill's made contact,’ Ell shouted.
‘It may be only a matter of minutes before they break through.’
‘What?’
Bernice screamed, over the sound of the machinery.
DAY SEVEN 00:00 04:00
Swarf did not look concerned.
Chopra had told him about the changes transforming the planet, but the shapechanger just smiled knowingly.
Even the order to shut the main castle doors was more of a sop to the khthons than an acknowledgement that things had gone terribly wrong.
Chopra felt frightened as they walked up the narrow stairway to the battlements.
He had been sensing the red death for many days.
It had spread over the jungle and then had devoured the marshland.
He felt that the emptiness was trying to possess him.
The monsters were stirring, like babies in the womb, waiting to be reborn.
Swarf stood on the battlement.
He surveyed the new world sprawled in front of him.
He couldn't understand what had happened.
There was an expression of shock on the shapechanger's face.
The planet had faded into a deep gloom.
Above, storm clouds veiled the heavens, blocking the sunlight, and below the red stillness covered the surface of the planet.
Their world was petrified, and only fifty metres separated their sanctuary from the sea of red death.
The silence was overpowering.
Hunters played their incessant games in the skies overhead.
There were thousands of the creatures flying above them and ominously silhouetted on the witch trees at the edge of the plain.
They seemed to be able to move through the red death without being frozen in time.
This was the largest collection of these creatures Chopra had come across; normally, they hunted alone or in small packs.
This looked like an army.
This was also the shapechanger's perception.
‘They seem to be watching us,’ Swarf said.
‘They're waiting,’ replied Chopra.
Swarf looked up.
One Hunter was hovering just above the castle.
They could hear the hissing of one, maybe two others, close by.
Chopra leant over the battlements.
He moved back, startled.
Attached to the wall of the castle were forty of the creatures, hanging upside down and gently hissing at each other.
Their claws were holding tightly on to the nooks and crannies of the walls.
Swarf looked.
‘What are they waiting for?’ he asked.
Chopra shook his head.
He didn't know.
‘Bring some of your men up here.
Watch the skies.’
‘Apart from me, there are only four khthons,’ Chopra said.
‘If they attack we must be prepared to defend ourselves.’
Swarf swallowed nervously and descended back into the castle.
Chopra looked out into the night sky.
He wished it didn't have to end this way.
The Doctor's pacing around the cage had stopped.
He sat opposite Blake.
His eyes were closed and his mind was elsewhere.
In the few days that Blake had known the Doctor, he had never seen him fall asleep.
He seemed perpetually on edge.
Now, in the cage, he mumbled and turned, his brain trying to sort out answers even when his body slept.
It had been almost three days since they had first met in hell, in the arena where the mysterious traveller had fought his deadly foe.
Blake felt sad for the Time Lord.
He seemed a man without either a past or a future.
Something in him kept him going.
To call it hope would limit it.
The Doctor stirred up numerous feelings in the poet.
Even knowing he would die, and that the revolutions stirring over the planet would not create the Earthly paradise he so desired, Blake felt he could trust the stranger.
Perhaps the knowledge that he would one day die actually  gave the poet comfort.
The prospect of eternity did not appeal to him.
As he looked over at the stranger he suddenly became aware of someone else in the room.
Just outside the cage, there seemed to be a figure standing and watching them.
The faint light radiating from the cage threw out enough illumination to identify a motionless, shadowy form about six foot from their prison.
It seemed to be draped in black, its face hidden.
‘Hello,’ shouted Blake.
The figure stepped backwards into the darkness.
There had been a definite movement.
It wasn't his imagination.
There was somebody there.
The Doctor sat up.
‘What is it?’ he asked.
‘There's somebody watching us,’ Blake said.
‘Where?’ the Doctor asked, peering out of the cage.
‘It's gone from sight.
It's there, ten foot from the cage.’
The Doctor strained his eyes, but there was nothing to see.
The darkness had swallowed up the watcher.
‘What did it look like?’ the Doctor asked.
‘It wasn't a demon.
I don't know.
I couldn't see very well.’
Blake was unsure.
‘I don't know what I saw.’
‘How long have you been watching me?’ the Doctor shouted.
‘Khatori, m'y,’ a voice echoed from out of the darkness.
It was deep and flowing, offering a reassurance from the unknown.
‘Saved me!
How dare you!
Who says I wanted saving?
I was on the point of destroying any chance the Monsters had of breaking into this universe.’
‘You were on the point of dying,’ the voice continued.
‘I could not have allowed that.’
‘You could not have allowed!’
The Doctor's accent had deteriorated into an almost unrecognizable Scottish drawl.
‘Who do you think you are?’
The figure stirred and moved out of the shadows towards them.
It was draped in a black cloak, with a cowl covering the face.
As it walked forward Blake saw a hand illuminated by the pale lights.
The mysterious disguise  hid the identity of the figure, but could not conceal that it only had one arm.
The hood was thrown back and the cloak slid away from the old man's body.
A further dark robe hid the damaged frame from view, but the face had a pull, like magnetism.
A small beard grew around the mouth and a pony tail weaved down his back.
Blake turned to look at the Doctor.
He had sunk to his knees and was bowing his head.
‘You ask me who I am,’ the figure's voice became louder.
‘I am Kopyion…’
‘Forgive me,’ the Doctor whispered, falling prone to the floor.
'…
Liall a Mahajetsu, the Lord Defender of the Faith of the Peoples of Gallifrey.’
The old man moved painfully, closer to the cage.
His body had been damaged by some long distant war.
However, his eyes shone with the brightness and power of a great intellect.
Blake stood back, overpowered by the sight of this man.
The man was a mythical figure from the Doctor's past.
A man who, according to the time traveller, had died thousands of years ago.
Yet here he was, standing in front of them on this distant planet.
The figure pressed a switch on the wall and the bars of the cage disappeared.
Blake could now see that they were in a large white room, part of a much larger edifice.
The figure stood over the prostrate Doctor.
‘You may rise,’ said the figure.
The Doctor raised his head and pulled himself to his feet.
‘Liall Kopyion, I thank you,’ the Doctor said, holding his arm out beseechingly.
The figure moved out of reach and appeared to sneer.
‘You got in my way,’ Kopyion stated in a cold, humourless manner, ‘and I am afraid the consequences will be grave.’
‘I didn't want to interfere,’ said the Doctor.
‘No,’ Kopyion replied.
He started to walk away.
The Doctor waved to the poet that they should follow him.
‘Where are we?’ the Doctor asked.
‘This is a deep space monitoring station.
It slipped out of orbit many centuries ago,’ Kopyion said.
‘I'm worried about my companion, Bernice Summerfield.
Do you know anything of her?’ the Doctor asked.
Kopyion looked him over.
‘You are tiresome.
The woman is still alive.
She is a prisoner of the shapechanger.
I have far larger tasks than to worry over her petty life,’ Kopyion said.
Blake followed the two men down a corridor.
A door opened automatically and they entered a huge control room.
Screens were erected on the walls.
Dials and switches flashed on and off.
The screens had images from many different worlds, including Mediaeval Christendom, an airless barren world with a red moon, a futuristic city where men were shooting each other with guns firing burning light, Victorian London, and hell.
A large yellow flag acted as the centrepiece of the room.
The crest bore a distinctive design of overlapping circles, resembling an over-elaborate number eight.
A warrior's uniform hung up next to the standards.
The items appeared to be centuries old.
‘What are they?’
Blake asked.
‘They're relics of the early Time Lords,’ the Doctor replied.
‘They are not,’ said Kopyion.
‘These predate the Time Lords by thousands of years….’
Somehow that triggered the Doctor, and he interrupted the old man.
‘We fought a war, didn't we?
Against the Monsters.
Why was it kept a secret?’
‘We made a terrible mistake when the Time Lords set themselves up as guardians of all space and time,’ Kopyion replied.
‘That isn't an answer,’ said the Doctor.
Kopyion began to laugh.
‘It is the answer.’
The Doctor looked furious, as if the old man was laughing at him.
Kopyion walked over to the screens.
He looked intently at the pictures conjured up before him.
‘Please,’ said the Doctor.
‘I need to know.
We've both seen much suffering and horror…
.’ The Doctor grasped the old man's sleeve.
'…sometimes I think the light flickers.’
The Doctor stared at Kopyion's face.
The old man grabbed hold of the Time Lord's hand and removed it from him.
‘What light?’
Kopyion replied.
‘I am doomed for all eternity.’
Kopyion pointed at one of the screens.
Blake leant closer.
It seemed to be a moving picture of an ancient courtyard.
Flames were pouring out of a well.
Figures were running around in chaos.
Kopyion tapped the screen.
‘Soon….’
The machinery was rocking.
The power building up in the shaft was starting to have an effect on the castle.
The old stone pillars were shaking as if they were being brought back to life.
The screams of the drill drowned out all other sounds.
Shadows moved all around them as if coming to life.
Chopra stood unsteadily on his feet.
The shapechanger bounded around with excitement.
Chopra could tell something had happened.
Whatever had walked the corridors of the castle had started to stir again.
It was no longer the voices he could hear, but movement.
The Monsters themselves….
He could hear the wailing.
Like the cry of a banshee, the sounds of the Elder Gods re-awakening from their slumber bore only the prophecy of death.
A long, blood-curdling howl….
‘The ancients believed that they could create immortality,’ said the shapechanger.
‘Now we are so close to achieving their ends.
We will import into this universe huge amounts of Dream B. People can then enter into their own worlds, where they can live forever as Gods.’
Chopra looked at him.
This man was not mad.
He really did not care about the effect of his actions.
As long as he became rich, it didn't matter.
His brother had died, but it didn't matter.
Chopra could feel no malice.
After all, they were all pawns in a game.
A game played out for millennia.
Their lives were all mapped out.
There was no free will.
Somewhere, hands were moving chess pieces across a board.
Bernice didn't like the sounds.
She could hear howling.
Thomas told her that it was the Hunters.
He had heard the voices before.
He told his fellow prisoners of an attack on a colonial settlement where the creatures had made the same noises just before they raided and massacred the colonists.
Bernice didn't feel like writing any more in her diary.
Ell had smartened herself up and started to harangue the android about his apparent surrender to fate.
She told him that they couldn't possibly stay down here, and that he had to make some effort to escape.
It was his mission and he had to fulfil it, she said.
Bernice wondered if there had been anything in the cold meat the woman had eaten.
She seemed to have gone through a character change.
Perhaps it was panic setting in.
The three of them seemed to have been inexorably drawn together with each step they had taken.
They were boxed in.
There was now only a slim chance of escape.
Bernice didn't like this woman.
She couldn't understand why the woman's husband had brought her on to this hazardous planet.
But then, she had survived and he hadn't.
‘They're barbarians.
You must do something,’ Ell said to the android.
Suddenly, Bernice heard something move in the corner of the room.
She turned quickly, expecting to see a rat staring at her.
However, it was one of the typewriter creatures that had managed to dig its way into the cell.
It scuttled over to her.
A message was being typed out.
Bernice looked at it.
‘Bernice.
This is the Doctor.
There is cosmic evil on this planet.
Beware….’
As Bernice tried to read the next line, Ell moved forward and stamped on the creature.
It was crushed, its parts scattered across the room.
Bernice turned to rage at the woman.
‘I hate those things,’ Ell said, smiling.
I cannot cope with the pain, Spike thought.
If only he could make a sound or move his body.
He was being tortured by the Hunters, and there was nothing he could do to stop it.
They had flown into the atmosphere and had carried his broken body to the other side of the castle.
They seemed to have landed away from the red paralysis, but as he looked around he could see the castle being encroached upon from all directions by the strange weed.
He was laid down on brittle pampas grass and then manhandled by the creatures.
He couldn't tell whether there was a steady stream of them, or whether it was the same five or six Hunters who were torturing him.
He was reminded of the behaviour of domestic felines — how they would kidnap smaller creatures from the garden, take them into the house and then taunt them, keeping them alive until they starved or the cats became bored with the game.
He wondered whether prayer would do any good.
The last time he had prayed he appeared to have been granted a few more minutes before termination.
But for what purpose?
He decided that although the Prime Mover had granted his wish, it was up to him how he used that time; but with his badly broken body there was little he could do.
Spike couldn't rant against the Prime Mover.
His wish had been granted, but he had only been given more time to experience cruel and unabated pain.
Some philosophers argued that the Prime Mover did not exist, or was a weak and feeble deity who was impotent to intervene in the machinations of the universe: Spike could not believe that.
The lead Hunter appeared to have a mane around its neck.
This was the creature which had picked him up and flown with him.
Spike's one eye tried to focus on the movements occurring in front of him.
He couldn't close his eyelid.
That part of his mechanism had seized up.
The leader stood back and watched as two, perhaps three, Hunters covered his body in a gold paste.
Spike watched them spit the stuff out of their mouths and then spread it over his skin with their claws.
And it hurt!
It was like acid, and made his whole body scream with pain.
‘Stop, stop,’ he wanted to shout out.
But there was only silence.
He was powerless to stop this terrible torture.
Every synapse and electronic membrane of his machine body burnt with the intensity of a thousand deaths.
He stared out of his bodily prison and cursed them.
A Hunter rubbed the cold, clammy substance over his face, making sure that it covered his one remaining eye.
His vision misted over and he could no longer see.
It hurts!
Why could they not let him die?
The gel covered his body, and Spike's mind struggled to cope with the signals from every neuron in his artificial frame.
He started to realize that he was experiencing sensations from parts of his body which he had thought had ceased to function.
This did not make sense.
Perhaps the substance also had effects on the mind.
He was aware of strange thoughts and sensations swimming through his mind, but he could not cope with the pain.
He heard himself whisper the word, ‘Help…’ and then he lost consciousness.
When he awoke he could not tell if he had fainted or had been asleep for hours or even days.
The pain was gone.
His body felt pleasant and warm.
He felt his hair being stroked and opened both eyes.
He still had difficulties focusing, but could tell clearly enough what was happening in front of him.
The lead Hunter knelt to the side of his face and was gently running its claws through the android's hair.
It was purring, like a pet cat.
The heat in the throne room was building up.
Steam was pouring out of the mine shaft.
A watery mist drifted along the corridors of the castle.
The mist took on the form of tentacles seeping from the otherworld and manoeuvring a gossamer-like web around them.
Chopra could sense they were merely minutes away from the opening of the gateway.
One of the three khthons began to hum a sorrowful melody.
Although it was wordless, Chopra recognized the tune and the homesick sentiments inspiring the ancient lullaby.
The khthon was rocking his head to and fro.
Chopra began to join in.
His voice echoed his fellow khthon's morose singing.
The song was one sung by all khthons as Death approached.
Stories were told of whole communities sitting down and wailing the old tune whilst waiting for the slave masters to arrive and incarcerate their bodies and souls.
Swarf turned, screaming for them to stop.
This was his triumph.
He would soon be rich.
Chopra could see into his mind.
The shapechanger could not face up to his failure; with only five khthons left there would be no mass production of the drug.
Swarf thought he could come to this world, steal the treasures of another race and escape with immortality and immeasurable riches.
There was no escape.
‘Stop it!’ shouted Swarf.
The khthons didn't listen.
The third khthon was also swaying and chanting a welcome to death.
The shapechanger's mind was confused.
Swarf was panicking.
He had lost control, and didn't know what to do.
Suddenly Swarf lunged forward, grabbed one of the khthons and strangled him.
Swarf smiled in triumph, letting the body fall on to the ground.
The singing stopped.
‘No,’ Chopra shouted.
‘It is over for us all.
Let us make our peace before we die.’
‘You can see the signs, but you can't read them,’ said  Swarf.
‘I promised you riches beyond the avarice of man.
And you shall have them.’
Bernice decided that Ell had been watching too many films.
She had suggested that one of them should pretend to be ill, shout for help and then, when one of their captors responded, the others should attack him.
Ell had once seen a vidfilm where that had been used for an escape bid.
Bernice had seen a number of films where that had succeeded, and more importantly thought it likely that everybody had seen at least one film where that less than daring idea had been tried.
Thomas was apathetic, and said he would go along with whatever plans everybody else had.
‘We're not arranging a night out, you know,’ Bernice said.
Bernice agreed to lie on the ground and moan.
Thomas stood behind the door.
The three of them shouted.
And eventually a khthon approached the cell.
It looked through the small door window, asked what was going on, and then told them all to stand back.
It entered and Thomas struck it.
Ell smiled.
‘I don't believe it,’ Bernice said, coming to the conclusion that the khthons didn't have many cinemas.
The khthon had been killed instantly.
Bernice felt sorry, but thought many more would die before they escaped from the castle.
They had decided that they should not walk up the staircase to the throne room but find another route to approach their captors.
They took the torch with them.
One of the typewriter creatures was following them.
It seemed to be watching them.
As they walked through the dungeons, Bernice saw blood-splattered walls and rusty instruments of pain.
She was frightened.
There were weird sounds and feelings brewing in the castle.
The winds brushing through the tunnels and stairwells had an unnatural quality to them.
There were  also other things moving around and making their presence felt.
Suddenly, all three of them froze as one of the inner walls appeared to vibrate and move.
The stone walls seemed to buckle.
The prisoners didn't wait to identify the cause of the disturbance but quickly carried on.
Ell pointed to scratch marks on the wall which she said had just appeared.
Thomas said that the two women were very suggestible, that it was just the wind and that the claw marks were certainly many centuries old.
Bernice saw something which she didn't point out to her companions.
It was a crest.
She had first seen it on one of the standards fluttering in the throne room.
It was also carved on to a number of the walls, as if to ward off Evil.
She had finally recognized it.
She didn't know what it meant but had seen it in some of the old books in the Doctor's TARDIS.
It was the mark of the Time Lords of Gallifrey.
It was called the Seal of Rassilon.
‘That was lucky,’ Blake said, as they watched the three prisoners escape from the dungeon.
‘There is no blind chance,’ Kopyion said.
The screen flickered.
They had seen the argument between the khthons and the shapechanger.
Now the Doctor's companion, the woman and the android were walking through the dark corridors of the castle, trying to find some means of escape.
Blake couldn't understand what was happening in front of him.
The moving pictures on the wall seemed to be of events occurring elsewhere on the planet, or in the universe, across the ages.
But the events were all going on now.
‘I created this whole planet, using Gallifreyan technology,’ said Kopyion.
‘Its purpose is to monitor the Yssgaroth.
I knew they would return; perhaps tomorrow, in a year or in a million years, but they would be back.
I have stood guard across the centuries.’
Blake looked at the old man.
Kopyion sat on a chair, staring out of half-blind eyes at the screens and eating dates from a little box on his lap.
Kopyion's body seemed decayed, only able to move due to sheer strength of will.
‘But why have the Time Lords kept this Great War a secret?’ the Doctor asked.
He had seemed to be sulking.
He was sitting on the floor with his legs crossed, and had said nothing for over an hour.
Kopyion's refusal to answer any of his previous questions had irritated the Time Lord.
‘I am sorry, Doctor.
Do you want the truth?’
‘Yes.’
The Doctor looked suspiciously at him.
‘It is a history lesson, but one that you will never have heard before.
‘Gallifrey was an advanced civilization.
Across the sentient worlds of the galaxy we were treated as gods.
Our people were happy.
We created works of art that could not even be imagined by lesser races; we pushed our bodies even further and devised whole new theories and systems to improve our way of life.
‘We believed in God.
We were a spiritual race.
We prayed.
And then it started.
Philosophers argued about the existence of God.
And then the scientists stated that we were alone in the universe, that we made our own destiny.
There were many ideas, debates and arguments about our place in the cosmos.
‘And one of our greatest scientists, Rassilon, announced that he had discovered the principles of time travel.
All we had to do was harness the power of a black hole.’
Kopyion shook his head.
‘And the fools tried it.
They exploded the most powerful device ever created, inside a black hole.
Do you know what they did?’
‘According to our history, they discovered the power to drive the experiments in time,’ the Doctor replied.
‘No.
That was much later.
The initial experiment went horribly wrong.
They pierced the fabric of our universe; like a gunshot that ripped open the whole of space and time.
They created holes throughout the cosmos, from our universe to the other side of the black hole.
The other side….
‘And then they came.
Monsters.
Hideous monsters, in their hordes.
Star systems were destroyed.
Billions died.
The war went on for over a thousand years.
And we were responsible….’
‘This isn't true,’ the Doctor said.
‘And then, after the war, the newly formed High Council set themselves up as the Time Lords.’
‘But Gallifreyan history isn't like that.’
‘Your history is a lie.
When I returned from the War, I wished I was dead.
I saw a people half destroyed by plague.
The virus had annihilated all those who knew of Rassilon's great mistake.
A sole warrior survived the Eternal War.
But he soon died.
Most of the great men died.
‘Rassilon had become the first President of the Time Lords of Gallifrey.
‘He talked of science and reason.
The rule of law.
I argued.
It was Evil which we had fought, dark desperate evil.
I had seen things which no-one should ever see.
But they were not interested, Rassilon and the scientists.
They talked of the end of superstition and dread.
The truth did not suit them.
They re-wrote history.
They were technologically advanced.
They sat in their ivory towers.
‘But the Time Lords were immoral.
‘I could tell you so much.
How in another experiment a scientist was sent into a black hole and was supposedly killed by the force of the explosion.
He wasn't.
He was sealed in there to prevent him ever telling of Rassilon's great mistake.
‘I escaped.
To keep a lone guard against an ancient and bitter enemy.’
The Doctor had stood up and was pacing around the room.
He didn't seem able to agree with this version of his people's history.
Blake didn't know what to think.
He didn't agree with Kopyion.
He saw scientists and thinkers as exploring the unknown, pushing forward their place in the universe.
They had eaten of the forbidden fruit of knowledge and had been cast out of paradise.
He didn't  think there was a God.
He had seen no signs of His existence in his journey with the Doctor.
‘I don't understand how you knew they would come back here, to this time, at this place in the universe.
I can see it's happening, but why here and-now?’
Blake asked.
‘It's very simple.
The Monsters want my body and soul.
They want vengeance.’
‘I see,’ said Blake.
‘I doubt whether you could understand how it feels to know for all eternity that the creations of hell are pursuing you,’ Kopyion said.
‘Can we get into the castle?’ the Doctor asked.
He was clearly concerned about his companion.
‘I've heard what you've said.
I don't know whether I believe you, but I feel powerless standing here.’
‘There is a path, but it would be playing our hand too early.
We would not be able to tell what the enemy's intentions are this time,’ Kopyion replied.
He offered Blake and the Doctor a date.
Both declined.
‘But Bernice might die,’ the Doctor said, exasperated.
‘Yes, she might,’ said Kopyion.
Bernice stopped.
She couldn't go any further forward.
She pointed to the wall in front of them.
Thomas couldn't see and bent forwards.
‘Don't,’ she said.
‘Why not?’
Thomas asked.
And then he saw it as well.
In the centre of the wall was a crack.
It was only a narrow mark on the wall, but all around seeped the red death.
The paralysis bubbled and oozed through the small hole.
This was worse than they had thought.
The castle was not sealed off, and their lives were in utmost danger.
‘Get back,’ said Thomas.
‘No,’ Ell said.
‘We've got to carry on.’
He looked at her.
‘We only have a short time,’ Ell said.
Before Bernice could reply, Ell had walked past the red paralysis and  had started to run down the corridor.
She seemed to have lost interest in her companions.
‘After you,’ Bernice said to the android.
He smiled a thank you.
They shuffled past the paralysis.
‘What's she running for?’
Bernice asked.
‘Perhaps she's scared,’ suggested Thomas.
‘I doubt it.
Come on, we'd better keep an eye on her.’
They continued to walk along the corridors of the dungeons, until they came to another stairway.
Bernice turned and faced the typewriter creature that was following them.
‘I hope we're doing the right thing, Doctor,’ she said.
She smiled, and then began to climb the stairs to the ground level and the shapechanger.
As she did, a cold shiver ran down her back.