

Yes your  is cancelled about er twenty thirty stop.
yeah, outbound 
In or outbound?
In or out?
Well, in that case we'll forget it.
I've got the inbound one over there 
Yeah  unless they're referring to tomorrow's?there's a crossed line somewhere
He's coming from Moscow tomorrow
Mm
he's changed his tomorrow to Moscow
I'll go get the er, programme, get that er, for tomorrow, Okay, such as it is.
Right, done that, check the kettle
two four now, the wind is ten knots,one zero kilometers,three thousand, temperature eight.
one zero two zero
currently on the heading of one zero, one eight  maintaining 
Yes,you turn right to the two one zero, clear two thousand feet altitude, to one eight twin zero, two zero.
No, no just keep going 
Hello
Hello, seven miles,strong there, two four, Victor, Delta, Michael
Continue approach,radar, when it picks bursts  cue position in  get transferred radio beeps that keep jam , to land, and two obstructions,
Will they ring us with that tomorrow morning?
If you know where to look you'll see it 
Victor, Delta, Michael,
is established
Okay,one zero, two zero,, two four eight feet
Oh, God, I've lost half my
one zero, one zero
lost one circuit of the runway line
It looks all there to me.
Yeah, they are now, but they're on ten percent  
Ah,I've never heard of you 
I was actually reading off it 
six over 
to Romeo, Delta, Mike mark final
Victor, Delta, Mike, getting on runway two four, the wind's two one zero degrees at twelve knots
Victor, Delta Mike, thanks  
The British National Corpus, sounds like forensic doesn't it  detail?
 
Are these for tomorrow, Keith, are they these strips already done?
Yeah 
Where's the air traffic pen gone?
Oh, I've got two, I'm greedy
particular green one, like that 
G B Fan, till he was scrubbed, that was supposed an outbound, wasn't it?
Mm
What do I hear a please, but don't come again
Two one zero eight, ten knots,
Thank you 
Hello, Sharon.
Tomorrow's programme.
G B Fan, we've got it coming in from Stuttgart at eight twenty.
Where's, where is the aeroplane at the moment, do you know?
Well that's what I felt, but then we had that outbound planned, which was cancelled  
In a minute, if you've got a minute, er, twenty  from Munich
Yes, so that if he's coming at twenty hundred tonight, he can't be
Victor, Delta, Mike, locate left at the end.
Proceed to open 
 
So G B Fan inbound from Munich tonight is scrubbed?
Yeah, maybe, maybe they got the, the, the oh, eight twenties, and the twenty twenties er confused there  yes, if, have you 
Let's just have a look
Yes, that's okay, it's just that originally you see, we had an outbound tonight as well mhm, yes  okay I think we can pick up the pieces from there.
It seems to make a fair amount of sense.
I'll just get these things to you.
Okay well I won't be keeping the programme, so I'll probably give it back to you in a couple of minutes.
Okay bye.
Yes, eight twenty, it was eight twenty tomorrow, not tonight, so
Next one should be in ten minutes.
Whereabouts have you been to on your travels, to take recordings, what sort of places have you been to?
photography, I personally  talking to people about jobs
Mhm
quite a lot of other ones,er, other people have done, people making speeches,
Mhm
tape recordings, recordings of the whole union's A G M. 
Very interesting, thank you.
And they just send tapes to you, you know, they don't?
Oh, they do, yeah.
No, I ju I just, I was just thinking, a lot of these things if you, if you are actually recording interviews you're gonna get a very stilted,
Yeah, well
Yeah
pass the message?
something just approaching from the south two thousand feet one zero one niner, and now turning eastbound er, via  to pick up the M twenty five clockwise.
And er  services.
 
used rates as well 
Zero, zero, one niner 
These are obviously the ones that don't fly anyway 
Hello seven three one eight, no Roger's off duty at the moment  it's Chris  here  erm, he should be, hang on I'll just have to look at the watch roster and check up on precisely what his movements are, erm  just look through tomorrow and I can find the right page in the roster here, er, two thir yeah, he'll be on tower, so he'll be in first thing tomorrow from about seven, seven o'clock onwards.
Okay then?
Well, we, we just sort of muddle along from day to day week to week, nobody tells us anything, we just have a guess and usually the guesses are wrong.
Don't know  well, I mean, yeah, the basically factory's closed.
Erm, they've demolished all the north side, you know what used to be the dynamics and  that's all gone, it's gonna become, you know, it's not very, that's becoming a, well, in the process of becoming a business park, but I mean, mean  well, I mean, it, it, it's all executive erm, and you know business stuff and on the surface, you know, we're still reasonably busy with, with that sort of thing, but erm, no that, they have, the only one four six we see now is just on the company shuttle just you know until they complete the close down of the factory, they shuttle them up to Woodford, er, er, and back every day.
But that really won't last long much after the erm, well we don't know, I er, nobody really knows, I mean, British Aerospace has fragmented into all of these property groups and Rover and everybody's got fingers in the pie and we're not, we're sort of caught half way between short-term aims to make a quick profit from trying to get Shell in you know and that sort of thing, but I mean, we just need to talk about, nobody really knows what the long-term policy of the main British Aerospace Board is.
Whether to you know sort of try and pick up the guys who are getting thrown out of Heathrow and make a long-term go of it or whether in the long term, em, they want to flog it off for gravel and you know mining it for gravel and sending it for houses and you know, that sort of thing.
Erm, we get fed all sorts of information from various levels in  and rumours from outside, not just the milkman, you know 
Golf, Romeo, Alpha, Alpha, Romeo 
Alpha Romeo 
about er, ten minutes to land if possible
Yeah, yeah what time do you want to go?
He won't know any more either 
Er, if we can make it one six nine O, with just er,
No problem,starting, temperature is plus eight,one zero, one nine
one zero, one nine
want to speak to Roger  was that control,
They said er, he is
Who's he?
He's the chief, whatever they call it, the C A title is for  
changing to  one three two seven  
I thought that was erm  another chap's name 
It may be, but you know, they've got several levels of management, one's the manager of air traffic services another one's the chief executive officer 
Hello 
Hello, London, er, Golf, Romeo, double Alpha Romeo, on a Hendon departure, please,
Okay hold the line  right which was the one?
Golf, Romeo, double Alpha, Romeo, on a Hendon departure
five, four, one, one,seven six,frequency for that erm, one, one, nine, seven, seven
Heading five, five, four, one, one, one, one, nine, seven, seven, through loop, thank you.
Thank you, bye, bye
What's Dublin these days, is it Delta, Whisky?
Dublin is the I D 
Yeah, course.
They're er, obviously gathering information for a big push then 
Yeah,
There's a lot of gaps on this tape to edit 
Whoever's got to do the transcription
Hello,, ah, I bet it's something I've just written down, isn't it?
Yeah, come on then  yes, yeah, I've just that bit,
 
from Luton,
What's the signal?
the weather
Right
to the wind is er, two three zero degrees at ten knots, visibility is greater than one zero kilometers,three thousand feet, temperature eight, D L H, one zero, one niner
Okay 
Thank you,altitude two thousand feet,
signal
You can go and have a look at the radar if you want?
Could  
Do you know if Maria's down there, excuse me?
This plane, hello
radar, ten miles, most eight zero, six one
Continue approach
Roger
Yeah, bottom of the stairs, straight through that open sliding door, straight ahead of you, well,ju just, to your right
Chris, I might take the  down
Oh, you're gonna take that  
Oh, well not now, yes 