

Lot seventy does not have a horn with it  but Lot ninety two, the good news is it does have a reproducer  er  Lot one hundred and eleven should have a black dot against it to indicate that it will be removed from the premises if not cleared within the stated time  Lot one seven four is withdrawn  one nine one  the estimate should read eight to twelve hundred  and finally Lot one nine eight is withdrawn.
Right, Lot one  is  on the screen now, yes, there it is, Lot one  fifty pounds for this, fifty pounds anyone?
That's fifty pounds bid,fifty five  fifty five now, any more, fifty five.
All on fifty five  fifty five, any more?
At fifty five, all done?
Fifty five only  sixty down there, thank you, sixty on the left,sixty five  seventy, five  seventy against you on the left, now any more?
Seventy five, you all done at seventy five  eighty  eighty pounds now, eighty five  eighty five, any more?
At eighty five bid   standing  standing at eighty five against you all seated now, at ninety pounds, standing at the back and I'll sell at ninety pounds, are you all done, ninety pounds  ninety five just in time  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one thirty  one thirty still on the left at the back at one thirty, any more now at a hundred and thirty pounds?
Can I have the number sir.
It is eight five seven, thank you very much.
And Lot two  erm  two receivers and an H M V  pick-up attachment  Lot two  er  fifty for these, fifty pounds anyone?
Fifty pounds  fifty pounds, anyone at fifty  fifty pounds, no one at fifty, twenty then, twenty pounds  twenty pounds  at twenty, twenty bid down there, thank you, any more at twenty?
Twenty pounds, twenty two  twenty five, twenty eight  thirty  five  forty, five  forty five   forty five, all done at forty five, now any more?
At forty five, fifty standing  fifty five  fifty five  standing at fifty five, any more?
Fifty five pounds   all done at fifty five, now any more at fifty  sixty  sixty pounds up there   all done then at sixty pounds 
Er Lot three   showing Lot three  the er Radio Year Book   fifty pounds anyone?
At fifty pounds  fifty bid,sixty   seventy, seventy pounds  any more at seventy?
Seventy pounds, five, any more?
At seventy five  all done, at seventy five only, any more at seventy five pounds?
Any more  at seventy five.
And Lot four  is er  an Amplion speaker  Lot four  and I've fifty offered, any more at fifty, alright sixty  sixty pounds, any more?
At sixty, all done at sixty only, sixty five, seventy  five  eighty  five  eighty five stands, any more at eighty five pounds?
All done at eighty five pounds  ninety  good for ninety five  one hundred seated  and ten  one ten on the right standing  a hundred and ten  against you all at  and twenty  one thirty  one thirty, on the right standing, at one thirty  are you all done at a hundred and thirty pounds.
That's number  nine O six, thank you.
And Lot five  there's Lot five, the er  V two  Lot five and I have four hundred pounds offered for this one  four hundred pounds and twenty  four  fifty, four eighty  at four hundred and eighty pounds, any more at four eighty?
Five hundred  five hundred now, any more at five hundred  and fifty  five hundred and fifty pounds, any more at five fifty?at five hundred and fifty pounds against you , are you all done?
At five hundred and fifty pounds  any more?
For one three O.
And Lot six  Brownie number two and    Lot six  er fifty for these  fifty pounds  fifty, anyone at fifty?
Fifty five, sixty, sixty pounds, any more  at sixty five, any more, seventy, seventy five  eighty  five  ninety  ninety standing, any more at ninety, all done?
At ninety only, any more at ninety pounds, all done, ninety five  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one twenty standing, any more at a hundred and twenty?
All done at a hundred and twenty pounds.
nine O six, thank you.
Lot seven  is the Andia Cockatoo loudspeaker now showing, there it is, thank you, Lot seven  and two hundred is offered for this, two hundred pounds and twenty,two twenty  forty, sixty  two sixty now  any more at two sixty, all done?
Two sixty, eighty, three hundred  three hundred pounds   any more at three hundred pounds, all done at three hundred pounds,and I'll sell  at three hundred pounds, any more?
One one two five.
Whoop.
Lot eight  is the Pye transportable  showing  twenty pounds   at twenty pounds  twenty   twenty, twenty pounds  at twenty pounds  twenty pounds.
Lot nine  is a Brownie number two  thank you, there it is, Lot nine  twenty for this one  twenty pounds  twenty  twenty two   twenty five  twenty five seated, any more at twenty five pounds,at twenty five, twenty eight  thirty  thirty five  forty  forty five  fifty  fifty pounds down here  any more at fifty?
I'll sell at fifty pounds  all done, fifty five standing    standing at fifty five,sixty  sixty there   now, sixty five  seventy  seventy pounds on the right, any more?
Against you on the aisle  so eighty at the back now  against you, all done at  eighty pounds  right at the back,eighty pounds, are you all done?
I'll sell at eighty pounds.
Number three one O  thank you.


Lot ten   Gecophone number one and I have eighty pounds , eighty five, ninety  ninety pounds, any more?
Ninety five  at ninety five, any more at ninety five pounds?
All done then at ninety five, any more, ninety five, one hundred, one ten  against you now, a hundred and ten, twenty, one thirty  at one thirty with me, all done at one thirty?
I shall sell then, it's with me at a hundred and thirty pounds.
. Lot eleven  two Pye portables, Lot eleven  fifty for them, fifty anyone?
At fifty pounds  fifty   fifty pounds  at fifty pounds   fifty pounds.
And Lot twelve  is the Ediswan mains receiver, Lot twelve  and I have forty offered for this, any more at forty?
Forty pounds, any more?
At forty, all done then at forty five standing, fifty  fifty five, sixty  sixty five  standing at sixty five, any more  at sixty five  all done at sixty five, seventy  seventy five   eighty  eighty five  ninety  ninety five  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one thirty  forty  one fifty  sixty  one sixty.
one sixty, any more at a hundred and sixty pounds,at one sixty  any more?thank you very much.
And Lot thirteen 


is the Grafonola  with some needle tins and things, Lot thirteen, twenty for them, twenty pounds  at thirty pounds, anyone at twenty  twenty pounds, twenty three, any more, twenty  at twenty pounds  any advance on twenty pounds, two, five eight, thirty  thirty pounds against you, thirty five  forty  forty five  fifty  fifty five  sixty  sixty five  seventy  seventy five  standing at seventy five pounds now, any more  at seventy five  at the back, I'll sell at seventy five pounds.
and Lot fourteen  is the cabinet now showing, thank you, Lot fourteen, fifty for it  fifty pounds anywhere at fifty  at fifty pounds  fifty  at fifty pounds  fifty pounds, anywhere at fifty  unwanted then at fifty pounds  fifty pounds.
Lot fifteen  thank you, is  two portables, Lot fifteen, twenty for them  twenty pounds anywhere  at twenty  at twenty pounds   any more at twenty  twenty two  twenty five  twenty five pounds down there, twenty eight  thirty  thirty five  forty  five  fifty  five  sixty  five  seventy  seventy pounds seated, now any more at seventy, seventy five  eighty  eighty five  ninety  ninety five  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one twenty seated, any more at one twenty?
All done then, I'll sell at a hundred and twenty pounds.
And the number is  nine one seven, thank you, Lot sixteen  mahogany cabinet gramophone, there it is, Lot sixteen, twenty for it  twenty pounds anywhere?
At twenty pounds  twenty bid  twenty two  twenty five, twenty eight  twenty eight pounds against you now, any more at twenty eight?
All done at twenty eight pounds then, any more, thirty  five  thirty five against you standing, thirty five, all done then, at thirty five pounds, any more?
Forty  forty five  fifty  on the  fifty pounds, any more at fifty and I'll sell at fifty pounds.
The number is  nine two seven, thank you, Lot seventeen  is a Stroviol  and a couple of bows to go with it, Lot seventeen  and I have sixty offered for these, five, seventy  five  seventy five pounds, any more?
At seventy five, eighty five  ninety five  one hundred, one ten  against you now, one twenty  one thirty  one forty, one fifty  with me, one sixty  near the back at one sixty there, any more at one sixty?
All done at a hundred and sixty pounds  one seventy   one seventy now on the   one eighty  one ninety  one ninety  two hundred  two hundred pounds.
All done at two hundred and I'll sell at two hundred pounds.
Eight six one, thank you.
Lot eighteen is the H M V Model thirteen  there it is, thank you  various accessories to go with it, Lot eighteen  hundred pounds for it, one hundred anywhere?
One hundred pounds  one hundred  one hundred bid, ten, twenty  one thirty  any more at a hundred and thirty pounds?
All done at a hundred and thirty only, one forty, one fifty  sixty, one seventy  eighty  ninety  standing at one ninety, any more?
All done then?
Bidding two hundred  two two twenty on the aisle 


bidding  two forty  bidding?
Er two sixty  two eighty  two eighty the  bid, any more at two eighty now?
I'll sell at two hundred and eighty pounds  are you all done at two hundred and eighty pounds.
And your number?
Eight six three.
And Lot nineteen  is the H M V Model  one six three, now showing, thank you, Lot nineteen and I've three hundred offered and twenty  
 
three eighty, four hundred and twenty  four eight, four fifty, four eighty  at four eighty now, any more at four eighty?
Four hundred and eighty pounds  all done at four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred and fifty  at six fifty now, any more?
It's with me at six hundred and fifty pounds  all done at six fifty then?
I'll sell  at six hundred and fifty pounds  any more?
One three six.
Lot twenty  is a Pathe Gaulois  glass horn, there it is now showing, Lot twenty and I have  three hundred offered, three twenty  three fifty  three eighty, four hundred  twenty  fifty, four eighty  at four hundred and eighty pounds  any more at four eighty, five hundred and fifty  five fifty, any more?
Five fifty, six hundred, six fifty  six hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Six  seven hundred, seven fifty  seven hundred and fifty  eight hundred  on my right now at eight hundred pounds, any more?
At eight hundred, eight fifty  eight fifty on my left  nine hundred  nine hundred pounds, any more?
It's against you  bidding on my right at nine hundred pounds, now any more  at nine hundred pounds?
You all done then,on my right  nine hundred pounds  any more?
All done?
Six six five, thank you.
Lot twenty one  the lacquer cabinet gramophone  thank you, there it is showing, twenty for this  twenty pounds anywhere  at twenty  twenty pounds  any more at twenty?
All done at twenty only, two  five  eight  thirty  five  forty  five  forty five standing, any more at forty five pounds?
Fifty  fifty five  sixty  five  seventy  seventy pounds standing there, any more at seventy?
I'll sell then  seventy five  eighty  five  ninety  five  one hundred, one ten  twenty, thirty  one thirty  on the left now at the back one thirty  are you all done at one hundred and thirty pounds?
Number  nine six seven, thank you.
Er Lot twenty two  is a Beltona portable  there it is, thank you  thirty offered for this, any more at thirty?
Thirty pounds, any more?
Five, forty  at forty pounds  any more?
At forty, all done at forty pounds  five  fifty  five, sixty  five, seventy  five, eighty  five  eighty five at the back, any more?
Eighty five pounds then, at the back and I'll sell at eighty five, ninety on the aisle, ninety five  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one twenty on the aisle, at one twenty, are you all done at a hundred and twenty pounds?
. Now Lot twenty three  a red portable one O one, there it is, Lot twenty three  twenty for it  twenty pounds anywhere  at thirty pounds, thirty  twenty bid, thank you, any more at thirty  thirty five  forty  five  fifty  five  sixty  five  seventy  seventy pounds seated, any more at seventy?
Five  eighty  eighty five  ninety  ninety pounds  ninety  are you all done and I'll sell at ninety pounds.
one seven, thank you.
Lot twenty four  this is the model one six three  there it is, thank you, I'd like two hundred offered for this one  two hundred pounds  any more at two hundred?
Two hundred pounds, any more?
At two hundred pounds, are you all done at two hundred, two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty  three hundred, three twenty  three fifty, three eighty  three eighty with me now  four hundred  on my right at four hundred pounds, are you all done at four hundred?
I shall sell then at four hundred pounds.
Five seven six, thank you.
Lot twenty five  little red Peter Pan  there it is now showing, thank you and I've a hundred pounds offered for this, any more at one hundred?
One hundred pounds and ten, one twenty, one thirty, one forty  one fifty, one sixty  seventy, eighty, one ninety, two hundred  and twenty  two twenty seated, any more?
At two hundred and twenty pounds  two forty  two sixty, two eighty  three hundred  three hundred pounds, three twenty on the aisle  three fifty  three eighty  three eighty on the aisle, bidding sir?for three  that bid's on the aisle, three eighty, any more at three hundred, four hundred  four hundred and twenty  on the aisle at four twenty, now any more at four hundred and twenty pounds and I shall sell at four hundred and twenty pounds.
 
Lot twenty six  is the Edison disc phonograph, there it is, thank you, Lot twenty six, hundred pounds for this, one hundred anywhere, one hundred pounds bid, ten, twenty, any more at one twenty, thirty  one thirty now, any more?
You all done at one thirty,one forty, one fifty  one sixty, seventy  one eighty  one eighty on the right, any more?
At a hundred and eighty pounds, standing on my right at a hundred and eighty pounds, are you all done?
I shall sell at one hundred and eighty pounds, any more.
That's number  five seven six, thank you.
Lot twenty seven  is the cottage gramophone  there it is, thank you, Lot twenty seven and I have a hundred offered and ten, twenty, one thirty  forty, one fifty, any more at one fifty?
One hundred and fifty, sixty, seventy  one seventy now, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred and twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty  in the front at three twenty now, any more?
At three hundred and twenty in the front row and I'll sell at three twenty, are you all done at three hundred and twenty pounds.
thank you.
Lot twenty eight  is a Klingsor  there's the Klingsor now showing, Lot twenty eight and I have five hundred offered for it, any advance on five hundred pounds?
Five hundred pounds, any more?
At five hundred, all done at five fifty, six hundred  six fifty, seven hundred  seven hundred pounds with me now, any more?
At seven hundred pounds, seven fifty  eight hundred  eight hundred, it's against you now, any more at eight hundred pounds  still with me at eight hundred, are you all done at eight hundred pounds?
I shall sell then at eight hundred pounds, against you all in the room.
Number one two nine.
And Lot twenty nine  is a Mikkyphone, that kind of Mikkyphone, Lot twenty nine  and I have a hundred pounds offered, any more at a hundred?
One hundred pounds and ten, one twenty  one twenty, it's against you now, one thirty, one forty, one fifty, one sixty  against you at one sixty, the bid's with me at one sixty, any more?
One seventy on the aisle  one eighty  one ninety  down on the aisle at one ninety now, any more?
At a hundred and ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two twenty, any more bids?
On the aisle at two twenty now, are you all done at two twenty?
I'll sell then at two hundred and twenty pounds.
thank you.
Lot thirty  is a Peter Pan  there it is now showing, Lot thirty  a hundred pounds for it, one hundred anywhere?
One hundred pounds, one hundred and  ten, one twenty  thirty, forty  one forty standing, any more at one forty?
All done then at a hundred and forty pounds, standing at the back, one fifty  one sixty  one seventy, one eighty  one eighty standing, any more at one eighty?
It's against you seated and I'll sell at one hundred and eighty pounds, one ninety  two hundred  standing at two hundred now, against you seated, are you all done at two hundred pounds?six six, thank you.
Lot thirty one  is the Model four six one, Lot thirty one  there it is now showing, thank you, fifty for it?
Fifty pounds anywhere at fifty?
At fifty, fifty pounds bid, five, sixty  sixty pounds  five, any more?
Sixty five  all done at sixty five now, any more?
Six, seventy, thank you, standing, seventy five  eighty  eighty five  ninety  standing at ninety pounds, against you seated at ninety pounds, are you all done?
I shall sell then at ninety pounds, any more, ninety five  ninety five on my left, now any more at ninety five pounds?
I'll sell at ninety five.
Number  eight six , thank you.
Lot thirty two   is  the H M V  one O one showing now, Lot thirty two  and I have fifty offered for these, five, sixty  sixty pounds  any more at sixty?
At sixty pounds, five, seventy  five, eighty  five, ninety  ninety pounds, any more?
Ninety five  one hundred standing  standing at a hundred pounds now, any more?


At a hundred pounds, are you all done?
And ten  one hundred and ten up here on my right, any more at a hundred and ten pounds?
I shall sell then at one hundred, and twenty  one twenty,at a hundred and twenty pounds, are you all finished at one hundred and twenty pounds?
And thirty, just in time, any more then at a hundred and thirty pounds.
And the number's , thank you.
Lot thirty three  is a horn gramophone  there showing, thank you, Lot thirty three  erm  a hundred and fifty offered for this  one hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
One fifty, one sixty, one seventy  one seventy now, any more at a hundred and seventy?
All done then at a hundred and seventy, one eighty seated, one ninety  two hundred, two twenty, forty  two sixty  two hundred and sixty pounds, any more at two sixty?
All done at a hundred and sixty, any more at two  two eighty  seated then at two hundred and eighty pounds  any more, are you all done?
At two hundred and eighty pounds.
nine three, thank you.
Lot thirty four  another horn gramophone now showing, thank you and I have two hundred offered for this,twenty, two forty, two sixty, any more at two sixty?
Two eighty, three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty  on my right at three eighty now, any more?
At three hundred and eighty pounds there and I shall sell at three hundred and eighty pounds.
thank you.
Lot thirty five  is the French phonograph now showing, Lot thirty five  a hundred is offered for this, one hundred pounds and ten, one twenty, one thirty, any more at one thirty?
One hundred and thirty pounds, any more?
One forty, one fifty  sixty, one seventy  eighty, one ninety, two hundred and twenty  forty, sixty  one sixty, any more?
Two sixty , two eighty  two eighty down there now any more at two eighty?
You all done then at two hundred and eighty pounds?
Three hundred seated  three twenty  three twenty standing, all done at three twenty and I'll sell at three hundred and twenty pounds, three fifty  three eighty  three hundred and eighty pounds standing, any more?
Bidding?
Four hundred  four twenty  four twenty standing, any more?
Four twenty standing then and I'll sell at four hundred and twenty pounds.
Nine  seven six, thank you.
And Lot thirty six is a Puck  there it is, thank you, Lot thirty six, fifty for this  fifty pounds anywhere at fifty?
Fifty pounds  fifty bid, thank you, fifty five  sixty  sixty five, seventy, five, eighty, five, ninety, five  one hundred, one ten  twenty, thirty, forty, one fifty  one sixty  one sixty at the back, any more at one sixty?
I shall sell then, one seventy new bidder  one seventy on the aisle, now any more at a hundred and seventy, one eighty  one eighty at the back again, all done then at a hundred and eighty pounds.
thank you.
Lot thirty seven  is an Edison Gem phonograph  as you can see it has some cylinders with it  er fifty pounds for it, fifty pounds any bids, five, sixty, five, seventy  five, eighty, ninety, one hundred  a hundred pounds and ten  any more at a hundred and ten?
One hundred and ten pounds, any more?
One twenty, one thirty  one forty, one fifty  sixty, one seventy, one eighty  one eighty up here, any more at one eighty?
One ninety  two hundred, two twenty  two forty, two sixty  two sixty seated, any more at two sixty?
All done then at two hundred and sixty pounds  two eighty new bidder  three hundred  three hundred pounds, all done at three hundred then  I'll sell at three hundred pounds.
thank you.
Lot thirty eight  is the mahogany Monarch with brass horn now showing, thank you, I've five hundred pounds offered, any more at five hundred?
Five hundred pounds, any more?
At five fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred and fifty, nine hundred and fifty, one thousand  one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred  five hundred  at one thousand five hundred pounds on my right, six hundred  seven hundred  one thousand seven hundred pounds on my right now, any more at one thousand seven hundred pounds?
I shall sell then at one thousand seven hundred pounds.
Number nine seven six, thank you.
And Lot thirty nine  is four six O, there it is, Lot thirty nine  two hundred offered for it, any more at two hundred, and twenty  two hundred and twenty pounds, any more?
At two forty, two sixty  two eighty, three hundred  three twenty, three fifty  three eighty, four hundred  and twenty, four fifty  four eighty, five hundred, and fifty  five fifty standing now, any more?
At five hundred and fifty pounds, all done then?
Six hundred new bidder   six, six fifty  six fifty standing  seven hundred, seven fifty  seven fifty standing, all done at seven fifty then and I shall sell at seven hundred and fifty pounds.
one two, thank you.
Lot forty  is the Zonophone advertisement now showing, thank you, Lot forty for which I have eighty pounds offered, ninety, one hundred and ten, one twenty, one thirty  one thirty standing, any more at one thirty?
All done?
Standing at the back, one thirty and I'll sell at one hundred and thirty pounds.
thank you.
Lot forty one  Edison Gem  there it is, Lot forty one  eighty is offered for this  eighty pounds, ninety, one hundred  one hundred against you now, any more?
At a hundred pounds, all done then at a hundred and ten , twenty  one thirty, one forty  fifty, one sixty  seventy, one eighty  one eighty with me, it's , any more at one eighty?
I shall sell then at a hundred and eighty pounds, are you all done at one eighty?
Lot forty two  two Columbia portables  there they are now, thank you, Lot forty two, fifty for them  fifty pounds anywhere for the portables?
Twenty then, twenty pounds  twenty pounds  at the back, any more?
Twenty two  five  eight standing  twenty eight pounds standing now, any more at twenty eight, thirty, thirty five, forty  forty five, fifty  fifty pounds on my right, any more at fifty?
Fifty five  fifty five  at the back, any more at fifty five pounds?


Sixty on the aisle  sixty five  sixty five standing, all done at sixty five pounds?
I shall sell then at sixty five pounds  seventy, just in time, any more at seventy?
It's on the aisle now at seventy pounds.
And that number is  nine two seven, thank you.
And Lot forty three  is an H M V one O one  and a Columbia as well thank you, Lot forty three and I have forty offered for these, any more at forty?
Five, fifty  five, sixty  sixty pounds with me, any more?
Sixty five, seventy, five, eighty  eighty pounds, any more?
Five, ninety  ninety pounds with me, any more at ninety?
I'll sell them at ninety pounds, ninety five, one hundred  one hundred pounds still with me, any more?
Are you all done at one hundred pounds.
six one.
Lot forty four  there it is now showing, Lot forty four  twenty for this, twenty pounds anywhere?
At twenty  two in the Lot  twenty pounds anywhere?
Twenty bid, twenty two  five, eight  thirty  five  thirty five pounds, any more?
Forty  forty pounds standing, any more at forty?
Bidding?
Standing then at forty pounds, are you all done and I'll sell, forty five  fifty  fifty pounds standing, any more at fifty?
Are you all done then at fifty pounds and I shall sell at fifty pounds.
Nine six O, thank you.
And Lot forty five  thank you, Lot forty five is  that's Lot forty five  an Edison Home phonograph  Lot forty five, an Edison Home phonograph with H reproducer and large brass horn  and I have two hundred pounds offered for it, two hundred pounds, any more at two hundred?
Two hundred and twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty  three eighty, it's against you now, any more at three eighty?
The bid's with me at three hundred and eighty pounds and I shall sell, are you all done at three hundred and eighty pounds.
. Lot forty six  Trade-Mark gramophone, there it is on the screen now, Lot forty six  I've a thousand pounds offered for this, one thousand pounds, any advance on a thousand?
One hundred  two hundred  three hundred, four hundred  five hundred, six hundred  seven hundred  one thousand seven hundred pounds standing, any more?
One thousand eight hundred  nine hundred  two thousand  two thousand two hundred  two thousand two hundred pounds, any more?
Two thousand four hundred  two thousand six hundred  standing at two thousand six hundred pounds, any more?
Two thousand six hundred pounds and I shall sell at two thousand six hundred pounds.
Three two seven, thank you.
Lot forty seven  is five postcards  there's the two, there they are  twenty pounds for them  twenty anywhere?
At twenty pounds  twenty  twenty pounds  twenty is bid, thank you, in the doorway, any more at twenty?
I'll sell them at twenty pounds then, in a single bid, are you all done at twenty pounds?
Any more, it's in the doorway at twenty pounds  twenty two  twenty two near me now, any more at twenty two pounds?
All finished at twenty two, twenty five  twenty eight  twenty eight still , twenty eight then, all done now at twenty eight pounds.
Number    nine one five, thank you.
Lot forty eight  a Style number six now showing, thank you, Lot forty eight  and I have three hundred offered, three twenty, three fifty  three hundred and fifty pounds, any more at three fifty?
All done, three eighty, four hundred  four twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred  and fifty, six hundred  and fifty, seven hundred and fifty  at seven hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Eight hundred and fifty  nine hundred  and fifty  one thousand  one hundred  two hundred  three hundred  one thousand, one thousand three hundred pounds then  one thousand three hundred pounds, all done?
One thousand three on my right standing and I'll sell at one thousand three hundred pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
And Lot forty nine is the drip-pan Gem  there it is, Lot forty nine  a hundred pounds offered, hundred and ten, one twenty, one thirty, any more at one thirty?
Forty, one fifty, sixty  seventy  eighty  one ninety  two hundred and twenty  forty .
sixty  two eighty  three hundred  three twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  four twenty  four fifty  four eighty  five hundred  and fifty  five fifty on the right then, any more at five hundred and fifty and I'll sell at five hundred and fifty pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
And Lot fifty  is a suitcase Standard, there it is now, Lot fifty for which I have a hundred and fifty offered, sixty, one seventy, one eighty  one ninety  two hundred, two twenty  two forty, two sixty  two eighty, three hundred  and twenty, three twenty seated, any more?
At three twenty, all done then at three twenty now seated  and I'll sell at three hundred and twenty pounds.
Number eight nine three.
Lot fifty one is a suitcase Home, there it is now showing, Lot fifty one, two hundred for this  two hundred anywhere?
Two hundred pounds anywhere?
Two hundred, two hundred bid  and twenty  forty , two sixty, two eighty  three hundred  three twenty  three twenty now, any more?
At three twenty, three fifty standing, three eighty  four hundred  four hundred pounds standing, now any more at four hundred?
Bidding sir?four hundred standing, four twenty on the aisle  four fifty  four fifty standing at the back, any more at four fifty?
Four eighty  five hundred down there  five fifty  at five fifty there now, any more?
At five fifty, it's against you all on the left, at five fifty, any more at five hundred and fifty pounds?is nine seven six, thank you.
Lot fifty two is an Excelsior  there it is, Lot fifty two, hundred for, one hundred anywhere?
One hundred bid and ten, one twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, two hundred, two twenty, two forty, two sixty  eighty  two hundred and eighty pounds standing  any more?
Three hundred, three twenty  three fifty, three eighty  four hundred  four hundred on my right now, any more at four hundred?


I shall sell then at four hundred pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
Lot fifty three  is an Edison Gem  there it is  you can see it now  Lot fifty three and I have a hundred and fifty offered for this, sixty, one seventy, one eighty  ninety, two hundred  two hundred, yes, two hundred and twenty, two forty, two sixty  two sixty near the back seated, any more?
Two eighty  three hundred, three twenty  three twenty standing, any more at three twenty?
All done then and I'll sell at three hundred and twenty pounds.
Nine two three, thank you.
Lot fifty four is the Fireside  Fireside  Fireside horn, there it is, thank you, Lot fifty four  two hundred offered, twenty, forty, two sixty  two hundred and sixty pounds, any more?
At two sixty, all done at two sixty only?
Two eighty, three hundred  three twenty   three fifty, three eighty, four hundred  and twenty  four fifty  eighty  five hundred  and fifty, six hundred and fifty  six hundred and fifty pounds, any more at six fifty?
Seven hundred  seven fifty  seven hundred and fifty pounds, all done then and I'll sell at seven hundred and fifty pounds.
seven six, thank you.
Lot fifty five  four phonograph horns  and   Lot fifty five, fifty for them  fifty pounds anywhere?
At fifty bid, thank you, five  sixty, five  seventy, five  against you seventy five, eighty  eighty five  ninety  at ninety pounds up here, any more?
Ninety five  one hundred  one ten  one twenty  one thirty  one hundred and thirty seated, one forty  one fifty  one sixty  one sixty standing, any more?
Bidding?
Standing then at one sixty, are you all done, one seventy, one eighty, one ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two twenty on the left standing, any more at two twenty?
All done then?
Two forty  two forty standing at the back now, all done at two hundred and forty pounds.
Nine two four, thank you.
And Lot fifty six  is the gramophone horn basket  there it is, thank you, with the horn inside   er fifty is offered for this, fifty five, sixty, five, sixty five pounds, any more?
Seventy, seventy five, eighty  five  ninety, ninety five  one hundred, one ten, one twenty, one thirty, forty  one forty down there, any more at one forty?
All done?
Any more at one hundred, one fifty  one sixty, one sixty in the centre, any more?
Seventy  one seventy, one eighty  one eighty   one eighty, are you all done at one hundred and eighty pounds seated in the centre.
number is  nine one seven, thank you.
Lot fifty seven is the car mascot  there it is, Lot fifty seven  I've a hundred and fifty offered for this, sixty, one seventy, one eighty  one hundred and eighty pounds, any more?
One eighty, one ninety  two hundred, two twenty, two forty  two forty now, any more?
Two sixty, two eighty  two eighty, three hundred  three twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  four twenty  four fifty  four fifty at the back on the right, any more at four fifty?
Four eighty  against you now at five hundred  five fifty  five fifty seated, any more at five fifty, it's against you all on the right now  five hundred and fifty pounds.
Number again is  nine one seven, thank you.
Fifty seven A, an additional Lot  the H M V Silver Shield, there it is now  a hundred pounds for this, one hundred anywhere?
One hundred pounds    one hundred pounds for the Silver Shield is bid, thank you, any more at a hundred?
One hundred pounds now, any more?
At a hundred and ten , twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, two hundred  two hundred pounds seated near the back, two twenty standing  any more at two twenty,at two twenty , two forty  two forty seated now, any more at forty?
I shall sell then at two hundred and forty pounds, two sixty  two sixty on my right, any more at two hundred and pounds?
And the number is eight six eight, thank you very much.
Lot fifty eight  collection of record pads and  bits and pieces  for which I have a hundred pounds offered, and ten, one twenty, one thirty, any more at one thirty, forty, one fifty, one sixty, one seventy  one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, two twenty  two forty  two forty on the left at the back, any more at two forty, two sixty, two eighty  two eighty  three hundred  three twenty  three twenty on the left near the back now, at three twenty, are you, it's your bid, sir, at three twenty pounds , any more at three twenty and I'll sell at three hundred and twenty pounds.
number is nine five eight, thank you.
Lot fifty nine  gramophone spare parts this one, Lot fifty nine for which I have  two hundred pounds offered and twenty, two fifty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty, any more at three twenty?
Three fifty, three eighty  three hundred and eighty pounds now, any more, it's against you all at three hundred and eighty, any more?
Four hundred  four hundred pounds and twenty  yes  four twenty  bid's with me now at four twenty and I'll sell at four hundred and twenty pounds.
One three six.
And Lot sixty  Edison Combination Attachments  there we are, Lot sixty  er  fifty for these, fifty pounds anywhere?
At fifty, fifty pounds  twenty then, twenty pounds  twenty pounds bid, twenty two, five eight, thirty, five, forty, five, fifty  five  fifty five pounds, any more?
Sixty  five  seventy  seventy five  eighty  eighty five  ninety, five  one hundred  one ten  twenty  thirty  one forty  fifty  one sixty  standing at one sixty now, any more at one sixty?
And I shall sell at a hundred and sixty pounds.
, thank you.
And Lot sixty one  phonograph spare parts this time  there we are, Lot sixty one and I have a hundred offered and ten, one twenty, one thirty  any more?
One forty, one fifty, one sixty, seventy, one eighty  one ninety, two hundred  and twenty  there standing at two twenty, two forty, two sixty  two six two eighty 


three hundred  three hundred pounds , any more at three hundred?
All done at three hundred now, all done?
Three hundred pounds.
thank you.
And Lot sixty two  is the Edison ephemera, Lot sixty two, and I've a hundred offered for this, one hundred pounds, any more?
At a hundred pounds, any more at a hundred, and ten, one twenty  one thirty, one forty  fifty, one sixty  seventy, one eighty  one ninety, two hundred  two hundred pounds , against you at the back, two hundred, two twenty  front row now at two hundred and twenty pounds, two forty, two sixty  two eighty  three hundred  and twenty  three twenty on the right seated, any more at three twenty?
It's against you at the front and I'll sell at three hundred and twenty pounds.
, thank you.
And Lot sixty three  is the red Gem carrier arm now showing with an N reproducer   I have sixty pounds offered, any more at sixty?
Sixty pounds, any more?
At sixty, all done then at sixty pounds  any more?
I'll sell at sixty, sixty five, seventy  seventy five, eighty  eighty five, ninety  ninety pounds with me, it's against you seated, at ninety pounds, all done now and I shall sell at ninety pounds, any more at ninety pounds.
six O.
Lot sixty four   is er advertising  items, records and other bits and pieces for which I have sixty pounds offered, any more at sixty  five  seventy  five, eighty five, ninety five, one hundred  ten, one twenty  thirty, one forty, one hundred and forty pounds with me, are you all done, one fifty in the middle, one sixty  one seventy   one hundred and seventy, any more?
At a hundred and seventy pounds seated on the right  one eighty standing  one ninety  one ninety on the right seated, any more at one ninety, all done then at one hundred and ninety, two hundred  two twenty  two twenty, any more?
Against you at two twenty  two forty  two sixty  two sixty seated on the right, any more at two sixty?
At two sixty then, there I'll sell at two hundred and sixty pounds.
Eight two two, thank you.
Lot sixty five  is an album of postcards, Lot sixty five for which I have four hundred pounds offered and twenty, four fifty, four eighty  four hundred and eighty pounds, five hundred  five hundred now and fifty, six hundred and fifty, six fifty, any more?
At six hundred and fifty pounds  seven hundred, seven fifty  eight hundred and fifty  nine hundred  nine hundred pounds on the right seated, any more?
At nine hundred pounds now, all done?
At nine hundred and I shall sell at nine hundred pounds down there at nine hundred pounds.
thank you.
Lot sixty six  is the Columbia B Q, there it is, Lot sixty six  four hundred pounds offered, four twenty, four fifty  four hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred  and fifty  seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred  against you now at eight hundred and fifty  seated there at the back at eight fifty  nine hundred  standing at nine hundred, nine fifty, one thousand  one thousand pounds, any more?
One thousand pounds, standing at the back then at one thousand pounds, against you seated and I'll sell at one thousand, any more at one thousand pounds?thank you.
Lot sixty seven  thank you, is the typewriter showing now, Lambert typewriter  hundred pounds for it, one hundred anywhere?
One hundred pounds , thank you, any more at a hundred?
One hundred pounds  and ten  one twenty, one thirty, forty, one fifty  one sixty, one seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred  on my right at two hundred pounds, any more?
At two twenty  two forty  two sixty  two eighty  three hundred  and twenty, three twenty on my right, any more at thee twenty, three fifty  three eighty  three eighty on my right, all done at three eighty and I shall sell at three hundred and eighty pounds.
thank you.
Lot sixty eight  Edison stand, there it is now, Lot sixty eight  er  three hundred is offered for this, three hundred pounds  and twenty, three fifty  three eighty, any more at three eighty?
Four hundred  four hundred and twenty, four fifty  four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, near the back, seven fifty seated, any more?
Eight hundred  eight fifty  nine hundred  nine fifty  one thousand  one thousand pounds standing now on my right, any more at a thousand pounds, are you all done, it's up there and I'll sell at one thousand pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you very much.
And Lot sixty nine  Edison Standard, there it is, Lot sixty nine, two hundred is offered for this, and twenty, any more at two twenty?
Two forty  two forty now, any more at two forty, sixty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty  three twenty with me now  three fifty   at the back, three fifty, any more?
At three fifty  and I'll sell at three hundred and fifty pounds.
Eight nine three, thank you.
Lot seventy  Edison Bell Standard, there is no horn included with this Lot, please note, Lot seventy and I have two hundred pounds offered and twenty, two forty, sixty, two eighty  three hundred and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, four hundred pounds against you then at the back now, any more at four hundred, it's with me, four twenty, four fifty, four eighty  on my left seated at four eighty  any more now at four hundred and eighty pounds?
And it's eight six three, thank you very much.
Lot seventy one  a Stroviol now showing  and I have fifty pounds offered, five, sixty, five, seventy  seventy pounds, any more?
At seventy five, eighty, five, ninety  five  ninety five at the back now, any more?
One hundred and ten, one twenty  one twenty seated, any more at one twenty?
Bidding?
One thirty  one forty  one forty now, any more?
One fifty  one sixty on the aisle, one seventy  one eighty  any more?
One ninety  one ninety, two hundred  two hundred pounds near the back, any more?
Two twenty    on my left up here, any more at two twenty?
I shall sell then at two hundred and twenty pounds.
The number  is  is it eight six three?
 

Er Lot seventy two  someone fed up?


At fifty for it's offered  fifty pounds  at fifty pounds bid  five, sixty  sixty pounds, any more?
At sixty  all done at sixty?
Sixty five  seventy  five  eighty  five  eighty five up here, any more?
At eighty five now, all done at eighty five pounds, all done on my right and I'll sell at eighty five pounds is there's no further bids at eighty five pounds.
, thank you.
Lot seventy three  is the Moscow Pathephone, there it is, Lot seventy three, fifty for this one  fifty pounds anywhere?
At fifty bid, five, sixty, five, seventy, five, eighty  eighty five, ninety, five, one hundred, one ten  one twenty, one thirty, one forty, one fifty, one sixty  one sixty at the back, any more at one sixty?
All done then at a hundred and sixty pounds  at the back.
Eight two six.
Lot seventy four is the Concert  that's it, yes there it is the er Edison Concert, Lot seventy four  five hundred offered for starters, five hundred pounds, any more at five hundred?
Fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred, seven hundred pounds, any more?
At seven hundred pounds, all done at seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred, and fifty, nine hundred, and fifty, one thousand  one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, five hundred  at one thousand five hundred on the right now, any more?
One thousand five hundred pounds, six hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred  nine hundred, two thousand, two thousand two hundred, thousand four hundred, thousand six hundred, thousand eight hundred, three thousand  three thousand pounds on my right there, now any more?
At three thousand pounds then, are you all done at three thousand pounds.
Number nine seven six, thank you.
Lot seventy five  is the reproduction Berliner, there it is, Lot seventy five  hundred for , one hundred pounds anywhere?
One hundred pounds is bid, thank you, any more?
And ten  against you now at a hundred and ten pounds, one twenty on the aisle, one thirty, one forty, one fifty, one sixty, near me at one sixty, any more at a hundred and sixty pounds, seventy  one eighty  one ninety  any more?
Two hundred  two hundred pounds against you now at the back, now any more at two hundred?
Are you all done then?
It's up here and I'll sell  two twenty new bidder  two twenty now  two twenty then it's half way down on the left at two twenty and I'll sell at two  two forty   two sixty  still against you  two sixty, it's down there and I'll sell at two hundred and sixty pounds.
is eight six four, thank you.
Seventy six  thank you, is the Victor now showing, Lot seventy six, two hundred offered for this, two hundred pounds and twenty, any more?
Forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty  standing at three eighty now, any more?
At three eighty then, all done at three eighty, four hundred  and twenty  four fifty, four eighty  five hundred and fifty  six hundred and fifty  six hundred and fifty standing, any more at six fifty?
Seven hundred, seven fifty  standing at seven fifty, any more?
All done, seven hundred and fifty then and I'll sell at seven hundred and fifty pounds.
six six.
Lot seventy seven is a Style four gramophone and there it is, Lot seventy seven  three hundred offered for this one, three hundred pounds and twenty  three fifty, any more at three fifty?
Three hundred and fifty pounds, all done then?
Three eighty, four hundred  four twenty, four fifty  four eighty, five hundred  and fifty  six hundred  and fifty, seven hundred  and fifty  it's on the left at seven fifty now, eight hundred behind you  against you now  eight fifty  nine hundred standing  nine fifty  one thousand  one thousand pounds standing on the left at the back, one hundred  two hundred  three hundred, one one thousand three hundred pounds, that's against   any more at one thousand three hundred, four hundred, five hundred  one thousand five hundred standing, any more?
One thousand five hundred pounds then, are you all done at one thousand five hundred pounds?thank you.
Lot seventy eight  is the red Gem now showing, thank you, Lot seventy eight for which I have three hundred offered, and twenty, three fifty, three eighty  four hundred, any more at four hundred?
Four hundred pounds and twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  seven hundred pounds with me now, any more at seven hundred pounds?
Against you all, seven fifty  at the back now standing at seven hundred and fifty pounds, are you all done at seven fifty?
I'll sell at seven hundred and fifty pounds.
Nine two three.
Lot seventy nine  is the Pathe now showing, Lot seventy nine and I have  pounds offered for it and sixty, any more at one sixty?
Seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred  at two hundred pounds, against you, any more?
Two hundred and twenty, two forty  two sixty  on my right now at two sixty, any more?
At two hundred and sixty pounds  and I'll sell at two hundred and sixty pounds.
Number nine seven six, thank you.


Lot eighty  Edison Bell Gem, there it is, Lot eighty  hundred for it, hundred pounds anywhere?
One hundred pounds, one hundred for the Gem, one hundred pounds  one hundred pounds bid, thank you, and ten  twenty, thirty, forty, one fifty, one sixty, seventy, one eighty, ninety, two hundred, two twenty, two forty, two sixty  two sixty seated, any more at two sixty?
Two eighty  three hundred and twenty  three twenty, all done then at three twenty, any more at three hundred and twen three fifty new bidder  against you at the back now, bid's on my left at three fifty and I'll sell, the bid's here at three hundred and fifty pounds.
Er  eight six three, thank you very much.
Lot eighty one  is the Victor  thank you, there it is now showing, Lot eighty one  a hundred and fifty is offered for this, one hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
At one sixty, one seventy  eighty, one ninety  two hundred, two twenty  forty, two sixty  two  eighty  two eighty at the back seated, any more at two eighty?
Three hundred sir,twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, four twenty, fifty, four eighty, five hundred  five hundred  you offered five hundred?
Five hundred pounds standing, against you seated now, any more?
At five hundred then  five fifty in the front  here at five fifty, are you all done at five hundred and fifty pounds?
Up here.
, thanks very much.
Lot eighty two  an Edison Amberola seventy five  now on the screen, Lot eighty two and I have three hundred pounds offered for this, any more?
Three hundred and twenty, three fifty  three hundred and fifty pounds now, it's with me still at three fifty, any more?
Three fifty then and I shall sell at three fifty, three eighty, four hundred  four hundred pounds now, still with me at four hundred, against you all in the room and I'll sell at four hundred pounds.
Four four six.
Lot eighty three is a Busy Bee  there's the Busy Bee, Lot eighty three  , hundred pounds for it?
Hundred pounds anywhere?
One hundred is bid, ten, twenty, one thirty, any more at one thirty?
One hundred and thirty pounds, any more?
All done at one thirty, any more  one fifty  sixty, seventy  one eighty  one, one ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two forty  two forty at the very back there, any more at two forty?
All done then at two hundred and forty pounds, all done?
Two hundred and, two sixty  two eighty  two eighty standing at two eighty against you seated and I'll sell at two hundred and eighty pounds.
Number three one O, thank you.
Lot eighty four  is the New Compton now showing, Lot eighty four, two hundred is offered, any more at two hundred?
Two hundred pounds, any more?
Two twenty  forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred, and twenty, three fifty  standing at three fifty then, any more?
At three hundred  eighty, four hundred  four twenty, four fifty  standing at four hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Four eighty, five hundred  five hundred pounds, five fifty, six hundred  at six hundred pounds standing now  against you all seated, six fifty  six fifty seated on the aisle at six hundred and fifty pounds, are you all done at six hundred and fifty pounds.
Nine two eight, thank you.
And Lot eighty five  now showing, thank you, a Zon-O-Phone, Lot eighty five  two hundred offered, any more at two hundred?
Two twenty, forty  two sixty, any more at two sixty?
Two hundred and sixty pounds, all done at two sixty?
Two eighty, three hundred, and twenty  against you there at three twenty it's there, are you all done?
Three fifty  three eighty  three hundred and eighty pounds, four hundred  and twenty  four fifty  four fifty on my right now, any more at four fifty?
Four eighty  four eighty on the left, all done at four eighty and I shall sell then at four hundred and eighty pounds.
four eighty.
thank you.
Lot eighty six  is a Junior Monarch  there it is now, eighty six, two hundred offered, twenty  two forty, two sixty, any more at two sixty?
Two eighty, three hundred  three twenty, three fifty  three eighty, four hundred  four twenty, four fifty  four eighty  four eighty standing, any more?
Five hundred  five fifty  six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred  eight hundred pounds seated now, eight fifty  nine hundred  nine fifty, one thousand, one hundred  one thousand one hundred pounds now, any more at one thousand one hundred and I shall sell then at one thousand one hundred pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
Lot eighty seven  Edison Gem  there it is  a hundred and fifty is offered and sixty, one seventy, any more at one seventy?
One eighty, one ninety, any more at one ninety?
One, two hundred, two twenty  against you now at two twenty, any more at two twenty?
The bid's with me, two forty  two forty now, any more at two forty?
All done?
It's down there at two forty  at  two fifty  still against you at two fifty, any more?
Two fifty then, all done at two hundred and fifty pounds.
. Lot eighty eight  is another similar Gem, there it is, thank you, Lot eighty eight  and I've a hundred and fifty offered for this  one sixty  seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, and twenty, two forty  two forty, any more at two forty?
All done then  two fifty  on the left at two fifty now, sixty  two sixty, two seventy  eighty  two eighty then, all done at two hundred and eighty pounds.
Er eight ninety, thank you.
Lot eighty nine is a new Cecil  Zonophone, there it is, thank you, a hundred is offered for this one, a hundred pounds  one hundred pounds anywhere, one hundred  one hundred bid on the aisle, thank you, any more?
At a hundred pounds, all done at a hundred ?
One ten  twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one sixty, seventy, eighty  one eighty on the aisle, any more at one eighty, it's your bid, sir  one eighty, any more?
One ninety standing  two hundred, two twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty  three hundred  three hundred pounds standing, any more at three hundred?
I shall sell then at three hundred pounds.
Nine two four.
Lot ninety  is a Dulcephone  there it is, Lot ninety, thank you and I have er four hundred offered for this, four hundred pounds and twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred, and fifty, six hundred and fifty  six fifty standing, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred and fifty  nine hundred and fifty, one thousand, one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred  one thousand four hundred at the front, any more?
One thousand five hundred  six hundred  bidding?
One thousand six hundred pounds here, seven hundred  one thousand eight hundred  nine hundred, two thousand  two thousand pounds, any more at two thousand pounds?
All done, it's against you  two thousand, are you all done  at two thousand pounds standing on my right then and I'll sell at two thousand pounds.
And it's nine  seven six, thank you.
Lot ninety one  Intermediate Monarch mahogany, there it is    and I have six hundred offered for this and fifty, seven hundred and fifty,


eight hundred at the back, eight fifty  against you now at eighty fifty, any more?
Nine hundred, nine fifty  one thousand one hundred  one thousand one hundred with me, any more?
Two hundred, three hundred, four hundred  one thousand four hundred pounds, any more?
At one thousand four hundred on my right and I'll sell at one thousand four hundred pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
Lot ninety two  is  reproducer  there it is, Lot ninety two  er, eighty pounds for this, eighty pounds  eighty pounds anywhere?
Eighty bid, thank you  five  ninety, five, one hundred  one hundred on the aisle, any more?
And ten, one twenty, thirty, forty, one fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty  one eighty on the aisle, any more at one eighty?
I shall sell then at  one ninety  against you on the aisle now, two hundred new bidder  two hundred pounds on the left at two hundred, are you all done?
I'll sell at two hundred pounds.
Nine four O, thank you.
Lot ninety three, a Kastenpuck  there it is  and I have a hundred offered for this, and ten, one twenty, one thirty, one forty, one fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, two hundred, and twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty  three hundred and twenty  three twenty, three fifty   three fifty, any more?
At three fifty  three eighty  three eighty , any more?
Three eighty  four hundred  four hundred pounds in the front now, any more at four hundred pounds?
All done then at four hundred pounds  any more?one five.
Lot ninety four  is the Peter Pan now showing, thank you, and I have sixty offered, five, seventy, five  eighty, five, eighty five pounds now, any more?
At eighty five  ninety  ninety five  one hundred, one ten  one twenty, one twenty on the aisle, any more at one twenty?
All done then?
One thirty  one forty  one forty on the aisle, one forty then and I shall sell at  one fifty also on aisle, one sixty  one sixty now near me on the aisle at one sixty, are you all done at a hundred and sixty pounds?six seven.
Lot ninety five  the three twenty Pathe discs, Lot ninety five  erm fifty for them?
Fifty pounds for these, fifty anywhere?
At fifty pounds, anywhere at fifty?
Fifty pounds  fifty is bid, thank you, standing, any more at fifty?
Fifty five  sixty, five  seventy five  eighty five  ninety  ninety pounds standing, any more?
At ninety pounds, ninety five  one hundred  one ten  twenty  thirty  one forty  one fifty  bidding?
One sixty  one seventy  one eighty  standing at a hundred and eighty pounds, are you all done?
One eighty and I'll sell at one hundred and eighty pounds.
four six, thank you.
Lot ninety six  is the Ampico rolls, Lot ninety six, fifty for them?
Fifty pounds anywhere?
At fifty pounds, fifty  fifty pounds anywhere   fifty  fifty pounds  fifty pounds.
Ninety seven  there it is now showing, Lot ninety seven, singing bird in cage  I have three hundred offered for this, three hundred pounds and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred and twenty, fifty  four eighty  five hundred  fifty  six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  fifty  eight hundred  eight hundred pounds seated now, any more at eight hundred and fifty  nine hundred  and fifty  nine fifty  nine fifty, one thousand new bidder  thousand one hundred  one thousand one hundred pounds, any more?
At one thousand one hundred pounds on the right at the back, any more at one thousand one hundred pounds.
Eight seven five, thank you.
Lot ninety eight  cabinet roller organ, there it is, Lot ninety eight  two hundred offered, two hundred pounds, any more?
Two twenty, forty, sixty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred and twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred  five hundred now, any more?
Five fifty, six hundred and fifty  seven hundred  and fifty  eight hundred  eight hundred pounds near the back seated at eight hundred, any more?
Eight fifty  nine hundred  nine fifty  nine fifty on the right, any more at nine fifty?
All done at nine hundred and fifty pounds.
Nine seven six, thank you.
Lot ninety nine  Griesbaum figure, there it is, thank you and I have two hundred offered and twenty, fifty, two eighty, three hundred  three hundred pounds, any more?
Twenty, three fifty, three eighty  four hundred  and twenty, four fifty  four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred  six hundred pounds against you now, it's with me at six hundred pounds, are you all done?
At six fifty new bidder  at six fifty now, any more at six hundred and fifty pounds.
The number  is eight seven three, thank you.
Lot one hundred  is the Weber upright Duo-Art piano, Lot one hundred, two hundred pounds offered, two hundred pounds, any more at two hundred?
Two hundred pounds, any more?
Two hundred  two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty  bidding?
Three hundred, three twenty  can't see you  three fifty, three eighty  four hundred and twenty  four  fifty   four fifty down there, any more?
At four fifty, all done?
Four eighty  five hundred  and fifty  six hundred  and fifty  seven hundred  seven hundred pounds on my right then, any more bids down there at seven hundred and I'll sell at seven hundred pounds.
And the number here is  nine seven six, thank you.
 

Lot one hundred and one  thank you, is the Rogers Ampico piano, Lot a hundred and one, I've five hundred offered, five hundred pounds, any more at five hundred?
Fifty  five hundred and fifty now, any more?
At five hundred and fifty pounds, any more at five fifty?
Five hundred and fifty pounds, any more at five fifty?
All done at five fifty only?
Six hundred and fifty  six fifty  any more?
Six fifty only then  bidding?
All done then at six hundred and fifty pounds, any more at six hundred and fifty.
Lot one hundred and two  there it is now, Lot one hundred and two and  I have six hundred offered for this, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, any more at seven fifty?
Seven hundred and fifty pounds, any more at seven fifty?
At seven hundred and fifty pounds, are you all done at seven hundred and fifty?
At seven sixty, seven eighty  seven eighty now, all done at seven hundred and eighty pounds.
Lot a hundred and three  Ariston now showing, thank you, Lot a hundred and three, a hundred for it, one hundred pounds  is bid  and ten, one twenty, thirty  forty, one fifty, sixty  seventy  one eighty  ninety  two hundred  two hundred pounds, any more at two hundred?
Two twenty  two forty  two sixty  two eighty  two hundred and eighty   three hundred  three twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  and twenty  four hundred and twenty pounds down there, any more then at four hundred and twenty pounds?
Eight five three, thank you.
Now Lot one hundred and four  there it is now showing, thank you, Lot a hundred and four, Simplex  fifty for it, fifty pounds anywhere?
At fifty pounds anywhere at fifty?
At fifty pounds, twenty , twenty pounds  twenty pounds  twenty pounds, no one want it for twenty pounds  is bid, thank you, on my right, any advance on twenty?
Twenty pounds only and I shall sell if there's no further bid, are you all done?
Twenty two now  twenty five  twenty eight  thirty  thirty five  forty  forty five  bidding?
Fifty  fifty five  sixty  sixty five  sixty five, seventy  seventy five, eighty  eighty pounds standing  any more, it's against you seated there at eighty pounds.
Three two four, thank you.
Lot a hundred and five  is the Celestina now showing, Lot a hundred and five  and I have a hundred and fifty offered for this, and sixty, one seventy, one eighty  one ninety  any more at a hundred and ninety pounds?
Two hundred and twenty  two twenty with me still, any more?
Two twenty, forty, sixty  two eighty, three hundred and twenty, fifty  three eighty, four hundred and twenty  on the right at four twenty there, any more?
At four twenty then and I shall sell at four hundred and twenty pounds.
That is number  nine seven six again, thank you.
Lot one hundred and six  table barrel organ, there it is, Lot one hundred and six  and I have two hundred offered and twenty, two fifty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty  three fifty, three eighty, four hundred and twenty, four fifty  there at four fifty now, any more?
At four hundred and fifty pounds, all done then at four fifty and I'll sell at four hundred and fifty pounds.
nine three.
One hundred and seven  is a sixty five note er Pianola   twenty for this one, twenty pounds anywhere?
At twenty pounds  twenty  at twenty pounds  no one want it for twenty?
At twenty pounds  twenty pounds  all done at twenty pounds  is bid, thank you,any more at twenty?
I'll sell at twenty pounds only, are you all done at twenty pounds?
That's number nine two seven, thank you.
Lot a hundred and eight  a portable reed organ  there it is  twenty for this  twenty anywhere?
Twenty pounds  twenty pounds anywhere?
No one want it for twenty pounds  is bid, thank you, twenty two pounds  twenty five  twenty five , any more at twenty five?twenty five?
All done then at twenty five  and I'll sell at twenty five pounds.
one hundred and nine  the English chamber barrel organ now showing, thank you  and I have eight hundred pounds offered for this  fifty, nine hundred and fifty  nine hundred and fifty pounds  one thousand one hundred  one thousand two hundred  on my right now at one thousand two hundred pounds, any more?
One thousand two, three hundred, four hundred  one thousand five hundred  six hundred  bidding?
Seven hundred, eight hundred, nine hundred, two thousand  two thousand two hundred  two thousand four hundred  two thousand six hundred  two thousand six hundred, two thousand eight hundred  three thousand  three thousand  all done at three thousand pounds and I'll sell at three thousand pounds.
Number again is  nine seven six, thank you.
Lot one hundred and ten  barrel organ  showing at the back  screen now, Lot one hundred and ten and I have three hundred pounds offered, twenty, three fifty, three eighty  three hundred and eighty pounds, any more?
Four hundred, four twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred  eight hundred pounds on my right now, any more?
At eight hundred pounds on my right and I shall sell at eight hundred pounds.
That is eight six nine, thank you.
Lot a hundred and eleven  eighty eight note player piano , there it is, thank you  twenty for it, twenty pounds  twenty  twenty  twenty pounds  twenty pounds, no one want it at twenty pounds  twenty pounds  is bid, thank you,twenty two  twenty two now, any more?
Twenty five  twenty five pounds , any more at twenty five and I shall sell at twenty five pounds if there's no further bid  any more at twenty five pounds?
Number nine two seven, thank you.
Lot a hundred and twelve    erm  twenty pounds for these?
Twenty?
Twenty pounds anywhere?
Twenty pounds  no one want them at twenty  twenty pounds  twenty pounds, all done then at twenty pounds only?
Twenty pounds  twenty pounds.
Lot one hundred and thirteen  the singing bird box,


Lot a hundred and thirteen  there it is now  the Rochat and I have two thousand for it to start at two thousand, two hundred  two thousand four hundred  two thousand six hundred  thousand eight hundred, three thousand  three thousand pounds, any more?
At three thousand, two hundred, five hundred  three thousand eight hundred, four thousand  four thousand two hundred  four thousand two hundred pounds down there, four thousand five hundred, four thousand eight hundred  five thousand  five thousand pounds in the  fourth row, five thousand pounds, any more?five thousand five hundred  six thousand  six thousand pounds, any more?
Six thousand five hundred  seven thousand  seven thousand pounds, any more?
At seven thousand pounds  all done at seven thousand, the bid is here and I'll sell at seven thousand pounds.
Eight seven three, thank you.
Lot one hundred and fourteen  now showing  another one by Bruguier, Lot one hundred and fourteen  and I have four thousand pounds offered to start with,four thousand two hundred, five hundred  four thousand eight hundred, five thousand  at five thousand pounds, any more at five thousand?
At five thousand  it's with me at five thousand five hundred  fifth row at five thousand five hundred pounds, any more at five thousand five hundred pounds down there and I shall sell at five thousand five hundred pounds.
seven three, thank you.
And one hundred and fifteen  is a Rochat again now showing and I have two thousand offered, two thousand two hundred, five hundred  two thousand eight hundred  three thousand  at three thousand pounds, any more?
Two hundred, three thousand five hundred, three thousand eight hundred  four thousand  two hundred  four thousand five hundred  four thousand eight hundred  five thousand  five thousand pounds, any more at five thousand pounds and I'll sell at five thousand, all done at five thousand pounds.
Number  is three one seven, thank you.
Lot a hundred and sixteen  thank you, another Bruguier now showing  and again I have two thousand offered to start, two pounds, any more at two thousand?
Two thousand two hundred  two thousand four hundred, two thousand six hundred, two thousand eight hundred, three thousand  three thousand pounds down there, three thousand two hundred  three thousand five hundred  three thousand eight hundred   three thousand eight hundred, any more?
At three thousand eight hundred pounds then, on my right  bidding?
Three thousand eight hundred pounds, all done at three thousand eight hundred pounds.
Lot one hundred and seventeen  another Bruguier now showing, Lot one hundred and seventeen for which I've three thousand offered  two hundred, five hundred  three thousand five hundred  three thousand eight hundred, four thousand  at four thousand pounds now, any more at four thousand?
Four thousand pounds, all done at four thousand two hundred, four thousand five hundred  at four thousand five hundred pounds, the bid's with me, are you all done at four thousand five hundred and I shall sell then at four thousand five hundred pounds.
three seven.
Lot one hundred and eighteen  singing bird box now showing , Lot one hundred and eighteen for which I have five hundred pounds offered and fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred and fifty, nine hundred  at nine hundred on the right there, any more?
Nine hundred pounds, all done at nine hundred pounds and I'll sell at nine hundred pounds.
thank you.
Lot a hundred and nineteen  singing bird box now showing, Lot a hundred and nineteen  for which I have six hundred offered and fifty, seven hundred, any more at seven hundred pounds?
Seven hundred  all done then, seven fifty, eight hundred  eight hundred pounds now, any more?hundred pounds  eight fifty I hear down there, thank you, any more at eight fifty?
Eight fifty on the right and I'll sell at eight hundred and fifty pounds.
Three six O  thank you very much.
Lot one hundred and twenty   mother of pearl case now  three hundred for this one, three hundred pounds, any more?three hundred and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred and twenty  four hundred and twenty, four fifty  four eighty  five hundred  fifty  six hundred  six fifty  seven hundred  seven hundred pounds near the back, any more at seven hundred, and fifty new bidder  against you now  seven hundred and fifty over there on the right at the back and I'll sell at seven fifty  eight hundred  eight hundred on the left at the back, now any more at eight hundred pounds?
Against you on the right  eight hundred pounds and I shall sell then  are you all done at eight hundred pounds?
Three two six, thank you.
Lot a hundred and twenty one  fine musical necessaire now showing, thank you, Lot one two one  for which I have eight hundred pounds offered, fifty, nine hundred and fifty, one thousand, one hundred  one thousand one hundred pounds  two hundred  three hundred  one thousand three hundred and fifty, any more?
One thousand four hundred  on my left at one thousand four hundred pounds  any advance on one thousand, five hundred  one thousand six hundred  seven hundred  eight hundred  nine hundred  one thousand nine hundred pounds, any more at one thousand nine hundred?
The bid is there at one thousand nine hundred pounds  one thousand nine hundred pounds.
Number  thank you.
Lot a hundred and twenty two  overture snuff box  Der Freischutz this one, Lot one two two  for which I have one thousand pounds offered, one hundred, two hundred  three hundred  four hundred  one thousand five hundred  one thousand six hundred, any more at one thousand six hundred pounds?
One thousand seven hundred, eight hundred  nine hundred, two thousand  two thousand two hundred, two thousand four hundred  two thousand six hundred, two thousand eight hundred  three thousand  two hundred  three thousand five hundred, three thousand eight hundred  four thousand  four thousand two hundred  four thousand five hundred  at four thousand five hundred pounds in the fifth row now, any more at four thousand five hundred pounds, all done?
Four thousand five hundred pounds.
Er  eight seven , thank you.
Lot one two three  is  black composition snuff box, there it is now, Lot one two three  and I have three hundred pounds offered for this and twenty  three fifty  three eighty, four hundred  four hundred pounds and twenty, four fifty  four fifty with me now, any more at four hundred and fifty pounds, any more at four fifty?
Four hundred and fifty pounds, are you all done at four fifty, four eighty  at four eighty now  all done at four hundred and eighty pounds.
seven.


Lot one hundred and twenty four  thank you, another one showing here, three hundred is offered and twenty, three fifty, any more at three hundred and fifty?
Three hundred and fifty pounds, three eighty, four hundred  at four hundred pounds  are you all done at four hundred?
It's with me and I'll sell at four hundred and twenty, four fifty  against you at four fifty, any more?
All done then, it's with me still at four hundred and fifty pounds against you all in the room.
four seven.
Lot a hundred and twenty five  thank you  another snuff box now showing, Lot one two five for which I have two offered and twenty  two fifty, two eighty, three hundred  three hundred pounds, any more?
At three hundred pounds, are you all done at three hundred pounds?
Any more?
Twenty, three fifty  against you at three fifty now, any more?
Three eighty, four hundred  four hundred pounds, any more?
It's with me then at four hundred pounds and I shall sell at four hundred pounds.
Four hundred pounds, all done.
four seven.
Lot a hundred and twenty six  snuff box  there it is now showing in a painted tin case  and I have five hundred offered for this  five hundred and fifty, six hundred  six fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred  eight hundred pounds, any more?
Eight hundred pounds  are you all done then at  eight hundred and fifty, nine hundred  at nine hundred pounds  with me still, are you all done at nine hundred pounds?
One four seven.
Lot one two seven  Laurencekirk box, there it is, thank you  and I have four hundred offered and twenty  four fifty, four eighty, five hundred and fifty  at five fifty now, any more at five fifty?
All done then?
Six hundred, six fifty  against you at six hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Bid's with me, seven hundred, seven fifty  eight hundred, eight fifty  nine hundred  at nine hundred pounds in the fifth row, any more at nine hundred pounds?
Nine fifty  standing at nine fifty then, are you all done at nine hundred and fifty pounds?
Three two six, thank you.
Lot a hundred and twenty eight  is the snuff box now showing, thank you, Lot one two eight  and I have six hundred pounds offered, fifty, seven hundred and fifty, eight hundred  eight hundred pounds, any more?
Eight fifty, nine hundred  nine fifty, one thousand  one hundred, two hundred  one thousand three hundred  four hundred  five hundred  one thousand six hundred, seven hundred  eight hundred  one thousand eight hundred pounds, any more?
One thousand nine hundred new bidder  one thousand nine hundred pounds near the back in the aisle  two thousand  two thousand two hundred  two thousand two hundred pounds  near the back, two thousand four hundred  two thousand four hundred pounds on my left and I shall sell at two thousand four hundred pounds.
thank you.
Er Lot one hundred and twenty nine  three airs snuff box now showing, Lot one two nine for which I have five hundred offered, five fifty, six hundred  six hundred pounds, any more?
At six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  seven hundred against you now, any more?
Seven hundred pounds  any more at seven hundred?
All done then at seven hundred pounds, seven fifty, eight hundred  eight fifty, nine hundred, nine fifty, one thousand  one hundred  at one thousand one hundred in the fifth row, any more at one thousand one hundred and I shall sell at one thousand  one hundred pounds.
And the number is  three one seven, thank you very much.
Lot a hundred and thirty  tortoiseshell box now showing, Lot a hundred and thirty and I have four hundred offered for this one, four twenty, fifty, four eighty, five hundred, and fifty  six hundred and fifty, seven hundred and fifty   and fifty  nine hundred  at nine hundred pounds  fifty, one thousand  one hundred  two hundred  one thousand three hundred  four hundred, five hundred, six hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred, nine hundred, two thousand, two hundred  two thousand four hundred  two thousand six hundred  two thousand eight hundred, three thousand  three thousand pounds  it's your bid at three thousand  any advance on three thousand pounds, are you all done then at three thousand pounds?
Three one seven, thank you.
One three one  thank you, now showing, Lot one three one and I have five hundred offered for this  fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  seven hundred now, any more?
Seven fifty, eight hundred and fifty, nine hundred  and fifty, one thousand  one hundred, two hundred  one thousand two hundred pounds, any more?
One thousand two hundred pounds, the bid's with me, are you all done at one thousand two hundred pounds  a thousand three hundred  on my right now at one thousand three hundred pounds, any more?
At one thousand three hundred and I shall sell at one thousand three hundred pounds.
Six six seven, thank you.
Lot a hundred and thirty two  there it is now, a snuff box with micro-mosaic lid, Lot one three two and I have eight hundred pounds offered for this one and fifty, nine hundred and fifty, one thousand, one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, one thousand five hundred, six hundred  one thousand six hundred pounds at the back in the aisle, any more?
One thousand seven hundred   one thousand eight hundred, nine hundred, two thousand, two thousand two hundred, two thousand four hundred, two thousand six hundred  eight hundred  three thousand  three thousand two hundred  three thousand two hundred pounds , any more now?
At three thousand two hundred pounds, three thousand five hundred  three thousand five now in the fifth row  three thousand eight hundred  three thousand eight hundred pounds, any more?
All done then at three thousand eight hundred?sell at three thousand eight hundred pounds.
Nine five seven, thank you very much.
Lot a hundred and thirty three  now showing, thank you, Lot one three three and I have five hundred offered and fifty, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  seven hundred pounds, any more?
Seven fifty, eight hundred  and fifty  there at the back in the aisle at eight hundred and fifty pounds  nine hundred and fifty  one thousand, one hundred  two hundred, three hundred  four hundred  a thousand five hundred  six hundred  one thousand seven hundred, one thousand eight hundred, nine hundred  two thousand  two thousand two hundred, two thousand four hundred   six hundred  eight hundred  two thousand eight hundred pounds in the fifth row  now any more?
Two thousand eight hundred and I shall sell  two thousand eight hundred pounds.
Er   three one seven?
One hundred and thirty four    er  Bordier box, there it is, Lot one three four   it's illustrated in the catalogue  a small box with a , Lot one three four  and I have three hundred pounds offered for it, three hundred pounds and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, and twenty, four fifty, four eighty  five hundred and fifty, six hundred  and fifty, seven hundred and fifty  eight hundred and fifty  near the back in the aisle at eight hundred and fifty now  nine hundred  nine fifty  nine hundred and fifty, any more?
At nine fifty then, all done then at one  one thousand  one thousand one hundred  still near the back in the aisle at one thousand one hundred and I shall sell at one thousand one hundred  one thousand two hundred just in time  any more?
One thousand three hundred  all done at one thousand three hundred pounds.
Nine five seven, thank you.
One hundred and thirty five  a small box by Capt, snuff box by Capt  now showing  er  I have er four hundred pounds offered, four fifty, five hundred and fifty, six hundred, six hundred and fifty, seven hundred  and fifty, eight hundred  and fifty  on my left at eight fifty now, any more?
At eight hundred and fifty pounds on my left seated and I'll sell at eight hundred and fifty pounds, all done?five.
Lot one hundred and thirty six   tortoiseshell case   Lot one three six  Martinet and Benoit  could well be, yes  it's in a plain tortoiseshell case  er  I have four hundred pounds offered for this, four twenty, fifty, four eighty, five hundred  five hundred pounds, any more?
Five fifty, thank you, six hundred  six hundred pounds with me,on the screen   six hundred pounds with me, any more at six hundred pounds?
Six fifty, thank you  down there at six fifty now, any more at six hundred and fifty  seven hundred  seven fifty  seven hundred and fifty pounds, are you all done at seven fifty then?
Any more at seven hundred and fifty pounds.
And the number again is  eight seven  thank you very much.
One hundred and thirty seven  snuff box of casket form  that's the right one, yes  and I have two hundred offered for this  two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred  at four hundred pounds, any more?
Four hundred pounds, any more, it's with me at four hundred now, are you all done?
Four twenty, four fifty   four fifty, any more?
Four fifty, four eighty, five hundred  five hundred, it's still with me at five, five fifty   five fifty, are you all done at five fifty and I'll sell then at five hundred and fifty pounds.
Three one seven, thank you very much.
Lot a hundred and thirty eight  silver gilt box with micro-mosaic, there it is now showing, thank you  and I have one thousand five hundred pounds offered to start me, six hundred, seven hundred, one thousand eight hundred, nine hundred, two thousand  two thousand pounds, two thousand one hundred  two thousand two hundred, three hundred  thousand four hundred, five hundred, two thousand six hundred  on my left at two thousand six hundred pounds, any more?
At two thousand six hundred pounds  in the aisle at seven hundred, eight hundred  two thousand nine hundred  three thousand  three thousand pounds, any more at three thousand?
Two hundred, three thousand four hundred  three thousand four hundred  now any more?
Three thousand four hundred and I'll sell at three thousand four hundred pounds on my left.
Two five two, thank you.
Lot a hundred and thirty nine  snuff box in tortoiseshell case now showing  initials W B D on the top and I have four hundred offered for it, four fifty, fifty, four hundred and fifty now, any more?
At four eighty, five hundred  five hundred pounds with me, any more?
Five fifty  on my right now at five fifty, any more at five hundred and fifty pounds?
Are you all done at five hundred and fifty pounds.
thank you.
Lot one hundred and forty  is an overture snuff box, there it is, thank you  it's a Mozart one and I have one thousand five hundred offered for this, six hundred, seven hundred  one thousand eight hundred  one thousand nine hundred  any more at one thousand nine hundred pounds?
One thousand nine hundred pounds, all done then at one thousand nine hundred pounds?
Two thousand  at two thousand pounds now, any more?
Two thousand, all finished and I'll sell then at two thousand pounds, are you all done at two thousand pounds?
And Lot one hundred and forty one  