

fifty to three hundred and fifty pounds  and Lot one four three  three hundred and fifty to four hundred and fifty pounds.
I'll remi remind you of those again as I reach the various Lots.
And we commence this morning with Lot number one  Lot number one is showing to my right here, the ivory carving  at fifty pounds  at fifty pounds  at fifty pounds  you want it for fifty pounds, thank you sir, fifty I've got now, fifty pounds is offered at fifty five  at fifty five, sixty, sixty five  seventy, seventy five  eighty five  ninety  ninety pounds in the back row at ninety and selling for ninety pounds, any further bids at ninety pounds   at ninety pounds.
Thank you sir, it's yours for ninety pounds.
Number six O six.
Lot number two  Lot two is a Japanese ivory carving  we've got that showing for you for seventy five pounds  at seventy five pounds, eighty, eighty five, ninety offered  I'm offered ninety pounds and I'm selling it for ninety, ninety five, a hundred pounds  and ten  one twenty  thirty  a hundred and thirty for you sir, coming in at one thirty in the back row, one thirty and selling for a hundred and thirty pounds.
The same buyer thank you, one thirty.
Six O six.
Er Lot number three  Lot number three  the Canton trays  there we are there we've got a sample showing for you  Lot number three, there are seven of them in the Lot  all seven of them for a hundred and fifty pounds  at one hundred and fifty, sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, two twenty, forty, sixty  two eighty  I'm offered two hundred and eighty pounds you're on three hundred for you sir  three hun three twenty  three fifty, three eighty  go to four hundred  four twenty  four fifty  four eighty  five hundred  and fifty  and you bet against you both now  five hundred and fifty is offered against you both now, five fifty  five hundred and fifty pounds.
Thank you that's a lady's offer at five fifty and that's six eleven, thank you.
Lot number four  Lot number four the rectangular box and we have that showing  Lot number four  at eighty pounds for this and eighty pounds and eighty five, ninety pounds  at ninety pounds  any more at ninety pounds only at ninety all   ninety pounds   ninety pounds.
Thank you Lot number five.
Lot number five  the circular mirror  this the mirror  fifty pounds for this one at fifty pounds, at fifty five, at fifty five pounds  at fifty five pounds all done?
At fifty five only, at sixty, thank you, at sixty five  sixty five again  at sixty five if you're all finished at sixty five pounds.
Thank you.
Lot number six.
Lot six a Canton card case  this the card case showing  I've got several offers I've got to start at three hundred pounds  got that in several places three hund three twenty, three fifty, eighty, four hundred  I bid four hundred, four twenty, four fifty  at four hundred and fifty pounds, anybody else?
Four fifty and selling for four hundred and fifty pounds, all done at four fifty.
Number ninety four, thank you, four fifty.
Excuse me please, is it possible for you to speak a bit louder.
It's  
I'll, I'll try for you yes.
Thank you.
Lot number seven  Lot seven the rosewater sprinkler  Lot number seven  there it is  a hundred pounds for this one, one hundred pounds and ten, a hundred and ten pounds.
Any more at one hundred and ten only, one twenty, one thirty  one forty, fifty  one sixty, seventy  one seventy  one eighty, the lady's bid sir  do you want to come in?
One eighty coming in?
One hundred and eighty pounds with the lady at one eighty and selling for one eighty in the back row.
One ninety standing  two hundred pounds, two twenty  two forty  two sixty  two sixty against the lady at six go on at two hundred and sixty pounds, you all done at two sixty.
Six one five, thank you, two sixty.
Lot number eight  Lot eight  there we are there it is showing to you, Lot number eight and I'm offered a hundred pounds to start me on it, one hundred pounds and ten, twenty, one hundred and twenty pounds  at a hundred and twenty pounds all s all done at one twenty, one thirty, forty  a hundred and forty pounds  selling for one hundred and forty pounds, any more at one hundred and forty pounds.
Number one eight two, one forty.
Lot number nine  Lot nine  this the carving, Lot number nine  eighty pounds for this one, eighty, eighty five, ninety , ninety pounds, any more at ninety pounds, ninety five, one hundred pounds, at one hundred pounds, anybody else at one hundred and ten standing, one twenty  going on, sir?
One twenty against you standing  all done at one hundred and twenty pounds, any more at one twenty?
One hundred and twenty pounds.
Lot ten  ten, ten is the Burmese Buddha  this the Buddha showing for a hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds, and ten  at a hundred and ten pounds  all done?
At one hundred and ten pounds, any more at one hundred and ten?
All done?
Thank you, Lot number eleven.
Lot eleven  the Tibetan model  there's the model showing  eighty pounds for this, at eighty, eighty five offered, at ninety, ninety five, ninety five bid, one hundred and ten, twenty, thirty  a hundred and thirty is offered  at one hundred and thirty, one forty  a new bidder now, one forty to my right and selling for one hundred and forty  thank you, one forty for  join on.
Lot number twelve  Lot twelve  an alabaster model  there's the Indian model showing  at eighty pounds for this, at eighty, eighty five, ninety five, one hundred, at one hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds, any more at one hundred,one hundred, you all done?
At one hundred pounds, any more?
And ten, at one hundred and ten pounds  one hundred and ten pounds.
Lot number thirteen  thirteen is the bronze model  there's the bronze model showing  for eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  any more at eighty pounds, all done?
At eighty pounds, the opening offer, at eighty pounds only.
Thank you.
Lot number fourteen.
Lot fourteen, the bronze bell  the bronze bell is showing  fifty for this, at fifty, fifty five pounds  at fifty five, sixty, sixty five, seventy, seventy five  going on, sir?
Eighty pounds, eighty five  ninety  ninety five  one hundred  and ten  twenty  one twenty to my left standing, at one twenty all done, at one hundred and twenty pounds standing, at one twenty.
Thank you sir, it's yours for one twenty and that's for number  eight four eight, thank you.
Lot number fifteen  Lot fifteen, the jadeite plaque  there's the jadeite plaque showing  a hundred pounds for it, one hundred pounds and ten, twenty, thirty, one thirty offered, forty, fifty, at one hundred and fifty pounds  at a hundred and fifty only, at one hundred and fifty pounds, I shall sell, one sixty, one seventy, going on sir?
One eighty, one ninety  two hundred and twenty  two forty, sixty  two eighty, three hundred  three hundred pounds, against   anybody else?
At three hundred pounds and selling for three hundred pounds.
Three hundred pounds, number sixty five, that's a commission bid.
Lot sixteen  Lot sixteen  an okimono  is showing, for a hundred pounds, at one hundred pounds and ten, twenty, one hundred and twenty pounds  at a hundred and twenty, thirty, forty  one fifty, sixty  one seventy, eighty  ninety, two hundred  and twenty  two hundred and twenty pounds to my right, and selling for two twenty, all finished?
At two hundred and twenty pounds  thank you, two twenty for number  two O two.
Lot number seventeen  Lot seventeen, the glass snuff-bottle  snuff-bottle there showing  at a hundred pounds for this, at one hundred pounds  at a hundred pounds, any more at one hundred only, at one hundred all done?
At one hundred pounds  any more at a hundred pounds?
Thank you, Lot number eighteen.
Lot number eighteen is the next to offer  that's the bronze model  the bronze model, I have fifty pounds offered to start me at fifty, fifty five, sixty pounds, at sixty five  sixty five pounds  any more?
Sixty five all done, at sixty five, if you're all finished at sixty five pounds.
Sixty five pounds.
Lot nineteen  nineteen  cylindrical vase  there's the carved vase showing  thirty for this one, at thirty pounds, at thirty five, at thirty five pounds  at thirty five pounds, any more at thirty five only, at forty in front, forty five  fifty in front, five  fifty five against you, near me  at fifty five pounds, you all finished now, at fifty five, any more at fifty five.
Fifty five pounds.
Lot number twenty  twenty is a quantity of stands  there we are, we've got a sample showing for you  just a sample showing  fifty for the lot  the whole lot there for fifty pounds  at fifty pounds  want them for fifty pounds  thank you sir, fifty pounds I've got, at fifty five  going on  fifty five, sixty pounds, sixty five  coming in sir?
Seventy pounds, seventy five  eighty, eighty five  ninety five  one hundred and ten  one twenty  I'm offered a hundred and twenty pounds, I'll sell, one thirty  one forty  fifty  one sixty  one seventy  one eighty  one ninety  carrying on, sir?
One ni two hundred pounds  two hundred pounds against you now, sir 
two hundred to my right at the back, at two hundred pounds  thank you, six one O at two hundred pounds.
Lot number twenty one  Lot twenty one  the Japanese cloisonne  there we are, we've got one of them showing  one of them showing for you, for a hundred pounds, one hundred pounds and ten, twenty, one hundred and twenty pounds  at a hundred and twenty pounds, you all finished now, at one twen one thirty, forty  one fifty, sixty  one sixty against you, coming in?
One sixty, any more?
One six yes.
One hundred and sixty pounds, all done, at one hundred and sixty pounds, any more at one sixty.
One sixty.
Lot number twenty two  twenty two, the gilt-bronze and enamel model   showing  at a hundred and fifty pounds  one fifty I'm offered, thank you, one hundred and fifty pounds I've got, one sixty, one seventy, one eighty, ninety  two hundred and twenty, forty, sixty  two eighty, three hundred  three hundred pounds against you  at three hundred, anybody else?
Three twenty in the back row now  three twenty in the back row and selling for three hundred and twenty pounds.
Thank you sir, it's yours for three twenty and that's for number six O nine.
Lot number twenty three  Lot twenty three is the er lacquered circular cover  there we are, that's showing  fifty for this one, at fifty pounds, at fifty pounds, at fifty five  fifty five pounds  any more?
At fif sixty, thank you, standing, for sixty, sixty five  seventy pounds, seventy five  eighty, eighty five  ninety standing  I'm offered ninety pounds at the back standing, at ninety and selling for ninety pounds, you all finished, at ninety pounds.
Thank you sir, it's yours for ninety pounds and that's for number  two one three  thank you.
Lot number twenty four  Lot number twenty four  there's Lot number twenty four showing  at a hundred pounds, one hundred pounds and ten, twenty  one thirty to my right  a hundred and thirty offered .
at one hundred and thirty pounds, one forty in the back row, one fifty  one sixty  one seventy  one eighty  one ninety  two hundred  two hundred pounds in the back row, at two hundred pounds, two twenty to my right  the lady's bid, sir  two forty  two forty, going on?
Against the lady at two forty, it's in back row at two forty, it's yours, sir  at two forty.
All done at two hundred and forty pounds.
Thank you, two hundred and forty pounds, that's for number six O six.
Lot number  twenty five, Lot number twenty five  there we are  fragmentary carving  there's the carving showing  sixty pounds for it  sixty five, seventy  seventy five, eighty  eighty five, ninety  ninety five  a hundred  and ten  twenty  thirty  forty  one fifty, sixty  one sixty against you standing  and against you  no  one sixty in the centre  at one hundred and sixty pounds I've got, at one hundred and sixty  thank you, one hundred and sixty pounds for that  six one three.
Lot number twenty six  Lot number twenty six, the grey jade pendant  there's the grey jade pendant showing  Lot twenty six for thirty pounds  at thirty, thirty five, forty, forty five, fifty for you sir, thank you, five  sixty, sixty five  seventy offered  I'm bid seventy in the centre now  and selling for seventy, seventy five to my right  eighty pounds  eighty five  eighty five, the lady's offer, sir  at eighty five pounds, any more at eight five pounds.
The lady to my right, eighty five pounds, that's eight forty, thank you.
Lot number twenty seven  twenty seven the bronze model  there's the bronze model  fifty for this, at fifty, thank you, fifty is offered, at five, sixty, sixty five, seventy, seventy five, eighty, eighty five  ninety bid  I'm offered ninety pounds at the back, anybody else at ninety, ninety five  one hundred  going on sir?
And ten  one twenty  one twenty bid  at one hundred and twenty pou one thirty  against you both  going on?
One forty  one fifty  one sixty  seventy  eighty, ninety  two hundred  and twenty  two forty  two sixty  any more sir?
Two eighty  three hundred  still against you  three hundred pounds here on my right at three hundred, and selling for three hundre yes  three twenty  three twenty against you   three twenty at the back and selling for three hundred and twenty pounds.
Thank you, three twenty and that was for  number  eight four one, thank you.
Lot number twenty eight  Lot twenty eight  er  the white jade bottle  there's the bottle showing  a hundred pounds for it, at one hundred pounds  at a hundred pounds  and ten, twenty  one thirty  one thirty offered and selling for one hundred and thirty, one forty  one forty against you now  one forty to my left and selling for one hundred and forty pounds  second row, thank you, one forty  and the next number is number two one eight, thank you.
Lot number twenty nine, Lot twenty nine  the mandarin head-dress  there's the head-dress showing  eighty pounds, at eighty pounds, at five, ninety, ninety pounds  at ninety pounds  all done?
At ninety pounds, any more?
At ninety only, at ninety pounds.
Have you all finished?
Thank you, Lot number thirty.
Lot number thirty is the next to offer  and that's the beaker  there's the beaker.
Twenty pounds for it  at twenty pounds  at twenty pounds  thank you, twenty is offered and selling for twenty pounds only, twenty five for you sir, thank you, twenty five, thirty  thirty five  thirty five to my left and selling for thirty five pounds  yours sir, thank you, thirty five pounds for number  eight four five, thank you very much.
Lot number thirty one, Lot thirty one, the netsuke  there's the netsuke showing  sixty pounds offered, at sixty, sixty five pounds, at sixty five pounds, seventy in the centre, seventy five  eighty, eighty five  ninety in the centre  I'm offered ninety and I shall take ninety if there's no further bid, ninety five in front  going on sir?
Ninety five, coming in?
One hundred pounds  and ten  one twenty  one twenty offered to my right, at one twenty and selling for a hundred and twenty pounds.
Thank you, one twenty for  two hundred.


Lot number thirty two  Lot thirty two, the lacquer brushes  there we are, there's the lacquer brushes, I've got two offers of a hundred pounds for them  one hundred pounds in two places, at one hundred and ten, one twenty, thirty, forty  going on?
One fifty, sixty  one seventy, one eighty  any more?
One one ninety, thank you, at two hundred pounds  coming in sir?
Two hundred against you both  at two hundred pounds, the bid's on the book at two hundred against you both, at two hundred and selling  for two hundred, two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty  any more sir?
At two hundred and eighty, the bid's with me at two hundred and eighty pounds against you all, at two eighty.
Thank you, that's a commission bid and that's for number one eight eight.
Lot number thirty three  Lot number thirty three  is the hanging basket  there's the hanging basket showing, a hundred pounds for this, at one hundred pounds and ten  twenty, thirty, forty, fifty  sixty, seventy  one eighty  I'm offered a hundred and eighty pounds, one ninety  two hundred  two twenty, two forty, two sixty  eighty  three hundred  three hundred's bid on my left and selling for three hundred pounds second row, three hundred pounds.
Two one eight, thank you, three hundred pounds.
Lot number thirty four  Lot number thirty four  the okimono  there's the okimono showing  eighty pounds for this one is offered, at eighty pounds I've got in two places, at eighty pounds, eighty five in the centre, at eighty five is bid and selling for eighty five it's yours sir at eighty five, ninety to my right, ninety five  going on sir?
One hundred pounds and ten  one hundred and ten pounds, one twenty  a hundred and twenty to my right, at one hundred and twenty pounds, have you all finished?
At one twenty.
Eight thirty, thank you, one twenty.
Lot number thirty five  Lot number thirty five  there we are, there it is showing, Lot number thirty five, eighty pounds for this one, at eighty, eighty five, ninety, ninety five, one hundred is offered  I'm offered a hundred pounds and selling for one hundred, all done?
At one hundred pounds, any more?
At one hundred pounds  thank you, number seventy four, one hundred pounds.
And Lot number thirty six  Lot thirty six showing to my right, at a hundred pounds again, at one hundred pounds  at a hundred pounds  one hundred only, at one hundred, you all done?
At one hundred, the opening offer at one hundred pounds.
Thank you, Lot number thirty seven.
Lot number thirty seven  Shibayama aide-memoire  there's the aide- memoire showing  fifty pounds for this, at fifty, fifty five for you sir, sixty pounds, sixty five, seventy, seventy five, eighty  eighty five  eighty five offered and selling for eighty five pounds, any more?
Ninety here now  ninety five, a hundred pounds  one hundred to my left and selling for one hundred  all done at one hundred pounds.
That's in the aisle at one hundred pounds, thank you, and that's for number  two one two, thank you.
Lot number thirty eight  Lot thirty eight  the er  Persian brass standard  there's the brass standard  seventy pounds for it, seventy, seventy five, eighty pounds, at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  any more at eighty only, at eighty pounds, all done?
At eighty pounds, any more at eighty pounds  eighty five, thank you, at ninety pounds  ninety five, a hundred  at one hundred against you at the back, at one hundred, you all done at one hundred pounds.
One hundred pounds.
Lot number thirty nine  thirty nine is the coal holder  there it is  seventy pounds for this, at seventy, seventy five, eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  any more at eighty only, at eighty, eighty five, ninety pounds, ninety five, a hundred pounds, and ten, twenty, one thirty offered  I'm offered one thirty on my left and selling for one hundred and thirty pou one forty standing  one fifty  one sixty  one seventy  going on sir?
One seventy against you, any more at one, one eighty  one ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two hundred and twenty still against you, at two hundred and twenty pounds I'm offered  thank you, two hundred and twenty for the lady and that's for number  nine one eight, thank you.
Lot number forty  Lot number forty  Persian steel fitting  there it is  seventy for this, at seventy pounds, at seventy five, eighty pounds, at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds, any more at eighty pounds, you all done?
At eighty pounds only, at eighty pounds, any more at eighty?
Thank you, Lot number forty one.
Lot number forty one, the brass sticks  there we are, we've got one of them showing for you  just one of them showing, I've got a hundred and fifty offered for it, one fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty  one ninety, two hundred I'm bid  I'm offered two hundred pounds, anybody else at two hundred and selling  at two hundred, two twenty, two forty  going on?
Two sixty, two eighty  two hundred and eighty pounds against you at the back and selling for two hundred and eighty pounds  two eighty, one one nine.
Lot forty two  Lot forty two is the er large selection of auction catalogues  and we've got a sample showing, there we are  works of art for you  twenty pounds for them  at twenty pounds  anyone want them for twenty pounds  sample showing for twenty pounds, anyone want them for twenty, thank you sir, twenty pounds I've got in the centre and I shall sell at twenty if there's no further bid at twenty pounds, any more?
Eight five eight, thank you, twenty pounds.
Lot number forty three  Lot forty three  a snuff-bottle  there it is  and I'm offered two hundred for this one, and twenty, two forty, two sixty  two eighty for you sir, three hundred pounds, going on?
Three twenty, three fifty, three eighty in the centre  three eighty is offered and selling for three hundred and eighty, all done?
At three hundred and eighty pounds.
Gentleman in the centre, three eighty and that's for number eight three six  Lot number forty four  Lot forty four  is the Japanese hand-warmer  there's the hand-warmer for fifty pounds, at fifty, fifty five pounds, at fifty five pounds  at fifty five, any more at fifty five, all done?
At fif sixty at the back, sixty five  going on sir?
Seventy, seventy five, eighty five  ninety  ninety is offered at the back and selling for ninety if you're all finished at ninety pounds.
That's back left ninety pounds, number eight five three, thank you.
Lot number forty five is the scribe scribe's set, there it is  for three hundred pounds, at three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, four twenty, four fifty  four eighty offered  I'm offered four eighty to my left, five hundred seated, five fifty  six hundred  six fifty  going to you sitting  six hundred and fifty, going on?
At six fifty standing on my left and selling, seven hundred to my right  seven fifty  going on sir?
Seven fifty, going to you, any m eight hundred  eight fifty  eight nine hundred  and fifty  round it off?
No?
Nine fifty to my left and selling for nine hundred and fifty pounds.
Thank you sir, it's yours  eight two eight, thank you, nine fifty.
Lot number forty six  Lot number forty six is the next, that's the ivory figure  Chinese figure there  a hundred pounds for this and ten, twenty, thirty, forty, one forty, fifty, one hundred and fifty pounds, one sixty, one seventy, one eighty, one ninety  two hundred and twenty  coming in sir?
Two fifty here in the centre now  two fifty I've got and I shall sell, two eighty  two hundred and eighty, three hundred pounds  three twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  four hundred by the post, at four hundred and selling for four hundred, if you're all finished at four hundred pounds  yours sir, thank you, four hundred and that's for number six O nine, six O nine thank you.
Lot number forty seven  Lot number forty seven, the micro-mosaic  there it is  Lot number forty seven  at a hundred and fifty pounds, at one fifty, one sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred offered, two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty  three going, three fifty, three eighty  any more sir?
At three eighty going to you, all done?
Anybody else at three hundred and eighty pounds, I'm selling for three hundred and eighty pounds  three eighty and that's number one O three.
The next Lot I'm afraid is withdrawn as announced er Lot number forty nine is the next, Lot number forty nine is a soapstone carving  there's the soapstone carving     Lot number forty nine  for two hundred pounds  at two hund two twenty, two fifty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, four twenty offered  at four hundred and twenty, four fifty, four eighty  going on sir?
Four eighty against you, any more?
Five hundred pounds and fifty, against you still  at five fifty seated  at five hundred and fifty, six hundred to my right  six fifty at the back  seven hundred pounds  going on sir?
Seven fifty  eight hundred  eight fifty  nine hundred  and fifty  at a thousand pounds  eleven hundred  twelve hundred  twelve hundred against you sir, thirteen hundred  fourteen hundred  fifteen hundred  sixteen hundred  seventeen hundred  eighteen hundred  nineteen hundred  two thousand  any more sir?
No?
Not giving up now are you?
Two thousand pounds here, going on?
Two thousand?
Two thousand one hundred  two thousand two hundred  two, two thousand three hundred  two thousa coming in sir?
Two thousand four  two thou two thousand five  two thousand five hundred on the back row, at two thousand five hundred pounds, I'm selling for two thousand five hundred  two thousand six in time  any more sir?
At two thousand six to my right, at two thousand six.
Thank you, two thousand six hundred pounds  and that's for number two eleven.
Lot number fifty  Lot fifty is a wood carving, a Japanese wood carving, eighty pounds for this, eighty five, ninety five, one hundred and ten  I'm offered a hundred and ten pounds, I shall sell, one twenty, one thirty, forty, fifty  one sixty bid  I'm offered one sixty to my right, at one hundred and sixty pounds, have you all finished at one sixty?
Thank you, one sixty for  two hundred.
Lot number fifty one, Lot fifty one, Japanese mask   put it on John   er Lot number fifty one  er eighty pounds for it, thank you, at eighty, eighty five, ninety pounds, at ninety pounds  any more at ninety pounds, all done?
At ninety only, at ninety pounds, you all finished?
Ninety five in time, one hundred pounds  at one hundr and ten, twenty  one thirty in front  I'm bid a hundred and thirty and I shall sell for one hundred and thirty pounds  thank you, the lady's offer, one thirty, front row and for that's for number six one two.
Lot fifty two 
 
Lot fifty two  there we are, Lot number fifty two is in front of the rostrum here  Lot number fifty two  sorry?
What's wrong?
Lot fifty.
I think we're we're okay, that was fifty one  fifty one was the mask, that was okay.
Er, Lot, Lot number fifty two I'm offering which is in front of the rostrum here  Lot number fifty two  for a hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds  at one hundred and ten, one twenty, one thirty  at a hundred and thirty pounds  any more at one hundred and thirty, one forty in the centre  one fifty  going on sir?
One f one sixty  one seventy  any more?
One eighty  one ninety  two hundred pounds, two twenty  any more?
Two twenty, all done?
Two twenty standing, at two hu two forty  two sixty  two hundred and sixty still against you  two eighty  three hundred  three hundred pounds standing, at three hundred pounds, you all done at three hundred pounds?
Thank you, that's yours sir, for three hundred pounds  and that's for number   eight five four, thank you.
Lot number fifty three 
 
Lot fifty three again it's in front of the rostrum here, Lot number fifty three for a hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds, any more at one hundred only, at one hundred, you all done?
At one, and ten, twenty  one thirty  at a hundred and thirty pounds standing, at one thirty, all done, at one hundred and thirty and selling  for a hundred and thirty pounds  thank you sir, the same buyer, one hundred and thirty pounds for eight five four.
Lot number fifty four  Lot fifty four  copper bowl  copper bowl showing  for a hundred pounds, at one hundred and ten  at a hundred and ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty  sixty, seventy  one eighty offered  I'm offered a hundred and eighty pounds, I shall sell for one eighty, one ninety  going on sir?
One ninety against you now  at a hundred and ninety bid, with the lady at one ninety.
Thank you, one ninety  er, nine, nine one eight is it?
Nine one eight it is, thank you.
Lot number fifty five, Lot number fifty five  the hanging lamp  there's the hanging lamp showing  for a hundred and fifty pounds  at a hundred and fifty, one sixty, one seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, two twenty standing  I'm offered two hundred and twenty pounds, I'll take two twenty, two forty, two sixty  two eighty  three hundred  three, going on?
Three on  any more?
It's against you both, three twenty  three fifty at the back  three fifty standing  at three hundred and fifty pounds standing at three fifty and selling for three hundred and fifty.
Eight five four, three fifty, thank you.
Lot number fifty six  Lot fifty six, the copper bowl, the Timurid copper bowl, there it is  for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds, any more at three hundred pounds, all done?
At the opening offer at three hundred pounds, any more at three hundred?
Thank you, Lot number fifty seven  Lot fifty seven I'm offering, that's the five er Persian sections, there we are, they've got those showing or one of them  Lot number fifty seven, fifty pounds for this, at fifty pounds  at fifty pounds, fifty five, sixty, sixty five, seventy  seventy five, eighty  eighty five, ninety  ninety five, a hundred  and ten  twenty  one thirty  a hundred and thirty against you near me now  one thirty, anybody else want, forty in front  one fifty  going on sir?
One fifty against you  one  yes?
One sixty, thank you  one sixty in front now  second row at one sixty and selling for one sixty  thank you, a hundred and sixty pounds and that's for  number  two one eight.
Thank you.
Lot number fifty eight  Lot number fifty eight is another five sections  there we are, we've got one of those showing  for fifty pounds, at fifty, fifty five pounds, at fifty five, any more at sixty  sixty five  going on?
Seventy  seventy five  eighty  eighty five  ninety  ninety five  a hundred  and ten  twenty  thirty  forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty  one eighty to my left  one eighty, it's yours sir, at one eighty, anybody else at one hundred and eighty pounds  one eighty.
Thank you, a hundred and eighty pounds for number  six one five, thank you.
Lot number fifty nine, Lot fifty nine is a plaster model  there's the plaster model showing  thirty pounds for this, at thirty pounds  at thirty pounds  any more at thirty pounds, all done at thirty, thirty five, forty pounds  yes?
Forty five  forty five offered and selling  forty five to my left, all done at forty five, in all  at forty five.
Forty five pounds and that's for  five two two.
Five two two sir.
Lot number sixty  Lot number sixty  rock-crystal beaker, there's the rock-crystal beaker, for fifty pounds, at fifty, fifty five pounds, at sixty five, seventy five, eighty five, ninety  five  a hundred  and ten  twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, two hundred, two twenty  going on sir?
Two fifty  two eighty  three hundred  and twenty  three fifty  eighty  four hundred  twenty  any more?
Four twe four twenty against you  at four twen anybody else?
At four twenty I'm bid at the back on the left at four twenty.
Eight five four, four twenty, thank you.
Lot number sixty one  Lot sixty one is the er  Bohemian base, there it is  there's the base showing, a hundred pounds and ten, twenty, thirty  a hundred and thirty pounds  any more?
At one hundred and thirty pounds, one forty, fifty  one, one fif sixty, seventy  any more sir?
One eighty  one ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two forty  sixty  two eighty  three hundred  and twenty  three twenty bid at the back on the left at three twenty, anybody else  at three hundred and twenty pounds?
Eight five four, thank you, three twenty.
Lot number sixty two, sixty two, the Roman pottery lamps  Roman pottery lamps  thirty pounds for these, at thirty pounds, at thirty five, at thirty five pounds  any more at thirty five only, at thirty five, you all done?
At thirty five pounds, any more at thirty five?
Forty in time  forty five  fifty, fifty five  fifty five against you near me, at fifty five, all done at fifty five.
Fifty five pounds.
Lot number sixty three  Lot sixty three  Lot number sixty three, the  showing for a hundred and fifty pounds, at sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred is offered  I'm bid two hundred, to anybody else at two hundred?
Two ten, two twenty, thirty, at two hundred and thirty pounds, forty, fifty  two fifty, going on?
At two fifty, all done, at two hun two sixty  at two hundred and sixty pounds, any more at two sixty?
Yours sir, thank you, two sixty and that's for number  two two two.
Lot number sixty four  Lot number sixty four  there's another one showing for you, fifty for this one, at fifty pounds  thank you, fifty is offered at the back  at fifty pounds I've got  I can and will sell for fifty pounds only, any further bids at fifty five  sixty  going on sir?
Sixty five  seventy  seventy pounds at the back standing at seventy and selling for seventy pounds.
Eight five four, thank you, seventy pounds.
Lot number sixty five  Lot sixty five is another one  there we are  another one showing  I'm offered seventy five to start me, at seventy five, eighty, eighty five, ninety five, ninety five is bid, at ninety five and selling, all done?
One hundred and ten against you  one hundred and ten pounds against you at one ten is my bid at one hundred and ten, all done?
Thank you, a commission bid for number sixty six, one ten.
Lot number sixty six  Lot number sixty six is another one  there we are, there's another one showing for a hundred pounds  at one hundred and ten, at one hundred and ten pounds  any more at one ten, one twenty, thirty, forty, fifty  one sixty, seventy  one eighty at the back  against you near me  one eighty at the back and selling for a hundred and eighty pounds, all done at one eighty.
Eight five four, thank you, one eighty.
Lot number sixty seven  Lot sixty seven is another one  there we are, that one showing for you  a hundred pounds for this, and ten, twenty, at one hundred and thirty, forty  one hundred and forty is bid and selling  for one hundred and forty pounds, anybody else at one for one fifty, one sixty  going on sir?
One seventy, one eighty  one ninety offered  I'm offered a hundred and ninety pounds, have you all finished at one ninety?
The same buyer, thank you, one ninety for eight five four.
Lot number sixty eight  Lot sixty eight is another one  there we are  that one is showing for a hundred pounds  at one ten, one twenty, one thirty bid, and s one forty  one fifty  sixty  one seventy  eighty  one ninety  two hundred  two twenty  two forty  two forty bid at the back and selling for two forty, all done at two hundred and forty.
Eighty five four, thank you, two forty.
Lot number sixty nine  Lot sixty nine, double page  there it is  Lot number sixty nine for three hundred pounds, at three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred  four hundred, going on sir?
Four twenty, four fifty  four eighty bid  I'm offered four hundred and eighty pounds, I shall sell at four eighty if there's no further bid at four hundred and eighty pounds  five hundred in time  going one sir?
Five fifty  against the lady now, at five hundred and fifty I'm offered and selling for five fifty.
Eight five four, thank you, five fifty.
Lot number seventy  Lot seventy  there we are, there's  in there look, number seventy for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds, any more, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, four hundred pounds, going on sir?
Four twenty, four fifty  four eighty offered  I'm offered four hundred and eighty pounds, anybody else at four hundred and eighty pounds, have you all finished at four eighty?
The same buyer, thank you, four eighty.
Lot number seventy one  Lot number seventy one  seventy one  there's the stele showing  there's the carving showing there  for a hundred and fifty pounds, at one fifty, one sixty, one seventy, at one hundred and seventy pounds, at one eighty offered, one ninety, two hundred now  two hundred is bid and selling for two hundred, you all done?
At two hund two twenty, two forty  going on sir?
Two sixty, two eighty  three hundred, three twenty  any more?
Three three twenty, three forty, three sixty  still against you sir, three sixty, anybody else?
At three hundred and sixty pounds and selling for three hundred and sixty, have you all finished?
Three sixty is a commission bid for one O eight.
Lot number seventy two  Lot seventy two  two-handled ding  there it is  Lot number seventy two  for two hundred and fifty pounds, at two hundred and fifty, two eighty, at two hundred and eighty pounds  at two eighty, three hundred, three twenty now  three twenty is offered  all done at three twenty?
I shall sell at three twenty if there's no further bids at three hundred and twenty pounds  any more?
Three twenty, that's number sixty three  commission bid.
Lot number seventy three  seventy three, the baluster vase  is showing  for fifty pounds  at fifty, fifty five pounds, at fifty five pounds  at fifty five, any more at fifty five, you all done?
At fifty five, sixty at the back, sixty five, going on sir?
Seventy, seventy five  eighty, eighty five  ninety at the back  I'm offered ninety pounds, I shall sell at ninety, it's yours sir at ninety pounds  ninety pounds, gentleman left back and that's for eight five three.
Lot number seventy four  Lot seventy four, the censer  there's the Ming censer showing  Lot number seventy four, a hundred for this, at one hundred pounds  at a hundred pounds and ten, one twenty, one thirty, at one hundred and thirty I'm offered and selling for one thirty, all done?
At one hundred and thirty pounds, any more at one thirty?
One thirty, thank you, for number  two two three.
Lot number seventy five  Lot seventy five  soapstone panel  soapstone panel  eighty pounds, at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds, any more at eighty pounds, all done?
Opening offer at eighty, any more at eighty pounds only, at eighty pounds  any more?
Thank you, Lot number seventy six  Lot number seventy six  Peking er dishes  there's the Peking dishes, there's seven of them, we've got one of them showing  seven in the  for a hundred pounds  one hundred pounds  at a hundred pounds and ten, at one hundred and ten pounds, any more at one hundred and ten , twenty, thirty  one forty in front, one fifty  one sixty, seventy    yes?one eighty, thank you  one eighty in front, at a hundred and eighty pounds and selling for one hundred and eighty.
Thank you, they're yours for one eighty and that's for number six one two.
Lot number seventy seven  Lot seventy seven  Lot number seventy seven is showing for you and I've got a hundred pounds offered for it and ten, twenty, at one hundred and twenty pounds  at a hundred and twenty pounds,one twenty, you all done?
At one twenty and selling  all done?
One thirty, forty  a hundred and forty pounds, you all done at one forty, against you all, at one forty.
One forty is for one eight one.
Lot number seventy eight  Lot seventy eight  a patinated bronze teapot  there's the bronze teapot  a hundred pounds  at one hundred and ten, twenty, one hundred and twenty pounds  at one hundred and twenty pounds, one thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty  ninety, two hundred  two twenty bid  I'm offered two hundred and twenty to my right and selling for two twenty, two forty  two sixty, two eighty  three hundred  and twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  and twenty  four fifty, eighty  five hundred  and fifty  six hundred  six hundred pounds offered  anybody else at six hundred pounds still to my right at six hundred pounds.
Thank you , six hundred pounds.
Two O eight.
Two O eight.
Lot number seventy nine  Lot number seventy nine is the Ming bronze model  there's the bronze model showing  for three hundred pounds, at three hun three twenty, three fifty, at three hundred and fifty pounds  any more at three hundred and fifty, all done at three fifty, any more, at three hund three eighty, four hundred, going on sir?
Four hundred going to you, any more?
Four four twenty, four fifty  going on?
Four fifty, any more?
Four eighty, five hundred  and fifty, six hundred  any more?
Six hun and fifty  six hundred and fifty pounds against you both, any more at six hundred and fifty pounds, have you all finished at six fifty?
To you, six hundred and fifty pounds.
Lot number eighty  eighty is the bamboo carving  there's the bamboo carving  fifty for this, at fifty, fifty five, sixty, sixty five  seventy, seventy five  eighty, eighty five  ninety is offered, back row, ninety and selling for ninety, all done?
At ninety five  ninety fi one hundred pounds and ten  one ten, one twenty  thirty  one thirty against you on the back row, you coming in now sir?
One thirty here, one hundred and thirty  one thirty.
Thank you, one thirty to my left  and that's for number  two one two.
Er Lot number eighty one  Lot number eighty one  er the inkstone  there it is, Lot number eighty one  and I'm offered a hundred and fifty in two places  one hundred and fifty, one sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety  two hundred, two twenty  two hundred and twenty bid  at two hundred and twenty pounds  two twenty only, at two twenty.
Two hundred and twenty pounds for one O three.
Lot number eighty two  Lot number eighty two  oviform jar  eighty pounds for this  at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds  any more at eighty only, at eighty pounds, all done, at eighty, the opening offer, at eighty pounds  any more at eighty?
Thank you, Lot number eighty three  Er Lot number eighty is the next to offer  a soapstone carving  there's the soapstone carving showing for a hundred pounds, at one hundred and ten, a hundred and ten pounds  any more at one hundred and ten  all done, at one hundred and ten pounds.
Thank you, Lot number eighty four  Lot number eighty four  a square seal  there's the seal showing  eighty for this one, at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds, eighty five, ninety, ninety five, a hundred pounds  and ten  one twenty  thirty  one forty  fifty  one hundred and fifty at the back against  one sixty  one seventy  eighty  one ninety  two hundred  two hundred to my right, at two hundred pounds, any more at two hundred, two twenty, a new bidder  two fifty, at two hundred and fifty, two eighty  three hundred offered  I'm offered three hundred to my right and selling for three hundred pounds.
Thank you  three hundred.
Two O five, thank you.
Er Lot number eighty five   number eighty five is the jade pendant  Lot number eighty fi er Lot number eighty five, beg your pardon, it's a vase  there we are, the vase is showing  for seventy pounds, at seventy, seventy five, eighty pounds  at eighty pounds, eighty five, ninety  ninety five, a hundred  and ten  a hundred and ten to my right  one ten is offered and selling for one hundred and ten pounds.
Thank you, one ten  two O nine, thank you.
Lot number eighty six  Lot number eighty six I'm offering  there it is  for four hundred pounds, at four hundred pounds  at four hundred pounds, any more at four hundred only, at four hundred, you all done?
And fifty, five hundred  going on?
At five hundred pounds and selling  all done at five hundred pounds, have you all finished at five hundred?
Five hundred pounds for one O five.
Lot number eighty seven  Lot number eighty seven is a celadon jade carving  there's the jade carving showing  for two hundred pounds, at two hundred pounds, at two twenty, two fifty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred offered  at four twenty  four fifty  going on sir?
Four fi four eighty  five hundred  still against you  and fifty  six hundred  and fifty  seven hundred  seven hundred pounds is offered to my right, at s and fifty  eight hundred  still against you sir  eight hundred, going on?
At eight hundred pounds and selling  for eight hundred pounds, have you all finished at eight hundred pounds, anybody else at eight hundred?
Thank you, eight hundred pounds  two one four.
Lot number eighty eight  Lot number eighty eight  the bronze model  there's the bronze model showing  and I'm offered a hundred and fifty for it, one fifty, one sixty, one seventy  any more?
One eighty, one ninety  two hundred, two twenty  two forty, two sixty  going on sir?
Two sixty, against you, two eighty, three hundred  still against you  going on sir?
Three twenty, three fifty  three hundred and fifty pounds, all done at three fifty and it's still with me at three fifty against you all  three fifty, it's my bid at three hundred and fifty pounds.
Three fifty commission for number seventy one.
Er Lot number eighty nine  Lot number eighty nine  the seal  there's the seal there showing  Lot number eighty nine for seventy pounds, at seventy pounds, at five, eighty, eighty five, ninety, ninety five, a hundred pounds and ten, at one hundred and ten pounds, all done at one ten, any more, one twenty  one thirty  one forty  one forty in the front row  at one hundred and forty I've got and I shall sell at one forty.
Thank you, a hundred and forty pounds for six one two.
Lot number ninety  Lot number ninety, the horn box  the horn box and cover is showing for you  for a hundred pounds  one hundred pounds  any more at one hundred pounds?
All done at one hundred only?
At one hundred pounds, any more at one hundred pounds?
Any more, last time?
Thank you, Lot number ninety one  Lot number ninety one  for a hundred pounds  at one hundred pounds  any more at one hundred pounds only?
At one ten, at one hundred and ten pounds, you all done at one hundred and ten pounds?
Any more at one ten?
One ten.
Er Lot number ninety two  Lot number ninety two  is the seal  Lot number ninety two  for thirty pounds, at thirty, thirty five, at thirty five pounds in white, thirty five only, forty, forty five  fifty pounds, at fifty five, sixty, sixty five  seventy I'm offered  I'm offered seventy pounds on my right, seventy five  eighty pounds  eighty five  ninety  ninety five  a hundred  and ten  twenty  thirty  forty  one forty bid against you now  one forty is here at one forty, all done?
At one hundred and forty pounds.
Any more?
There was no other, one forty, thank you.
Two O five  two O five, thank you.
And Lot number ninety three  Lot number ninety three is the Buddha 
There we are, there's the Buddha up, up here on my left  there it is showing for five hundred pounds  at five hundred pounds  I'm offered thank you, five hundred is bid, and fifty, six hundred and fifty  seven hundred and fifty  eight hundred  at eight hundred pounds, all done at eight hundred pounds, I'm selling for eight hundred, any further bids at eight hundred pounds?
Any more at eight hundred pounds?
Are you bidding?
At eight hundred pounds to my right.
Thank you, eight hundred pounds.
Two O five, the same buyer.
Lot number ninety four 
Showing here on your left sir 
Lot number ninety four  showing here on my left there's there you are showing for you  Lot number ninety four  and I have two thousand offered for them, at two thousand pounds I'm bid, at two thousand two hundred, four hundred, two thousand four, two thousand six  two thousand eight, three thousand  three thousand two hundred, three thousand five  three thousand eight  four thousand, four thousand two hundred  four thousand five hundred  at four thousand five hundred, four thousand eight hundred  five thousand pounds  five thousand five hundred  six thousand  six thousand    seven thousand to my left and selling for seven thousand pounds, anybody else?
At seven thousand, it's yours for seven thousand pounds.
Thank you, the lady to my left, seven thousand and that's for number  eighty hundred and seventy, thank you.
Eight seventy the last.
Lot number ninety five, Lot number ninety five, the cabinet 
Showing here against the wall  
the cabinet, there it is  showing on the left-hand wall there, Lot number ninety five is showing  for a hundred pounds, at one hundred and ten, twenty  at one hundred and twenty pounds  at a hundred and thirty, forty, fifty, sixty  one seventy for the lady sir  one eighty standing  one ninety  two hundred, two twenty for the lady  two hundred and twenty, two forty  two sixty  two hundred and sixty and it's still with the lady and selling for two hundred and sixty pounds  eight forty, thank you, two sixty.
Lot number ninety six  Lot number ninety six  there we are, we've got this showing here now Lot number ninety six  at eighty pounds, at eighty, eighty five, ninety, ninety five is offered  I'm offered ninety five, anybody round it off for me?
At ninety five, all done?
At ninety five and selling for ninety five pounds, you all done?
At ninety five.
Thank you, eighty four, ninety five pounds.
Lot number ninety seven, ninety seven, the lacquered panel  there it is, showing here on my left  showing at two hundred pounds, at two hundred pounds and twenty, at two hundred and twenty pounds  any more at two twenty, all done?
Two forty, thank you, at two sixty  carrying on, sir?
Two eighty, three hundred  and twenty, three fifty  three eighty to my left  I'm offered three hundred and eighty pounds, I'll take three eighty if there's no further bid at three hundred and eighty pounds.
Thank you, eight hundred and twenty, three eighty.
Lot number ninety eight  Lot number ninety eight  a cloisonne dish  we have that showing on my right this time, there we are  eighty for that  at eighty pounds  at eighty pounds, any more at eighty only, at eighty pounds, all done?
At eighty, eighty five, ninety  ninety five, a hundred pounds  and ten  going to you at the back, going on, sir?
You going on?
One ten, here on my left  at a hundred and ten and selling for one ten.
A hundred and ten, it's yours, sir.
Two one two, thank you.
Lot number ninety nine  Lot number ninety nine  cloisonne vases, we've got one of them showing  there's one of them showing there, for three hundred pounds  and twenty, forty, sixty, three hundred and sixty, any more?
At three eighty, four hundred  coming in?
Four hundred pounds, and four twenty, four forty  at four hundred and forty I'm offered  at four hundred and forty pounds and selling  for four hundred and forty pounds against you all.
That's a commission bid for one O three, four forty.
Lot number one hundred  Lot one hundred is the belthook  there's the belthook showing.
For a hundred pounds  at one hundred and ten I'm bid, at one twenty, one thirty  at one hundred and thirty pounds  any more at one thirty, and selling  for a hundred and thirty pounds, you all done at one thirty.
One thirty and that's for one one eight.
Lot number one O one  Lot number one O one, the patinated vase  there's the patinated vase showing  at a hundred and fifty pounds, at one hundred and fifty pounds, one sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, two twenty to my left  two twenty is offered and selling for two twenty, two forty at the back  going, two sixty, thank you, two eighty at the back  two eighty, three hundred?
Three hundred?
Two eighty at the back, at two eighty, all done?
At two hundred and eighty pounds, any more at two ei any more?
Two, three hundred I'll take.
No.
Two eighty at the back, at two eighty  two eighty  er three five three.
Lot number one O two  Lot number one O two is the lacquered bottle vases  there's the bottle vases showing for, a hundred and fifty pounds, at sixty, seventy  one hundred and seventy pounds  at a hundred and seventy, one eighty, one ninety  two hundred is offered, two twenty  two forty, two sixty  any more, sir?
Two sixty against you near me  at two hundred and sixty pounds, you all finished?
At two hundred and sixty pounds  two hundred and sixty pounds.
Lot number one O three  Lot number one O three  for a hundred pounds  and ten, twenty  one twenty, any more at one hundred and twenty pounds,at one twen anybody else at one hundred and twenty pounds, any more?
One twenty.
Lot number one O four  Lot number one O four  military sword  there's the sword showing  for a hundred and fifty pounds, at one fifty, sixty, at one hundred and seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred, two twenty, two forty  two sixty bid  I'm offered two sixty and I shall sell at two sixty, any further bids?
At two sixty  thank you, sir, eight three two, two sixty.
Lot number one O five  Lot number one O five, the terracotta carvings  there's eight of them  there we are, all eight of them in the framed case  for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  and twenty, fifty, at three hundred and fifty pounds  any more at three fifty only, at three hundred and fifty, all done?
At three hundred and fifty pounds.
Three fifty.
Er Lot number one O six  Lot one O six, the opium set  there's the opium set showing  for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  any more at three hundred only, at three hundred and twenty, three fifty, three eighty  going on, sir?
Four hundred, four twenty  four twenty, any more?
Four twenty you're going to?
At four hundred and four fifty, four eighty  going on?
Four eighty  coming in?
Five hundred, five fifty  six hundred offered  I'm offered six hundred against you, six fifty  seven hundred  seven hundred to my left, at seven hundred pounds.
Yours, sir, thank you  seven hundred pounds 
two two one?
Thank you.
Two two one the last.
And Lot number one O seven, Lot number one O seven, the one-case inro  there's the inro  and I'm offered a hundred and fifty to start me, at one fifty, sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety  two hundred and twenty is bid, at two hundred and twenty is offered, selling  at two hundred and twenty, two forty, two sixty  two eighty, three hundred  and twenty, three fifty  three eighty  do you want to come in, sir?
Three eighty in front  at three eighty and selling for three eighty  thank you, it's yours, sir, for three eighty  and that's for number six  six one  six one two  six one two, thank you.
Lot number one O eight  Lot number one O eight 
Showing on your left  
There's the lamps showing  Lot number one O eight  there we are showing for twenty pounds  at twenty pounds for the lamps  at twenty pounds anyone  anyone want them?
For twenty pounds only.
Twenty pounds  anyone want them for twenty pounds?
No?
Twenty pounds?
Ten pounds?
No?
Thank you.
Lot number one O nine  Lot number one O nine  is er  the cake stand  there's the cake stand showing  there's the cake stand  for twenty pounds  at twenty pounds again, anybody want it?
For twenty pounds  twenty pounds  don't you want it for twenty?
Twenty pounds only, ten pounds, at ten pounds, thank you, ten is offered and I shall sell at ten if there's no further bid, at ten pounds.
The lady's offer, thank you, ten pounds and that's for number 
six eleven, thank you.
Lot number one hundred and ten  one hundred and ten is the bucket-shaped saki pot and cover  there's the pot and cover for ten pounds  at ten pounds, fifteen at the back now  fifteen is offered and selling for fifteen only, at fifteen pounds, you all done?
At fifteen.
Yours.
sir, thank you, fifteen pounds and that's eight five three.
Lot number one eleven  one eleven  chess board  there's the chess board  thank you, a folding chess board for ten pounds  at ten pounds I'm offered, thank you, fifteen in front  twenty at the back, twenty five in front  going on, sir?
Twenty five, any more?
Thirty pounds  at thirty pounds, any more?
At thirty in the back row  at thirty pounds.
Thirty pounds and that is for number  six O three.
Lot number one hundred and twelve, Lot number one hundred and twelve   gentlemen, it's the bamboo picnic baskets, there we are, there's the picnic baskets showing in the front here  for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds, anyone want them for three hundred pounds?
Two hundred pounds I want  at two hundred pounds  at two hundred pounds, anyone want them?
At two hundred only, at two hundred pounds  all done?
At two hundred.
Thank you.
Lot number one one three  Lot number one one three I'm now offering  there we are, the brush pot  there's the brush pot showing  for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  at three twenty, three fifty, three eighty, four hundred, and twenty, four fifty, four eighty, five hundred  and fifty  five fifty, six hundred for you, sir  six hundred, six twenty  six fifty  six hundred and fifty in the centre and selling for six eighty  seven hundred  and twenty  seventy fifty  seven eighty  eight hundred  and twenty  eight fifty  eight eighty  nine hundred  and twenty  nine twenty is bid on the left, at nine twenty and selling for nine hundred and twenty  thank you, sir, nine twenty and that's for number  eight four eight, thank you very much.
Lot number one one four, Lot number one one four  the kukri  there's the kukri showing  Lot number one one four for sixty pounds, at sixty, sixty five pounds, at seventy, seventy five, eighty is offered  eighty five, ninety  I'm offered ninety pounds, any more at ninety and selling for ninety pounds, if you're all finished, at ninety pounds.
Ninety pounds and that's for one eight two.
Lot number one one five, Lot number one one five  has a revised estimate  Lot number one one five, two fifty to three fifty for this one, Lot number one one five  and I have a hundred and fifty offered for it, one fifty, sixty, seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred and twenty  at two hundred and twenty pounds, all done?
At two fifty, thank you, at two fifty I've got  I shall sell for two fifty if there's no further bid at two hundred and fifty pounds.
Thank you.
Five two three, sir 
One two three, two fifty 
Five two three 
Five two three, I beg your pardon.
Lot number one one six  one one six, the celadon jade pendant  there's the jade pendant  for sixty pounds, at sixty pounds, at five, seventy, at seventy pounds  any more at seventy only?
At seventy, seventy five, eighty pounds  eighty five, ninety pounds  ninety five, a hundred  one hundred pounds against you, one ten to my right, against you at the back  one ten to my right, at one ten and selling for a hundred and ten.
Yours, sir, one ten, thank you.
Six O eight.
Lot number one one seven  Lot number one one seven is the next to offer  celadon jade er pendant  another jade pendant  for fifty pounds, at fifty, fifty five pounds  at fifty five pounds, any more at fifty five pounds only, at fifty five, sixty  sixty five  seventy I'm offered  I'm offered seventy to my left and I shall take seventy pounds, any more at seventy??
Seventy pounds, it's yours, sir.
Eight four five
Eight four five, thank you.
Lot number one one eight  one one eight, the opium weights  there's the opium weights showing  Lot number one one eight, fifty for these, at fifty, fifty five pounds, at fifty five pounds, any more at sixty, sixty five, seventy, seventy five  eighty in front, eighty five  ninety in front  ninety pounds, going on?
Ninety five  one hundred pounds  and ten  one twenty  one twenty against you  one twenty in the second row  at one hundred and twenty pounds  eight three three, thank you, one twenty.
Lot number one one nine  Lot number one one nine is the next to offer  globular jars  and there are two in the lot, we have one showing  fifty pounds for the two of them  thank  fifty pounds?
Eh?
Fifty pounds anyone?
Nobody want them?
Thank you, fifty is offered.
I've got fifty pounds bid and I shall sell at fifty if there's no further bids at fifty pounds only  at fifty pounds, you all done at fifty?
Five two three, sir.
Five two three, fifty pounds, thank you.
Lot number one hundred and twenty  Lot number one twenty  there it is at the back on the left, one twenty  right at the back there for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds, any more at three hundred only?
At three hundred pounds, anyone want it?
For three hundred pounds, have you all finished, at three hundred pounds.
Lot number one two one  Lot number one two one  the gilt-bronze figure  there's the gilt-bronze figure showing  for two hundred pounds, and twenty, two forty, sixty, two eighty, three hundred and twenty I'm bid, at three twen three fifty, three eighty now  coming in ?
Four hundred pounds  four hundred pounds, four twenty to you, sir  four fifty  four eighty  five hundred  any more?
Five hundred against you  any more?
For five hundred pounds standing at five hundred, all done at five hundred pounds.
Thank you, five hundred for number two O nine?
Yes?
Two O nine.
Lot number one two two  Lot number two  one two two, the gold lacquer shrine  there's the shrine showing  there it is for five hundred pounds  at five hundred pounds  at five hundred pounds  at five hundred pounds, any more at five hundred only, at five , you all done?
Opening offer at five hundred pounds  thank you, Lot number one two two A 
one two two A is the Tibetan bell, it's in front of the rostrum here  it's in front of the rostrum at two hundred pounds  at two hundred, two twenty, at two hundred and twenty pounds  two hundred and twenty pounds  you all done at two twenty?
Anybody else?
At two hundred and twenty pounds.
Two twenty.
Lot number one two three  Lot number one two three  there it is, Lot number one two three  for a hundred and fifty pounds, at one fifty, one sixty, one seventy, one eighty, one ninety, two hundred pounds, two twenty offered, at two twenty to my left standing, at two twenty, anybody else?
At two forty  two sixty  two eighty  three hundred  three twenty  three fifty  three eighty  four hundred  four twenty  four fifty  four eighty  five hundred  five hundred is offered, standing at five hundred pounds and selling for five hundred pounds.
Five hundred pounds and that is for number eight three two.
Lot number one two four  Lot number one two four  there it is, Lot number one two four  a hundred for this one, and ten is bid, at one hundred and ten pounds, at one hundred and ten pounds, any more, one twenty, one thirty  going on, sir?
One forty, one fifty  one sixty, coming in Jim?
One sixty in the back row  at one sixty and selling  for a hundred and sixty, one seventy standing  one eighty  one ninety  one ninety, two hundred pounds  any more?
Two hundred pounds against the lady, at two hundred and selling for two hundred pounds  thank you, sir, it's yours for two hundred, that's eight five four.
Lot number one two five, Lot number one two five, an Indian dagger  there's the dagger  for fifty pounds, at fifty, fifty five, sixty, sixty five, seventy  seventy five, eighty pounds  eighty five, ninety pounds  ninety pounds against you, sir, at ninety, ninety five standing, a hundred pounds against you, at one hundred and ten standing  at a hundred and ten pounds on my right, standing at one ten.
Thank you, a hundred and ten pounds for number six one O.
Lot number one two six  Lot number one two six is a silver bowl  there's the silver bowl  fifty for this, at fifty, fifty five pounds  at sixty, five, seventy offered  I'm offered seventy to my left, at seventy, seventy five  eighty pounds  eighty five  ninety  ninety five  ninety fi one hundred offered  one ten  one ten to my right seated, at one ten, all done at one hundred and ten?
Thank you, the lady's bid, one ten and that's for number six one e six eleven.
Lot number one two seven  Lot number one two seven, an okimono  the okimono for four hundred pounds  and fifty, at four hundred and fifty pounds  at four hundred and fifty pounds, any more at four fifty, all done?
At four hundred and fifty pounds  any more at four hundred and five hundred, thank you, and fifty  fi going on, sir?
Five fifty against you at the back  at five hundred and fifty pounds, you all done at five fifty.
Five hundred and fifty pounds.
Lot number one two eight  one two eight, an okimono  there we are, another one showing for three hundred pounds  at three hundred pounds  any more at three hundred pounds, you all done?
Opening offer at three twenty, three forty  going on sir?
Three sixty, three eighty  four hundred, four twenty  four twenty  coming in now, sir?
Four fifty, thank you  four fifty standing at four fifty and selling for four fifty, all done?
At four hundred and fifty pounds, any more?
Eight four one, thank you, four fifty.
Lot number one hundred and twenty nine, an okimono  there's another one for you  for four hundred pounds and fifty, at four hundred and fifty pounds  at four hundred and fifty, five hundred, five fifty  going on, sir?
Five fifty against you, any more?
At five hundred and fifty pounds, if you're all finished at five fifty.
Five fifty.
Lot number one hundred and thirty  Lot one thirty  a koro  koro and cover, there it is  a hundred and fifty pounds, at one fifty, one sixty now  one hundred and sixty pounds, all done at one sixty?
Anybody else?
At one hundred and sixty pounds, any more at one sixty?
One sixty.
Lot number one hundred and thirty one  Lot number one three one is the container  sutra container, there it is  for two hundred pounds, at two hun , two twenty, at two hundred and twenty offered, at two hundred and twenty pounds  any more at two twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred, three twenty bid  I'm offered three twenty and I'll take three twenty, any further bids at three twenty?
Thank you, three twenty and that's for number  two hundred.
Lot number one three two  Lot number one three two  is showing for you, Lot number one three two for thirty pounds, at thirty, thirty five, forty, forty five, fifty pounds, fifty five standing  at fifty five I've got and I shall sell at fifty five, sixty in front  sixty, sixty five pounds  seventy  going on?
Seventy five  any more?
Seventy five against you, are you coming in now, sir?
Seventy five pounds standing at seventy five, all done at seventy five.
Eight four one, seventy five pounds.
Lot number one three three  one three three is the sword rack  there's the sword rack showing  for two hundred pounds  at two hun two twenty, two forty, two sixty, two eighty, three hundred bid  I'm offered three hundred pounds and ta I shall take it at three hundred pounds, anybody else?
At three hundred pounds I'm selling for three hundred.
Three hundred pounds, number seventy six.
Lot number one three four, one three four  is the pipe  there's Lot number one three four  at eighty pounds, at eighty, eighty five, ninety five  at a hundred pounds and ten  one ten  one twenty, thirty  one thirty, forty, fifty  one fifty, one sixty offered  I'm offered a  