

Introduction
The questions at the end of each chapter have been designed to assist students to test that the reading has been understood before moving on to the next chapter.
The answers and commentary given below are intended to provide Tutors with an insight into the way in which these questions and the approach underlying the design of the review questions and problems for discussion have been successfully used by the authors and others with a number of different groups of students.
Review questions
As we have indicated in the text the exercises at the end of each chapter are divided into a number of categories.
The first of these is the Review questions.
These are intended to ensure that the main points in the chapter have been absorbed and provide a basic check for the lecturer and the student to ensure that the basic tools are there to enable the student to tackle the problems for discussion with a reasonable grounding in the subject.
The answers which we have provided below are indicative.
In some cases these are taken directly from the text, and where this is not directly possible some suggestions are made.
These answers should not be viewed as the ‘right answer’ and we would suggest that wherever possible the students are encouraged to use their own words and find their own examples as this will enhance their learning immeasurably.
Problems for discussion
The problems for discussion and solving have been designed to encourage students to discuss the issues before attempting to answer the technical side of the problem.
In many cases the issues raised are contentious and there is more than one answer possible.
These questions are designed to encourage debate and make students aware that in a world of uncertainty accounting is not able to provide the definitive answer.
As potential managers they will be better equipped to deal with the complexities of management if they realize that accounting is based on judgement and not on absolutes.
It is therefore in many ways more akin to an art rather than a science.
Whilst we may all have our own ideas about how far accounting is an art or a science, hopefully the book and the exercises will provide the basis for a stimulating debate on the issue for both the students and for the lecturers.
This has certainly been the experience of the authors and a number of other staff who have adopted this approach on their courses.
More importantly it has also been the experience of the many students on whom the approach, exercises and problems have been piloted over the last four years.
Case studies
Throughout the text there are case studies which are designed to illustrate to students the relevance of the subject matter contained in the text.
For example, Chapter 1 contains extracts from the annual reports of British Coal and the Independent  Broadcasting Authority.
We have not provided any questions specifically based upon these case studies but they provide a valuable base for further questions and exercises for students.
These could either take the form of specific questions on the material contained in the case studies or they may be used to provide the base for students to be set exercises involving library research.
As an illustration in the case of the British Coal case study (see p 11 of the text) students could be asked how the reporting in terms of‘the progress in respect of minimising the impacts of new mines on the environment’ could be improved.
Alternatively they could be set an exercise to find examples in annual reports and elsewhere of environmental reporting from a range of organizations or industries such as the Oil industry, the Chemical industry etc.
Chapter 1
Review questions
1.
For what purposes is accounting information used?
a)
by the individual
Answer guide: To help them control the level of their expenditure, to assist in planning future levels of expenditure, to help them raise additional finance (e g. mortgages, hire-purchase etc.), and to help them decide the best way to spend their money.
b)
by the enterprise
Answer guide: To control the activities of the organisation, to plan future activities, to assist in raising finance and to report upon the activities and performance of the enterprise to interested parties.
2.
Who are the users of accounting information and which accounting reports do they normally use?
Answer guide: In general for external users the answer to this is the Annual Report or Accounts.
Where specific reports such as the balance sheet or profit and loss account are mentioned in the body of the text these are shown below.
Management — Various reports including specialist reports
Owners — Annual Report
Lenders — Profit and Los account, balance sheet
Suppliers — Annual Report, balance sheet
Customers — Profit and loss account, balance sheet
Employees — Profitability therefore profit and loss account
Government — Profit and loss account
The Public — Profitability therefore profit and loss account
3.
What are the needs of internal users?
Can you identify any other needs of internal users?
If so can you suggest how these would be met?
Answer guide: Needs identified in the text are the need for information to enable management to carry out its duties and responsibilities in terms of stewardship, planning, control and decision making.
The second part of the question should provoke a number of different answers perhaps related to the market for their product, competition, the economic situation etc.
We have found that by encouraging the students to think about these alternative information needs and the sources from which information can be derived, they are better able to see their accounting studies and the role of accounting in a wider context.
4.
What are the limitations of accounting information?
Answer guide:
(a)
That the information is only a part of that necessary to make  ‘effective decisions’.
(b)
That accountancy is as yet an inexact science and depends on a number of judgements, estimates, etc.
(c)
That the end result of the accounting process can only be as good as the inputs and in times of rising prices some of these inputs are of dubious value.
(d)
That accounting systems can be counter-productive for example the maximization of a division's profit may not always ensure the maximization of enterprise profit.
5.
For certain of the limitations examples were given can you give examples of your own?
Answer guide: Numerous examples are acceptable.
Ideas such as exclusion of certain items such as good reputation, brand names, technical know-how can be used to provoke discussion.
6.
What are the major determinants of a useful accounting system?
Answer guide: Once again a number of alternative answers are acceptable here.
However, the final summary should include some if not all of the following: the provision of information that is useful in terms of meeting the needs of users, presented in a timely manner and in a format that is appropriate and understandable.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
It was pointed out that accounting information is only a part of the input to the decision making process.
In order to expand your understanding of the role of accounting information, for the situation outlined below:
Head & Co. was in business making navigation equipment and wished to diversify into the production of hang gliders.
The existing business is based in London but the owners may be willing to move.
The owners have little knowledge about the market for hang gliders but feel that there is money to be made in that field.
a)
identify the accounting information that would be relevant ,
Answer guide: Examples are: selling price, costs of manufacture, set up costs, marketing costs, etc.
b)
identify any other information that would be relevant.
Answer guide: Examples are: size of market, competitors, technical specifications, etc.
2.
Tack was left some money in his mother's will and decided that he should give up his job and go in to business for himself.
Whilst the lawyers were still sorting out his mothers estate he started looking round for a suitable business.
After a short while he identified a small bacon-curing business that he felt was worth investing in.
He was still uncertain how  much his mother had left him but thought it was probably between £40,000 and £50,000.
The bacon-curing business was for sale for £l00,000 so assuming that he could finance the remainder he engaged an accountant to check over the books of the existing business and report back to him.
As proof of his good faith he deposited with the business agents the sum of £1,000 pounds which he had in savings.
The report from the accountant confirmed his initial impression that the business was worth investing in so he paid the accountants modest fee of £500 in full.
At this stage he discussed his plans more fully with his bank manager who was duly impressed with the professional approach taken by Tack.
His bank manager pointed out that Tack had no business experience and as such was a high risk from the banks point of view.
However, in view of their long-standing relationship the bank was prepared to take a chance and said that it would lend Tack 40% of the purchase price.
On the basis of this Tack signed a conditional agreement to buy the bacon curing business.
A short while after this he received from the lawyers a letter stating that his inheritance from his mother amounted to only £30,000.
He could not raise the additional finance to purchase the bacon-curing business so withdrew from the agreement, recovered his £1,000 deposit and purchased a yacht with the intention of doing charter work to the Caribbean.
You are required to discuss the point at which, in your opinion, the accounting process should begin, giving reasons for your point of view.
You should pay particular attention to the dual needs of Tack as an owner and as a manager.
Answer guide: There is no ‘right’ answer to this problem as in effect until the yacht charter business was purchased there is no separate business entity.
However, there is clearly a need for Tack to account for expenditure as an individual.
It is worth posing additional questions to promote discussion some that have been found to be useful are: If there had been no problem with the purchase of the bacon-curing business what would you have done with the £500 paid to the accountant?
Would you have a different answer if Tack was already in an established business looking for areas to expand or to diversify into?
Chapter 2
Review questions
1.
Profit is normally seen as a flow over time whereas wealth can be described as a stock at a point in time.
Explain in your own words the difference between a stock and a flow.
Answer guide: The answers to this should encapsulate the idea of the static nature of a stock measure, and the way in which that differs from the dynamic nature of measures covering periods of time.
2.
There are a number of different ways in which we can measure wealth.
List the alternatives discussed in the chapter together with any drawbacks or problems that were identified with their use.
Answer guide: The alternatives and the drawbacks identified were:
— Original cost: identification of original cost as cost to whom.
— Historic cost: reductions in value, increases in prices
— Replacement Cost: specialist items, changes in technology leading to non-replacement
— Economic value: problems of forecasting the future, the choice of appropriate discount rates
— Net Realizable value: do we want to sell, is it a forced sale or at open market value.
3.
In certain situations we said that written-down cost could be used as an alternative.
Explain in your own words the difference between cost and written-down cost and suggest when the latter would be more appropriate.
Answer guide: Answers should show an understanding that assets are used up over time and that this fact is not reflected merely by stating an asset at cost.
The example used in the chapter which students could be directed to is the car.
We have found that they can understand the idea of written-down cost if they are directed towards examples with which they are familiar.
4.
What effects, is any, do rapid changes in technology have on the appropriateness of each of the alternative ways Or putting a cost or a value to an item.
Answer Guide: Historic cost — normally technology will lower prices as better alternatives are available and in this situation unadjusted historic cost will overstate the asset worth.
Replacement cost — changes in technology will lead to two effects.
The asset is likely to be replaced with a technologically superior asset and as such the replacement cost of the asset held will be difficult to establish even if it was still appropriate.
Economic value — as this is based on future cash flows from the asset the economic value is likely to be reduced.
Net Realizable value — once again this is likely to reduce with a change in technology.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
It may be that under certain circumstances one of the alternative methods of valuation is the most appropriate.
Giving brief reasons for your choice, for each of the following situations suggest the most appropriate value to be placed on each item:
Jean owns a shop which used to sell clothes but she has now decided that given the location she would make more money running a restaurant at the same premises.
She has obtained planning permission for the change of use and has bought some of the equipment needed but has not yet started trading.
She has made a list of the items the business owns.
Answer guide: The way in which this question is designed to be used is to allow students to think through the alternatives and for the tutor to tease out some of the underlying assumptions and test the students understanding.
It also serves to reinforce the idea that if accounting is to reflect economic reality it is unlikely to be able to do so using only one cost/value measure.
(a)
Freehold shop — This could be economic value or historic cost.
Students' attention should be drawn to the problems inherent in calculating the economic value of a business that has not started and to the problems with historic cost in changing economic conditions.
This may lead to the conclusion that Net realizable value based on open market value may be more appropriate.
(b)
Hanging display rail for clothes — This is likely to have limited, if any usefulness to the new business and therefore it is likely to be sold, thus under these assumptions Net realizable value is likely to be most appropriate.
(c)
A two year old car which is essential for the business — The fact that it is essential for the business would seem to rule out NRV whilst the fact that it is two years old would suggest that original cost is inappropriate.
This leaves as possible choices Economic value which may be difficult to ascertain, Replacement cost of a similar vehicle, written-down cost, and historic cost.
In the case of the latter it is important that students are made aware of which historic cost is appropriate; ie. cost to the restaurant business not cost to the clothes shop.
(d)
New restaurant tables and chairs — In this case Replacement cost is likely to equal historic cost so either of these would be acceptable as would economic value.
In the case of net realizable value the tutor can use this as an opportunity to explain that there are costs associated with sale which will mean that this value is lower than the price paid for the tables and chairs.
This is of course exacerbated by the fact that they are now second hand.
(e)
Cash till — Like the car and the freehold property this can be used in the new business so net realizable value is unlikely to be appropriate.
The example is chosen because unlike the freehold and the car the market for used cash tills is not so visible and as such establishing replacement cost of a used till may not be so easy.
This example can also be used to illustrate the problems associated with establishing historic cost and written-down cost; what is the economic life of a till?
(f)
Quantity of fashion garments that were not sold in the closing down sale — At first sight the basis that looks obvious is the net realizable value.
However, students attention should be drawn to the fact that these were not sold in the closing down sale so open market value may not be appropriate even if it could be established.
2.
In the example of Alex in the chapter no allowance was made for the fact that an item had been in use for some time.
Whilst it is intuitively obvious that the utility of most things declines over time, it is more difficult to identify the extent of that decline over a given period.
In addition even if we could identify the decline in utility and the utility remaining we still have to assign some monetary amount to both parts.
We said in the chapter that this was done through the medium of arriving at a written-down cost or value.
For each of the following situations suggest, with reasons, the best method for arriving at the written-down cost or value.
(a)
A machine which will produce 10,000 items and then need to be replaced.
Production each year is to be matched to sales and estimates of sales are 1,000 units in year one, 2,500 units in year two.
Sales in the years after that cannot be forecast with any accuracy.
Answer guide: The point being illustrated here is that although we have been told the finite life of the machine and we are aware of the reasons for the loss in utility we still have to make estimates of when the machine will cease to be useful.
The example can be used to explore ideas such as a fast write down to offset the effects of uncertainty, the basis on which estimates are made, etc.
(b)
A leasehold property on a five year non-renewable lease.
Answer guide: In this case the uncertainty is mitigated as the life is clearly known and it is also clear that the loss in utility relates to time.
Tutors may wish to explore the effects of uncertainty such as the business closing down, or no longer needing the premises for other reasons, and use this to introduce the idea of the going concern concept.
(c)
A company car.
Answer guide: This is a useful example of the problems of identifying what it is that causes the reduction in utility ie. in this case mileage or time.
The fact that new cars are normally sold with a guarantee that includes both mileage and time is a useful illustration of the dilemma.
(d)
A microcomputer.
Answer guide: The reason for choosing this example is that this particular area is subject to rapid changes in technology which make estimation of useful life extremely difficult as in many cases there is still utility in the asset but it has been superseded by a ‘better’ alternative.
(e)
Computer software
Answer guide: This example serves to illustrate the problem already identified with the microcomputer as the software has high development costs but can be superseded either by new versions of the same software as is the case for Lotus 123, Word Perfect, etc.
It may also be superseded because the hardware is replaced with hardware that is not compatible with the software.
3.
Two brothers decided to go into business buying and selling beds.
Details of their transactions are set out in the case study below.
They initially bought 400 beds at £100 each and a delivery van for £6,000.
At the end of six months they had sold 300 of the 400 beds for £150 each.
Unfortunately the bed manufacturer had during that time increased the price to £120 each and this was their only source of supply.
To make matters worse a discount store had opened in the area and it was selling the same beds at £140 each.
The brothers found that on average over the six months they had incurred costs for advertising, petrol etc. which amounted to £10 for each bed sold.
On the basis of the information above, calculate what the brothers' wealth was at the start and end of the six months and what profit had been made.
Answer guide: The calculation of the opening wealth here is straightforward as the historic cost, replacement cost, and net realizable value can be judged to be effectively the same.
However, the question is designed to raise problems in terms of the wealth at the end of the period as here the historic cost of the beds is £100 per bed, the replacement cost is £l20 and the net realizable value is £130.
Thus a number of alternative answers are possible and acceptable.
The answers using historic cost, replacement cost and net realizable value basis are as follows.
Profit calculations
These are done using the formula Wealth 1 — Wealth 0 as illustrated in the chapter as this is the only way of calculating profit to which the students have been exposed to date.
Historic cost £58,000 -£46,000 = £12,000
Replacement cost £60,000 -£46,000 = £14,000
Net Realizable value £61,000 -£46,000 = £15,000
4.
Having calculated the profit for the first six months discuss whether the profit figure is a useful benchmark for measuring the performance of the business, and also whether it is useful as a guide to future profitability.
Answer guide: The point that needs to be illustrated here is that depending on the valuation basis used the profit changes.
The students should be encouraged to identify what the profit per bed is likely to be next year, i.e. based on the conditions at the end of the year it is likely to be only £10 per bed.
This is arrived at by taking the selling price prevailing at the end of the year £140 less the costs per bed of advertising, delivery etc. of £10 making a net selling price of £130, and taking off the cost of beds at the end of the period, i.e. £120.
Thus if they sold the same number of beds next year they would only make £3,000 assuming they bought all those beds at the current price.
You may wish to illustrate the effect on that profit of having 100 beds in stock which were bought at £100.
The point that is being made is that in this situation none of the profit figures are a guide to the future.
As far as their usefulness as a measure of performance the conclusion that should be reached is that none is superior as we can only measure performance by comparison.
Chapter 3
Review questions
1.
What are the essential elements of a useful definition of an asset?
Answer guide:
(a)
Future benefits.
(b)
Accruing to the enterprise.
(c)
Measurable in monetary units.
(d)
Legal rights to use.
2.
What are the deficiencies, if any, in the following definition of an asset: ‘Assets are the things a business owns.’
Answer guide: No mention of future benefits; this means that an obsolete piece of equipment would be classified as an asset under this definition.
Also ownership is not the measure of whether something is an asset or not — substance over form — the case of leasing is a good example of how in contemporary accounting practice the idea of legal ownership is no longer seen as vital.
3.
What are the essential elements of a useful definition of a fixed asset?
Answer guide:(a) Purpose of acquisition is to use in the business.
(b) Use will continue for a substantial period.
4.
Explain in your own words the difference between fixed assets and current assets and why it is important to classify assets into subgroups.
Answer guide: Answers should contain the following elements: fixed assets are for use in the business and are long term; on the other hand current assets are essentially short term.
Classification gives a guide to liquidity.
5.
Explain in your own words what a liability is, and the differences between liabilities and owners' equity.
Answer guide: The answers should show that the student understands that liabilities are amounts owed by the business to third parties whereas the owners' equity can be viewed as an amount the business owes to the owners.
Note: We have deliberately avoided the idea that owners' equity relates to the owners' investment in the business as with the historic cost model this is fraught with obvious difficulties.
6.
What is the purpose of a balance sheet and what information does it contain.
Answer guide: It is a list of assets less liabilities with the owners' equity being the residual figure.
It is a snapshot at one point in time and is therefore only relevant to that point in time.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
Prepare a balance sheet from the following information and comment on the position of the business as shown by that balance sheet.
note: The question has been set up so that there is a situation where the current liabilities exceed the current assets in order to allow an explanation of how dangerous this can be in terms of risk.
The business in the example, it should be pointed out, is likely to be a retailer as there is no manufacturing capacity in the fixed assets and thus an opportunity is provided for the teacher to explore with the students the expected differences in the structure of assets and liabilities between different industries.
2.
In each of the following situations identify whether the item should be included in the balance sheet of Transom Trading at 31 December 1991, and if so at what amount and under which heading.
Transom Trading is a retailer of motor spares and accessories.
In all cases reasons for your decision must be given.
Answer guide: This question has been designed to illustrate the business entity principle, the fact that a balance sheet represents a snapshot at one point in time and some of the difficulties encountered in deciding what should be included in a balance sheet.
Students should therefore be encouraged to debate the issues before moving on to the next question.
We will now examine each item in turn and point up some of the main arguments.
At the end of the discussion of each item we will indicate the decisions on which the answer to question 3 is based.
(a)
A freehold shop bought in August 1991 for £38,000.
Answer guide: As some future benefit is likely and the business is a retailer thus this is likely to be a business asset and should be included in the balance sheet.
(Include.)
(b)
A mortgage of £30,000 taken out to buy the shop in August 1991.
Answer guide: If the business owns the shop it also owes this money and therefore has a liability, in this case it is a long term liability.
(Include.)
(c)
Goods on the shelves at the end of the day on 31 December 1991.
These goods had a resale value of £12,000 and had been purchased by Transom Trading for £8,000.
Answer guide: Once again there is likely to be a future benefit to the business therefore we have a business asset.
The next question is which figure to include.
The realization principle should be brought out in the discussion of this asset.
(Include at £8,000.)
(d)
Delivery van, costing £6,000, which Transom Trading ordered on 20 December 1991 but which was finally delivered and paid for on 2 January 1992.
Answer guide: The point here is that at the date of the balance sheet the business did not own the asset nor had it any right to its use as all that had happened at that date was an order had been placed which could easily be cancelled.
The legal situation regarding contract law can be explored in this example so providing a link with other subjects being studied.
(Do not include.)
(e)
Shop fittings which were worth £3,000 and had been bought at an auction by Transom Trading for only £1,500 prior to opening the shop in August 1991.
Answer guide: The issues brought out here are the question of whether cost or value is to be included and whether the fact that the asset was acquired prior to opening the shop is relevant.
(Include at £1,500.)
(f)
A Ford Fiesta costing £3,500 which the owner of Transom Trading had bought in November 1991 for his wife to use.
He had found that the Ford Granada Estate which he had bought second-hand in September for £4,000 was being used exclusively for collecting and delivering goods for Transom Trading and not as a family car as originally intended.
Answer guide: The points being illustrated are the business entity.
In the case of the Fiesta used by the spouse this is not a business asset.
The case of the Granada is different as it is being used in the business exclusively and giving the business some benefit.
Tutors may wish to explore how it would be treated if it was used for the business and for family use to illustrate that these decisions are not always so clear cut.
(Include Granada at £4,000.
Do not include the Fiesta.)
(g)
One cash register which was rented from Equipment Supplies at an annual rental of £200.
Answer guide: In this case the future benefit to be obtained is difficult to judge and may not exceed the rental.
The item does not therefore classify as an asset of the business, rather it is an asset of the business renting it to Transom.
(Do not include.)
(h)
One cash register which Transom Trading had bought in November 1991 for £600.
Answer guide: In this case Transom owns the cash register and is likely to get a benefit in the future from its use.
(Include.)
(i)
A bank overdraft which amounted to £6,500 on 31 December 1991.
Answer guide: Here Transom owes money to the bank which the bank can demand is repaid immediately.
The item therefore conforms to the definition of a current liability.
(Include.)
(j)
A supply of seat belts which the owner of Transom Trading had bought for £600 in September from a market trader in good faith and which were subsequently found to be defective.
Answer guide: In this case Transom has incurred a cost but there is no future benefit because Transom cannot sell defective seat belts.
Tutors might like to explore the question of whether anything could be included in the balance sheet if Transom was able to return these to its supplier.
(Do not include.)
Note: In the answer below these are assured not to be included in the stock of goods for resale on the shelves.
3.
Using the information in 2 above calculate the owners equity and draw up the balance sheet of Transom Trading as at 31 December 1991.
4.
Fred owns a garage and has tried to get everything together ready for the business accounts to be drawn up.
He has drawn up the list of items below.
You are required to identify with reasons the balance sheet heading under which each item should be classified, and the amount at which it should be included.
(a)
A motor car bought for resale at a cost of £3,500 the retail price of which was £5,000.
Answer guide: There is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is not a fixed asset as there is no intention to use it in the business.
It is likely to be converted into cash and is part of the operating cycle therefore a current asset.
Include at cost to the business £3,500.
Balance Sheet of Transom trading as as 31 December 1991
(b)
Various loose tools for car repairs which cost £700.
Answer guide: There is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is a fixed asset as there is an intention to  use it in the business.
Include at cost £700.
Tutors may wish to explore the fact that in many cases these are not included in business accounts on the basis of materiality and cost/benefit of keeping track of them.
(c)
Two hydraulic jacks which had each cost £120.
Answer guide: There is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is a fixed asset as there is an intention to use it in the business.
Include at cost £120 each, i.e. £240.
(d)
Freehold premises which had cost £40,000.
Answer guide: Assuming these are the business premises there is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is a fixed asset as there is an intention to use it in the business.
Include at cost £40,000.
(e)
The cost of digging and finishing a pit for repairs £600.
Answer guide: Here the situation is less clear; there is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is a fixed asset as there is an intention to use it in the business.
Include at cost £600.
(f)
Spare parts held as a general stock having originally cost £790.
Answer guide: There is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
Although there is an intention to use these parts in the business they are essentially part of the operating cycle of the business and should be treated as current assets.
Include at cost £790.
(g)
Spare parts bought from the previous owner when the garage was bought.
At that time the value was agreed at £600 but it was subsequently discovered that only £200 of these spares were of any use.
Answer guide: As with item (f) above the question of the cost is important to discuss in terms of what future benefit is likely to accrue to the business.
Include at £200.
(h)
Breakdown truck which cost £3,000 for the basic truck and £600 to have the crane fitted.
Answer guide: There is likely to be a future benefit therefore we have an asset.
It is a fixed asset as there is an intention to use it in the business.
The discussion should explore whether the cost of having the crane fitted should be included and the point that the business will derive a future benefit from having a crane on its breakdown truck should be made.
Include at cost of £3,600.
(i)
A customers car worth £1,500 which was being held because the customer had not paid an outstanding bill of £300.
Answer guide: The point here is that the business has no legal right to the car at this point in time.
It does, however, have a right to payment of the bill of £300.
The maximum amount that can be included therefore is £300.
What needs to be explored with the students is the effect of uncertainty on whether an asset should be included or not.
(j)
Fred's own car which cost £4,000.
This is used mainly for business but Fred also uses it in the evenings and at weekends for the family.
Answer guide: This is a difficult situation as the ownership of the car rests with Fred but the business is obtaining a benefit because the car is used mainly for the business.
The question of whether it is in fact an asset of the business or of Fred can be explored in more detail.
Note in the last example there was a similar situation except that in that case the car was being used exclusively for the business and in our answer we classified it as a business asset.
Clearly if we tried to apply a legal definition of ownership the asset belongs to Fred, however, unless the business is set up as a company in most countries the law does not recognize the separation of the business assets from those of the owner.
(k)
Customer goodwill which Fred reckons he has built up.
He thinks that this would be worth at least £7,000 if he sold the garage tomorrow.
Answer guide: The question that arises is whether there is a future benefit, and if so what that benefit is.
In other words is Fred's estimate right and what are the effects of uncertainty.
There is an opportunity to introduce the concept of prudence at this point.
(l)
A bank loan for £1,500 repayable within three months.
Answer guide: In this case the business owes the bank money which needs to be repaid in the short term.
Therefore we have a current liability.
NOTE: Due to a typesetting error this item was excluded from the question in the text.
(m)
A twenty year mortgage taken out on the property amounting to £24,000 has not been fully repaid.
The amount still outstanding is £18,000.
Answer guide: In this case the business has a liability as it owes money to the mortgage provider.
As mortgages tend to be for a long term and in view of the fact that 75% of the amount originally borrowed is still outstanding it is reasonable to classify this as a long-term liability.
Chapter 4
Review questions
Tutors note: It should be noted here that many of the answers relate to past versus future benefits.
Experience has shown that if the distinction between these two is reinforced at every opportunity students are very soon comfortable with the difference between assets and expenses and can relate to new and unusual situations.
1.
In your own words define revenue.
Answer guide: The important points that should be contained is that these relate to inflows from normal activities.
Students should be encouraged to discuss why the monies from sale of fixed assets should not be included as revenue in the context of user needs.
2.
At what point should revenue be recognized?
Answer guide: When the earnings process is substantially complete and payment is reasonably certain.
3.
In your own words define an expense.
Answer guide: The answer should contain the idea of an expired or past benefit.
4.
How does an expense differ from a cost?
Answer guide: The answer should point out that a cost can be incurred which will result in both an asset, i.e. something that has a future benefit, or an expense, i.e. something where the benefit has been used up.
5.
‘Expenses are always the same as costs for a period.’
Discuss the truth of this statement using examples to illustrate your argument.
Answer guide: The intention here is to reinforce the idea that costs of one period may be expenses of another period.
Examples could include prepayments, fixed assets, accruals, etc.
6.
What is the purpose of a profit and loss account and who would use it?
Answer guide: To provide a guide to the way in which a business has performed over a period of time.
It will be used by owners, and other users for making decisions in respect of continued investment in that enterprise and help them to form a judgement of managers' performance etc.
7.
Describe the difference between an expense and an asset.
Answer guide: An asset gives a future benefit whereas with an expense the benefit is used up.
8.
In what circumstances would it be inappropriate to recognize a cost as either an expense or an asset?
Answer guide: When the cost does not relate to the business, e.g. the purchase of private assets through the business bank account.
1.
In each of the following situations, discuss whether the item would be included in the profit and loss account for the year to 31 December 1990 and at what amount.
The business is that of a builder and builders' merchant.
Answer guide: As in previous examples after the discussion we have included the decision on which our profit and loss account provided as an answer question 2 is based.
(a)
Sales of general building materials by the builders merchant to third parties amounted to £26,000 of which £24,000 had been received in cash by 31 December 1990 and the remainder was received in January 1991.
Answer guide: The point to be made here is that the sales are to third parties, as the process is selling materials this is complete and the receipt of moneys is reasonably certain.
(Include as Sales £26,000.)
Note: No balance sheet entries need to be or should be discussed at this stage as the students have not yet been exposed to debtors etc.
Problems for discussion and analysis
(b)
Three house conversions were started and completed during the year at a price of £24,000 each.
These amounts were received in full by 31 December 1990.
Answer guide: Once again an application of the realization principle, here the process is complete and the payments received.
(Include Sales of £72,000.)
(c)
One office conversion which had been 60% complete at the end of 1989 was completed in 1990 at a price of £40,000.
Invoices on account amounting to £24,000 had been sent out in 1989.
Answer guide: In this case the problem is not whether to include the office conversion in sales but how much to include.
The answer will depend on what assumptions are made about whether the £24,000 invoiced in 1989 had been included in full or in part in the 1989 accounts.
(Include £16,000 as sales assuming £24,000 was in 1989 accounts.)
(d)
The building materials sold to third parties during the year had cost £14,000 of which all but £1,000 had been paid for by December 1990.
Answer guide: The question here i6 what should be included as the cost of goods sold.
The students need to understand that the timing of the payment is not relevant to the decision on whether  an expense is included in the profit and loss account.
(Include cost of £14,000.)
(e)
The building materials used on the three houses referred to in (b) above had cost £18,000 and had all been paid for by December 1990.
Answer guide: As these houses had been started and completed during the period all these materials are included under the matching principle.
(Include £18,000 as cost of materials.)
(f)
Wages paid in respect of the houses mentioned in b) above amounted to £20,000 for the year.
Answer guide: As these houses had been started and completed during the period all these wages are included under the matching principle.
(Include £20,000 as wages.)
(g)
As regards the office mentioned in (c) above the costs relating to that were:
Answer guide: This point should be used to illustrate the problems that arise when a trading cycle does not fit neatly into one year.
In this case we need to make some assumptions in order to proceed.
There are a number of possibilities available and some of these are discussed briefly below.
The easiest way to deal with the situation and the one which causes least problems to the students is to assume that the wages paid in 1989 and the materials used in 1989 were charged in 1989.
This we have done for our answer to question 2.
Another method is to allocate the total costs over the two years on the basis of work invoiced.
What is important is to explore these possibilities with the students and to use the example to illustrate the difficulty of the latter method if we try to apply it at the end of 1989 when the costs to completion are uncertain.
On the other hand the solution we have used is clearly sub-optimal in terms of a strict application of the matching principle.
(Include Wages £6,000 and materials £7,000.)
(h)
The storeman's wages in the yard amounted to £8,000 for the year.
Answer guide: This is an easy situation after the last one, here the wages are for the year and matching tells us they should be charged to this year.
(Include Wages £8,000.)
(i)
The owner who worked full time in the business paid himself a salary of £9,000 and also withdrew £1,000 in cash from the business to pay a pressing personal debt.
Answer guide: Once more a difficult situation to deal with.
If we apply the concept of accounting for a separate business entity  then there is no reason why the salary paid to the owner should be treated any differently from other salaries.
It is however worth exploring why in practice this is often not done.
The reasons for this are largely practical relating to Tax regulations rather than the underlying theoretical debate about the way in which by adjusting the owners salary the performance measure can be manipulated.
In the case of the cash withdrawal the case is much more clear cut as this is a personal transaction rather than a business transaction.
You may wish to explore whether had it been a business transaction it would have been included in the profit and loss account.
(Include Salary of £9,000 as expense.)
(j)
The motor expenses paid in the year were broken down as follows:
Answer guide: In the first two of these cases the question is how much to include, not whether the expenses should be included.
We have included one quarter at 1989 rates and three quarters at 1990 rates.
(Tax £285, Insurance £460, Repairs £600.)
Answer guide: These expenses are more controversial as there is a need to establish what is a business expense and what is not.
If we deal with the situation of the wife's car first, from the information provided there is nothing to indicate that she is involved in the business in any way so her car expenses could be said to be personal.
On the other hand the owner is clearly involved in the business and may well use his car for business the question is how much.
For our answer we have made an arbitrary assumption that he uses his car for 80% of the time for business and that half the repairs etc. relate to that car.
Any other assumption is just as valid; the point is to illustrate to students the difficulties and judgements involved.
(Include Tax £76, Insurance £92 and Petrol £320.
NB: Tax and insurance are based on one quarter at 1989 prices and three quarters at 1990 prices, all amounts are based on 80% apportioned to the business.)
(k)
The following bills were also paid during the year:
Answer guide: In the case of the TV licence it is unlikely to be a business expense.
In the case of the rent and electricity we can assume these are legitimate business expenses.
The rent should be based on one quarter from the 1989 payment and three quarters from 1990 but as there is no change in the rent over the two years the expense is the same.
For the electricity which is normally paid in arrears we should take ⅓ of the bill paid 1 February for January and make an estimate for the amount due for November and December.
If we do this we could take ⅔ of the last bill as being a reasonable estimate.
Once again it is more important to explore the problem with students than to come to an answer.
(On our assumptions we have included Rent of £400 and Electricity of £208 made up of ⅓ × £54 + 2 X £45 + 1 × £60 + ⅔ x £60.)
2.
Based upon your decisions, draw up a profit and loss account for 1990 using the information above.
Answer guide: NB.
The answer provided below is based upon the assumptions set out in the commentary on question 1 above and provides one possible answer.
It should not be used without reference to that commentary.
3.
There are two partners in AB & Co., an electrical retailer.
They each have withdrawn £5,000 from the business in cash  during the year.
B has also taken a washing machine which cost £200 and which had a selling price of £280 from the business for personal use.
A has been paid wages of £12,000 and B has been paid £6,000 in wages.
Discuss how each of the above should be dealt with in the accounts giving reasons for your decisions.
Answer guide: This question is designed to investigate the way in which decisions are made about how to deal with monies and goods withdrawn from a business by the owners.
It is intended to reinforce the lessons learnt in question 1.
Alternatively it can be done prior to question 1 to introduce the topic.
In the first situation all we have is the partners withdrawing cash from the business with no apparent input.
This can therefore be treated as a withdrawal rather than a business expense.
Similar logic applies to the second situation.
As far as the salaries are concerned the arguments on this have been set out in relation to item (i) in question 1 above.
Chapter 5
Review questions
1.
Describe in your own words what is meant by the concept of duality.
Answer guide: The answer should show an understanding that the both sides of the balance sheet equation must always be equal.
2.
In each of the following cases describe the two entries required on the worksheet.
Answer guide:
(a)
The owner pays £500 into the business bank account.
Answer guide: Increase the bank column and increase the owners' equity column.
(b)
A desk is bought for the business for £100 paid for from the bank account.
Answer guide: Reduce the bank column by £100 and open up a new asset column for the new asset, a desk, and put £100 in that column.
(c)
The business buys goods for £200.
Answer guide: Here we have to assume that the goods have been paid for.
In this case we decrease cash by £200 and open a new asset column for the goods bought and put £200 in there.
(d)
The rent of the premises for the first week of £50 is paid.
Answer guide: If we assume the rent is paid in arrears then the entries would be to reduce cash and charge an expense of £50.
If the assumption is that the rent is paid in advance then the entry would be to reduce cash and open an asset account for a prepayment.
As the students have not been introduced to prepayment at this stage in any detail it is better if the former assumption is made.
(e)
A potential customer makes an offer for the goods of £250.
Answer guide: No entry is required as the earnings process is not substantially complete.
(f)
The wages of the employee amounting to £60 are paid.
Answer guide: Reduce bank column and charge as an expense in the profit and loss column.
(g)
The firm receives another offer of £350 for the goods, accepts this offer and is paid immediately.
Answer guide: Increase the bank column by £350 and increase the  profit and loss column by £350 for sales as in this case the earnings process is complete and receipt of money is certain.
3.
In situations where doubt exists as to whether a transaction has resulted in an asset or expense what questions should be posed?
Answer guide: The major point to drive home here is that an asset gives a future benefit.
4.
If some doubt still remains how should a choice be made?
Explain any principles involved.
Answer guide: This question is looking for some discussion around the realization and prudence principles.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
In each of the following situations discuss the potential effect on the business and suggest possible ways in which those effects could be reflected on the worksheet.
(a)
The owner starts up a new business and pays into the business bank account £1,000.
In addition it is decided that the owners car will be used exclusively for the business.
The car was purchased last year at a cost of £5,000 but a similar one year old car could be bought for £4,500.
Answer guide: The first part is straightforward as this is an injection of capital by the owner where the amount is certain.
The bank column is increased by £1,000 and the owners' equity column by the same amount.
In the second case the discussion should focus on the cost to the business, should this be £4,000 or £5,000.
The entries are the same, i.e. open an asset column for the car and increase the owners' equity by the cost to the business of the car.
(b)
Goods previously bought by the business for £500 were sold to a customer for £800.
However prior to taking delivery of the goods the customer changed his mind and decided that he did not want the goods after all.
Answer guide: This raises the question of when the earnings process is complete and in this case it would seem that the process is not going to be completed therefore no entries need to be made.
(c)
Another batch of goods which had been bought for £400 and sold for £600 were subsequently found to be faulty.
The options available are as follows:
(i)
Give the customer a rebate on the purchase price of £100.
(ii)
Refund the full selling price to the customer and reclaim the goods.
If this course of action is followed a further £140 will need to be spent to rectify the faults.
Answer guide: This question needs to be split up into its  constituent parts in order to take the student through the progression logically.
First of all the sale needs to be dealt with.
If we assume that the customer has paid for the goods then the first entries would have been to increase the bank by £600 and include in the profit and 1088 account sales of £600.
We would also have reduced the asset for goods in stock by £400 and charged this amount to the profit and loss account as an expense for the period.
We can now examine what should happen in the alternative situations outlined above.
(i)
In this case we need to reduce the bank by £100 and reduce the profit and loss by £100.
Whether the latter is put through as a reduction in sales or a rebate should be discussed in terms of the effects of these alternatives on the usefulness of the profit and loss account as a guide to the future.
(ii)
In this situation the first entry relating to the sales is clear as we reduce the sales by £600 and reduce the bank account by £600 in respect of the refund.
The expenses would also be reduced by the £400 in respect of the goods returned.
The question which warrants discussion is what the goods should be included in the accounts at as they are defective.
Do we include them at £400 or a different figure?
This is a good opportunity to allow the students to derive the lower of cost or net realizable value rule by applying the ideas of future benefits and prudence.
2.
Leech has recently gone into business selling office chairs.
Details of his transactions for the first month are given.
Required:
(a)
In each situation where there are two possible treatments discuss the arguments in favour of and against each alternative.
Answer guide: The situations most commonly discussed here are set out below.
The objective is to get the students to discuss the arguments as in many cases there are equally acceptable alternatives.
It is important for the learning process to avoid being prescriptive but at the same time ensure that the alternatives put forward are acceptable.
The discussion below does not attempt to outline all the arguments but merely to point to some of the issues involved.
We also set out the basis adopted for the answer to parts (b) and (c).
Day 1 Rent — At this stage there is a future benefit so set up an asset and review at end of month.
Alternatively as the accounts are being done at the end of the month at that point in time the benefit is used up so the rent could be charged to the profit and loss account directly.
(Charged directly to profit and 1088.)
Day 2 Chairs — The issue is do we record them when the purchase is made or only on delivery which is the next day.
(Included on Day 2 — prudence.)
Day 5 Advert — Asset or expense?
Is there a future benefit? prudence v. matching.
(Included as expense — prudence.)
Day 8 Orders — Realization principle here we have certainty of payment but completion of earning process is questionable.
Alternative is to include on day 9 when process is complete.
(Included on day 9.)
The other issue arising here is whether you take the cost of the chairs out of the asset account and show them as an expense each time a sale is made or whether this is done at the end of the month.
The arguments are similar to those for rent above.
(Charged all at the end of the month for ease of presentation.)
Day 14 Wages — The area of contention is whether this is a business expense or a withdrawal by the owner.
(Included as business expense under business entity principle.)
Day 24 Advert — As for day 5 above.
Day 28 Chairs — Related to item on day 8 above.
Our experience has shown that this is a useful way to start the student reviewing the bottom line of the worksheet, i.e. the balance sheet, and asking the question in relation to all asset balances: ‘Is there a future benefit?’
(b)
Based upon the outcome of your discussions draw up a worksheet and enter the above transactions.
Answer guide: Note: The answer provided below is based upon the assumptions set out in the commentary on question (a) above and provides one possible answer.
It should not be used without reference to that commentary.
Leech Worksheet for Month
(c)
Extract a balance sheet at the end of the month and a profit and loss account for the month.
Answer guide:
Balance Sheet of Leech at end of Month
Profit and Loss Account of Leech for the Month
(d)
Discuss the performance of the business for the period as revealed by the accounts you have prepared, paying particular attention to its cash position and profitability.
Answer guide: The question points students to the areas of concern.
They should be encouraged to look in more detail at the profitability of the business.
They need to be reminded that this is a start-up situation so that they start to do any analysis in the context of all the information available.
Chapter 6
Review questions
1.
What main categories of stock are likely to be held by a manufacturing business?
Answer guide: Raw materials, work in progress, finished goods.
2.
In arriving at a figure for stock in a business manufacturing and assembling furniture what questions would need to be considered?
Answer guide: What is the stock of raw materials?
What work is in progress, and what stage of completion is it at?
What finished goods are in stock?
What costs and overheads should be included in the work in progress and the finished goods?
3.
What would be the effect on the profit if goods costing £6,000 were excluded from the opening stock figure?
Answer guide: As the cost of the goods sold, especially with a small business, is often calculated by taking the opening stock plus purchases less closing stock, the effect would be to reduce the cost of sales figure and thereby increase profit.
4.
What are the effects of omitting goods costing £500 from the year end stock figure?
Answer guide: Increase in cost of goods sold figure and decrease in profit.
5.
Why is it necessary to value stock at the lower of cost and net realizable value?
Answer guide: If the net realizable value is less than cost then to use cost would overstate the future benefits; on the other hand if it is higher, to include the higher figure would mean that unrealized profits were being taken which would be contrary to the prudence principle.
6.
Explain in your own words the difference between absorption costing and marginal costing.
Answer guide: The answer here should bring out the distinction between directly variable costs and other costs attributable to getting the product to its ‘present state and condition’.
7.
Which of the following costs would be appropriate to include in a marginal costing system?
Director's salary
Foreman's wages
Machine operators' wages
Cost of raw materials
Answer guide: Machine operators' wages and cost of raw materials as these are the only ones which are likely to vary directly with  production.
8.
Of the costs above which would be appropriate to include in arriving at cost under a marginal costing system?
Answer guide: This question should read which costs would be appropriate to include in an absorption costing system.
The discussion should then focus around the inclusion of the foreman's wages and whether the director's salary should be included and whether the answer to the latter will be affected by the job description.
E.g. production director v. sales director, and by the size of firm, e.g. ICI v. five employee company.
9.
Name three methods of stock valuation and describe the differences between them and the effects of those differences.
Answer guide: This question asks the student to look at FIFO, LIFO and average cost.
The effects in times of rising prices are tabulated below.
10.
Think of examples of types of business where one method would be more appropriate than the others.
Answer guide: Some useful examples are high technology v. more traditional industries, retail consumables v. furniture retailers.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
In the situation described in the following example discuss which costs, if any, should be included in the stock valuation, and at what point in time they should be included.
Hank is in business manufacturing sails.
The sail material is purchased in 100m lengths and these are delivered to the storeman who sorts the materials according to quality and width.
The material is then issued to the cutting room where five people are employed, one of whom is the cutting room supervisor.
After cutting the material is passed through to the machining room where the sails are sewn up and the hanks etc. are put on.
The machining room has seven staff employed full time including a supervisor.
From the machining room the sails go through to the packaging department where they are folded, inserted in sail bags and sent either to the despatch department or put into stock.
The packaging department and the despatch department each employ one member of staff working on a part-time basis.
The whole operation is under the control of a production manager who also has responsibility for  quality control.
Answer guide: The answer below is based on both an absorption costing approach and a marginal costing approach although the question is deliberately not explicit about which should be used.
Obviously some of the above are debatable and such debate should be encouraged as it provides the student with — problems encountered in reality.
2.
Discuss the ways in which your answer to q.1 above would be affected by the use of a marginal cost basis of stock valuation.
Answer guide: The answer to this is dependent on the discussion and conclusions arrived at in the answer to question 1 above.
One possible answer can be derived from the table above.
3.
Using the information in the example below, discuss the accounting treatment of each transaction and the possible value of the stock at the end of the month.
Stern has recently gone into business assembling hang gliders.
Details of the transactions for the first month are given below.
Answer guide: A number of the transactions merely reinforce those in previous examples and in these cases no comment will be made in this answer guide.
We will however comment on the treatment of all items relating to stock.
Day 1 Opened a bank account for the business and paid in £50,000 of his own money.
Purchased for cash assembly machinery for £40,000.
Rented factory space at a rental of £200 per month and paid one months rent in advance.
Day 2 Bought 1,000m of tubing for the hang glider frames at price of £250 per 100m and paid the £2,500 in cash.
Answer guide: A new asset account for Tubing should be opened and the £2,500 should be included here with the bank account being reduced accordingly.
Day 3 Purchased 150 sets of material for sails for £20 per set and paid the £3,000 immediately.
Each hang glider takes one set of sails.
Answer guide: Here there are alternatives available: either a new asset account can be opened for the sail material or it can be added to the tubing.
For clarity and to enable students to follow through the process we recommend a separate column is opened.
Day 8 Received an order for 20 hang gliders at £400 each together with a cheque for £8,000.
Day 9 Banked the cheque and commenced manufacture of the hang gliders.
Day 14 Completed manufacture of the 20 hang gliders and despatched the completed order to the customer, paying the delivery charges of £200 immediately.
Answer guide: Although the students have met the realization principle before it is important that the treatment of this is highlighted in the discussion which should revolve around the question of the point at which the earnings process is substantially complete.
At this stage it was possible to do some preliminary calculations relating to the manufacture of each hang glider.
These calculations showed that each hang glider required the following:
Answer guide: This information will be used later in the question when the question of how the stock is valued is discussed.
It is also possible to charge the cost of the direct materials at this stage which avoids the issue of using FIFO or average cost etc.
Day 15 Received an order for another 200 hang gliders at a price of £250 each.
Payment is to be made on a cash on delivery basis.
Day 16 Commenced work on the new order.
Day 26 Purchased another 100 sets of sails, and paid for them in cash.
The price had gone up to £22.00 per set making a total of £2,200.
Answer guide: If a separate account has been opened the cost of these new sails should be included in that account.
Day 30 Paid wages of £320 for the month based on four 40hr weeks at £2 per hour.
Day 31 Established the position at the end of the month as follows:
Answer guide: The question required a discussion of the possible value of stock at the end of the month.
The question has been designed to allow discussion around the stock valuation method, and the choice of absorption or marginal cost basis.
It also provides three levels of stock, i.e. raw materials, work in progress and finished goods.
4.
Draw up a worksheet and enter the transactions outlined in the example above.
Answer guide: It is important to recognize that the answer to this question will be directly affected by the decisions made in answering question three above.
We have found an effective way to show the effect of different choices is to split the class into groups working with different bases eg. some using FIFO and some using average cost.
Our answer is based on FIFO and absorption costing.
Worksheet of Stern
5.
Draw up a balance sheet and profit and loss account for Stern.
Answer guide:
Balance Sheet of Stern at end of Month
Profit and Loss Account of Stern for the Month
6.
Comment on the situation as revealed by the Balance sheet and profit and loss account of Stern.
Answer guide: Although the business has no cash problems and is making a profit there is cause for concern over stock holding levels and production levels.
It is a profitable business but there is evidence of some slack time, perhaps this is a learning curve effect.
We would suggest that Tutors discuss the fact that if we use the present system the order for 200 hang gliders will take 600 hours of labour which given we are using 160 hours per month would mean that this order will take in excess of another three months to fill.
7.
Spain has recently gone into business manufacturing office chairs.
Details of the transactions for the first month are given below.
Day 1 Opened a bank account and paid in £10,000 of own money.
Purchased machinery to make the chairs at a cost of £4,000 paid for immediately.
Rented factory space at a rental of £200 per month and paid one month's rent in advance.
Bought office equipment at a cost of £400.
Day 2 Bought 1000m of steel tubing at a price of £50 per 100m and paid for this immediately.
Day 3 Purchased 250 packs of end fittings for £l25, together with a quantity of screws costing £40.
Both of these purchases were paid for immediately.
Day 4 Purchased 150 sets of ready-cut seat bases and backrests at a price of £5 per set, and paid for them.
Day 5 Bought upholstery materials and cloth for seat covers for £400.
Day 8 Received an order for 20 chairs at £50 each together with accompanying cheque.
Day 9 Paid the cheques into the bank and commenced manufacture of the chairs.
Day 14 Completed manufacture of chairs for order and despatched these to the customer, paying £40 total delivery charges.
At this stage it was possible to do some preliminary calculations relating to the manufacture of the chairs.
These showed that each chair required the following:
Day 15 Received an order for another 200 chairs at a price of £50 each payment was to be on the basis of cash on delivery.
Day 15 Commenced work on the new order.
Day 26 Purchased and paid for another 100 sets of seats and backrests.
The price per set had however gone up to £6.
Day 30 Paid himself wages for the month of £320 calculated on the basis of £80 per week for a 40 hr week.
The position at the end of the month was established as follows.
Draw up a worksheet for Spain and enter the above transactions.
Answer guide:
Worksheet of Spain for the Month
8.
Draw up a balance sheet at the end of the month and a profit and loss account for the month.
Answer guide:
Balance Sheet of Spain at end of Month
Profit and Loss of Spain for Month
9.
Discuss the performance of the business for the period.
Answer guide: The problems here are similar to those outlined above: there is an urgent need to expand production capacity if Spain is to avoid losing the order from the large customer.
Such expansion in a small business is particularly dangerous at this stage of its development in terms of potential survival given the number of small firms that fail in the first two years.
Chapter 7
Review questions
1.
In your own words describe what a creditor is and when creditors arise.
Answer guide: A creditor represents an amount owing by an enterprise to a third party.
They arise when goods or services are supplied in advance of payment being made.
2.
Explain the difference between creditors and accruals.
Answer guide: In the former case an invoice for the goods or services supplied has been received whereas in the latter no invoice has been received at the time the accounts are drawn up therefore an estimate of the amount owing for the goods or services provided is made.
3.
Why are debtors and prepayments classified as current assets?
Answer guide: Because they will change their form in the next year, in the former case to cash and in the latter normally to services.
4.
When do prepayments arise and how do they differ from accruals?
Answer guide: When goods or services are paid for in advance by the enterprise.
They differ in that in the case of prepayments the exact amount is known and has been paid although the services have yet to be received whereas in the case of an accrual the service has been received but has not been paid for and we have to estimate the amount due.
5.
Explain the matching principle.
Answer guide: This states that the costs of earning revenue should be matched with the revenue earned.
6.
Why is it necessary to identify debtors and creditors?
Answer guide: Because the accounts are to do with measuring economic activity rather than the timing of receipts and payments.
7.
How do debtors affect the profit and loss account?
Answer guide: They have no direct effect but often the debtor is the other side of the sales entry.
Another effect could be when the debtor falls to pay and the amount has to be charged to the profit and loss account as a bad debt.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
In each of the following situations describe the way the transaction would be dealt with in the accounts of the  business and identify, where appropriate, the effect on the balance sheet and profit and loss account.
(a)
Purchase of stock of raw materials on credit terms.
Answer guide: Record in the stock column and in a creditor column.
Balance sheet — increase assets and liabilities.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(b)
Purchase of production machines for cash.
Answer guide: Record an asset and reduce the asset bank.
Balance sheet — increase one asset and reduce another.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(c)
Receipts from customers in respect of credit sales.
Answer guide: Increase the asset bank and reduce the asset debtors.
Balance sheet — increase one asset and reduce another.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(d)
Repayment of a loan.
Answer guide: Reduce a liability, the loan, and reduce the asset bank.
Balance sheet — reduce an asset and a liability.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(e)
Payment in respect of research expenditure.
Answer guide: This is ore open to discussion about how to deal with research expenditure.
The question is whether or not there is a future benefit and how certain that benefit is.
Reduce the asset bank and either record an expense or an asset.
Balance sheet — reduce one asset and perhaps increase another.
Profit and loss — either record an expense or no effect.
(f)
Sale of goods on credit.
Answer guide: Record an asset debtor and record revenue in the Profit and loss Balance sheet — increase the asset debtor.
Profit and loss — record sale as revenue
(g)
Payment to supplier in respect of goods already delivered.
Answer guide: Record a reduction in the liability, creditors, and reduce the asset bank.
Balance sheet — reduce an asset and a liability.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(h)
Payment of wages to clerical workers.
Answer guide:
Reduce the asset bank and record an expense in the P&L;.
Balance sheet — reduce the asset bank.
Profit and Loss — Charge the expense wages.
(i)
Payment of wages to production workers.
Reduce the asset bank and record an expense in the P&L;.
Balance sheet — reduce the asset bank.
Profit and loss — charge the expense wages.
(j)
Payment of loan interest.
Answer guide: Reduce the asset bank and charge the interest expense to P&L;.
Balance sheet — reduce an asset.
Profit and Loss — charge the expense interest.
(k)
Payment of an electricity bill from last year.
Answer guide: Reduce the asset bank and reduce the liability accruals.
Balance sheet — decrease an asset and a liability.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(l)
Payment of rent quarterly in advance.
Answer guide: Record an asset prepayments and reduce the asset bank.
Balance sheet — increase one asset and reduce another.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(m)
Withdrawal of cash from the business by the owner.
Answer guide: Reduce the asset bank and reduce the owner's equity.
Balance sheet — Reduce an asset and the owner's equity.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(n)
Receipt of cash from the owner.
Answer guide: Record an asset in the bank and increase the owner's equity.
Balance sheet — increase an asset and the owner's equity.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(o)
Withdrawal of stock for personal use by the owner.
Answer guide: Reduce an asset stock and reduce the owner's equity.
Balance sheet — reduce an asset and reduce the owner's equity.
Profit and loss — no effect.
(p)
A customer going into liquidation owing money.
Answer guide: Reduce the asset debtors and charge the bad debt as an expense.
Balance sheet — reduce an asset.
2.
On 1 May 1989 Barbara paid £3,000 into a business bank account as capital for her new business which she called Barbies Bikes.
The transactions during July were as follows.
Answer guide: Record the £3,000 in the bank and as owner's equity.
May 3 Bought van for £800 cash.
Answer guide: Reduce bank and record fixed asset van.
Profit and loss — charge bad debt as an expense.
6 Bought goods on credit from Drake for £700.
Answer guide: Record stock and creditor.
8 Paid rent for the quarter of £120.
Answer guide: Record prepayment and reduce bank.
14 Bought goods on credit from Gander for £300.
Answer guide: Record increase in stock and creditors.
16 Made cash sales of £200.
Answer guide: Increase in bank and revenue in P&L;.
18 Made credit sales of £400 to Bills Bikes.
Answer guide: Record debtor and revenue.
21 Paid the garage account for petrol and oil of £20.
Answer guide: Record expense and reduce bank.
23 Sold more goods on credit for £600 to Swans.
Answer guide: Record revenue and debtor.
24 Paid Drake £682 after taking advantage of a 2.5% discount for prompt payment.
Answer guide: This is something the student has not been exposed to 80 it is useful to let them discuss how they would treat the transaction in detail so they can work out for themselves the principles involved.
Reduce creditor by £700, bank by £682 and record as quasi revenue the discount of £18 in the P&L;.
30 Received £360 from the liquidator of Bills Bikes and was advised that no more would be forthcoming.
Answer guide: Once again this is new so the students need to be encouraged to discuss this.
In this case asking the question what is the future benefit to be received often unblocks the problem for students.
Increase bank by £360, reduce debtor by  £400 and charge £40 to P&L; as a bad debt.
31 Paid monthly salary to shop assistant of £400.
Received back from Swans goods with an invoice price of £80 which they had not ordered.
Answer guide: Reduce bank and charge salary as an expense.
As far as the goods returned are concerned once again this is new so the students need to be encouraged to discuss this.
The question revolves around whether revenue should have been recognised in the first place, i.e. had a sale taken place at all.
It can be argued that if Swans can establish they had not ordered the goods then no sale should have been recorded in which case revenue has to be reduced by the £80 and the creditor also has to be reduced by £80.
NB: It is important that this is taken into account when calculating the cost of goods sold as our experience is that it is often overlooked.
Other information:
No stock count was done at the end of the month-but all goods were sold at a price based on the cost price plus one third.
Answer guide: This introduces the idea of arriving at the amount of stock using sales less mark-up, a technique that is often used to produce regular accounts in the retail sector.
(a)
Discuss how each transaction should be treated.
Answer guide: See above.
(b)
Discuss what if any accruals and prepayments are or should be involved.
Answer guide: The obvious answer relates to the prepayment in respect of rent for the quarter; however, the question should be used to prompt students to think of other services etc. necessary to run the business.
Examples are electricity and other utilities, business rates, telephones, advertising, bank charges etc.
(c)
Draw up a worksheet, balance sheet and profit and loss account.
Answer guide:
Worksheet of Barbies Bikes
Balance Sheet of Barbies Bikes at 31 May 1989
Profit and loss of Barbies Bikes for May 1989
Chapter 8
Review questions
1.
What is the purpose of depreciation?
Answer guide: Broadly matching revenue with cost incurred in earning that revenue.
The chapter also discusses the UK Accounting Standard, the spreading of the original cost over the useful life of the asset and depreciation as a measure of the wearing out of an asset.
2.
Why is it unlikely that depreciation will provide for replacement of the fixed asset?
Answer guide: Because of the effects of changes in other factors such as the price of the asset which will mean that the cost of replacement is greater than the original cost.
However, it should be borne in mind that the effects of technological advances may mitigate or even reverse this effect.
3.
What factors need to be taken into account in determining the useful life of an asset?
Answer guide: Technological advances, past experience, the factors that cause the asset to wear out.
Note: It is important to emphasize that at best this is only a best estimate.
4.
On what basis do we decide what should and should not be included in the cost of a fixed asset?
Answer guide: Broadly the criteria is: has there been an enhancement of the future benefits as a result of incurring the cost?
5.
Describe what is meant by the net book value and the written down value of an asset?
Answer guide: These are alternative terms which are often used inter changeably to describe the figure arrived at after taking the accumulated depreciation away from the historic cost.
6.
What are the assumptions underlying the two main methods of depreciation?
Answer guide: Straight line — asset usage and wearing out is governed by time and is equal over the assets life.
Reducing balance — asset usage and wearing out is greater in earlier than later years.
7.
An expense has been defined as a past or expired benefit.
In what way does depreciation differ from other expenses?
Answer guide: Generally expenses are more certain in amount and it is easier to identify what has been used up as it is all used up in one period.
8.
In the chapter we described the profit or loss arising on the  disposal of a fixed asset as a paper profit or loss, explain how this profit differs from that arising on the sale of stock.
Answer guide: The profit or loss arises as the result of the difference between the sale proceeds from an asset not intended for resale and its net book value which is ‘broadly’ based on its continuing use in the business.
The sale of goods on the other hand is part of the normal operations of a business and making a profit is part of the normal plan whereas in the case of the sale of a fixed asset any profit or loss is purely fortuitous.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
In each of the following situations discuss the most appropriate method of depreciation giving reasons for your choice.
Land and buildings: The land was purchased for £300,000 and £400,000 was spent on the erection of the factory and office accommodation.
Answer guide: The land is normally not depreciated as it is assumed not to wear out.
The building should be depreciated a stronger case can be made for the use of the straight line method than the reducing balance method.
Motor vehicles: The business owns a fleet of cars and delivery vans all of which were bought from new.
The owners have decided to trade in the vehicles for new models after four years or 60,000 miles whichever is sooner.
The anticipated mileage figures are 12,000 miles per annum for the cars and 20,000 miles per annum for the vans.
Answer guide: In this case it would seem that for the cars they should be depreciated over four years as they are unlikely to do 60,000 miles.
The vans, on the other hand, should be traded in after three years purely on the basis of mileage.
The question is then do we use up more future benefit in the earlier years than in later years?
It may be the case that an argument can be put up suggesting that the wearing out process is even over the life of the assets and the incidence of repair costs is greater in later years.
This argument would indicate that straight line is the more appropriate method of depreciation.
However, if we looked at the total costs of using the vehicles one could argue that by using reducing balance the repair costs in later life would be compensated by the additional depreciation in earlier years so achieving a matching of costs and revenues over the assets' life.
Plant and machinery: The plant and machinery owned by the business can be broadly classified into three types as follows.
Type 1: Highly specialist machinery used for supplying roller bearings to Manicmotors Ltd.
The contract for supply is for five years, after which it may be renewed at the option of Manicmotors.
The renewal would be on an annual basis.
The machinery is so specialist that it cannot be used for any other purpose.
It has an expected useful life of ten years  and the residual value is likely to be negligible.
Answer guide: Depreciate over five years on the basis of prudence.
No particular method is clearly more appropriate.
Type 2: Semi-specialist machinery which is expected to be productive for ten years and have a residual value of 10% of its original cost.
However, other firms operating similar machines have found that after the first three years it becomes increasingly more costly in terms of repairs and maintenance to keep machinery of this type productive.
Answer guide: The facts suggest that if we apply the same argument as we outlined for vehicles then reducing balance would be the choice.
Type 3: General purpose machinery which has an estimated useful life of 80,000 running hours.
Based on present levels of production the usage is 8,000 hours a year but as from next year this is expected to rise to 12,000 hours a year if the sales forecasts are correct.
Answer guide: It may be that the appropriate method is usage related in this case.
Apart from that there is no strong reason for one method rather than another although as the first year has lower production than later years it would be difficult in terms of wearing out to argue for the reducing balance method.
2.
Using a worksheet draw up the balance sheet and profit and loss account for the business whose transactions are set out below:
Month 1 Bert put in £9,000 of his own money and transferred his own car into the name of the business.
At the time of the transfer it would have cost £6,000 to buy a new model of the same car but as the car was one year old its second-hand value was only £4,000.
The business then bought a machine for £4,000 paying for this in cash, and at the same time bought a second machine on credit terms.
The credit terms were a deposit of £1,000 which was paid in cash and two equal instalments of £900 payable at the start of month four and seven respectively.
The cash price of the machine was £2,500.
Month 2 Bought raw materials for £3,000 and paid cash and also made cash sales of £3,000.
Month 3 Paid rent in arrears for the three months amounting to £600 in cash.
Paid wages of £1,500 for the three months to date.
Made cash sales of £4,000 and purchases more raw materials again for cash amounting to £2,000.
Month 4 Paid instalment on machine of £900 in cash and made cash sales of £4, 000.
Month 5 to 7 Bought raw materials for cash for £2,000 and made cash sales of £5,000, paid wages for three months of £1,500, the rent for three months of £600 and the second and final instalment on the machine of £900.
Month 8 to 12 Made cash sales of £14,000, bought raw materials for cash for £6,000, paid wages for six months of £3,000 and  paid rent for three months of £600.
At the end of the year he has raw materials in stock which cost £2,000.
He calculates the car will last two more years after which he thinks he will be able to sell it for £400.
The machines have useful lives estimated at three years and will then be sold for £100 each.
Bert not being that clever with figures opts for straight line depreciation on all the fixed assets.
Answer guide: Note in the answer the interest on the machine bought by instalments has been dealt with on a separate line.
This is because the students will be dealing with this for the first time and this is thought to be a clearer presentation.
Note also an error in the text relating to the last set of transactions which should relate to l months 8 to 12, not 6 to 12 as shown in the text.
Worksheet of Bert's Business
Balance Sheet of Bert's Business at the end of the year
Profit and Loss of Bert's Business for the year
Chapter 9
Review questions
1.
Explain in your own words the meaning of the terms trial balance and extended trial balance.
Answer guide: The answers need to show an understanding of the trial balance as being equivalent to the first balance on the worksheet and the extended trial balance as including the end of year adjustments.
2.
Explain the meaning of the term ‘final adjustments’
Answer guide: The answers should show the students understanding of these adjustments as being the same as would be used on the worksheet to put through year end entries.
3.
Explain the difference between a sole proprietorship and a partnership.
Answer guide: A sole proprietorship has one owner whereas a partner has at least two, partners are jointly and severally liable for the debts of the partnership, there needs to be separate accounts kept of the transactions relating to each partner, agreements need to be reached regarding profit shares etc.
4.
Explain the reasons why partnership agreements often contain clauses relating to interest, bonuses, salaries and division of profits.
Answer guide: ‘these allow the partners to adjust their returns to reflect uneven inputs as between the partners whether they are in terms of money invested, skills, labour or whatever.
5.
Why is it advantageous to set a business up as a limited company?
Answer guide: Limitation of owner's liability is the main point to be made here.
6.
What are the differences between a sole proprietorship and a limited liability company?
Answer guide: Legal status, membership of company, dividends v. drawings, limited liability, audit, filing of accounts, etc.
7.
Describe how the choice of organizational form determines the format of the final accounts.
Answer guide: one or more owners’ accounts for proprietorship, partnership, current and capital accounts, company reports governed by statute and subject to accounting standards and audit.
Problems for discussion and analysis
The information below forms the basis for the questions which follow.
Susan sets up a business on her own as a sole proprietorship and has the following balance sheet at the end of year one.
Balance sheet of Susan's Business at the end of year 1
At the end of the first year Susan realised that although the business was profitable she could hardly take out enough money to live on because she was heavily reliant on her bank and creditors already.
She also found that a lot of her time which could have been used to produce more goods was being taken up selling goods, collecting debts and generally doing administrative work.
She therefore decided at the start of the second year to take in a partner who would put in an additional £5,000 into the business and would be able to do some of the selling and other tasks after Susan had trained him.
The agreement was a verbal agreement only on the first day of the new year and the two of them agreed to share profits equally.
In the second year the summarized transactions of the business were as follows: Sales, all on credit £70,000: Moneys received from debtors £62,000: Purchases, all on credit £40,000: Moneys paid to creditors £38,000: Moneys introduced by new partner, Bob, £5,000: Other Expenses incurred and paid £7,000: Drawings by Susan £7,000 and by Bob £5,000: Goods in stock at the end of the year £9,000.
1.
The current partnership agreement between Susan and Bob has the advantage of being simple.
If you were advising Susan would you suggest any alternatives to the present agreement and, if so, why?
Answer guide: Ideas should include: interest on capitals to reflect uneven capitals, compensation to Susan for goodwill built up, possibly a lower basic salary for the new partner with bonus payments based on new business or profits brought in or developed.
2.
What, if any, additional accounts need to be opened in the second year to cope with the fact that the business is now a partnership and for what reason are they needed?
Answer guide: Capital and current accounts to record each partners share and inputs and withdrawals from the business.
This ensures that each partner is visibly accountable to the other partner.
3.
How do you propose to deal with the following:
The balance of £7,100 i.e. the profit after drawings.
Answer guide: The cash is needed in the business, see overdraft situation, it will need to be left in.
Therefore it can either be seen as Susan's capital or as a current account balance due to Susan.
In our answer to question 4 we have included it as a current account balance in order to reduce Susan's exposure vis-a -vis Bob.
The drawings from the business by Susan and Bob in year two.
Answer guide: As a withdrawal of their share of profits.
We have recorded it in their current accounts.
The money introduced by Bob in year two
Answer guide: As Bob's capital or equity.
4.
Produce the final accounts of the partnership for year two in a form suitable for a partnership.
Answer guide: The answer should be read in conjunction with the notes on question 3 above.
Worksheet of Susan and Bob partnership
Balance Sheet of Susan and Bob partnership at end of year
Profit and Loss of Susan and Bob partnership for the year
5.
Discuss what changes would need to be made if Susan and Bob decided to form a company to take over the business to protect both partners' interests as they stand under the current partnership agreement.
Answer guide: In order to protect their current interests they would need to have an equal number of ordinary shares.
The question that is left is what to do with the balance of Susan's equity in the partnership.
This can be explored and used as a useful revision of the alternatives of different types of shares, debentures etc. available for consideration.
Chapter 10
Review questions
1.
Identify the main user groups and their common needs in terms of financial analysis.
Answer guide: The groups identified in the chapter are equity investors, i.e. shareholders and their representatives, lenders, employees, auditors and management.
The common needs identified were past and future profitability, information relating to financial risk and solvency, return on investment and risk.
2.
How do the needs of long-term lenders differ from those of equity investors?
Answer guide: Both groups have common needs — see above.
Where they differ is that the former group will look at interest cover rather than dividend cover or earnings per share.
They will also be interested in measures of security.
3.
What factors do we need to take into account in order to put our analysis in context?
Answer guide: The purpose of the analysis, size of business, risk of the type of business, economic, social and political environment, industry trends, technological change, price rises and their effects.
4.
What sources of information outside the business are available to you and how would you use this information in your analysis?
Answer guide: Sources are given below.
Students should be encouraged to identify for themselves how this information would be used and what they could get out of it.
External sources — government statistics, trade journals, financial press, databases, specialist agencies.
Internal sources — chairman's statement, directors' report, balance sheet, profit and loss, accounting policies, notes to the accounts, source and application of funds, auditors' report.
5.
What information would you derive from reading the Chairmans Statement?
Answer guide: An overview of the year just gone and some predictions for the future.
6.
What other parts of the annual report would you use in your analysis?
Answer guide: This would normally include some of the parts of the answer to question 4 above in terms of internal resources.
They generally should not include the source and application statement as this has not been covered in the text and students would not be able to interpret this statement unless they have been referred to other sources.
7.
Explain briefly what the difference is between financial risk and business or commercial risk.
Answer guide: Financial risk relates to the mix of owners equity and debt financing, whereas business risk refers to the type of business or trade in which the enterprise is engaged.
8.
How would you measure financial risk in the short and long term?
Answer guide: Here we are looking for an understanding of the relationships between current assets and their liquidity and current liabilities as a short-term measure.
In the long term we are looking for a measure of the relationship between debt financing and equity financing.
Note: The authors believe that it is important that we encourage students to understand the relationships involved and not concentrate on calculating ratios which they frequently don't understand and cannot interpret because they have not fully understood why a ratio is calculated or the relationships which the ratio expresses.
9.
What are the limitations to our analysis which are inherent in the accounting data we are using?
Answer guide: Timeliness, use of historic costs, use of summarized information, multiplicity of acceptable bases, changes in bases, identification of symptoms not causes.
Problems for discussion and analysis
Given below are the summarized accounts of Belper Ltd for the past five years.
These form the basis for the questions which follow.
Summarized Profit and Loss Accounts of Belper Ltd
Notes:
(i)
During 1988 some of the freehold properties were revalued.
(ii)
Loans amounting to £22 million were repaid during the year.
(iii)
The extraordinary item shown in the profit and loss account in 1988 represents the damages received by the company from a libel action against a newspaper.
(iv)
No fixed assets were disposed of during the year.
1.
From a review of the information above identify the areas which you would concentrate on in your analysis of the position of Belper ltd.
Answer guide: The review of the profit and loss reveals a steady reduction of the gross profit margin and an increasing reliance on debt finance shown by the increasing interest charge.
It also reveals in the latest year that dividends payable were greater than profits for the year.
The balance sheet reveals increasing fixed assets some of which relate to revaluations.
They also show high stock levels and an increasing reliance on borrowing both long term and short term.
Thus the areas to concentrate on are profitability, stock turnover and financial risk.
Summarized Balance Sheets of Belper Ltd.
2.
Produce common size profit and loss accounts for the five years and analyse these statements with particular reference to the profitability of Belper.
Answer guide:
Common size profit and loss accounts
Commentary: The common size statements merely confirm what we have already suggested above from our initial analysis, i.e. the gross profit has declined with a marked decline in 1988 and this  has been accompanied by an increase in interest over the last years.
What is also worth exploring to promote discussion is ways in which dividends have been dealt with by the directors in that they continue to be paid despite the non-availability–profits.
This can be used to reinforce the differences between preference and ordinary shares although in this case the explanation does not lie in that direction as there are no preference shares; rather the explanation is more to do with stability of dividends in an attempt to bolster shareholders' confidence.
3.
Calculate the trends in the Sales and cost of sales and comment on the information disclosed by your analysis.
Answer guide: Students could calculate this in a number of ways.
We have used a trend analysis which is based round setting the 1984 figures as a base year and producing an index number trend from that year.
This produces the following trend:
As can be seen the trend analysis once again confirms that although the business is expanding in terms of sales costs are escalating ahead of sales.
This can be shown graphically as follows.
The bar chart shows Sales on the left and Cost of Sales on the right.
4.
Using whatever form of analysis you consider appropriate comment on the financial risk profile of Belper Ltd for the five years under review.
Answer guide: Students should be encouraged to use whatever form of analysis they feel most comfortable with.
For information we have produced the data in the form of common size statements for  the five years.
We can see from this that there has been a rise in the reliance on current liabilities in 1988 compared to 1984.
Similarly there has been an increase in the reliance on long-term debt.
The common size balance sheets of Belper Ltd are shown at the end of this chapter of the guide.
Note: We are not suggesting common size statements are the only or best way to do the analysis; they are used here to illustrate the issue.
It is useful to use this opportunity to expand the discussion to take into account outside factors such as rising interest rates etc. and to ask students to explain why a comparatively modest increase in the proportion of debt finance leads to the change in interest charges experienced by Belper.
This can also be used as an opportunity to discuss the relative cost of long-term and short-term debt finance.
5.
Based on your analysis write a brief report for the Bank advising them on whether to continue to provide finance for Belper Ltd.
Answer guide: The form of report is not vital.
However, it should contain references to the underlying trends in profitability, risk, and the increasing reliance on debt.
6.
Apart from the information arising from your analysis what other information would you advise the bank to consider when making their decision.
Answer guide: This is intended to encourage discussion of the economic climate, the market for the goods produced, competition etc.
7.
Discuss how your analysis would have been altered if you were carrying out the analysis on behalf of a prospective shareholder.
Answer guide: The major difference is one of emphasis.
Interest cover, for example, would not be so appropriate — the shareholder would be more interested in dividends and may need to look at alternative investment opportunities as well as the possibility of selling their shares at this stage given the results of Belper.
Common size balance sheets of Belper Ltd
Chapter 11
Review questions
1.
What are the main reasons why management would require additional information to the annual accounts?
Answer guide: Annual accounts contain summarized information more detail may be required.
More regular and more up to date information is needed to take action.
The information in the annual accounts may not be suitable for the decision to be made in respect of planning, control, investment etc.
There are a number of examples in the chapter but students should be encouraged to identify others.
2.
One of the major improvements bankers wish to see in respect of financial information is an improvement in the timeliness of information.
Explain what this means and why it is important to bankers and how this might differ for managers.
Answer guide: Answers should reflect the fact that the accounts are normally at least three months old when they are published.
Students should be encouraged to analyse the usefulness of an out of date balance sheet and profit and loss account and the situation of a business that is experiencing difficulties.
Although managers require up to date information they have access to more information on a day to day basis than external users.
So, for example, they would know the current orders and be able to compare these with similar periods in the previous years, they would also have a ‘feel’ of production levels, stock levels etc. even though this information may be of a more qualitative rather than quantitative nature.
3.
What is likely to be the major impact of organizational size on the information needs of managers?
Answer guide: Level of detail, need for overview, monitoring and control information, different reporting frequencies required, strategic level information.
4.
What useful management information is available from the accounting system from which the annual accounts are produced?
Answer guide: Examples in the chapter were information on customers and debtors, information on costs, aged debtors etc.
Students should be encouraged to look at the other information in the financial accounting system to see if it would be helpful for managers in terms of monitoring, planning or control.
5.
What additional information would bankers wish to have and what purpose would they use this for?
Answer guide: Information about the future as repayment of any monies lent is likely to come from future profitability.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
Would the way in which managers use the information you have identified in your answer to question 5 above differ from the way it is used by bankers and if so how would it differ?
Answer guide: Managers would be using it to plan future activity levels, order stocks, employ labour etc. whereas bankers are more interested in an overview of where the business is likely to go and perhaps also as a monitoring tool, although it is doubtful that such a level of sophistication is applied to the majority of enterprises.
2.
In each of the situations outlined below identify what you believe your information needs would be.
Situation 1
You are the manager of a local branch of a national retail organization.
All buying is done centrally and prices are fixed.
You are in charge of the day to day management and hiring and firing of staff.
Your annual remuneration is fixed.
Answer guide: On the face of it you may not need much financial information as you are not judged on profitability over which you have little control as selling prices and buying prices are fixed.
You do have some control over the costs in the form of wage bills so you may require information about that area, and your daily cash takings and some idea of stock turnover to control for pilferage of goods or cash.
Situation 2
The situation is the same as above except that in addition to your annual salary you receive a bonus of £l for each £100 profit made above that expected.
Answer guide: Here you would need the information contained in the projections which provide the profit target so that you could attempt to improve on the profit either by increasing sales, or adjusting the staffing of your outlet to reduce the costs and thereby increase the profit.
Other issues such as profit by product and changes in sales mix could also be explored.
Situation 3
As in Situation 2 above except that you are able to decide on the selling price yourself.
Answer guide: Some of the additional information you would need relates to cost by product, potential sales volume by product, price elasticity of demand, competitor prices etc.
Situation 4
You have been so successful as a branch manager that the company has promoted you to the position of regional manager in charge of twenty shops all of whose managers work under the conditions outlined in situation 3 above.
Answer guide: Here the question moves the student into a senior  management position which would need information for control purposes, such as profitability by branch, turnover by branch, branch cash flows etc.
Chapter 12
Review questions
1.
There are a number of stages in the planning and control process.
Identify these and give a brief description of each stage.
Answer guide:
Stage 1 Setting Objectives — This involves detailing the objectives of the organization in the long and short term.
Organizations do not have objectives per se; the objectives will reflect the objectives of those people involved in the organization.
These objectives can be in quantitative terms eg. the growth rate of profits, or in qualitative terms eg. statements about public responsibility.
Stage 2 Making Strategic Decisions — Strategic decisions are those which determine the long-term policies of the firm and are necessary if the firm is to meet its objectives eg. policy changes relating to the range of products that are sold.
Stage 3 Making Operating Decisions — Operating decisions are those that focus on the efficient use of resources available to the firm in the short term and will be embodied in plans, conventionally referred to as budgets.
Stage 4 Monitoring and Possible Corrective Action Monitoring is the process of comparing actual performance with a predetermined plan.
It provides the basis from which corrective action can be planned and taken.
2.
In recent years external users of accounting information have required from firms their internal management accounting information.
Explain why such information is useful to these users.
Answer guide: This information tends to be more up to date and detailed as compared to published accounting information.
Users of accounting information, such as banks, need timely information for their decision-making.
This type of information has this quality and is more detailed which can also be useful.
It should be said, however, that there will not be many situations where users will be able to obtain such information from organizations.
3.
Define responsibility accounting with reference to the planning and control process.
Answer guide: Responsibility accounting is a system that identifies decision centres and the managers responsible for these centres (e.g. departments).
Costs and revenues are traced to these centres and compared with planned costs and revenues: thereby the performance of managers and their centres can be measured.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
Discuss the main differences between accountant's and engineer's control models.
Detail any limitations that can be  identified to the planning and control process through this comparison.
Answer guide: The main differences between the models is that the engineer's model is a physical model which generates automatic responses whilst the accountant's model is dependent upon humans for corrective responses.
A number of limitations can be identified primarily due to this particular difference in the systems.
Firstly, with the accountant's control model there tends to be time lags in the reporting of variances because of the nature of accounting systems, and secondly people, rather than the mechanical system, will have to be motivated to respond to variances, identify the cause of variance and take corrective action.
2.
Give illustrations of how the behaviour of individuals can affect the planning and control process.
Answer guide: This is an ideal situation to focus on how students will react to setting their own targets and having targets set for them and then relating this to a business situation.
For example, what pass mark would they set for an examination they are about to sit?
How would students react to you setting a pass mark of say 80%?
Hopefully, they will focus on motivational aspects of this situation.
That is setting a low pass mark themselves which they can easily achieve, whilst being demotivated when having to attempt to obtain a pass mark of 80% that a lecturer has set.
You can then relate these comments to setting input and output budgets in a business situation.
3.
For plans to be effective management should consider the wider environmental factors that relate to the firm.
Discuss.
Answer guide: The main point here to pursue is that the accounting information system (AIS) should be designed taking into consideration the environment in which the organization operates.
For example, the type of production process, e.g. process as compared to job costing, the degree of competition, e.g. monopolistic market conditions, size of the organization, e.g. a sole trader as compared to a multinational — these factors will influence the design of the AIS.
In the case of a monopolist it is likely their planned sales prices will be based on costs and revenues at output levels where they can maximize profits without reference to competitors' prices as they do not exist.
4.
Describe why it is important to set objectives in the firm and comment on the problems of setting objectives.
Answer guide: If concise objectives are not set organizations will tend to drift a long not knowing where they are going.
Planning will be hazardous as planners are not aware of what is required from them and there is no basis for establishing whether or not the organization is succeeding.
The major problems associated with setting objectives relates to the fact that differing people involved in the organization will have varying goals, e.g. shareholders and employees, and these objectives may conflict.
The discussion at this point could then lead to Lowe and Chua's suggested analysis of this phenomenon, that is by  examining ‘activity spaces’ of those involved with the organization and the ‘feasible region’which highlights the making of profit, which is detailed in the text.
Chapter 13
Review questions
1.
It is often assumed that in cost behaviour there is only one independent variable.
Explain the nature of independent variables and why this assumption is made.
Answer guide: Independent variables in the context of cost functions are normally activities that drive costs.
In the example in this chapter, relating to the cost of petrol for a journey, the activity that ‘drives’ the cost was the amount of miles travelled.
That is the cost of petrol for a journey will be dependent upon the miles travelled (the independent variable).
It is likely that the dependent variable, the cost, will be dependent upon more than one variable.
For example, the speed that a vehicle travels will also be influential on the petrol consumed, and therefore the cost of a journey.
However, it is argued that for cost accounting purposes it is too complex to include more than one independent variable.
When there is more than one independent variable the most influential variable in relation to the movement of costs should be chosen as this will be the main cost driver.
For teaching purposes we would encourage lecturers to ask students to identify a number of different activities and their associated costs, and then to discuss what are the associated independent variables that drive the costs of these activities.
2.
Explain what is meant by the relevant range of activity and its significance to CVP Analysis.
Answer guide: The relevant range of activity refers to the level of activity the firm has experienced in past accounting periods.
The significance of this range is that cost behaviour, the relationship between the dependent and independent variables, can be established with a certain amount of accuracy.
This is because the firm has experienced cost behaviour in this range before and can observe the relationship between cost and activity levels.
This information is useful in predicting future costs for decision-making purposes.
Outside this range cost behaviour in the past is not known and therefore is more difficult to predict.
3.
Variable and fixed costs are traditionally assumed to be linear.
Describe why this assumption is unrealistic.
Answer guide: It is assumed that variable costs are the same per unit of activity; therefore the variable costs will move in proportion to activity levels, i.e. in a linear fashion.
In reality variable costs do not behave strictly in this manner.
For example, often firms will receive quantity discounts when they are purchasing large quantities of goods for manufacture or resale.
In such cases the cost per unit of material will not solely depend upon the activity but also on the amount of goods purchased and therefore the variable costs will not behave in a linear fashion and will tend to reflect a curvilinear function.
A Fixed cost is assumed to be constant over all levels of output.
Once again these costs tend not to be strictly linear  in reality.
Fixed costs will often only be fixed over a limited range of output and will tend to behave in a stepped rather than linear fashion.
Students should be asked to consider particular items of costs that are traditionally classified as variable and fixed and to comment how they would expect them to behave over activity levels in reality.
4.
What are the problems associated with CVP Analysis in a multi-product firm?
Answer guide: There are a number of problems associated with CVP Analysis in multi-product firms.
There may be interdependencies between the production of two or more products.
For example, the demand for one product may be affected for the demand for another product, e.g. butter and margarine.
If the sales mix and the profit margins of the two products are different this causes problems because while overall sales volumes targets may be achieved total contribution will vary depending upon whether the higher or lower margin product dominates the sales mix.
Fixed costs can present another problem.
If fixed costs are shared between products a method of allocating and apportioning these costs to individual products must be introduced.
The nature of allocation and apportioning of such costs tends to be arbitrary and can therefore lead to distorting the costs associated with products.
Lastly, if resources are scarce there will be a constraint on the firm's capacity to produce all products it wishes to sell.
There is a need therefore to allocate resources to products taking account of the constraints that exist which will determine the level of output of each of the firm's products.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
In the table below fill in the blank spaces:
Answer guide:
2.
Clean-it Plc makes washing machines and with its existing plant capacity the maximum production possible is 1,000 units per year.
Fixed costs are estimated at £18,000 per annum and the selling price of each machine is £120.
Sales for the next year are expected to drop to 800 units.
The cost of each washing machine is calculated as follows:
Direct material cost £20
Direct labour cost 10 hours at £4 per hour
(a)
Calculate (i) the break even point,(ii) the maximum profit and (iii) the profit at an estimated sales level of 800 units.
(b)
If costs were to alter by the following proportions:
Direct materials increase by 20%
Fixed costs down by £6,000
Direct labour costs increase by £1 per hour
What would be (i) the new break-even point and (ii) the new profit at the estimated sales level of 800 units?
Answer guide:
(a)(i) Break even point: Using the break even equation, where x is the number of units to break even:
(ii) Maximum profit where output is 1,000 units: using the above equation where P equals profit:
(iii) Profit at the sales level of 800 units:
(b)(i) The new break even point: increase in costs:
(ii) The new profit at the estimated sales level of 800 units:
At this point students should be asked to comment on these results and on the advantages of CVP analysis with reference to this problem.
3.
Cords Plc manufactures a style of corduroy trousers that it sold last year at £18 each pair.
The cost specifications for these trousers were as follows: Cords Plc made a profit of £11,040 each month.
(a)
How many pairs of trousers did Cords Plc sell each month?
(b)
Cords-Plc is now planning next year's operations.
The Sales Director is proposing to boost sales by reducing the selling price to £17 and spending an additional £3,000 per month on advertising.
She estimates that these actions would enable the company to sell 5,800 pairs of trousers each month.
Evaluate the Sales Director's proposals taking into account their expected impact on profits and on the break even point.
State any assumptions you need to make.
Variable costs per pair of trousers:
(c)
If the Managing Director of Cords Plc were to require that next year's profit show a 15% increase over last year's performance, how many pairs of trousers would have to be sold each month (i) assuming that the Sales Director's policies were adopted and (ii) assuming that they were not adopted.
Answer guide:
(a)
The amount of trousers Cords sell each month.
Using the break even equation, where x is the number of pairs of trousers to earn a profit of £11,040 each month:
(b)
Fixed costs have now increased to (£26,400 + £3,000) £29,400.
The break even point, using the break even equation:
The break even point before the changes in price and advertising expenditure was:
Profit on sales of 5,800 pairs of trousers:
Comments regarding the Sales Director's proposals:
— Small increase in profits, by £160 (1.4%)
— much higher break even point, and therefore the proposal is riskier than previous operating level.
— What is the likelihood that sales will, indeed, increase to 5,800 units (24% increase).
Assumptions:
— All variable costs remain unchanged and are proportional to volume within this range of activity.
— Fixed costs do not change.
— Capacity is available.
— Efficiency does not change, e.g. no economies of scale.
— Business environment not changing (e.g. government policy, competitors).
(c)
Required profit 15% increase — £11,040 × 1.15 = £12,696.
(i)
Assuming the Sales Director's Policies were adopted.
(ii)
Assuming that the Sales Director's policies were not adopted:
Chapter 14
Review questions
1.
Explain why it is important to determine the cost of products.
Answer guide: The following summarizes the main reasons why firms determine product costs:
— To aid planning.
The determination of the costs of products will be useful in predicting the future (budgeted) costs of these products in the planning process.
— To control costs.
The costs of products need to be determined so that they can be compared with budgeted costs.
— For valuing stocks at the end of the accounting period.
It follows that these values will be influential in determining income.
— To aid the setting of selling prices.
In a number of situations the costs of the products will be a basis for setting prices, e.g. where the market price does not predominate over the pricing decision, as in the case of a monopoly or an oligopoly.
— To ascertain the relative profitability of products so that organizations can make decisions regarding the mix of products.
2.
Define direct and indirect costs.
Answer guide: A direct cost is one that is traceable, and thus is identifiable to a product.
Indirect costs (also known as overhead costs) are those costs that cannot be easily and conveniently identified with a particular product.
3.
Give examples of expenditure that would be classified, in a manufacturing organization, as direct cost and indirect costs.
Answer guide: The following are typically categorised as direct costs in a multi-product firm:
— Direct labour
— Direct materials
— Components specifically purchased for the production of products
— Any other costs that are directly traceable to products and services.
The following are examples of indirect costs in a multi-product firm:
— Supervision
— Inspection
— Maintenance
— Personnel services.
4.
What are period costs?
Answer guide: Period costs are costs that relate to the current period in question.
They are therefore viewed as costs that cannot be justifiably carried forward to future periods because  they do not represent future benefits or the future benefits are so uncertain as to defy measurement.
Thus period costs will be recognized in the profit and loss account in the accounting period when they are incurred.
5.
Explain why it is necessary to use estimates in determining an absorption rate.
Answer guide: There are two main reasons why estimates are used in determining absorption rates.
Firstly, some overhead costs are only known some months after they have been incurred.
For example, telephone charges are normally billed to customers every quarter in retrospect.
Therefore a firm would have to wait three months before they could determine this charge which is not timely for management purposes.
Secondly, a number of overhead costs are seasonal, e.g. heating and lighting costs.
Seasonal variations can distort the costing of products.
For example, if a product is manufactured in the summer it is likely that heating costs would be minimal.
Thus the cost of a product could, to an extent, be dependent upon when the product was manufactured.
It is argued that such variations could distort costing of products and also require complex systems to reflect these seasonal variations.
6.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of applying marginal costing for product costing.
Answer guide: Marginal costing only includes costs that are directly attributable to products.
It is argued that the inclusion of overhead costs, which have to be absorbed into the product using some arbitrary basis, can distort product costs.
This is seen as the main advantage of marginal costing.
It could also be argued that the costs involved in installing and maintaining a marginal costing system is less costly vis-a-vis full costing system.
The main disadvantage of marginal costing that overheads are not included into product costs although it apparent that if activities classified as overheads were not employed then it is unlikely a firm would be able to satisfactorily produce the products.
In addition if marginal costing were to be used for stock valuations the stocks would clearly be undervalued.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
Barclay Plc uses a predetermined overhead rate in applying overheads to product costs on a direct labour cost basis for cost centre X and on a machine hour basis for cost centre Y. The following details the estimated forecasts for l9X1:
(a)
Calculate the predetermined overhead rate for cost centres  X and Y.
(b)
BNH is one of the products manufactured by Barclay.
The manufacturing process involves the two cost centres X and Y. The following data relates to the resources that were used in the manufacture of the product until 19X1:
Determine the total production cost for product BNH using full costing.
(c)
Assuming that product BNH consists of 20,000 units, what is the unit cost of BNH?
(d)
At the end of the year l9X1 it was found that actual production overhead costs amounted to £160,000 in cost centre X and £138,000 in cost centre Y. The total direct labour cost in cost centre X was £144,200 and the machine hours used were 18,000 in cost centre Y during the year.
Calculate the over or under-absorbed overhead for each cost centre.
Answer guide:
(a)
The predetermined overhead rate Cost Centre X based on direct labour cost basis:
Cost Centre Y based on machine hour basis:
(b)
The total production cost for BNH:
(c)
Unit cost of Product BNH:
(d)
The over-absorbed or under-absorbed overhead for l9X1:
2.
Drawrod Plc has three manufacturing costs centres: Punching, Stamping and Assembly.
In addition the company has two service cost centres: Maintenance and Inspection.
The following details the estimated production overhead expenses for the year to the 31 December l9X2:
The following are additional estimates relating to manufacturing for the year ended 31 December l9X2:
The company's bases for the absorption of overheads are:
Punching — Machine hours
Stamping — Machine hours
Assembly — Working hours
(a)
Calculate the absorption rates for Punching, Stamping, and Assembly cost centres (calculations to the nearest pence).
(b)
Specify and explain the factors to be considered in determining whether to use a single, factory wide overhead absorption rate for all factory overheads or a separate rate for each manufacturing cost centre, with reference to the system applied to Drawrod Plc.
Answer guide:
(a)
(b)
It is likely that in manufacturing environments different production cost centres will have differing operating characteristics.
For example, one cost centre may be highly mechanized whilst another may be labour intensive.
It is these differing activities, it is assumed, that will drive the overhead costs.
In such circumstances it is therefore appropriate to employ separate overhead rates for each cost centre reflecting the main activity of the centre.
If a single factory-wide overhead absorption rate were to be used it is likely that product costs will be distorted because the application of overheads to products i6 not a fair reflection of the costs incurred in manufacturing the product.
However, there is evidence that the majority of small and medium size  manufacturing firms do employ a single overhead rate.
The reason given for this is that the costs of installing and maintaining an accounting information system that computes individual cost centre rates is complex and expensive.
This problem clearly relates to the question of cost and benefits of particular accounting information systems which cannot be ignored in the consideration of whether to use a single factory-wide overhead rate or a separate rate for each cost centre.
3.
The management of Absent Ltd have been studying the first three years' results of this newly formed company and are a little concerned with the figures produced.
They tend to think of profits as being directly related to the volume of sales and find it confusing that for one year the reported sales are higher than the previous year but the reported net profit is lower.
The following figures are applicable to the years under consideration:
In each of the years the estimated production volume was 45,000 units and the estimated fixed overheads was £67,500.
The selling price was £4 per unit and variable costs were £1.50 per unit for all three years.
Actual costs equalled estimated costs in all years.
Selling and administrative expenses for each year were £10,000.
The company had no opening stock.
The management accountant was having considerable difficulties explaining to management that fluctuations in profits resulted from differences between volume of sales and the volume of production within an accounting period, together with the system of product valuation used.
(a)
Prepare income statements for Absent Ltd using marginal costing and absorption costing for each of the three years to aid the management accountant's explanation.
(b)
Reconcile the net profit reported under the costing methods.
(c)
Which costing method would you recommend for management decision-making purposes and why?
Answer guide:
(a)
(b)
The stock change in units over the three years:
(c)
For management decision-making the relevant costs to be accounted for are future incremental costs.
The marginal costs of the product by their very nature are incremental.
In contrast fixed costs, it is assumed, will remain constant over activity levels and therefore unavoidable costs.
It follows that marginal costing should be used for decision-making.
Full costing using absorption methods includes fixed overheads and thus would not be appropriate for decision-making purposes.
Absorption costing.
Marginal costing
Chapter 15
Review questions
1.
Discuss the reasons why accrual accounting methods are not appropriate to future decision making.
Answer guide: Accrual accounting methods primarily evolved from the need to report historical events for internal and external users of accounting information.
The relevant costs and revenues associated with decision-making, in contrast, relate to the future rather than the past.
It is therefore not surprising that a number of the concepts underlying the accrual accounting method are not appropriate to decision-making that is forward looking.
However, it should be said that past costs can be useful in predicting future costs.
The costs of producing a particular product in a past period will be very useful information in predicting the costs of producing the same product in the future.
2.
In the context of decision-making explain the meaning of:
* sunk costs
Answer guide: Sunk costs are costs of a historical nature and therefore are incurred as a result of a past decision.
It follows that these costs are irrelevant to future decisions.
Sunk costs can be easily identified in that they will have been paid or are subject to legally binding contracts and the firm is committed to paying for these contracts in the future.
* differential costs
Answer guide: Differential costs, sometimes referred to as incremental costs, are differences in costs and benefits of alternative opportunities available to the organization.
If the costs and benefits do not differ for alternative opportunities under consideration these costs and benefits will be irrelevant to decisions.
On the other hand, if there are differences between costs and benefits these will be classified as relevant to the decision.
* avoidable and unavoidable costs
Answer guide: An avoidable cost is a cost that can be avoided if an opportunity is not taken up.
These costs are relevant because they are directly attributable to the decision to take up an opportunity.
In contrast, an unavoidable cost is one that is going to be incurred whether or not the decision related to a particular opportunity is accepted or rejected.
This cost, by nature, is irrelevant in decision-making.
* opportunity cost
Answer guide: An opportunity cost is defined as the maximum benefit which could be obtained from a resource if it were used for some alternative purpose than the opportunity under consideration.
The opportunity cost of resources are therefore relevant costs in decision-making.
Note to Lecturers — In the above review question it is helpful for students to be able to relate these concepts of relevance to real-life situations.
It is therefore suggested that students are also asked to give examples of relevant and irrelevant costs associated with these concepts.
3.
Depreciation is an important concept in the determination of profit.
Discuss why it is classified as an irrelevant cost in decision-making.
Answer guide: The cost associated with the depreciation of an asset is based on the historic cost of that asset.
The historic cost is the result of a past decision and is therefore a sunk cost and irrelevant in decision-making.
It follows that the cost of depreciation, which is based on the historic cost, is also a sunk cost and therefore an irrelevant cost.
4.
In the majority of cases fixed costs will be irrelevant in decision-making, but on some occasions they may be relevant.
Describe the circumstances when fixed costs are relevant to future decisions.
Answer guide: Fixed costs in the majority of cases will be unavoidable; that is they will be incurred whether or not an opportunity is accepted or rejected.
However, in some cases fixed costs are avoidable; that is they will only be incurred if an opportunity is accepted.
For example, a firm has the opportunity to increase its product range; however, an additional building would have to be rented for production purposes.
The cost of the building, by its nature, is a fixed cost and is also an avoidable cost.
In these circumstances this cost would therefore be relevant in the decision whether to increase the range of products.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
Calculators Plc manufacture and sell pocket calculators.
The sales price of these calculators is £22.
The company's current output is 40,000 units per month, which represents 90% of the company's productive capacity.
Noxid, a chain store customer, who specialises in selling consumable electronic goods, offers to buy 2,000 calculators as a special order at £16 each.
These calculators would be sold under the name of Noxid.
The total costs per month are £800,000 of which £192,000 are fixed costs.
(a)
Advise Calculators Plc if they should accept the special order.
(b)
Would your advice change if Noxid wanted 5,000 calculators?
Answer guide:
(a)
Accept or reject special order.
Check on the number of units that can be manufactured at full  capacity:
Capacity at 90% = 40,000 units; therefore 100% capacity is equal to 40,000 × 100÷90 = 44,444 units [to the nearest round number].
Therefore the company could increase their capacity by another 4,444 units if they 80 wished.
Variable cost per unit:
Contribution per unit if special order is accepted:
Calculators Plc should accept the special order, assuming that fixed costs are irrelevant, because it would increase their total contribution by £1,600.
(b) 5,000 extra units
The company, due to its limited capacity, can only make 4,444 additional units.
Assuming that Noxid will only accept a contract for not less 5,000 pocket calculators Calculators Plc can:
(i)
Sell the 5,000 units to Noxid and reduce their other sales of units that sell for £22 by 556 units; this would result in a total contribution of  or:
(b)
Reject the order from Noxid and sell 40,000 at £22 per unit; the total contribution for this option would be 
In purely financial terms option (i) above is preferable to  Calculators Plc by [£272,219.20 -£272,000]£219.20.
It should be noted that there is possibly another option, that is for the company to increase its capacity.
However, it is likely that fixed costs would increase, but we have no available information to assess this possible option.
2.
Spinks Ltd produce three products, A, B and C. The following is an estimate of costs and revenues for the forthcoming year: The total cost of each product comprises of one third fixed costs and two-thirds variable costs.
Fixed costs will be constant whatever the volume of sales.
The managing director argues that as product A makes a loss the production of this product should be discontinued.
Comment on the managing directors argument.
Answer guide: Fixed costs, we are told in the question, will be constant whatever the volume of sales; it follows that fixed costs will be irrelevant to the decision as to which products should be produced and sold.
The decision whether or not to sell a product will depend on which ones make a positive contribution.
Variable costs of products [to the nearest £]: Contribution of product Range: It can be seen in the above table that Product A makes a positive contribution of £8,000 and therefore should not be dropped from the company's produ
company's profits would be reduced by £8,000.
3.
Eatitnatural Ltd is a company which specializes in the manufacture and sale of healthfoods.
The company have just completed market research on a new type of organic toothpaste called Abrasive.
The budget estimate derived from the market research for one year's production and sales, which was presented to the Board by the Marketing Managing, is as follows:
The Board of Directors are very disappointed with this budget, view of the research and development costs already incurred of £20,000 and the need to make use of the spare capacity in the factory.
Fred Sharpe, the Managing Director, suggests bringing a consultant to examine the costs of this new product.
Abrasive Toothpaste
The following additional information is available:
(i)
60% of the direct labour requirement would be transferred from another department within the company.
The monthly contribution of this department (£5,000), subject to a special machine being introduced into the department at a hire cost of £4,000 per year, would fall by only 20% of its current level as a result of the reduction in the labour force.
The remainder of the direct labour requirement would have to be recruited.
It is anticipated that their wages will be the same as those transferred from the other department.
In addition, it is estimated that the cost of recruitment, e.g. advertising, will cost £3,000.
Two supervisors would be required at a cost of £15,000 per year each.
One would be recruited; the other Reg Raven, would remain at work instead of retiring.
The company will
(iii)
pay him a pension of £5,000 per year on his retirement.
Stocks of ingredient X are currently available for a whole year's production of Abrasive, and are valued at their original cost.
The price of this ingredient is subject to dramatic price variations, and the current market price is double the original cost.
It could be resold at the market price less 10% selling expenses, or retained for use later in another new product to be manufactured by the company, by which time it is expected that the market price will have fallen by about 25%.
(iv)
Ingredient Y's price has been very stable and is used for other products currently manufactured and sold by the company.
There are no stocks available for the production of Abrasive.
(v)
Ingredient P is another commodity with a fairly static price.
One half of the annual requirement is in stock and the other half will have to be purchased during the year at an estimated cost of £4,500.
The materials in stock could be resold for £4,000 less 10% selling expenses, or could be used to produce another product after some further processing.
This processing, which would take 2,000 hours in the Mixing Department, where labour is paid £12 per hour, would save the company additional purchasing costs of £5,000.
The Mixing Department has sufficient idle capacity to do this amount of work only.
Ingredient Z was bought well in advance and is in stock.
It has no alternative use.
Fred Sharpe is beginning to regret the decision to buy this ingredient in advance as it will deteriorate in store and may become dangerous before the end of the budget period.
It cannot be sold and will cost the company £500 to dispose of it if it is not used to produce Abrasive.
(vii)
The other variable costs can all be avoided if the contract is not accepted.
(viii)
Fixed overheads of the company are expected to increase by £2,000 per year as a result of manufacturing and selling Abrasive.
As the consultant employed by the company, you are requested to re-examine this statement, taking account of the additional information, and to recommend any necessary action.
Clearly state any assumptions that you make.
Answer guide: Each item will be considered separately before an amended statement is produced for the revenue and costs of Abrasive Toothpaste.
(i)
Direct labour:
(ii)
Supervisors 
(iii)
Ingredient X 
The ingredient could be retained for other users thereby saving purchases of £34,000 less 25% [£8,500]= £25,500.
The opportunity cost of using Ingredient X to produce Abrasive is the higher of these two opportunities; that is £30,600.
Note the original cost of Ingredient X is a sunk cost and is therefore irrelevant to the decision.
(iv)
Ingredient Y
Ingredient Y would have to be purchased if Abrasive is to be manufactured; thus the cost of manufacturing Abrasive is an incremental cost of £7,000.
(v)
Ingredient P
Existing stocks could be sold for £4,000 less 10% ie. £3,600 OR
The stocks could be further processed saving purchases of £5,000.
Note under this option the labour cost will be nil because labour is currently available but idle.
The opportunity cost will be the higher of the two options i.e. £5,000.
In addition half of Ingredient P would have to be purchased externally for [f9,000/2]f4,500.
The total cost of using Ingredient P is therefore £9,500.
It should be noted the original cost of the stock is a sunk cost and therefore is irrelevant in establishing the cost of manufacturing Abrasive.
(iv)
Ingredient Z
This ingredient is in stock, the original cost is a sunk cost.
If it is not used to manufacture Abrasive it will cost the company £500 to dispose of the ingredient; therefore if it is used the company will gain £500.
(vii)
Variable Overheads
Depreciation is not a relevant cost; only real loss in value of the machine should be taken into account if Abrasive is manufactured ie. f2,000.
We shall assume that the other variable overheads [£l0,000 -£ 3,000]£7,000 are relevant.
(viii)
Fixed Overheads
The only relevant fixed costs are those that are incremental, i.e. £2,000.
Research and development costs £20,000: these are sunk costs and it follows are irrelevant to the decision.
AMENDED STATEMENT OF REVENUE AND COSTS — ABRASIVE TOOTHPASTE
The company will make a profit of £56,400 if they manufacture and sell Abrasive Toothpaste.
Chapter 16
Review questions
1.
Many organizations, at particular times, will be subject to shortages of resources.
These shortages will effectively restrict their ability to meet the demand for their products or services.
Describe four examples of these types of constraints; two from a manufacturing firm and two from a service firm.
Answer guide:
(a)
Manufacturing — Two typical constraints that are often experienced in manufacturing industry are shortages of particular labour skills and space for machinery.
The shortage of skilled labour will often occur when there are competitive local labour markets.
Available space is often the cause of restricting the number of machines that can be installed in a factory and thereby the production capacity.
(b)
Service Sector — For professional firms in the service sector a typical resource constraint is the lack of the necessary professionally qualified staff needed to meet client demand.
Another example of resource constraints in the service sector is the shortage of trained motor mechanics required by garages.
This constraint would effectively limit the amount of vehicles that a firm could service.
2.
Explain why a shortage of resources in an organization is a short-term phenomenon.
Answer guide: The shortage of resources, although an effective short-term constraint, can invariably be overcome in the long term as the firm can take action to eliminate the constraint.
A good example is the case of shortages of particular skills of labour.
For example, a proprietor of a garage may be restricted as to the amount of work that can be taken on due to a lack of skilled motor mechanics; however, the proprietor can overcome this constraint in the long term by training non-skilled labour to perform the task.
3.
Discuss the importance and usefulness of the concept of internal opportunity cost in the making of decisions.
Answer guide: If a resource is scarce a firm may be constrained in terms of output.
This is the case when there are competing opportunities for a scarce resource within a firm.
The use of the scarce resource on one opportunity (project) may mean that another opportunity cannot be undertaken even though it would have generated a positive contribution in cash-flow terms.
It is this contribution foregone which is described as the internal opportunity cost.
The determination of the internal opportunity cost can be a very useful tool in the decision making and the planning process of an organisation.
The management of a firm by knowing the contribution from the next best opportunity could quickly determine the additional contribution if the constraint were to be relieved.
In addition the firm would know how much it is willing to pay to relieve a constraint.
For example, if labour is in short supply this constraint could be relieved by the firm  offering overtime to its present workforce; if the internal opportunity cost of labour is £5 the firm could offer an overtime premium up to this amount and by doing so generate a positive contribution.
4.
The opportunity cost of a resource may, in some circumstances, be higher than the resource's purchase price.
Explain why this may be the case.
Answer guide: The cost of employing a scarce resource may be greater than the cost associated with purchasing the resource.
The use of a scarce resource involves not only the purchase price but also the contribution foregone by not being able to accept other opportunities.
That is the use of the scarce resource on one project may mean that another project cannot be undertaken although it would have generated a positive contribution to fixed costs and profits.
In such cases the cost of a resource includes the external (purchase price) and internal opportunity cost.
5.
Qualitative factors are often influential in the decision making process.
Describe the nature of qualitative factors and give three examples that may influence a decision to make a component rather than buy it from another firm.
Answer guide: Qualitative factors are not capable of being quantified in terms of costs and revenue.
They may stem from either non-financial objectives or factors which might be quantified in money terms, but which have not been quantified, because there is insufficient information to make reliable estimates.
The nature of qualitative factors in decision making will vary with the circumstances related to the opportunities under consideration.
Examples of qualitative factors in the make or buy decision:
(i)
Quality: If a firm makes a component rather than buys it from an external party it has greater control over the quality of the component.
For example, the firm can implement its own quality and inspection policies and amend these as they see fit.
Although this factor may be difficult to assess in monetary terms it may be influential in the make or buy decision.
(ii)
Reliability in supplies: It is likely that a firm has greater control over reliability of supplies if it makes a component rather than buying it in from another firm.
For example, the cost of buying a component externally may be less than the cost of making the component however, the potential supplier may have a history of poor industrial relations which may jeopardize supplies periodically; this factor may be significant in the decision to make or buy.
(iii)
After-sales service: When a firm sells a product that embodies a component purchased externally it may find it difficult to service the product if the component is the cause of the malfunction of the product.
After-sales service may be influential in the firm's ability to sell the product and it follows the make or buy decision will also be influenced by this factor.
Problems for discussion and analysis.
1.
Coyle Plc at present manufactures ail the components that go to make up its finished products.
A salesman from a components supplier has just offered to provide the firm's requirements for two components, the BC100 at £7.75 each and the BC200 at £2.00 each.
If the firm buys in components the capacity utilized at present would be unused.
The firm currently manufactures 50,000 units of each component and the current costs of production are as follows:
(a)
On a quantitative basis should the firm continue to manufacture BC100 and BC200 or should it buy in both or either of the components?
(b)
Discuss the qualitative factors which are likely to have an influence on this decision.
Answer guide:
(a)
We will assume that fixed costs are unavoidable.
The relevant costs of the make or buy decision:
(b)
The following outlines a number of qualitative factors which may be influential in the make or buy decision:
* The opportunity cost of the use of spare capacity.
* Reliability of supplies.
* Control over quality.
2.
Pigeon Proprietory Ltd proposes a production plan for l9X1, aiming to maximize profits.
The following details are available  
Fixed overhead, which is estimated to cost £10,000, irrespective of what is produced and sold, is applied at 100 per cent of direct labour cost.
A maximum of 64,000 direct labour hours is expected to be available.
(a)
Calculate the optimal profit-maximizing production plan and explain the reasons for your choice.
(b)
Explain the following hypothetical internal opportunity costs:
* Direct labour hours £2.40
* Machine hours £l.70
Answer guide:
(a)
* The number of units of product A that can be produced will be restricted to 1,000 units due to the constrained labour hours.
NB.
Fixed costs are unavoidable and are therefore irrelevant in the decision.
(b)
Internal opportunity cost — direct labour hours f2.40 can be interpreted in the following ways:
* the contribution a firm would forego by losing one hour of labour
* the contribution gained if the firm could release one more hour
* the maximum the firm would be willing to pay to release one more hour.
Answer guide: Machine hours £l.70 — The additional contribution if one more machine could be released.
Thus it is also the maximum additional cost that the company would be willing to pay to secure one more machine hour.
It can also be interpreted as the contribution the company would forego by losing a machine hour.
3.
You have recently been appointed as a consultant to the Murphy Manufacturing Company.
The management of the company had prepared a report showing certain data concerning the two products made Mox and Tox.
The following information has been extracted from this report:
In view of the poor results shown by MOX the following changes have been proposed by the management:
(i)
Abandon the production of MOX and buy in 1,000 per month for f2,800.
The quality is identical and selling price will remain unchanged.
(ii)
Use the spare capacity to make COX.
It is estimated that 1,000 units could be sold at £1 each.
Material costs are £0.4 per unit and labour costs f0.2.
All overheads are fixed and are not expected to change from the present cost of f2,000 per month.
No stocks are held.
(a)
Comment on the suitability of the management's statement for assessing product profitability and indicate any ways in which you think it could be improved.
(b)
Prepare a monthly profit and loss statement for the present and proposed new programmes.
Do the proposed changes appear to be profitable?
Explain the reasons for any misunderstandings which may have arisen as a result of the management's proposal.
Answer guide:
(a)
The management's statement of the profitability of Mox and Tox includes fixed costs which we are told will not be expected to change from the present total costs of £2,000.
Therefore, fixed costs are unavoidable; that is they will be incurred whether or not the firm manufactures and sells both products.
It follows in the decision regarding the optimal production plan fixed costs are irrelevant and should therefore be ignored.
(b)
Calculation of contribution per unit:
The present programme is the most profitable and therefore it is strongly suggested that no changes are implemented.
Present plan:
Abandon production of Mox and buy in 1,000 units for £2,800:
4.
Burco Ltd produces and sells two products: X and Y. During the last year 700 labour hours were worked and the operating results were as follows:
All variable costs are a linear function of output.
The  material used for X is quite different from that used for Y but both may be produced with the same labour force.
Five X's can be made in one labour hour, whilst only two units of Y can be made in one labour hour.
Labour hours are expected to be limited to 800 next year.
The following information about the market for X and Y for next year is available:
(a)
Assuming plant capacity is fully used, what is the optimum mix of X and Y?
(b)
Assuming that the price of material for Y decreases by 20%, what is the optimal mix of X and Y?
Do not assume any change in the price of X or Y.
(c)
Assuming the cost of labour increases by 20%, prices may only be put up by 10% without affecting sales limits and the number of labour hours available is reduced to 600, what is the optimal mix of X and Y?
(d)
What is the net income in each case for scenario (a),(b) and (c) above?
(e)
Discuss the limitations of your analysis.
Answer guide:
(a)
Contribution per labour hour:
(b)
Material costs for Y decrease by 20%:
The ranking now changes; Y will be preferred to X 
Optimum mix of X and Y:
optimum mix of X and Y:
(c)
Cost of labour increases by 20%; prices increase by 10%; and the number of labour hours is now reduced to 600.
NB.
Although product X is ranked before product Y the optimum mix only includes the manufacture of 1,000 units of X, this is because the minimum quantity of Y that must be sold is 800 units.
Optimum mix of X and Y:
(d)
Income under all scenarios:
(e)
The limitations of the analysis:
* Costs and revenues are assumed to behave in a linear fashion; this will not necessarily be the case.
* The projections for next year assume certainty; in reality all the variables are uncertain.
* It is assumed that there are no stocks and all production is therefore sold when produced.
* No qualitative factors have been considered in the analysis although these factors may be influential in the decisions.
Chapter 17
Review questions
1.
What is a budget?
Answer guide: A budget is defined as a plan of action expressed in money terms.
However, it should be stressed that different types of organizations will require differing types of budgets to enable them to function effectively.
The budget must match the organization's situation.
2.
What are the main reasons for an organization to introduce budgets?
Answer guide: The following are the main reasons that organizations introduce budgets:
(i)
Budgets compel management to look ahead and set short-term targets.
By looking ahead management are then in a good position to anticipate potential problems.
(ii)
The introduction of budgets encourages greater co-ordination of the functions within the organization.
For example, a production budget can only be constructed with knowledge of the forthcoming period's sales and desired stock levels.
(iii)
Budgets may be introduced to force management to formally communicate their objectives and strategies in the forthcoming periods.
Communications are also enhanced within the organization when budgets are compared periodically with actual expenditure.
Discussions through this control mechanism will invariably occur regarding future actions.
(iv)
Provides a basis for identifying those responsible for differing functions within an organization and a basis for measuring their performance.
(v)
If an organization wishes to implement control mechanisms the budget is an important part of these mechanisms.
Budgets in such cases will act as a benchmark that can be compared with actual performance of managers and operatives.
(vi)
Budgets may be introduced as a medium for which expenditure is authorized.
If expenditure is contained within a budget it implies that it has been approved by top management and no further approval is required.
(vii)
A reason for introducing budgets in an organization may be to motivate employees.
In this sense the budget is once again being primarily used as a target to motivate employees to reach certain levels of attainment.
3.
Explain why budgets may mean different things to different people within an organization, giving reasons.
Answer guide: Often budgets will mean different things to differing people in an organization.
For example, management may introduce budgets primarily to enhance planning within the organization.
But the introduction of the budget may be seen by operatives in a more negative perspective of controls being imposed upon them.
4.
Describe the main differences in the budgeting process for a small retail firm and a large manufacturing firm.
Answer guide: In the case of a retail firm the main emphasis of the budget will be on consumer sales and in particular the changing pattern of sales.
In addition attention will also be given to having sufficient purchases to meet the demand of customers.
In a manufacturing firm typically the budgets will be more complex due to the production process itself being complex.
The emphasis here will be on the sales budget and production planning necessary to meet the sales budgets.
The production plan will normally include functional budgets in respect of direct and indirect labour, materials and bought-in parts, machining resources, stocks and overheads.
5.
Discuss the interrelationships between the sales budget and production budget in a manufacturing organization.
Answer guide: In manufacturing organizations it is extremely important that there is co-ordination between the sales and the production function.
The main reason for this is that the production cycle, that is the time taken to produce goods for sale, can be relatively long.
If, for example, a firm were to amend its sales budget half-way through a budget period the personnel responsible for production need to know this amended sales budget so they can plan and make provisions to ensure the products are available for sale.
This may involve ordering additional stocks of material, amending production schedules and possibly introducing overtime working or shift working, all of which takes time to plan and implement.
6.
Explain, giving examples, the main advantages of identifying cash surpluses and deficits in a cash budget.
Answer guide: An important aspect of cash budgets is that cash surpluses and deficits can be identified in advance.
By identifying surpluses at a early stage in the planning process a firm is in a good position to plan the investment of such funds.
The time period that funds can be invested is critical in maximizing the returns from investments.
Knowing, for example, that the firm will have a cash surplus, say for two months prior to the payment of a large creditor, such as the Inland Revenue, means that the company will be able to arrange to deposit cash over this period to obtain the maximum returns.
If no cash budget existed these cash surpluses would only be identified when they occur.
It is likely that in these circumstances the rate of return on deposits will be less due to not identifying the surpluses earlier and not knowing how long the surpluses will exist.
By identifying cash deficits at the planning stage a firm will be in a good position to arrange financing for the deficit.
Certainly, a bank, for example, would look more favourably on an application for an overdraft after having some insight into the future cash position of a firm.
7.
What determines the budget time period?
Answer guide: The time period for a budget will normally be one year.
The reason for a year would appear to relate to the periodic reporting requirements regulated by company law.
Companies, for example, are required, with a few exceptions, to publish accounts annually.
It should be recognised that there is a link between the information content of management budgets and published annual accounts.
For example, a company's budget will normally detail a sales budget for a period whilst the published accounts will show sales for the year.
The budget can therefore be usefully utilized as a control mechanism by management in the reporting of external results.
For internal management control purposes a annual budget will normally be broken down into discrete quarterly, monthly or even shorter periods.
Breaking the budget down into shorter periods facilitates a more effective control device.
8.
What is a master budget?
Describe its role in relation to other budgets.
Answer guide: The master budget will normally represent a summary of the individual functional budgets of the organization as a whole.
It conventionally consists of the budgeted profit and loss account and balance sheet for the organization.
This budget is extremely useful for management as it clearly sets out the short-term objectives and targets for the forthcoming budget period and is in a form that is easy to comprehend.
It also provides a basis for co-ordinating the individual functional budgets; these functional budgets will normally include the sales, production, administration, distribution and cash budgets.
Problems for discussion and analysis
1.
With reference to the example of Sivraj (page 311), prepare a profit and loss account and balance sheet from the data given using worksheets.
Answer guide:
Sivraj worksheet for six months to 31 December
2.
CJH Ltd is preparing its annual budget.
The following data is available:
(a)
Production Budget in units.
(b)
Total budgeted cost of materials used in production of X, Y and Z.
(c)
The total cost of materials A, B and C purchased.
Answer guide:
(a)
Production budget in units:
(b)
Total budgeted cost of materials used in production of X, Y and Z:
(c)
The total cost of materials A, B and C purchased:
3.
Faraday Ltd is a wholesaler.
The management have been extremely worried about the firms cash position over the last few years.
In January l9X1 they seek your advice and ask you to prepare a cash budget for the forthcoming months of April, May and June l9Xl.
In addition they have asked you to write a report on the cash position over this period and in particular on ways in which you think it could be improved.
The following data is made available to you regarding the firm's operations:
(a)
Estimated Sales for the six months to June l9X1:
Cash is received immediately on cash sales.
The firm allows customers one month's credit on sales other than for cash.
(b)
Purchase of goods for resale are made on credit.
The firm receives two months credit on these purchases.
The purchases for the 6 months to June l9X1 are:
(c)
A stock check at the end of last year has revealed £45,000 of stock, valued at cost, that is considered obsolete.
The firm is currently negotiating the sale of this  stock for £9,500 and anticipates payment in May l9X1.
(d)
Faraday's manufacturing overheads are estimated to be £12,000 per month.
This includes a charge for depreciation of £2,000 per month.
The company takes one month to pay these expenses.
(e)
Selling and Distribution expenses are estimated to be £50,400 a year and are incurred evenly over the year.
One months credit is taken.
(f)
The firm are currently negotiating an advertising programme with an agency.
The cost will be £6,300 in May and £7,700 in June.
Payment will be made in cash.
(g)
In June the firm anticipates paying £3,880 tax to the Inland Revenue.
(h)
The firm has agreed to purchase new stock handling equipment.
The cost of £105,200 is payable in two equal instalments in April and May l9X1.
(i)
The firm expects in June to be able to take advantage of adjacent property, cost £150,000, to expand their operation.
(j)
It is estimated that the cash balance at the 1st April will be £16,000.
Answer guide:
Cash budget for three months ending June l9X1:
The following details an outline of the points that should be covered in the report:
The company's cash position from trading activities appears to be healthy.
If capital expenditure were to be ignored the surplus in April would be [53,340 + 52,560]£105,900, in May [81,980 + 52,560]£134,540 and in June [150,000 -27,200]£122,800.
From  the cash surpluses from trading activities it would appear that the firm can afford, in cash terms, to finance the purchase of the new stock handling equipment.
However, it seems that some additional finance will have to be raised to finance the proposed purchase of property.
The nature of the finance to be raised to fund the purchase of the property will depend upon a number of factors, for example the cost of finance from differing sources of capital and the firms current capital structure.
This information is not available thus no recommendation can be made regarding this issue.
The firm could improve its trading cash flows by reducing the credit given to customers and delaying payment for purchases.
However, there is often a cost to this strategy.
For example, if the credit period were reduced for customers to pay their debts it is likely that sales would decrease as customers may trade with another company that gives them a greater period to pay.
The cost associated with delay in payments to suppliers includes the possible erosion of goodwill between the supplier and the company, which could have significant consequences.
For example, there may be an occasion where the company requires supplies delivered more quickly than normal — the supplier may not be very accommodating because of the previous delays in payments.
4.
Borough Equipment Plc produces two products, Main and Pain, for sale to electrical wholesalers.
The following information relates to the six months ending 31 December 19X3:
Overheads for the six months are anticipated to be £25,000.
The company adopts a marginal costing system and treats overheads as a period cost.
Components bought in and used in manufacture:
Required:
(a)
Sales budget
(b)
Production budget
(c)
Purchases budget in terms of components
(d)
Purchases budget in £
(e)
The total labour hours and cost for the period
(f)
The contribution per unit
(g)
The profit or loss for the period
Comment on the usefulness of these budgets for planning, decision making and control.
Answer guide:
(a)
Sales Budget:
(b)
Production budget:
(c)
Purchases budget in terms of components:
(d)
Purchases budget in £:
(e)
The total labour hours and cost for the period:
(f)
Contribution per unit:
(g)
The profit and loss for the period:
The usefulness of these budgets for planning, decision-making and control:
Planning:
(i)
All those responsible for functions within the organization must clearly co-ordinate their individual budgets with others.
The budgets prepared for Borough Equipment Plc illustrate the importance of co-ordination between these functions.
For example, those responsible for the labour budget will know the hours required for forthcoming period and can therefore plan to ensure this requirement is available.
(ii)
These budgets will act as a medium to communicate the short-term objectives of the company to management and operatives.
(iii)
The budgets represent targets which responsible personnel can work to during the period and possibly also provide a means to motivate personnel.
Decision making:
(i)
The functional budgets give management the opportunity to make decisions within the defined objectives of the company.
(ii)
From the production of these budgets it may be felt that certain aspects of the budgets need to be amended before they become operational.
The budget in this context gives the management the opportunity to examine the overall effect of operating decisions.
For example, operating decisions regarding the range of products to be made and sold would normally be made prior to the completion of the functional  and master budgets, but these decisions when considered as a whole within the budgeting framework may be reconsidered and amendments made to the range.
Control:
(i)
The budget may be used as a source for the control of authorizing of expenditure.
The fact that the total expenditure for components X and Y is shown in the budget for the forthcoming six month period implies this level of expenditure has been endorsed by top management and therefore requires no further authorization from them.
(ii)
These budgets provide a basis for responsibility accounting.
(iii)
Budgets can also act as a basis for comparing actual performance with a plan, and this comparison can then lead to identifications of variances from the plan which may initiate management action, where variances are undesirable, to ensure that in future periods such deviations do not occur.