

CHAPTER TWO
Early-modern England
BASIC RECORDS
Some records are worthy of special comment at the beginning of this chapter for they are sources that every family and local historian must learn to use straight away if he is to gain any understanding of the period before the Industrial Revolution.
Parish Registers
Parish registers are the major source for anyone tracing his family tree in the centuries before the introduction of civil registration in July 1837.
They are also of fundamental importance for the local historian as they provide demographic data essential to a proper understanding of his chosen community.
In recent years the rigorous analysis of these data by the Cambridge Group for the Study of Population and Social Structure has indicated the general trends of population movement and has pinpointed the years when harvests failed, epidemics struck and the death toll soared.
Anyone working seriously on the social and economic history of the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries must become acquainted with the major findings of this demographic research.
In 1538 Thomas Cromwell ordered each parish to keep a record of its baptisms, marriages and burials.
Apparently, most parishes kept their records on loose sheets of paper, many of which were subsequently lost or destroyed.
Very few registers go back as far as 1538.
The system was improved in 1597, when ministers and churchwardens were instructed henceforth to keep  their records in a bound register and to copy out surviving documents at least as far back as 1558, when Elizabeth came to the throne.
At the same time it was ordered that in future an annual transcript of events should be sent to the bishop's office.
Where they survive, bishop's transcripts are a valuable alternative source for the historian; they may cover gaps in the original registers and can sometimes be more readily consulted.
The first task of the researcher is to locate his records and to check whether or not they are more easily available in print or on microfilm.
Since 1979 parish registers have been deposited in appropriate record offices if churches cannot meet strict requirements for their safety and preservation.
It can take time to find exactly where the records one is searching for are kept.
The newer dioceses which have been created since Victorian times normally use a local authority record office as their approved archive repository.
This means that the original parish registers are usually housed in a different place from the bishop's transcripts which are kept at the record office of the appropriate ancient diocese.
Thus, the original registers for the Sheffield district are to be found at Sheffield Central Library, whereas the bishop's transcripts for those parishes that were within Yorkshire are kept at the Borthwick Institute for Historical Research, York, and the transcripts for those places that formerly lay within Derbyshire are available at the Lichfield Joint Record Office.
At an early stage of his enquiries the local and family historian must become familiar with the shape and size of his parish and learn which places are located within its bounds.
Parishes vary enormously in size, according to their geographical position and the special circumstances of their historical development.
A moorland parish will obviously be larger than a parish in a fertile area that was densely settled in early times; a church that was an Anglo-Saxon missionary centre will usually have a larger parish than one that was founded later.
Some parishes contained chapelries or chapels-of-ease, which may or may not have had independent rights to perform baptism, marriage and burial ceremonies.
Such ceremonies were sometimes recorded in separate chapelry registers, but others were noted in the register of the parish church.
The Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies, Canterbury, has published a series of county maps showing the ancient parish boundaries and the starting dates of surviving registers, and various record offices have produced similar maps for their own area.
These are essential tools for   family historians who are tracing their ancestors in unfamiliar parts of the country.
One must always bear in mind that the settlement pattern of England's industrial regions was altered beyond recognition during the course of the nineteenth century.
Some of today's populous places were insignificant before the Industrial Revolution, but they have now far outgrown the village that was clustered around the ancient parish church.
Elsewhere, the rate of growth has been such that ancient parishes have been carved into much smaller units so that new churches could serve the expanding population.
A further complication arises when a new settlement straddles the boundary between two parishes, so that two sets of records have to be seen.
One has to be aware of such problems and refer to whatever maps and directories are at hand.
Having found the appropriate register, the researcher is soon  faced with fresh difficulties, quite apart from the daunting task of reading sixteenth and seventeenth century scripts.
In the first place he must be aware that until 1 January 1752 the old year began on Ladyday, 25 March.
Thus entries for, say, the year 1680 will not end at 31 December but continue through January, February and most of March 1681; sometimes they will be written as 1680/1 for the period between 1 January and 25 March, and it is as well for the local and family historian to adopt that convention or else he will get in a hopeless muddle.
In 1752 the old Julian calendar was replaced by the more accurate Gregorian calendar and in order to bring England in line with Europe the next day after 3 September was proclaimed to be 14 September.
However, events such as annual fairs were often celebrated long afterwards on Old May Day, Old Michaelmas, etc., and the financial year still ends on 6 April, eleven days after Lady Day.
From 1754 onwards marriages were entered on printed forms, otherwise no standard procedure was laid down until 1813.
In earlier times the quality of the information provided by a register varies from place to place and from incumbent to incumbent.
Registers were often kept in a disorderly fashion with no attempt to separate baptisms from burials or marriages.
It is common to find gaps when nothing is recorded, blank spaces where the minister has forgotten a name when he came to register it after the event, repetitions, erasures and insertions.
A page from the register of the Leicestershire parish of Countesthorpe illustrates some of the difficulties one is likely to encounter.
Inserted in the margin is the information that ‘Thomas Jacksonne sonne of Willm.
Jackson was baptized July the viiii 1625’.
It will be seen from this extract that at a baptism sometimes both parents' names were recorded, but occasionally only the father's.
A man's occupation or standing might be noted, but not invariably.
Two of the entries are not in chronological order, which suggests that the recording of events was sometimes delayed.
Thomas Jackson may have found that his own baptism had not been recorded and so insisted on having it written in the margin twenty-two years later.
And we are left with the problem of deciding whether or not the two Elizabeths baptised on 17 October were really the same girl.
It ought to be said that this particular extract poses more difficulties than the normal run of parish registers.
It dates from the time of the Civil War when many registers were not properly kept; thus, under the year 1647 the vicar of Hooton Pagnell (Yorks.) wrote in his register:
In this year I was imprisoned and in trouble: and the clerk was negligent.
A droll comment from time to time enlivens the dry information that fills most of the pages of a typical register.
After recording the burial of Ann Parrot on 18 June 1736 in the Nottinghamshire parish of Beeston, the vicar commented:
a dissembling canting hollow presbiterian.
The incumbent of Worsbrough (Yorks.) followed the burial entry of ‘Richard Guest, Mason’, on 28 July 1765 with the extra information that he was:
Commonly Called Snivelling Dick
And at Cantley in the same diocese the vicar thought it was worth  making some comment on a baptism that took place on 12 October 1754:
Mary Daugr. of Martha Hazlewood of Cantley born above a year after her Husband left her.
Finally, let us observe the predicament of the minister of Horsley (Gloucs.) on 11 August 1731:
John Pegler & ann Thomas were half-married.
I proceeded no further, because they paid me but one-half, viz. 2/6d.
The incidence of Nonconformity in any particular parish will obviously affect the reliability of the Anglican registration.
However, this does not become a major problem until the late eighteenth century.
Apart from the Quakers, and sometimes the Roman Catholics, the Old Dissenting sects did not usually object to the baptism, marriage and burial services of the Established Church and therefore Dissenters appear in Church of England registers like anyone else.
Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act of 1753 compelled Dissenters to marry at their parish church; only the baptism registers give cause for doubt.
The spectacular growth of Methodism changed all this; the two generations before civil registration began in 1837 are often the most difficult for a genealogist because of this.
The Public Record Office has about 9,000 Nonconformist registers dating from 1775, which were deposited when civil registration began; these are on the Mormons' International Genealogical Index microfiche, and of course other Nonconformist records have been deposited in local record offices.
D. J. Steel, Sources for Nonconformist Genealogy and Family History (1973), is the essential guide.
On 1 January 1813 the Church of England began to standardize entries on printed forms bound into the register.
From that time onwards they are both informative and easy to use.
Baptism entries give name, date of baptism, parents' Christian names and surname, abode, and occupation of the father.
Marriage registers record both names, parishes of residence, date of wedding, and names of witnesses.
Burial entries give name, abode, date of burial, and age at death.
A uniform system had at last been achieved.
Wills and inventories
Parish registers are the best example of records that were first kept  during the Tudor era and which are now invaluable sources for the genealogist.
It is far easier to trace one's ancestors in the second half of the sixteenth century than in the Middle Ages, and the information that can be collected is usually much fuller than before.
Under the Tudors the age-old practice of making a will spread down the social scale; far more wills were made than in earlier times, even though the custom was still restricted to a minority of the population.
Making a will was partly a question of fashion and prestige, partly a matter of providing for children who were still minors.
If children had already married and had been provided for a will was not necessary.
Until 1858, when the state set up a new administrative body at Somerset House, the responsibility for proving wills lay with the church.
Testators normally began their will by committing their soul to Almighty God and asking to be buried in the local churchyard (or if they were rich and important enough within the church itself).
After making provision for the payment of their debts and funeral expenses, they then proceeded to the disposal of their worldly goods.
Wills were normally made shortly before death, as many a shaky signature can testify; some people left it so late that they could only make an oral statement (or nuncupative will), which was written down and sworn to by witnesses.
It is common to find that the will-maker was ‘sick in body but full in mind’, and a clause often cancelled any previous wills.
If a person died intestate the court had power to grant letters of administration of his estate to executors.
The strength and nature of a person's religious beliefs are often made clear by a will.
Before the Reformation it was common not only to commit one's soul to Almighty God, but also to ‘our Lady St. Mary and to all the holy company of heaven’.
Later Protestant wills state a belief in the ‘full reemission and forgiveness of all my sinnes, onely by the deathe and bludsheadinge of our Lorde and saivoure Jesus Christe’.
But one must beware of accepting such statements at their face value as evidence of deep personal belief, for such phrases are taken from books which advised people how to compose documents, and Dr Margaret Spufford has shown how rural wills in Cambridgeshire were drawn up by only a small number of scribes.
The standard guides on how to locate wills are A. J. Camp's Wills and Their Whereabouts (1974) and J. S. W. Gibson's Wills and Where to Find Them (1974).
Most are kept at the record offices of the ancient dioceses, together with the bishop's transcripts.
Substantial landowners tended to by-pass the administrative system by using the prerogative courts at Canterbury and York.
Canterbury was the senior court and for a time during the Commonwealth period — between 1655 and 1660 — all wills were proved there.
The researcher must also keep in mind the fact that some parishes were ‘peculiar jurisdictions’ independent of the usual ecclesiastical courts.
The thought and, better still, the taste of Theakston's ‘old Peculier’ will help him remember this point, for this special beer is brewed at Masham, which was one of the richest peculiar jurisdictions in the country.
The information contained in wills must be examined as critically as that in any other document.
Wherever possible, they should be used in conjunction with parish registers and other sources.
The will of Joseph Walker of Stubbing House (1729), a nailmaker-farmer in the Yorkshire parish of Ecclesfield, illustrates the pitfalls for the unwary.
After a lengthy statement of faith, he settled his personal estate in the following manner:
Without the information contained in the parish register, one might reasonably suppose that Joseph and Ann had three children, who were each to receive only a shilling unless Ann remarried, upon which occasion they would inherit the entire estate.
In fact, Joseph, Benjamin and Mary were the children of Joseph's first marriage (in 1696 to Margaret Bower) and they had each been provided for upon their marriage.
Joseph and Ann had six children, none of whom is named in the will.
They were all minors and Joseph was taking the normal step to protect their interests, for if Ann remarried the estate would pass to her new husband.
Joseph now appears in a very different light.
From the reign of Henry VIII to that of George II it was the  practice of the various probate courts to insist that ‘a true and perfect inventory’ of the personal estate of the person who had died should be attached to his will or the letters of administration.
In recent years tens of thousands of such inventories have been studied by historians and our understanding of the social and economic history of the early-modern period has been deeply enriched as a result.
No other class of records provides such a rich vein of information on farming systems, old crafts and industries, household arrangements, furniture, utensils and the provision of credit in the form of bills, bonds and mortgages.
Inventories were normally taken within a few days or weeks of the testator's death.
Where delays occurred, the chances of an inventory being incomplete were obviously increased; it has been noticed, for instance, that bequests mentioned in wills are sometimes missing from the inventory.
The appraisers were two, three or four local men appointed by the executors; usually they were friends and neighbours (some of whom were illiterate), but they often included someone who had the reputation of knowing how to do the job.
They performed their task conscientiously under solemn oath and they placed what they thought was an accurate valuation upon every pot and pan, every piece of furniture, each farm animal and even the manure.
These inventories, therefore, give a sound idea of the standard of living of thousands of ordinary people.
Anyone studying an inventory must be aware of their limitations.
In the first place, it must be realised that the ‘goods and chattels’ that comprised personal estate did not include the value of buildings and land, which came under the heading of real estate.
Inventories, therefore, do not give a complete picture of a person's wealth.
Secondly, goods which a husband enjoyed through his wife were excluded; this could have been anything from beds and linen to the poultry.
Thirdly, it is often impossible to tell from the inventory whether a person was poor or whether he was living in comfortable retirement, having already passed on most of his estate to his children; a yeoman with very few possessions is likely to have been in the latter category.
Poor people rarely left either a will or an inventory, but thousands of people of moderate means did so; the ordinary farmers and craftsmen are well represented in this class of record.
Indeed, wills and inventories tell us more about such people than any other source.
Mastering the handwriting of the Tudor and Stuart eras is  merely the first step in tackling these documents.
The old adage ‘practice makes perfect’ must be kept in mind when one begins to despair.
Quite apart from idiosyncratic spellings, lack of punctuation, inconsistent use of capital letters and a widespread inability to add up the total valuation, one is confronted with archaic and dialect words.
But many historians have trod this path before and there are now a number of glossaries and explanatory works to guide the newcomer.
Some of these are mentioned in the bibliography at the end of the book.
Happy is the family historian who finds an inventory of an ancestor's personal estate.
Mr Geoffrey Peace of Sheffield can trace his family back from the foundation of the family firm of Samuel Peace and Sons through several generations of filemakers to Anthony Peace, a Rotherham butcher, who died in 1696.
Anthony's inventory, taken on 24 October 1696, is given below (without a glossary) as an illustration of this type of record:
Inventories such as this have been used in bulk by agricultural historians to show how varied were the regional farming practices of England long before the Agricultural Revolution.
Indeed, that term is no longer used as confidently as it once was.
Inventories   prove, for example, that turnips were a successful field crop long before Viscount Townshend, that the Cheshire cheese industry was flourishing by the seventeenth century, that Lancastrian and Cumbrian farmers were the first to grow potatoes on a significant scale and that many Pennine hill-farmers relied upon the local  markets for their bread corn and malt, for they grew no cereals at all .
Historians working on the history of crafts, trades, housing and furniture have also made significant advances in their subject by using probate inventories.
A broad picture is obtained through the analysis of a large collection, while specific features can be vividly illustrated by single examples.
A skilled historian is able to entwine his inventory material with evidence gathered from a variety of other sources.
In order to illustrate how this can be done, let us start with the inventory or Abigail Pilmay (1698), a Silkstone (Yorks) widow who left personal estate valued at just over £300:
The information contained in this appraisal provides fascinating insights into seventeenth-century methods of manufacturing glass.
Abigail Pilmay's craftsmen were making pure lustrous ‘flint glass’ and a variety of coloured wares.
Several items in the inventory require a technical explanation.
‘Breeley sand’ was imported from Brierley, near Dudley (Staffs.), as a very high quality component of crystal glass.
Rape ashes were a source of alkali, necessary in the manufacture of bottles and green ware.
Saltpetre was added to prevent amber coloration when making crystal glass.
Red lead added sparkle, and manganese and blue powder (cobalt) were used as colouring agents.
‘Fretting clay’ was for making the crucible in which the glass was melted, and the ‘moolds’were wooden moulds lined with wax.
Finally, ‘Vyall metall’ referred to the  unfinished production of small glass containers or vials.
On reading this inventory and understanding its meaning one is left with the firm impression that seventeenth-century glassmaking was a sophisticated business.
Abigail's will provided for numerous relatives, i.e. a married son, his wife and 4 children, a married daughter, her husband, 6 children and 1 grandchild, and a brother, a sister and 2 brothers-in-law.
Her son was named John Scott, so he was presumably the child of an earlier marriage.
The information contained in the will prompts a search of the Silkstone parish registers and a visit to the church to look for tombstones.
The Pilmay and Scott graves are found grouped together on the floor of the north aisle of the fine Perpendicular church, a position which suggests that these two families were of superior standing within the community; only the better-off were buried within a church.
The tombstone inscriptions and the parish register entries reveal that Abigail had married a William Scott, who died in 1655, and that three years later she had taken John Pilmay as her second husband.
John Pilmay died in 1676, but his brother Peter was still alive when Abigail made her will twenty-two years later.
Abigail did not have any children by her second marriage.
Pilmay is an unusual name; it is the English way of pronouncing the French name Pilmé.
The family appear to have come to England during the reign of Queen Elizabeth when several glassmakers from Lorraine were invited to practise their skills in this country.
Later generations gradually spread from the South to build new glasshouses on the Midland and Northern coalfields.
During the reign of James I and Charles I the Pilmays married into the Du Houx family, Lorraine glassmakers who had settled in Lancashire.
John Pilmay had arrived in Silkstone by 1658, when he married Abigail Scott.
In November of the following year the memorandum book of Dr Henry Power of New Hall, Elland (British Library, Sloane ms. 1354), recorded the payment of 2s.6d. to his man, John Wilson, ‘for fetching glasses from the glasse house at Silkstone’, some 16 miles away.
Five years later, John Pilmay, glassmaker of Silkstone, was indicted at the West Riding quarter sessions.
In 1682 Ralph Thoresby, the Leeds antiquary, ‘saw the glasshouses’ as he passed through Silkstone, and when John Warburton came that way in 1718–19 while preparing his map of Yorkshire, he pinpointed the position of the glasshouse to the right of the road that crossed the stream just to the south of Silkstone church.
The will of John Scott ‘of Silkstone, gentleman’(1707), refers to the ‘Messuage Wherein my mother Pilmay lately dwelt with the Glasshouse’, together with the nearby water corn-mill.
His inventory provides further technical details of the art of glassmaking and also reveals the extent of his coal-mining interests.
The Scott family deeds, now housed in Sheffield Central Library, record the changing ownership of the Silkstone property and provide clues as to when the glassmaking enterprise came to an end.
A mortgage deed of 1748 refers to ‘the old Glasshouse’ and 6 years later another deed deals with the sale of ‘One Corn Mill with the Pott Ovens’.
The glass works had been converted into a pottery, just like some of the other south Yorkshire sites during the course of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The home that Abigail Pilmay built in 1682 has now been demolished but it was remembered in the 1920s as having the name Pot House.
A local tombstone recording the death in 1806 of John Taylor, potter, is apparently the last reference to pot-making at Silkstone.
That is the bare outline of the Pilmay and Scott story, a tale that could be told in much more detail.
It is a family history that becomes much more interesting when set against the wider background of the local history of an important industry.
From Silkstone we need to branch out to other parts of the Yorkshire coalfield.
The first glass works in south Yorkshire had been erected in 1632 at Glasshouse Green, Wentworth, on the estate of Sir Thomas Wentworth, the great Earl of Strafford, but it had ceased production before the Civil War.
John Pilmay's glasshouse at Silkstone may have been the first successful venture in the district.
Quite a lot is now known about the history of glassmaking in this region, for the nearby site at Gawber has been excavated and Sheffield City Museum has a collection of local ware.
Most importantly of all, one of a pair of cones erected at Catcliffe in 1740 still stands to its full height.
It was built by William Fenny, the descendant of another immigrant family whose name was gradually Anglicized.
The history of certain key families is obviously crucial to an understanding of the growth of this particular industry.
This example could be multiplied many times in all the industrial regions of England.
Manorial records
The manor did not disappear when the Middle Ages drew to a    close, nor when the Tudors made the parish the administrative unit that was responsible for maintaining the poor and the highways and for petty law and order.
Manorial courts continued to meet regularly throughout the  early-modern period and in many places the quality of record-keeping remained high right through to the eighteenth century and sometimes beyond.
In 1731 the old custom of using Latin for legal records came to an end, but in practice many manorial records were written in English from much earlier times.
These records are widely scattered now, but most county record offices have collections of local rolls and estate papers and can advise on the whereabouts of others.
A distinction that must be borne in mind is that between the Court Baron (which registered the transfers of copyhold lands) and the Court Leet (which saw to such practical matters as scouring ditches, mending hedges, muzzling dogs, etc.).
The records of both these types of court are of use to the local and family historian.
The descent of property can sometimes be traced over several generations through the archives of the Court Baron, while individual names can be picked out from the lists of freeholders and customary tenants at the beginning of each meeting of the Court Leet.
The tenants of the manor comprised the ‘homage’ or jury that decided the by-laws for the coming months; even if a man was not present, his absence would be recorded.
We are presented therefore with a list of all the owners of land in the manor.
Very often we shall also have the names of the major part of the actual occupiers, though we have to remember that sub-tenants were not usually recorded.
When I was researching the history of the Shropshire parish of Myddle I was able to trace some of the farming families back beyond the beginning of the parish register by using lists of manorial court jurors  dating from 1528.
It is not always possible, of course, to see how many of the homagers actually resided within the manor, nor how much land they might have held elsewhere.
Moreover, one must always bear in mind England's complicated manorial structure.
A manor did not necessarily cover the same area as a parish; indeed, parishes sometimes contained two or more manors and the boundaries between the two institutions often overlapped.
Despite these problems, manorial court rolls provide a great deal of information that is of use to the genealogist and they enable the family historian to gain insights into how the local society in which his ancestors lived was administered and to see what disputes arose.
Mr Frank Tyack of Sheffield knew that his ancestors must have come from Cornwall, for Tyack is a Cornish word meaning ‘farmer’.
While pursuing his family tree he found two Tyacks amongst those who held land in the Cornish manor of Binnerton, one of whom held the office of manorial reeve.
The record of the court proceedings on 7 October 1700 begins as follows:
It is perhaps worth making the point (for readers who are just beginning their enquiries into the history of this period) that a lord did not usually own all the land on his manor but had certain defined rights, which differed from place to place and even between neighbouring settlements.
Binnerton manor obviously had a large number of freeholders, including some members of the nobility and gentry who probably never set foot in the place let alone attended the manorial court.
Some of this freehold land was no doubt held in small parcels but in the absence of a survey and map its full extent cannot be known.
The conventionary tenants were much more likely to live locally.
Their system of tenure was peculiar to Cornwall and parts of Devon; it did not provide hereditary security but consisted of a seven-year lease at a negotiated rent with no automatic right of renewal.
The tenants were the people who knew the district intimately from years of experience living and farming there and they were the ones who made the decisions in the manor court.
The roll that is quoted above records the election of officers for the coming year and then goes on to note the making of by-laws and the fining of defaulters.
The deliberations of such courts are often full of minor points of interest.
In addition to court rolls the family historian may come across rentals which give the names of tenants and the rents that they paid each year at Ladyday (25 March) and Michaelmas (29 September).
With luck he may also find surveys that provide a much fuller description of properties and the nature of tenancies, including sometimes the names of previous owners.
A survey of lands belonging to the manor of Sheffield in 1611 describes the farmsteads and gives the names and measurements of all the fields.
One item reads:
This farm can be identified with Fox Hill, about 3 miles north-west of the centre of Sheffield.
On the various types of tenure by which people held their farms and cottages the reader is referred to Dr Christopher Clay's lucid account in Joan Thirsk (ed.),
The Agrarian History of England and Wales, vol.
V. 1640–1750 (1985), pp. 198–230.
Dr Clay writes that during the middle years of the seventeenth century customary tenures were still widespread and important, especially for the smaller properties, but that much less land was held in this way than was the case 100 years earlier.
During the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries tenants throughout the realm had found that custom did not always give them the protection that they believed they had.
Some won their battles, but many others discovered that in law they were merely tenants-at-will and that as a consequence they had to pay much higher rents than before.
In an inflationary age those who had sound customary tenures reaped the benefits of fixed annual rents, but those tenants who were successfully challenged by their lords had to meet demands for considerable increases.
The incidence of customary tenure varied from region to region and from manor to manor.
In Surrey and Sussex, for example, customary tenures were still common in the seventeenth century, but just across the border in Kent they were rare; Kentish families were either freeholders or else they held their land on a yearly basis or by a lease for a term of years.
In the country at large copyhold was by far the most common form of customary tenure.
Under this system tenants paid low annual rents and a large entry fine at the beginning of their tenancy.
This fine was either ‘certain', i.e. fixed by local custom, or ‘arbitrary’, i.e. negotiable.
Otherwise, the main burden was the payment of a  heriot at death, usually in the form of ‘the best beast’ or money in lieu.
Copyholders were obliged to attend meetings of the manor court, and any changes in tenancy were recorded in the court rolls.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries many copyholds were converted into leaseholds.
Local practice varied enormously, but a general picture may be obtained by dividing England into two halves.
In the western half the common system of tenure was the lease for three lives, whereby the tenant entered the names of any three people, and as long as one of them remained alive the lease held good.
It was common for a man to enter his own name, that of his wife, and that of his intended successor, usually the oldest son.
Such leases are therefore a useful source of genealogical information.
Obviously, this method of holding was a chancy business, but on the whole leases for three lives were considered slightly superior to leases for twenty-one years.
A tenant could insert a new name in his lease upon payment of another entry fine, and he had the power to sub-let all or any part of his property if he wished.
The terms were not onerous and few restrictions were placed on the tenant's actions.
Leases for lives were sometimes used in the eastern half of the country, but here the normal method of tenure was the lease for a restricted period, from one to twenty-one years.
Yearly tenancies held at rack rents (i.e. rents that were not fixed by custom but which were negotiated by the landlord and tenant) were common for the smaller farms and cottages and in the Midlands in particular they were usual for any property other than a freehold.
These ‘tenants-at-will’ had no written agreements, but that did not mean that a landlord could eject them whenever he liked.
Custom granted a tenant-at-will a full quarter's notice and compensation for his crops and the work he had put into the farm if he went before the harvest was gathered in.
Moreover, landlords were restrained by the knowledge that they would attract good tenants only if they had a reputation for fairness.
Given the fact that much of the property in the western half of the country was sub-let to under-tenants at rack rents, it is doubtful whether regional differences were as pronounced as they appear at first sight.
Having considered the conflicts that might arise between a landlord and his tenant, Dr Clay concludes that:
In practice it probably did not make a great deal of difference to either party whether or not leases existed, unless or until a serious  dispute between them arose.
In fact, it must be very doubtful whether in any given district tenants-at-will, yearly tenants, and tenants with leases for years held their land on significantly different terms.
Hearth tax returns
The most important tax levied upon the people of seventeenth-century England — as far as the local and family historian is concerned — was that based upon the number of hearths or chimneys that each house contained.
The first assessment was made in 1662, but the tax proved deeply unpopular and was finally abolished in 1689.
Returns are kept in the Public Record Office at Chancery Lane, London, under the classification E179, but an enquirer should first check the availability of those which have been printed on a county basis or have been copied on to microfilm.
The tax was paid by the occupier (or if a house was empty by the owner) at the rate of two shillings per hearth in equal instalments at Ladyday and Michaelmas.
A number of people were granted exemption on the grounds either that they were too poor to pay taxes and rates or that they had a certificate signed by the minister and parish officers to the effect that their premises were worth not more than 1 per annum or that their personal property was worth less than £10 per annum; however, no exemption was allowed anyone possessing more than two hearths.
Some collectors listed the exempted poor in their returns — in which case the names of all the heads of households of a particular parish or township were recorded — but others did not bother to name them.
The number of exempted people often amounted to 30–40 per cent of the community, and sometimes even more, so if the proportion is much lower than that the historian is left wondering whether his list is complete.
An individual's wealth tended to be reflected in the number of hearths he had in his house.
A full return will therefore allow the local historian to reconstruct the social structure of his community.
He will normally find that this assumes the shape of a pyramid, with a broad base of people who had only 1 or 2 hearths tapering to a few persons or a single individual who owned a disproportionate share of the wealth.
In an extreme case such as the Yorkshire estate village of Thrybergh the squire's hall was in a class of its own and the parsonage was far superior to   the rest.
The 1672 returns list the following heads of households and number of hearths there:
The fact that only two poor people were recorded makes one question whether the return provides a complete list of households, but then Thrybergh was an estate village that did not allow poor immigrants to settle within its bounds.
It is worth noting that Sir John Reresby appeared twice after his first entry, presumably as the owner of empty houses, and that women who were heads of households were often described as widows rather than given their Christian names.
Occasionally, and especially in an area of scattered settlement, buildings which still survive can be identified in the tax returns.
The number of recorded hearths may even be a clue as to whether or not a house had been completed by a particular date.
For the genealogist, however, the principal value of the returns lies in the help they provide in tracing elusive ancestors.
A thorough examination of all the available hearth tax returns on a county basis will enable him to identify which parishes had someone with the appropriate surname living there during the reign of Charles II.
This information will enable him to concentrate his search on certain parish registers.
The returns also show how far those surnames which are peculiarly local in origin had ramified by the second half of the seventeenth century.
A good example is the Derbyshire surname Bagshaw or Bagshawe, which is derived from a minor placename near Chapel en le Frith, high in the hills of the Peak District.
The hamlet, whose name probably means ‘badger-copse’, was recorded in 1251, though of course it may be much older in origin; the surname had no doubt become hereditary by the following century.
Fifty-two Bagshaw households were recorded in the Derbyshire hearth tax returns of 1670, including that of Mr Bagshaw, who had 5 households in the original township of Bowden chapel, and his neighbours Robert and Thomas Bagshaw, who had 2 and 1 hearths respectively.
The name was found most commonly in its ancient heartland and surrounding parishes, though a few branches had ventured off the hills to settle   in and around Chesterfield.
The gradual way that the family spread into neighbouring parts is entirely typical of the pattern of movement of most English families.
THE FAMILY, POPULATION TRENDS AND MOBILITY
Anyone who has read Richard Gough's History of Myddle (1701–2) is left in no doubt that the basic unit of English society in the Tudor and Stuart period was the family.
The inhabitants of his Shropshire parish had a clear sense of belonging to a local community within a wider neighbourhood — hospitality and neighbourliness were common ideals — but it was the family that was of prime importance.
With the help of his neighbours and by studying every relevant historical record that he could lay his hands on, Gough was able to trace the personal history of every family in his parish — often through several generations — and to show, incidentally, that intermarriage between the long-established families strengthened the bonds that made people think of themselves as a special community somehow different from all the others.
To Richard Gough local history seemed a natural extension of family history.
His purpose in writing was to recount the human stories of all his fellow parishioners and their ancestors and to set them against the physical environment and administrative framework of the place where they lived.
The typical English household in the Tudor, Stuart and Hanoverian era was not very different from that of today, except in its age structure.
It was rare for more than one married couple to live together in the same house.
The occasional listings of inhabitants that survive for places up and down the country make it clear that older married people did not live with their married children, though they were often housed nearby.
Even when they were old and widowed, grandparents often preferred the independence of living on their own, within daily reach of their offspring, as long as they could manage.
The size of each household depended upon the stage of the life cycle that the occupants had reached and upon whether or not adolescents were living-in as servants or apprentices.
On average, 4.75 seems a reasonable multiplier to use in order to estimate the total population of a community from such listings of households as the hearth tax returns.
The modern, nuclear form of family was the norm; large households with an extended range of kin were unknown.
Marriage was delayed until the young couple could afford to set up a home of their own.
Precise average figures are rather meaningless, for the range might be wide, but it is useful to think in terms of an average age at marriage of twenty-seven to twenty-nine  for men and of about twenty-six for women; the nobility and gentry usually married a little earlier.
A higher proportion of the population than today never married at all; throughout the period at least 1:6 people remained unmarried and sometimes the proportion reached 1:4.
Parents tried to help their children set up home with the aid of a ‘marriage portion’, but most couples had to rely mainly on their own savings.
Young people were normally allowed many opportunities to meet members of the opposite sex, and though examples can be quoted of disinheritance because parental wishes had not been met, the prime consideration in choosing a wedding partner was undoubtedly mutual love.
Family historians need to be aware that long after the Reformation people  continued to observe the prohibited periods of Lent and Advent when arranging their wedding day.
Harvest time was also avoided for obvious reasons.
By far the most popular months for marriage were October and November, when harvest was safely gathered in and the annual period of service for farm servants in the corn-growing regions had come to an end and wages had been paid.
May and June were the peak months for marriages in pastoral districts for that was when the annual farm cycle and period of service ended there.
Other peaks came during the months following the prohibited times of Advent and Lent.
The intensive study of demographic records through the technique of family reconstitution has dispelled many myths.
It is now clear, for instance, that before the nineteenth century illegitimacy rates were low and that bastardy was disapproved of by all sections of society, not just the church authorities.
On the other hand, bridal pregnancy was widely tolerated despite the exhortations of the professional moralists.
This in no way implies a relaxed attitude towards sexual liaisons.
Marriage was expected to last for life and adultery and fornication were punished in the ecclesiastical courts.
Whether or not they were legitimate, many children failed to survive their early critical years.
They were particularly vulnerable during their first 12 months and about a third of them did not live to reach the age of 10.
Nevertheless, high birth rates ensured that society was far more youthful in its composition than it is today.
At any one time about 40 per cent of the population were children who were living at home with their parents.
During their mid teens many adolescents left home to enter farm service or to begin an apprenticeship.
Dr Anne Kussmaul has estimated that  between the fifteenth and the nineteenth centuries about 60 per cent of the population aged between 15 and 24 were farm servants and that between a third and a half of the country's hired labour force was supplied in this way.
Many small farmers, of course, did not hire any outside labour but relied entirely on the combined efforts of each member of their family.
One has always to bear in mind that for very many people in early-modern England — in the towns as much as in the countryside — the home was also the place of work.
Only a minority of people lived to be grandparents.
Children very often lost one or more parents before they reached adulthood and the chances of a husband or wife losing his or her partner before old age were far greater than they are today.
Second marriages were therefore common, as anyone who has tried to construct a family tree for this period will know.
The Cambridge Group for the Study of Population and Social Structure (CAMPOP) have shown that in seventy communities where total lists of inhabitants were made at some point between the late sixteenth and the early nineteenth century the proportion of householders who were widowed was about 1:5; at Clayworth (Notts.) in 1688 it was higher than 1:4.
The earliest surviving parish registers consistently record a greater number of baptisms than burials.
By the last decade of Henry VIlI's reign, if not before, England was beginning to recover from a long period of population decline.
All over western Europe the trend was towards moderately fast growth up to about 1640.
CAMPOP's researches have shown that during the 100 years after 1540 England's population rose from about 2.75 millions to roughly 5 millions.
Thereafter, the country experienced sixty years of stagnation, and during the period 1656–86 the national total declined slightly.
At the close of the seventeenth century, however, towns and villages in certain industrial regions started to grow, and despite a setback in the 1720s they continued to expand at an astonishing rate throughout each decade of the eighteenth century.
The enormous growth of population in the rest of England began in the 1740s.
It has never stopped rising since.
This general pattern of growth was subject to regional variation and was punctuated by devastating epidemics — of which bubonic plague was only the most notorious — and by harvest failures that were so catastrophic that people died of starvation.
In 1551, for example, a virulent form of influenza known as  ‘sweating sickness’ killed thousands throughout the land.
In 1555 and 1556 continual heavy rain ruined the harvests and brought famine, thus weakening human resistance to the epidemics which struck in 1557–59.
Bubonic plague was endemic in the towns, less so in the countryside.
In 1563 it killed one in every five Londoners.
Other places were also hit savagely from time to time, but it is often difficult to tell from the registers which particular disease was responsible for an  unusually high number of deaths.
The word ‘plague’ was used loosely in an era when medical knowledge was rudimentary.
Genuine bubonic plague can be detected by the seasonal pattern of deaths, which were extraordinarily high in the summer months but low in winter when the pestilence lay dormant.
Thus, there seems little doubt that it was bubonic plague which struck Chesterfield in 1586–87.
During the previous twenty-five years Chesterfield's burial totals never rose to more than seventy per annum and were usually at a much lower level, but in 1587 the number of recorded deaths reached a staggering 313.
At this time the whole of England was suffering from the effects of the disastrous harvests of the previous two summers.
Elsewhere, typhus carried off many who had been weakened by starvation; in Chesterfield the pestilence was almost certainly bubonic plague.
A comment inserted in the register for October 1586 reads: ‘Here began the great plague of Chesterfield’.
Few died during the winter but the plague reappeared in the spring and killed 154 people in the summer months of June, July and August, before disappearing with the onset of a new winter.
Local historians should be aware that the high number of deaths that they may find during certain years in their own register could fit the experience of the nation at large.
The worst years for deaths caused by epidemics following in the wake of harvest failure were 1586–87, 1591–2 and 1596–98; these were times of acute distress.
In northern parts 1623–24 was equally bad and all over England 1630 was long remembered as a year of dearth.
Even so, the national population continued to rise steadily during the reigns of Elizabeth and the early Stuarts.
Bubonic plague struck London again with devastating effect in 1665 and during the following year even penetrated the Peak District at remote Eyam, but then it mysteriously disappeared.
Restoration England's improved agriculture made famine a thing of the past, though temporary shortages still caused suffering.
The last period during which the country suffered from the combined effects of disastrous harvest and epidemic diseases was from 1723 to 1730, particularly the later years.
Lancashire burial registers, for instance, refer to fever, ague fever and pleurisy, but several diseases rather than a single culprit appear to have been responsible.
Imported corn staved off the worst effects of harvest failure and some communities appear to have escaped altogether.
In the Yorkshire parish of Arksey, however, the vicar wrote in the register for 1729: ‘The greatest mortality that ever can be remembered, or made out to be’, and many other accounts speak of considerable distress.
The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries saw some redistribution of the population, for the towns grew faster than the villages because of immigration from the countryside.
London grew at an astonishing rate, from about 60,000 in 1500 to approximately 200,000 in 1600 and to an enormous 575,000 in 1700, by which time it was probably the largest city in Europe.
It has been estimated that between 1580 and 1650 London probably absorbed half the national increase of England's population and that about one in every eight English people lived in London at some stage of their lives; after 1650 the proportion was as high as one in six.
The leading  provincial cities were tiny in comparison with the capital.
By the end of the seventeenth century Norwich had about 30,000 inhabitants, Bristol 20,000 and Exeter, York and Newcastle even less.
England was still overwhelmingly rural; 75 per cent of the population lived in small communities of less than 450 people, and many of those who lived in more urban surroundings nevertheless had only 1,000 to 2,000 neighbours and often even fewer.
England was still an underpopulated country by later standards.
One of the most popular misconceptions about the past is that our ancestors were rooted in one particular place, that they rarely ventured beyond their restricted horizons and that consequently they were limited in their outlook and in their knowledge of life beyond the parish.
Now it is perfectly true that some families remained in the same district for hundreds of years.
When I traced my own family tree I found that the Heys had come into the parish of Penistone (and more particularly to that part known as the township of Thurlstone where I lived) about the year 1800 and that during the previous three centuries they had resided in Kirkburton parish immediately to the north.
Many other English families remained localized in this way, but even they usually moved short distances beyond their parish boundaries from time to time and younger branches of the family ramified the surname    far and wide.
We have already noted the prevalence of this sort of small-scale mobility during the Middle Ages.
In the Tudor and Stuart era, judging by the evidence of parish registers, court depositions and diaries, most people moved at least once in their lives.
Dr Peter Clark has called this ‘betterment’ migration, the movement particularly of apprentices, servants and young married couples within an area bounded by the local market towns.
Seventeenth-century people referred to such an area as their ‘country’.
In the Shropshire parish of Myddle between 1541 and 1701 nearly everyone found a husband or wife within a 10-mile radius of his or her dwelling and most partners came from within the neighbourhood that was centred upon the market towns of Shrewsbury, Ellesmere and Wem; only the gentry sought wives or husbands from a slightly wider area.
Several young couples took up residence in a neighbouring parish at the start of their married lives but returned later to inherit the family property.
The great majority of English people seem to have moved short distances at some time or other.
Such mobility was not only common, it was the usual way of life.
Recent demographic work has made this point time and time again.
It is brought home sharply when we look at the two lists of the inhabitants of the Nottinghamshire village of Clayworth that were made by the minister in 1676 and 1688, for we find that no less than 61.8 per cent of those recorded in 1676 were not there twelve years later; only one-third of those who had disappeared had died.
In the Northamptonshire village of Cogenhoe half the villagers recorded in 1618 were not there ten years later, and in the Suffolk parish of Horringer only two of the sixty-three family names recorded between 1600 and 1624 were still found in the parish register between 1700 and 1724.
Much of this mobility was accounted for by adolescent farm servants who regularly changed jobs every year; they moved from farm to farm regardless of parish boundaries but rarely went very far.
Once they were married adults they settled down for longer periods.
There is every reason to believe that this degree of movement was typical of the corn-growing regions, but we have to constantly bear in mind that one part of England may have very different experiences from another and that even neighbouring communities might have contrasting stories to tell.
Myddle parish saw nothing like the same rapid turnover of personnel.
Some of the tenement farmers there leased a family holding for five, six or seven generations under the Tudors and Stuarts, and old-established  surnames accounted for four out of every five entries in the Myddle parish register.
Even so, the younger children of yeomen and husbandmen moved on elsewhere and the labouring families were far more volatile than the stable core of farming families.
Generally speaking, people did not move very far.
Settlement certificates granted by parish authorities in Kent between 1691 and 1740 show that well over half the immigrants into Maidstone travelled no more than 10 miles and that only 15 per cent journeyed more than 40 miles.
Nearly three-quarters of the boys who were apprenticed to cutlers in and around Sheffield between 1650 and 1724 came from within a 15-mile radius of their new homes and only 4 per cent migrated more than 40 miles.
They were typical of apprentice lads all over England.
After studying the detailed entries in the parish registers of a group of farming settlements in the Vale of York from 1777 onwards, Dr B. A. Holderness has concluded that, ‘The picture which emerges is of village communities refreshed by an influx from similar settlements lying at a comparatively short distance away.’
The ebb and flow of personnel in these agricultural communities was notable in all occupational groups, though here too the farmers were the most likely to stay put and the labourers to move on.
The examples that have been quoted above could be multiplied by case-studies from all over England and from widely-separated periods of time.
Short-distance mobility was a normal feature of provincial life.
Dr Clark distinguishes this type of ‘betterment’ migration from longer distance ‘subsistence’migration, which occurred on a significant level in the century before the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the Civil War.
During those decades bands of pauper migrants went on the tramp in search of food and a living.
They caused public alarm wherever they went; the words of the nursery rhyme, ‘Hark, hark, the dogs do bark’ succinctly describe the mixture of fear and charity with which they were greeted.
The Elizabethan poor law acts of 1598 and 1601 threatened beggars with a whipping and placed the responsibility for maintaining the poor on ‘the Churchwardens of every parish and four substantial householders there…who shall be nominated yearly in Easter week under the hand and seal of two or more Justices of the Peace…[and who]shall be called overseers of the poor’.
These overseers were empowered to levy local rates, to set the poor on work, to apprentice poor children and to provide relief in the form of clothes, food, fuel and rents for the ‘lame, impotent, old, blind, and such other among them being poor and not able to work’.
Pauper migration was also limited by the settlement laws.
From the early seventeenth century onwards some towns erected barriers against incoming vagrants, and though parish officers were sympathetic to their own poor they were hostile to outsiders.
The 1662 Act of Settlement turned this widespread local practice into the law of the land.
It stated that anyone who moved into a property valued at less that £10 a year could be sent back to the place where he or she was last legally settled if they were likely to become chargeable to the poor rates.
Anyone seeking temporary work beyond his own parish had to have a certificate (signed by the minister and an overseer) which acknowledged legal responsibility.
Disputes between parishes were settled by the justices of the peace at quarter sessions.
The settlement laws help to explain why long-distance ‘subsistence’ migration declined rapidly after the Restoration.
Most poor folk now moved only short distances away from‘their’ parish.
The plight of the poor was ameliorated by the slowing down of population growth during the second half of the seventeenth century and by simultaneous improvements in agricultural production techniques and employment opportunities offered by rural industries.
Farming became geared to the demands of regional and national markets and harvest crises eventually became a thing of the past.
During the century after the Restoration rural industries such as framework knitting and nailmaking grew at an unprecedented rate and the industrial towns flourished as never before.
A greater gross national product meant that local authorities could be more generous towards the poor.
Parishes were able to cope with their pauper problem until England's population began to soar dramatically during the second half  of the eighteenth century.
Meanwhile, another option became available to the poor as they joined the growing number of emigrants to the New World.
It has been estimated that during the last forty years of the seventeenth century between 100,000 and 150,000 people crossed the Atlantic Ocean to start a new life in America.
London was the great magnet, the one place that continued to attract immigrants from all over the country, not just the poor but people from all classes of society.
London depended upon its immigrants to sustain its increase, for until the later seventeenth century its death-rates were higher than its birth-rates.
Professor E. A. Wrigley has estimated that between 1650 and 1750 London needed 8,000 immigrants per annum to account for its phenomenal  population rise.
The surplus population of England, especially that of the Home Counties and the Midlands, was siphoned off to the capital.
The Shropshire parish of Myddle lies some 160 miles away from London but at least fifteen of the ninety-one families that paid the hearth tax there in 1672 had one member or more who had been to the capital city.
As we noted earlier, perhaps as many as one in six of the adult population of England had lived in London for part of their lives.
To a much lesser extent other towns also depended upon an inflow of migrants to maintain their numbers.
The drift to the towns from the countryside was not merely associated with the Industrial Revolution.
Dr Alan Dyer has estimated that the doubling of Worcester's population between 1563 and 1645 was due in equal part to natural increase and to immigration.
Peter Clark has shown that at least half the Gloucester men and women who were called as witnesses in church courts during the early seventeenth century were first generation immigrants.
All towns drew the great majority of their recruits from their own hinterlands, though a significant minority came from further afield, especially to the larger towns.
In tracing that elusive ancestor the family historian therefore needs to be aware that long before the age of the railways people did sometimes travel long distances and that it was very common for men, women and adolescents to move within a few miles radius of their birthplace.
It is necessary for the researcher to become familiar with a whole neighbourhood, to become aware of the different types of community that formed such a ‘country’ and to search the parish registers of neighbouring settlements in ever increasing circles.
Every small clue should be noted.
For example, when John Hey of Birkhouse in the West Riding parish of Kirkburton died in 1719, the executors of his estate were his widow Susannah and a John Halstead, who lived at Thornhill, some 10 miles or so away.
I knew of no previous family connection with this place, but the information was sufficient to prompt a search of the Thornhill registers.
I was rewarded with the discovery that on 21 July 1718 John Hey and Susannah Hepworth were married there.
How did people travel such long distances around the country?
Many of them walked.
On 10 March 1736 the Revd James Clegg, a Nonconformist minister and apothecary from Chinley in the heart of the Peak District, noted in his diary: ‘An ancient man came for advice and brought a water [a urine sample?]from  beyond Southwell in Nottinghamshire, on foot, about 36 miles’; no doubt he returned the same way.
Otherwise, the cheapest way of travel was by the carrier's cart which trundled slowly but regularly to the market towns, where another carrier offered a service to the next destination.
The whole of England was linked by a network of carriers' routes.
A 1787 directory of Sheffield, for example, shows that local people could take advantage of forty-two different services leading directly or through connections in distant towns to most parts of England, Scotland and Wales.
London was linked to all parts of the provinces by weekly services as far back as the reign of Charles I and probably earlier.
In The Carriers' Cosmographie of 1637 John Taylor named the usual lodgings of provincial carriers in London, together with their times of arrival and departure.
For instance:
Nottinghamshire travellers could no doubt use the services of carriers coming from further north as well as their local men:
Travelling was a slow, tedious business but the difficulties were not insuperable.
RURAL COMMUNITIES
Each local community has its own individual character and does not conform in all its particulars to a general type.
Nevertheless, the local historian will find it useful to think of his chosen parish or neighbourhood in terms of broad categories such as‘open-field arable’ or ‘wood-pasture’or ‘fenland edge’and to set himself the  fundamental task of understanding how people adapted themselves to their physical environment.
It is sometimes hard today for us to grasp how much people's lives were governed by the nature of their everyday surroundings.
The physical setting of a parish influenced not only the ways in which a family might farm their land or work at a particular craft but also such basic matters as whether they lived in a village, a hamlet or an isolated farmstead, whether or not they had valuable rights of common to go with their farms or cottages, and sometimes the type of tenure by which they held their land.
The local topography helped in many subtle ways to shape their attitudes and whole outlook on life.
Thus, the dairymen who farmed the lush meadows of the Dove Valley geared their  husbandry to a different system from that followed by the sheep-and-corn farmers on the Lincolnshire Wolds, and the range of opportunities for earning a living and for gaining some measure of independence from a lord or squire was much greater for a cottager living on the edge of a moor, forest or marsh than the scope available to his counterpart in one of the nucleated, corn-growing villages of the Midland Plain.
Recent local studies have emphasized how different the fortunes of neighbouring parishes could be.
It is often more useful for the historian to compare types of local community which are widely separated from each other than to make comparisons with nearby settlements.
For example, the historian who is studying a parish in the Sussex Weald might get more enlightenment from an analysis of the economy and social structure of a wood-pasture community in the Forest of Arden than from a comparable study of a nearby parish on the South Downs, which might offer some rewarding contrasts but few points of similarity.
Cambridgeshire examples
Dr Margaret Spufford has examined the varying fortunes of three different Cambridgeshire parishes — Chippenham, Orwell and Willingham — in Contrasting Communities: English Villagers in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (1974).
Cambridgeshire has never been a county dominated by the nobility and gentry, for the degree of manorial fragmentation found there from Domesday Book onwards did not encourage the development of strong lordship.
The county was characterised instead by numerous small farmers and cottagers.
By the time of the 1524–25 lay subsidy  over half the rural population of Cambridgeshire were already dependent upon wages to supplement earnings from their own holdings, a proportion that had not quite been reached in the country as a whole at the end of the seventeenth century.
Only a little further up the social scale, another quarter or more of the rural inhabitants had tenements varying in size up to a yardland, which in Cambridgeshire seems to have been about 30 and 40 acres.
What happened to all these small owners in the next century and a half?
In general terms, renewed population growth and the corresponding rapid rise in the price of foodstuffs during the sixteenth century benefited the larger farmers (for they were able to produce a surplus for the market) and worsened the purchasing position of farm labourers whose relative wages sank as prices rose.
That much is clear, but how did the small landowner of a yardland or less fare in these circumstances?
Historians agree that the size of this group was certainly much reduced in number by the middle of the eighteenth century, but the chronology of this decline is debatable for it varied from region to region.
Dr Spufford's book has successfully demonstrated that the timing of this change depended in large measure upon the farming system and the social and economic structure of the communities that were affected.
Chippenham lies on the chalk ridge that forms the north-eastern part of the county.
It provides a classic example of the way that engrossers in the corn-growing regions enlarged their farms when small-holders could no longer cope and were forced to sell.
A detailed examination of the manorial court rolls reveals that the characteristic medieval holding, ranging from 15 to 45 acres, disappeared from the local scene between 1598 and 1636.
By the middle years of the seventeenth century Chippenham had a much higher proportion of farms with more than 50 acres and also more cottagers who were dependent upon their earnings from their work on these bigger farms.
Local society was becoming more polarised as smallholders sold up and moved elsewhere.
On the western clay plateau at Orwell the number of customary tenants who held yardlands or half-yardlands declined during the first thirty years of the seventeenth century.
Here again, both the size of larger holdings and the number of cottagers at the bottom end of the social scale increased as the Stuart era progressed.
The seventeenth century witnessed a tremendous expansion of the lord's demesne at the expense of some of the   tenants' arable and possibly at the loss of their commons as well.
The population level remained stable despite a surplus of baptisms over burials.
Orwell had fifty-two taxable adults in the 1520s and between fifty and fifty-four households 150 years later.
The surplus recorded in the parish register must have been lost through migration to other places.
The fortunes of the inhabitants of the fen-edge parish of  Willingham, where stock farming and dairying rather than cereal production were the mainstays, were rather different.
At the beginning of the sixteenth century the fens were less thickly settled than the clay plateau, but 200 years later they were amongst the most populous districts in the county.
The transformation and expansion of the fenland villages was one of Cambridgeshire's most significant and marked developments during the Tudor and Stuart era.
In Elizabethan Willingham the typical holding was no more than half a yardland, a size which in practice varied from 14 to over 20 acres.
On the main manor twenty-eight of the forty copyholders were half-yardlanders; as a group the copyholders were distinct from the thirty-one freeholders, for only three men held land by both methods of tenure in any significant quantity.
In a survey of 1575 between 40 and 50 per cent of the Willingham villagers held only a house or a house with a couple of acres of land.
In all, sixty-seven of the tenants named in this manorial survey held less than a half-yardland.
This does not mean that they were necessarily poor.
In fen and fen-edge parishes such as this a half-yardlander was quite a wealthy man, for the generous nature of his common rights completely changed the value of his holding.
The local historian who is trying to build up a picture of the social and economic structure of his own parish must always take into consideration the extent of the common and the value of the rights over it.
By the time another survey was made in 1603 the signs of change in Willingham were apparent.
The number of half-yardlanders had declined from twenty-eight to twenty, for three had enlarged their holdings and five had relinquished some of their property.
Furthermore, a quarter of the freeholdings were in the hands of completely different families from those which had held them in 1575.
On the other hand, over half the holdings remained intact and in the same family possession.
The breakdown of the old holdings continued through the next five generations between 1603 and the 1720s, and although the rate of change was no faster than before, in the end the results were dramatic.
By the Hanoverian era the half-yardland was no longer a recognizable unit in Willingham.
The total number of tenants had risen from 125 to 153; the number of wealthier farmers remained steady, but the poorer section had increased considerably.
Moreover, since the end of the sixteenth century incoming cottagers had no common rights and were dependent entirely upon their labour for their living.
Dr Spufford's study deals with many important themes which cannot be considered here, but the attention of the family historian is drawn to her conclusions about mobility into and out of the parish during the six generations between 1575 and the 1720s and to her remarks on the provision of education.
The fifty-eight separate surnames recorded in Willingham in 1575 had risen to ninety by the 1720s, but only a hard core of twenty-two families remained.
In other words, thirty-six (or about two-thirds) of the families that were resident in Willingham in 1575 had either moved or died out in the male line during the course of a century and a half.
Whether or not a family moved depended in large measure on the amount of land that they held and on the number of landholding branches.
Of the eleven families who had more than one member holding land in 1575 no less than nine were still in the village in the eighteenth century.
In contrast, all but one of the eighteen cottagers who had some common rights but no land in 1575 had disappeared altogether and had been replaced by others.
Immigration into the fens during this period outstripped emigration to other areas.
Sixty-eight of the ninety family names recorded in the 1720s, that is three out of every four, were those of families which had come into the parish since the Elizabethan period.
Under the  pressure of population growth the fenland holdings were broken down into smaller and smaller fragments.
As for education, Dr Spufford showed that about a fifth of Cambridgeshire's villages and minor market towns had a schoolmaster licensed continuously between 1570 and 1620.
Some sort of teacher was almost always within walking distance of a rural child.
The same sort of picture emerges from the study of other parts of the country.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries England became a semi-literate society in which even some of the agricultural labourers could read.
A study of the signatories to the 1642 Protestation Returns shows that the proportion of illiterate males varied from 53 to 79 per cent across the country and averaged 70 per cent.
Looked at the other way this means that at least 30 per cent of Englishmen in the mid seventeenth century were able to read and to sign their name.
Terling
Terling, a small parish on the Essex boulder clays, has been the  subject of an intensive study by K. Wrightson and D. Levine entitled Poverty and Piety in an English Village: Terling, 1525–1700 (1979).
Terling (pronounced Tarling) was an almost wholly agricultural parish, anciently enclosed, and for the most part devoted to mixed farming, with some emphasis on wheat and dairying.
When a lay subsidy was collected in 1524–25 Essex was one of England's richest counties and Terling was one of the wealthier villages, both in terms of total tax and the average amount paid by each person assessed.
About seventy Terling households and eighteen non-residents were taxed, ten on their land, forty-nine on their goods, twelve on their wages and seventeen on their earnings; the two latter categories are best explained as living-in farm servants and agricultural labourers.
A point of contrast a century and a half later is provided by the 1671 hearth tax return, by which time the seventy householders had grown to 122.
By that time the living standards of the middling sort of English countrymen had improved significantly.
In the 1570s William Harrison, an Essex parson, had commented on the new comforts provided particularly by chimneys, bedding and tableware.
A 1597 map of Terling depicts the village houses as mostly single-storey dwellings, though some had an upper storey at one end and many had chimneys.
By the middle of the seventeenth century references in inventories to parlours as well as hall and chambers were commonplace, and by 1700 a wide variety of rooms were being listed.
In 1671 8·2 per cent of the householders had at least six hearths (the squire had twenty), 23·8 per cent had three to five hearths, 17·2 per cent had two hearths, and 50·8 per cent had only a single hearth.
Forty of the 122 households, that is 32·8 per cent, were exempted from paying the tax on grounds of poverty.
In Essex as a whole the number of exempted poor in a parish ranged from 23·2 per cent to 53·2 per cent and averaged 38 per cent.
The broad structure of Terling society in 1671 remained similar to that in 1524, except that numbers in the poorest section had increased enormously.
Terling's population grew steadily during the sixteenth century and the first quarter of the seventeenth.
The only severe check came in 1625 when plague killed one in twelve people and raised the death rate to three times the annual norm; after that the population remained stable for almost 150 years.
Terling was a well-defined social unit, its villagers well aware of their special identity, yet it was in no way isolated from the surrounding parishes, for  a majority of the adult population of the village had experience of living in other communities.
The composition of the village was constantly changing as a result of short-distance mobility.
Keith Wrightson and David Levine were able to trace the ownership of about half the freehold and a quarter of the copyhold properties during the course of the seventeenth century.
They established that 6 copyholds changed hands a total of 36 times and 21 freeholds changed ownership a total of 118 times.
In both types of tenure sale was almost as frequent as change through inheritance.
Not a single holding in their sample remained in the same family name between 1600 and 1700 and only 2 freeholds and 1 copyhold stayed in the possession of the same family during this century even if allowance is made for inheritance through a female line.
Inheritance customs in Terling were far from rigid.
Children received portions of the family property on different occasions over long periods of time.
They did not delay their marriage until they had received their inheritance, and younger sons and daughters were provided for even though the formal system was primogeniture.
Kinship networks were loose but might extend far across the social scale of the village, and though Terling was riddled with petty conflicts, good neighbourliness was regarded as a virtue and a crucial social bond.
Nevertheless, Terling society was highly stratified; by the later seventeenth century the ‘better sort’ were becoming increasingly set apart from the labouring poor.
During the eighteenth century the word ‘class’ would be coined to differentiate the different social groups.
Leicestershire examples
The type of farming system that was followed was an important determinant of the character of a local community, but it was not the only one by any means.
Adjacent parishes on the Midland clays sometimes had very different histories from each other because of the varying ways in which the ownership of land was divided.
These divisions run very deep and go back as far as the available documents provide information on such matters.
Leicestershire lay at the very heart of open-field England.
Its cornfields were farmed in common and the individual strips were demarcated by the gently undulating patterns of ridge and furrow that stretched from village streets to the very edge of each parish.
Until these fields were enclosed by private agreement or by act of parliament hardly a building was erected beyond the nucleus of the settlement, for every piece of land was precious.
Yet Leicestershire also has many parishes where the village has disappeared from the landscape, leaving perhaps only the manor house or squire's hall and sometimes a forlorn and decaying church.
Of Leicestershire's 370 medieval settlements no less than sixty have been deserted and many others are now much smaller than they were in their heyday during the thirteenth and early-fourteenth century.
The Black Death began the long process of decline for many, but it rarely wiped out an entire village at a single blow.
Many settlements withered during the late Middle Ages but did not die until the Elizabethan or Stuart era when a local lord decided that corn production was no longer economical and that the arable land must be given over to cattle and sheep pastures.
An enquiry of 1607 claimed that in Leicestershire at least 8,245 acres had been enclosed and converted in seventy-one different places since 1578.
This figure understated the case; much more land had been put down to pasture and the tenants had been forced to leave.
Many of them fled to neighbouring parishes where the manorial structure was far weaker and poor immigrants were not prevented from setting up home.
By the nineteenth century these contrasting types of community would be categorized as being ‘open’ or ‘closed’to migrants who might become a burden on the poor rates.
A perfect example of a site that was deserted in the middle years of the seventeenth century can be examined on the ground at Great Stretton, a few miles south-east of Leicester.
The village took its name from the Roman road or straet known as the Gartree Road which passes close to the little limestone church of St Giles that now stands all alone on the skyline.
All around the oval churchyard can be found the sunken tracks that were once the village streets and paths and raised above them are the grassy mounds that cover the foundations of houses and cottages long since gone.
The deeply moated site of the former manor house marks the edge of the old settlement; sheep now graze peacefully over the remains of the village and over the ridge and furrow patterns of what were once the communal arable fields.
By the nineteenth century the church was almost in ruins, for only its sturdy medieval tower remained intact; the whole building was restored in 1838 when fragments of the ancient structure were patched together in new walls.
Like most deserted villages Great  Stretton was always on the small side, but in 1563 it still contained fifteen families.
By 1670 this number had fallen sharply to five.
The number of entries in the parish register dwindled in the middle decades of the seventeenth century, suggesting that many villagers moved elsewhere once the arable fields were enclosed.
By 1801 Great Stretton consisted only of a hall, a church and two farmsteads.
A similar story can be told about Foston parish not very far away.
A narrow lane, unenclosed by the usual hawthorn hedges of the Midlands, heads across open, pastoral countryside to the hall and the restored church dedicated to St Bartholomew.
Cattle and sheep move at a leisurely pace over the earthworks that mark where men once lived and worked.
In 1563 this small parish contained twenty-one families but by 1670 only eight households remained.
Soon there were even fewer.
When William Faunt bought the manor in 1549 half the land was already enclosed.
A quarter of a century later Anthony Faunt enclosed another 25() acres.
The arable side of the local economy had been destroyed and whereas many had once found employment in growing corn only a few people were now needed to tend the flocks and herds.
Burton's History of Leicestershire (1622) noted that Foston had some of the finest sheep pastures in the county and that the village community consisted only of the squire, the parson and three or four labouring families.
But on the near horizon, immediately beyond Foston's sheep pastures, stands Wigston Magna, the most populous village in Leicestershire since at least the time of the great Domesday Survey and a world apart from Squire Faunt and his shepherds.
In 1670 Wigston contained 161 households, including forty-seven that were exempted from payment of the hearth tax on the grounds of poverty.
No rich family dominated their neighbours.
The majority of the inhabitants were still the middling farmers of old, but the number of landless cottagers was on the increase.
Framework knitting offered a lifeline to such people in ‘open’ parishes all over Leicestershire.
At the top of the social scale the five largest houses in 1670 had five hearths apiece, which was hardly grandiose but was sufficient to set them apart from the rest.
For the first time in Wigston's long history a class of gentry was beginning to appear; moreover, substantial holdings were passing into the hands of absentee landlords.
As in Cambridgeshire and Essex, the gulf between the richer families and the very poor was getting wider.
Professor Hoskins has written that the 161 households recorded in the 1670 Wigston hearth tax return represent eighty-two different family names.
Thirty-six of these families (44 per cent) had lived in Wigston for at least a century and fifteen or sixteen (20 per cent ) had been there for 200 years or more.
During the later Middle Ages the turnover of names had been rapid, but afterwards an important group of middling farmers had put down roots in the parish and had given the community a sense of cohesiveness and continuity.
The most remarkable of these long-established families were the Boulters who had established no fewer than eight different households during the 100 years or so that they had lived in Wigston.
The Freers were equally prolific but at a slower rate, with eight branches after 200 years of residence.
The Smiths, Vanns and Wards each had six branches, the Johnsons five, the Langtons, Holmeses, Noones and Abbotts four and several others had three.
Kinship links through frequent intermarriage and numerous personal friendships cemented the bonds that gave Wigston and similar places a real sense of belonging to a community.
The old agrarian basis of the economy survived well into the Georgian era but the enormous growth of population made a new form of local society unavoidable and the Enclosure Award of 1766 put the final seal of approval on changes that had long been underway.
Prior to these changes, Wigston was typical of many Tudor and Stuart parishes where smallholders managed to hang on to their property for generation after generation.
A few rich families began to emerge at the top of such societies and the numbers of poor cottagers grew significantly, but the old-established middling families long remained the backbone of many a rural community.
Myddle
The pressure of population caused much less concern in the Welsh Border counties where there was still sufficient land available to allow poor immigrants to erect cottages on the wastes and to claim common rights to go with the few acres that they had cleared from the woods or the moors.
By draining meres and felling trees the inhabitants of the north Shropshire parish of Myddle were able to clear at least 1,000 acres of land between the late fifteenth and the early seventeenth century.
The signs are that other parishes in this region were equally active in increasing their  supply of pastures and meadows.
Some of these new ‘leasows’ were added to existing farms or smallholdings, but elsewhere in the parish entirely new units were created; then from the reign of Elizabeth onwards poor families who wanted a little land to go with their cottages encroached further into the remaining woods and wastes.
The landless cottagers of Midland and Eastern England had no counterparts here.
Richard Gough planned his History of Myddle (1701–2) to follow the arrangement of the seats in the parish church.
The social structure of the parish — in common with other contemporary communities — was formalized by the hierarchy of the pews.
The most sought after positions were at the front, where the gentry families had their seats.
Behind them came the yeomen and husbandmen and the better-off craftsmen, and at the rear and along the south wall sat the cottagers.
Pews were not personal possessions that could be sold or bequeathed but were part of the property of each farm, tenement or cottage, they passed to the new owner or occupier once the property was sold or transferred.
The topography of the parish of Myddle was very different from that of the open-field village of Wigston.
Excluding the chapelry of Hadnall, it was divided into seven townships and covered 4,691 acres.
It included several hamlets and scattered farms within its bounds as well as the village that was clustered close to the church and the ruined castle.
The lord of Myddle was a great figure who never visited the parish, so no one family dominated the others from an ostentatious pew at the front of the church.
Instead, the occupants of the best seats held twelve farms between them, ranging in size from 100 to 650 acres.
These parish gentry were conscious of their elevated status but they were not sharply separated from the rest of the community, for it was quite common in the Tudor and Stuart era for such a family to contain men and women of various occupations and lower social standing.
Younger sons did not at this time seek to maintain their gentility by going into the church or the army or by living off an annuity that allowed them to pass their time in respectable ease.
The fortunes of this richest group in the parish of Myddle varied according to the individual qualities, decisions and luck of the heads of each family.
Only the Gittinses and the Hanmers were resident gentry from the second quarter of the sixteenth century through to the early years of the eighteenth century.
Richard Gittins I, a rich Shrewsbury tanner, had arrived as tenant of Eagle Farm by 1528, when he was one of the jurors of the manor court.
His great-grandson, Richard Gittins IV, married an heiress and added the lease of Castle Farm, thus amassing an estate of some 650 acres, the largest in the parish.
However, the family were unable to hang on to both properties, for Richard Gittins V stood surety for a friend, lost a lot of money and had to relinquish the lease to Eagle Farm.
Nevertheless, the male line continued to thrive and two strong branches continued the family name in Myddle well into the eighteenth century.
A complete contrast to this story of stability and continuity is provided by the successive owners of Balderton Hall, an Elizabethan timber-framed dwelling that still stands a mile or so to the east of Myddle village.
Here, the Nicholas family held some 500–600 acres of land by the later years of the sixteenth century and ranked with the Gittinses as the largest landowners in the parish.
John Nicholas was not amongst the Balderton men who paid the 1524 lay subsidy but he was a manorial court juror four years later.
His son, Roger, may have been the richest man in Myddle upon his death in 1572, and his grandson, William, was responsible for building the hall.
Gough's comment on William Nicholas was that: He was forced to sell the freehold of Balderton and his lease of the adjacent Broomhurst Farm and to leave the district.
Gough's account of the changing ownership of the Balderton estate over the next 100 years shows how varied the fortunes and personalities of the parish gentry could be.
Michael Chambre, the next owner, was ‘a person of noe accompt…wholly addicted to idlenesse’ and debauchery, who frittered away his partrimony and had a spell in prison for debt.
Having sold Balderton Hall, he went to live on the smaller farm at Broomhurst.
The next two owners were wealthy Shrewsbury drapers, each of whom lost a great deal of money when their London connections went bankrupt and were forced to sell again.
The virtuous and pious rector of Hodnet purchased the estate but died soon after his arrival; his widow, however, lived at Balderton for many years.
Upon her death the property was bought by Matthew Lath, a man who had risen from humble origins through hard work and good fortune.
He had only a daughter to succeed him and his son-in-law turned out to be a second Michael Chambre, who after Lath's death ‘let loose the reins to many disorderly courses, as cocking, raseing, drinking and lewdnesse’, so that he too finally lost all and sold Balderton to Robert Hayward, a local yeoman.
The contrast between the continuity of the ‘charitable, meeke and comendable’ Gittins family at Castle Farm and the rapid turnover of contrasting personnel at Balderton could hardly have been more marked.
The stability of the Gittins family could almost be matched in other parts of the parish by the Hanmers and the Atcherleys of Marton, the Watkinses of Shotton and less wealthy farmers such as the Downtons of Alderton.
In contrast, during the last quarter of the seventeenth century Bilmarsh Farm had six successive tenants and Webscott had five.
The chances of a local gentry family holding on to its farm through three or more generations were about 50:50 during the Elizabethan and Stuart era.
Gough was careful to distinguish between the twelve farms, the forty-eight tenements and the growing number of cottages.
The tenements varied in size between 10 and 90 acres (depending in part upon the quality of the land), though their value was increased by generous common rights.
A quarter of the tenements were freehold; the rest were held by the normal Shropshire tenure of leases for three lives, with a large entry fine and a nominal annual rent.
The yeomen, husbandmen and craftsmen who lived in these tenements had mostly just a single fireplace in their  timber-framed houses at the time of the hearth tax return of 1672.
As farmers who concentrated on stock-rearing and, increasingly, on dairying, they had sufficient resources to survive but rarely had the means to expand their activities.
Like the middling farmers of open-field Wigston, they formed the backbone of the community.
From 1541 to 1701 the parish registers, with remarkable consistency, show just how important the long-established families were.
At any one time only two out of five surnames in the parish were those of this hard core of families, but four out of five of the total entries belonged to this group.
Some yeomen families were there for five, six or seven generations, and in some other cases the turnover of names is explained by inheritance through a female line in the absence of male heirs.
Richard Gough himself came from one of the most ancient families in the parish of Myddle, and one that had branches in several parts of north Shropshire.
His ancestors came from Tilley, just across the parish boundary, where the first Richard Gough of that name died in 1538 at the age of eighty-three.
Next year, the younger son of this old man became the first of five Richard Goughs to live at Newton on the Hill, a mile or so from Myddle church.
As in Wigston, few of the families that put down roots in the parish of Myddle during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had been there in earlier times; the turnover of names between the 1370s poll tax returns and the subsidies levied in the reign of Henry VIII was equally remarkable in both parishes.
But the new families that came into Wigston and Myddle during Tudor times tended to stay put.
Gough thought that the Lloyds were possibly the most ancient family in Myddle village.
They owned a freehold tenement that stood close to the north door of the church and another small tenement in Houlston township, which they normally let to tenants.
John Lloyd paid the subsidies in 1524 and 1544 and served as a juror of the manor court from at least 1528 to 1542.
Six generations of his direct descendants continued to live in Myddle throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The senior members of the family and some of the younger sons were described as yeomen or husbandmen, but the most junior members were craftsmen, such as glovers or weavers.
Some of the leaseholders were also remarkably stable over the generations, families such as the Braynes, the Groomes, the Tylers, the Juxes and the Formstons.
The first Brayne to live in a house by the village street in Myddle was William Brayne, a  husbandman who appears in the 1544 subsidy roll.
Four successive Williams then three Michaels carried the surname well into the eighteenth century.
Their neighbours, the Formstons, were a prolific as well as a long-resident family.
William Formston was a tenant at Marton in 1529; by the seventeenth century there were five branches in various parts of the parish, one of which continued there till Victorian times.
Many of Richard Gough's contemporaries provided him with information about a wide range of cousins and about ancestors going back several generations.
Gough was able to give character sketches of relations long since dead and not directly in his own line, as well as intimate portraits of the kinsmen of other families.
Time and time again families were identified with a particular farm or tenement, a link that was all the stronger because the home was also the place of work, the spot where an individual spent most of his time.
Recounting the history of Bilmarsh farm, Gough observed: ‘Nathaniell Reve had a desire to been tenant of this farme, because his grandfather and father had been tenants to it before’.
Family sentiment linked to a particular place is not a modern phenomenon.
The craftsmen were not always recognizable as a separate group within the parish, for they were often younger sons of farmers and had land of their own.
A few families followed a particular trade for a few generations, however.
The Hordleys and Taylors were prosperous yeomen-tailors, the Parkeses of Newton and the Davieses of Myddlewood were poor weaver-cottagers, the Raphes and Wagges were carpenters and the Chaloners were the village blacksmiths and coopers.
The Chaloners were one of the most prolific families in Myddle.
Their names appear in every type of record, with five Alans, four Williams and four Georges to baffle the person who is compiling their family tree.
The painstaking task is finally rewarded, however, by the detailed picture that emerges of an ‘ordinary’ family of farmers, craftsmen and labourers over a century and a half.
This village dynasty was founded by Alan Chaloner, a blacksmith who married in 1552 and died in 1601, leaving seven children alive.
Two main lines were carried on by Richard Chaloner, cooper, and George, the youngest son who inherited the cottage and smithy that his father had erected on a piece of waste land east of the church, together with the lease of 3 acres of land enclosed from Myddlewood.
The individuals who comprised the Chaloner family varied as greatly in their characters as did the members of the parish gentry, from Alan Chaloner (1603–84), the blacksmith who took pride in his  work, to his elder brother Richard, whom Gough described  as ‘an untowardly liver, very idle and extravagant, endeavouring to supply his neccssytyes rather by stealeing than by his honest labour’.
As I wrote in An English Rural Community: Myddle Under the Tudors and Stuarts (1974):
Some of the Chaloners were respected for their craft skills, others through their initiative and hard work earned the name of yeoman, but yet others through idleness or misfortune fell into poverty.
There were Chaloners who lived to be seventy or eighty, there were those who died in their youth or early manhood, and many others never reached their first birthday.
Some were fortunate in their wives; some were unusually unlucky.
Some had children of whom they could be proud; some were ashamed of their offspring.
Misfortune was surmounted, and misfortune became too great a burden; virtuous reputations were earned, and scandalous stories were recounted.
The family was one of the most prolific in the parish, but in the end the male line withered.
In short, the history of the Chaloners reminds one that people living in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were as varied and as human as we are today.
During the sixteenth century Myddle was essentially a society consisting of numerous smallholders and a few large farmers, but from the second half of Elizabeth's reign onwards poor immigrants came into the parish in search of labouring work and the opportunity to erect a cottage in the woods or on the manorial wastes.
The population of Pimhill Hundred, in which Myddle lay, rose by two-thirds between 1563 and 1672; Myddle's population during that period increased from about 270 to about 450.
Between 1541 and 1570 the labourers recorded in the Myddle parish register formed only 7·1 per cent of adult males, but during the next thirty years the proportion rose to 23·4 per cent.
Following a subsequent period of stability a fresh wave of poor immigrants arrived between 1631 and 1660, bringing the proportion of labourers up to 31·2 per cent.
After the Restoration the keeper of the parish register no longer recorded occupations, but Gough observed that whereas his father paid only 4d. per annum poor rate upon his marriage in 1633, by the end of the century he (Gough) paid almost 20 shillings.
Myddle was no doubt typical of many another parish in the Welsh Borders.
But the poor were still not the problem that they were in other parts of England.
Only 16·5 per cent of the inhabitants of Pimhill Hundred were exempted from payment of the hearth tax in 1672, and though many cottagers remained near the poverty line all their lives others prospered a little and moved up the social scale.
This group of cottagers were the most mobile of all, appearing briefly in the parish register or other records and then moving on.
But certain families remained for two or three generations, sometimes more.
The Hanmer family were the first of the new immigrants to appear and they were still there 120 years later.
The Hanmers were unconnected with the gentry family of the same name at Marton and their surname was not formed until they arrived in Myddle.
John Ellis of Hanmer (a small village just across the Welsh border) was presented at the manorial court in 1581 ‘for erecting of one bay of a house upon the lords waste grounde in Myddle woode’.
Seven years later a cluster of names in a rental follows that of Ellice Hanmer, as he was generally known in his new parish.
By 1701 Myddlewood had attracted a squatters' colony of fourteen cottages that formed a distinct, new settlement between Myddle village and the hamlet of Marton.
A labourer's cottage that still stands at the edge of the former wood was a one bay dwelling, open to the rafters, built by John Hughes in the 1580s and enlarged by the Hanmers during the seventeenth century.
It shows that not all labourers' cottages were flimsy hovels and that families in this group could aspire to reasonable comfort.
In contrast to the Hanmers, the Chidlows seem to  have experienced years of relentless poverty.
Roger Chidlow was amongst the first group of immigrants, for he appears in a 1590 rental paying 4d rent for a cottage in Newton.
He had three sons: James, a weaver, who lived in a little cottage without a chimney at Newton; Jacob, a tailor of Brandwood who died young; and Thomas, a labourer, who set up home in ‘a poore pitifull hutt, built up to an old oake’ at the side of Divlin Lane.
It was later converted into a better dwelling, but while they were rearing their eight children during the 1590s and early 1600s Thomas and his wife must have found life hard and unpromising.
The rise and fall of families depended not only on the circumstances in which people found themselves but upon individual character and temperament.
The Protestant ethic was observed by most people in Myddle except in one startling way; many ruined themselves and their families by excessive drinking.
We have only Gough to guide us on this, but he has some amazing tales to tell.
Thomas Downton's wife ‘went dayly to the alehouse.
Her husband payd £10 att a time for alehouse scores’ and in the end he had to sell his lands to pay off her debts.
David Higley of Balderton ‘was a good husband by fitts.
What hee got with hard labour he spent idely in the Alehouse’.
And in Gough's pithy  phrase, William Cross of Bilmarsh and his wife ‘went dayly to the alehouse, and soone after the cows went thither alsoe’.
Historians are rarely able to get to the truth of the matter in this way, but family stories often suggest that drunkenness was the reason for an otherwise inexplicable decline, not just in the Tudor and Stuart era but in much later times.
Heavy drinking sometimes went with immorality but many people who were otherwise upright and hardworking ruined themselves by spending all their available money on drink.
Thus Thomas Hayward of Balderton:
INDUSTRIAL COMMUNITIES
Even in the Elizabethan and Stuart era rural communities in certain regions such as the West Riding of Yorkshire or the West Midlands had an industrial character that marked them off from the societies that have so far been described.
In these industrial districts a high proportion of families earned a substantial part of their living from metal crafts or mining or the manufacture of cloth.
In the West Midlands, for instance, over a third of the men whose occupations were noted in the Sedgley parish register during 1579 and 1580 were either nailmakers or some other type of metalworker.
Until the eighteenth century settlement within the neighbouring parish of West Bromwich took the form of small groups of cottages clustered together in ‘ends’ around the heaths, where squatters had opportunities to graze a few animals and to build a little workshop.
The 212 occupations recorded in the parish register between 1608 and 1658 include those of 122 nailers and 12 bucklemakers.
By 1723, ninety-nine cottages had been erected on small pieces of land taken from the wastes.
Before the huge population rise of the eighteenth century English rural craftsmen normally combined their trade with the running of a smallholding.
The most substantial of them farmed sufficient land to earn themselves the description of yeoman; the poorest had merely an acre or two and perhaps the right to keep a cow and some sheep on the common.
Having a dual occupation    was the typical way of life in many parts of the country, particularly in pastoral zones where farming did not require constant application.
Men were described alternatively in the records as yeoman or husbandman or by their craft name, for industry and agriculture were not then regarded as two entirely separate ventures.
When John Nobles, a kersey clothier in the West Riding parish of Kirkburton, made his will in 1715 he directed his supervisors to ‘chuse such a master for my son where he may learn both the clothier trade and husbandry’ when he reached the age of 14.
The wills and inventories of the inhabitants of Pennine villages, hamlets and farmsteads show that those described as clothiers had livestock amongst their possessions and that the farmers had stores of wool, spinning wheels and looms.
In her book Masters and Men in the West Midland Metalware Trades before the Industrial Revolution (1975) Dr Marie Rowlands emphasizes the role of the family as the unit of production and the source of necessary capital.
It did not cost much to set oneself up as a metalworker.
Wills make it clear that fathers and sons worked together in the same little workshop, and perhaps the women and girls helped occasionally.
Tools, especially bellows, were passed on to the eldest boy, younger sons had the opportunity to rent workshops of their own.
Manor court rolls and deeds show that  families possessed small parcels of land on a variety of copyhold, leasehold and freehold tenures and that income from even the smallest holdings was often set aside to provide for dependants.
The local historian's problems in tracing the descent of family properties in districts with a high rate of turnover are made even more difficult by the complicated administrative structure and settlement patterns.
In the West Midlands detached portions of parishes and manors even crossed the county boundaries.
Freedom from the restraining hand of a squire or a parson no doubt encouraged enterprise but it meant that much activity went unrecorded.
By the late-sixteenth century certain trades were already concentrated in particular localities within the West Midlands metalworking region.
The scythemakers were found in the north Worcestershire parishes of Belbroughton, Chaddesley Corbett and Clent, the lockmakers worked mainly in Wolverhampton and its chapelries of Wednesfield and Willenhall, and the bit makers were mostly Walsall men.
The same sort of pattern, with each parish having a reputation for a certain product, is discernible in the other great metalworking region, around Sheffield.
Dr Rowlands  observes that the Sedgley parish registers, which give occupations almost continuously from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, demonstrate the continuity of family involvement in scythemaking, lockmaking and nailing.
Newcomers often turn out to be sons-in-law or cousins.
Members of metalworking families were far more likely to change their place of residence than their trade.
The importance of the family unit is most evident amongst the scythesmiths, with local dynasties such as the Rayboulds of Lower Gornal, the Waldrons of Clent, the Hill and Lea families of Bloomers End, Cradley, the Badgers of Kingswinford and others whose names constantly recur in local records.
The ironmongers also built up their businesses by using the human and material resources of their families.
Though the backgrounds of the successful ironmongers were varied, nearly all their families can be traced back in the neighbourhood to the sixteenth century, either through a direct line or through marriage.
Likewise, in south Yorkshire, the cutlery factors and nailchapmen started in a modest way from the local ranks of metalworker-farmers whose surnames had long been characteristic ones in the area.
The Booth family were amongst the leading chapmen who organised the nail trade in the rural parishes that lay to the north of Sheffield.
They provided rod iron from the local slitting mills at Wortley and Masborough and collected the finished products for sale in country fairs or for distribution down navigable rivers to the capital and abroad.
Abraham Booth of Loundside, yeoman, died in 1671, leaving a widow who paid tax on three hearths the following year.
Their four sons, Abraham, John, Thomas and George, were prosperous nailer-farmers and so were those of their children who were middlemen in the trade.
John Booth was the first of four generations of that name who were described variously as yeomen, nailers, nailchapmen and eventually gentlemen.
The third John Booth provided much of the capital for his partners, Samuel and Aaron Walker, when they established the business that eventually made them the leading ironmasters in the North of England.
The fourth John Booth founded another major firm in partnership with John Hartop and George Binks, whose own families also had had a long involvement in the local metal trades.
From families such as these came men with the knowledge, resources and entrepreneurial spirit that was a vital ingredient in the industrial development of their districts.
The individual histories of such families should be a  major concern of all those who wish to understand how Britain became the first country in the world to undergo an Industrial Revolution.
URBAN COMMUNITIES
Few English people lived in towns with more than 10,000 people during the Tudor and Stuart period, apart from those hundreds of thousands who dwelt in the capital city.
London was a giant that dwarfed the rest into comparative insignificance.
It was the commercial as well as the administrative capital of England and the nation's greatest port by far.
The enormous number of immigrants who poured in from all over the country congested the old area within the medieval walls of the City and created new suburbs all around.
William Cecil blamed the devastating plague of 1563 on the overcrowding of the central area and ordered that each house which had been subdivided during the previous year should be restored to occupation by a single family only and that recently-arrived lodgers should be removed, but such measures did not have a lasting effect.
Wealthy families were already seeking more desirable surroundings beyond the walls, particularly in the western suburb that stretched all along the road to Westminster.
South of the river, Southwark had effectively become a suburb rather than an independent borough, and to the north and the east of the City walls the immigrant poor clustered together in their cottages.
Newcomers often found work in areas that lay outside the jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor and Corporation, in what had once been rural manors; they moved constantly from one district to another.
London had well over 100 parishes.
My sympathies are extended to those family historians who are trying to locate an ancestor in the capital during this period.
Far below London in size came the provincial capitals, the cities of Norwich, Bristol, York, Exeter, Newcastle upon Tyne and perhaps Salisbury and Coventry, each of which began to recover from the doldrums of the late-medieval recession during the middle years of Elizabeth's reign.
Below them in the urban hierarchy came 100 or so towns with between 1,500 to 7,000 people each.
Most of them retained their medieval walls and intricate street patterns and they often served as ecclesiastical or secular centres of administration, but their major role was to act as retail, handicraft and distribution points for wide hinterlands.
A  simplified version of this role also distinguished the 500 or so small market towns with a population of between 600 and 1,500 inhabitants from the mere villages.
Tiny though they were by today's standards, they had a local importance out of all proportion to their size.
Some case studies
Let us look at a few Elizabethan towns in more detail, starting with York, the secular and ecclesiastical capital of Northern England, a county town and large commercial centre.
Its annual fairs and three weekly markets brought sellers and purchasers from miles around and goods from overseas were brought up the river Ouse right into the heart of the city, York remained one of the leading provincial centres, despite its decline to less than 8,000 people in the 1520s after the collapse of its cloth industry and the decay of its overseas trade.
By the end of Elizabeth's reign its population had risen to 11,500, and though this was 2,500 less than the total number of inhabitants 200 years earlier, York had climbed back from sixth to third position amongst England's provincial cities.
The youthful immigrants who swelled the population were attracted not only from the Vale of York but from far beyond.
Lists of freemen of the city must be used with great caution, for their coverage was far from complete, but they indicate patterns of immigration amongst the ‘middling’ groups of townsmen — the tradesmen, craftsmen and shopkeepers who together accounted for at least half the adult male population.
Surviving lists for York name 358 men for various years between 1535 and 1566.
In Tudor York (1979) Professor David Palliser has shown that nearly all of the 102 freemen (28·5 per cent) who were born in the city claimed their freedom through their father.
Only 12 of the 268 men who became free through completing an apprenticeship or by purchase were born in York.
In other words, the sons of non-freemen Yorkers had very little chance of becoming freemen themselves.
As for the incomers, about 108 freemen (47·2 per cent) were immigrants who came from within a 20-mile radius, 75 (29·3 per cent ) came from between 20 and 50 miles and 73 (28·5 per cent ) came from further afield.
York had a stronger pull than smaller towns and attracted migrants over much longer distances than most places.
Seventy-two freemen  (20 per cent) came from outside Yorkshire, including 33 who came from Cumbria.
The city also acted as a magnet for humbler folk, those single persons and young families who hoped to improve their fortunes by moving into York in search of work and a more comfortable home.
Nearly half of these poorer people came from within a 20-mile radius, but some of the others came long distances.
Very often they moved on again after a short stay, for they found that reality was harsher than their dreams.
The social hierarchy in English towns took the same shape as in the countryside, tapering from a broad base composed of those who lived on or below the poverty line to a few outstanding wealthy families.
The hearth tax returns of Charles II's reign commonly record 40 per cent or more of the urban population as being exempt from payment of the tax on the grounds of their poverty.
Most householders were probably employees rather than employers, men who worked as journeymen or casual labourers.
Independent craftsmen and small tradesmen formed a middling group, and at the top of urban society were the merchants who were as rich as the rural gentry.
The opportunities for social advance were there for all to grasp, but in practice most had to be content with their station in life.
William Hoskins was the first to analyse in depth the economic structure of a sixteenth-century town, in his essay ‘An Elizabethan Provincial Town: Leicester’, which was reprinted in his book, Provincial England (1964).
Leicester had about 600 households at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign and was largely contained within its medieval walls, surrounded by open, arable fields.
It was the focal point for one of the richest and most densely populated farming counties in England.
As in most provincial towns of the time, the wealthiest families lived in the central area and the poorest people lived in the thickly-populated outskirts.
In 1544 the top twenty-four  families owned one-third of the wealth.
The occupational structure of the town can be deduced from the freemen's registers, for between 1559 and 1603 an average of about twenty men per annum, almost 900 in all, were admitted to the freedom of the city.
Ten leading trades accounted for about half the total number of admissions.
Leicester did not have a staple industry at this time and the high degree of dependence on the surrounding countryside is evident at once.
Well over half the freemen were occupied in providing clothes, food and drink, household goods and buildings.
If the distributive    trades are included with the above, then three freemen out of every five provided for the customer.
Smiths, wheelwrights, butchers, tanners, graziers and husbandmen had direct links with the rural hinterland.
The lists also show that the Elizabethan era was a period of considerable economic change as the woolstaplers were replaced by the butchers and the tanners; cattle rather than sheep became the basis of local wealth, especially after 1541 when the disappearance of the Wyggestons removed a family which had dominated the town's economy for two or three generations.
Even though sons followed their father's trade with a high degree of regularity, it was rare for a family  business to last in Leicester for more than 100 years.
The Norrice family were exceptional in remaining tanners from 1493 to 1670, otherwise only the Newcombers (bell-founders), Herricks (ironmongers), Tatams (tanners) and Stanfords (butchers) stayed in the same business for a century or more.
In his study of The City of Worcester in the Sixteenth Century (1973) Dr Alan Dyer has shown that Worcester was far more reliant upon a single trade than most Elizabethan towns, certainly much more so than Leicester.
At the time of the 1525 lay subsidy a comparatively small group of thirty individuals (6 per cent of those taxed), who were assessed on goods valued at more than £30, dominated the political, economic and social life of the community.
A broad middle section of self-employed tradesmen formed the backbone of this urban society, but nearly 50 per cent of those who were taxed were dependent on their wages and were likely to be reduced to poverty in times of depression.
Worcester's population doubled from 4,000 to 8,000 between the mid-sixteenth and the mid-seventeenth century, a rise that is explained equally by natural increase and by immigration.
The dominant trade was the production and processing of woollen cloth, crafts that engaged well over half the adult male population at the end of the Elizabethan era.
Apart from the all-important cloth trade, however, the city had the normal, diversified economic structure that one would expect to find in a major provincial market centre and head of diocesan administration.
Between them, Worcester men in the first half of the seventeenth century had at least 100 different occupations.
The three weekly markets and four annual fairs were a regular attraction for buyers and sellers within a 10 or 12 miles radius.
Worcester was well-positioned to fulfil this role, for it was sited at the edge of an arable area to the south and east and a pastoral zone to the north and west.
The city had a relatively ‘open’ society and was the goal of countless migrants, but, as at Leicester, it is difficult to find many examples of families which stayed for more than three generations.
Sixteenth-century towns do not appear to have had a solid group of stable families in the same way as so many contemporary rural parishes.
Tudor urban families often either died out or disappeared very quickly.
Chesterfield will serve as our example of a small town in this era.
In 1563 it had no more than 1,000 to 1,200 inhabitants, but it was still the second most important town in Derbyshire.
The population of its large parish, which included several rural outliers, stood at about 2,700.
The lay-out of the town had been established back in the twelfth century when a new market place had replaced the old, congested commercial area alongside the church.
When William Senior drew his map of c.1635 Chesterfield had still not expanded beyond its medieval limits.
A regular pattern of narrow lanes gave a special character to the Shambles at the eastern edge of the market place, as indeed it does today, and narrow street frontages and long gardens and alleys preserved the medieval property divisions of the old burgage plots.
But Chesterfield had no rich merchants to build fine town houses round the market place; the more prominent families were not conspicuously different from the rest.
The characteristic townsmen worked at a craft to meet purely local demands.
About 85 per cent of the 215 probate inventories which were appraised within the parish between 1521 and 1603 were valued at less than £50 and 68 per cent were priced under £30.
Chesterfield wills and inventories show that the manufacture of woollen cloth — the most important industry in Tudor England — was basic to both the urban and the rural economy, for one in every three or four people in the parish had equipment such as spinning wheels, cards or looms or small quantities of wool.
Second in importance came the leather trades.
The Chesterfield tanneries were sited at the edge of the town by the small river Hipper, a sensible precaution that  was followed by most towns to keep away the smell and the flies.
The tanners' chief customers were the shoemakers, but of course quite a variety of goods, ranging from bottles to garments and from saddles to straps, were made out of leather.
Thirdly, Chesterfield shared in the region's involvement in metal trades, though to a much lesser extent than its northerly neighbour, Sheffield; the parish had its cutlers, scythemakers, nailers, locksmiths and Ralph Hethcote, the bellfounder.
Of course, Chesterfield's range of occupations was limited when compared with what was on offer in Worcester, Leicester or York, but the stalls and shops gathered in and around the market place provided goods and services that attracted rural families from miles around.
At the end of the seventeenth century Celia Fiennes enthused that Chesterfield's Saturday market was ‘like some little faire, a great deal of corne and all sorts of ware and fowles’.
During the later years of the seventeenth century and the opening decades of the eighteenth a few provincial towns began to grow rapidly.
Spa towns led by Bath, ports headed by Bristol and Liverpool and including the new venture at Whitehaven, and manufacturing centres like Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester and Sheffield began to grow at a significant rate.
This thriving group included some of the old provincial capitals such as Bristol, Newcastle and Norwich.
During the seventeenth century Norwich's population rose from about 12,000 or 13,000 to around 30,000, an extraordinary rate of expansion in a century where growth was generally sluggish after the 1630s.
Dr Penelope Corfield estimates that the net increase of newcomers into the city reached about 400 per annum during the 1670s and 1680s.
They came mostly from Norfolk and Suffolk, but (like York) Norwich was able to attract people from distant places.
For instance, during the 1680s between 100 and 200 Huguenots settled in the city.
Surviving papers relating to the removal of 433 paupers and vagrants between 1740 and 1762 show that 40 per cent of these unfortunates had come from other parts of East Anglia, 15 per cent had travelled up to 100 miles, 6 per cent had started from London and Middlesex and 39 per cent originated elsewhere, including thirty-three people from Scotland and sixteen from Ireland.
Beggars and vagrants, of course, may have been exceptionally mobile.
The places of origin of 1,601 Norwich apprentices between 1710 and 1731 show a preponderance of short-distance migration.
Only 6 per cent came from outside the county; 43 per cent came from Norwich itself, 22 per cent came  from the rest of Norfolk and 29 per cent of places were unrecorded.
Norwich's growth was not at the expense of its rural hinterland, however, for the surrounding villages grew as well.
When we turn to the registers of the freemen who comprised roughly half the adult male workforce of Norwich, the importance of the worsted industry is immediately apparent.
In the years between the Restoration of Charles II and the middle of the eighteenth century, textile trades provided employment for almost 50 per cent of the freemen.
From the 1670s and 1680s onwards the colourful and varied light-weight fabrics known as ‘Norwich Stuffs’ became fashionable and gave a new stimulus to an old industry.
The other half of the local freemen worked at the food and drink trades (10·5 per cent), clothing (8·9), leather (7·9), building (5·8), the professions (5·4), the metal trades (3·2) or at a variety of miscellaneous tasks.
The late-seventeenth century prosperity of Norwich owed much to the consumer trades.
Grocers, confectioners and tobacconists imported exotic goods in bulk and haberdashers, apothecaries, ironmongers and booksellers catered for growing local demand.
The Norfolk county gentry began to build fine houses in the town, and to cater for their needs and those of the affluent merchants a new group of professional men, notably attorneys, architects and physicians, set up trade and flourished, as did their fellow professionals in other provincial towns.
The hub of all this activity was found in and around the market place and the Guildhall and down towards the Cathedral.
No clear distinction could yet be made between the wholesale and retail trades that were carried on in the ‘shops’ in the historic centre of the city.
Norwich continued its ancient role as a major marketing centre, but its expansion owed more to the spectacular growth of the worsted trades.
Weavers from as far away as Taunton and Exeter were found in Norwich in 1674, and many others came in search of employment in this labour-intensive craft.
Northampton was another elegant county town and regional market centre and was known far and wide for its horse fairs.
It was much smaller than Norwich, but its population doubled from c.3,500 in the 1560s to c.7,000 in the 1770s.
During the same period the number of apprentices more than trebled from 80 to 250 as the town became a specialist craft centre offering a wide variety of trades.
Like many another eighteenth century town, its economy was becoming more complex and sophisticated.
Northampton has an excellent series of apprenticeship registers  which list the name, trade, father's name, and place of birth of nearly 3,500 boys between 1562 and 1776.
Professor Alan Everitt's analysis of these registers, in Ways and Means in Local History (1971), shows that forty-five different trades and crafts were recorded between 1562 and 1601 and that this figure rose to eighty-three between 1654 and 1705 and then to 114 between 1716 and 1776.
His analysis of the occupations recorded in the Northampton militia list for 1777, which names men aged between eighteen and forty-five who were liable for militia duty if required, reveals that craftsmen formed about half of Northampton's adult male workforce.
Shoemakers already formed the largest group and various types of woodworkers were also prominent.
Intimate links with the countryside were maintained, for the craftsmen drew upon local resources for their raw materials and also serviced a wide area.
Other sources show that the wealthiest group in town — the professionals and the innkeepers — were under-represented in the militia returns.
The later seventeenth century had seen a marked rise in the number of lawyers, scriveners, physicians, surgeons, apothecaries and schoolmasters, whose most prosperous members formed a type of urban gentry who were able to lead a leisured life without the support of a landed estate.
They and the principal innkeepers occupied the aldermanic pews at the front of All Saints church, where the social hierarchy was as carefully formalized in the seating arrangements as in any rural parish.
The leading innkeepers ranked amongst the richest men in Northampton, just like their counterparts in other busy towns.
Inns provided much more than accommodation, for they were the venues for feasts and banquets, cultural and social activities, business ventures and political affairs.
Professor Everitt has written that innkeepers were among the most mobile elements in the community, but that only a minority established dynasties that lasted for three or four generations.
In Northampton, the Pratts were innholders from the reign of Henry VIII to George I, the Lyons family lasted for four generations and in the mid-seventeenth century had three brothers who were prominent in the trade, and the Peaches eventually acquired quite a chain of inns.
They all belonged to an influential group of related families at the very centre of urban life in seventeenth and eighteenth century Northampton.
Sheffield was a very different type of town, but like most other places that developed into great Victorian cities it had already had a long history as a market and craft centre.
As it was not a  corporate borough it has no freemen's registers, other than those of the Cutlers' Company, but for certain periods the parish registers give the occupations of recorded males.
From 1 October 1698 onwards they are particularly informative and individuals can be located either within the town or within the rural parts of the parish.
During a five-year period up to 30 September 1703 the occupations of 763 of the 902 recorded townsmen are given in the baptism and burial registers.
As many as 450 (57·3 per cent) worked in the cutlery trades or other metalworking jobs, and another 203 men (26·6 per cent ) were employed in other trades or crafts.
Seventeen richer individuals who were described as gentlemen or by the name of their profession formed only 2·2 per cent of the sample.
They were gathered in the High Street and around the market place, but could not compete with the standard of living of those at the upper end of the social scale in the county towns and old corporate boroughs.
Sheffield already had that working-class character that was to be so marked during Victorian times.
When Daniel Defoe came this way during the first quarter of the eighteenth century he observed that:
By forges Defoe meant cutlers' smithies; it appeared to him that Sheffield already had a pronounced industrial character, and though it was very small by later standards it struck him as being ‘very populous and large’.
By 1736 the population of the town of Sheffield stood at 10,121, which was about three and a half times higher than it had been a couple of generations earlier in 1672.
The absence of a prosperous merchant class meant that Sheffield had few fine houses or public buildings.
However, many townsmen were reasonably well-off by the standards of the time and were able to rebuild their modest dwellings.
A visitor in 1725 wrote:
By the time that Sheffield cutlers were selling their goods all over Britain and large quantities of knives, scissors, saws and scythes were being exported to America.
Within a few years the improved navigability of the river Don enabled them to compete even more successfully in distant markets.
The population of the town soon began to expand at a phenomenal rate.
By the nineteenth century a new hierarchy of provincial towns had been established, led by manufacturing settlements that were often not even dignified by the title of borough, let alone that of a city.
Fisher Row, Oxford
Urban historians who deal with comparatively large populations limit the scale of their enquiries to aggregative studies.
The sheer  bulk of the material makes it difficult for them to do otherwise.
In 1982, however, Dr Mary Prior published the results of a different approach and showed just how revealing a detailed study of an urban occupational group over the centuries could be.
In so doing she demonstrated the vital role of the family in early-modern towns.
Her book, Fisher Row: Fishermen, Bargemen and Canal Boatmen in Oxford, 1500–1900, depicts ‘a very tight-knit community of boat-people who were united both by occupation and kinship’.
Fisher Row lay on the west bank of the Castle Mill stream, a small tributary of the Thames, in three sections known as Upper, Middle and Lower Fisher Row.
Three groups of river-people lived here; firstly the fishermen, then the bargemen who plied their trade on the navigable river, and finally the boatmen who married into the older families after the opening of the Oxford Canal in 1790.
At its most populous, between the 1790s and the 1840s, Fisher Row contained some 300–400 people.
The early history of the inhabitants of the Row can be pieced together in a limited fashion from leases and from entries in the freemen's registers.
During the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries all the fishermen and most of the bargemen were freemen of fairly high status; their homes were modest yet comfortable and they held their property on leases for years at a low annual rent but high entry fine.
Fishing was rather like farming in that a river fishery was a limited resource that could support only a restricted number of people.
Families were therefore nuclear and patriarchal and only one son inherited the patrimony.
Other sons, however, often married the daughters of neigbouring fishermen or bargemen.
The Row was a highly-traditional society where the skills of the trade were passed on from generation to generation.
Oxford's Elizabethan and Stuart fishermen were not poor but they never rose to prominence in the city, despite being well-connected on occasion.
They provided the citizens with a wide variety of fresh fish for its fast days and during the close seasons they exploited all the resources of the riverside that they could utilize.
By-employments such as basket-making, hemp-dressing and wild-fowling gave them additional security.
Families such as the Hickses, who occupied the second and third tenements, remained in the Row for several generations.
Right through from the mid sixteenth century to the end of the seventeenth one of these families was always recorded as Bonner alias Pitt, a continuity in the use of a double-barrelled surname that Dr Prior  thinks suggests a certain family pride.
The Fisher Row community had few surnames and they used the same Christian names over and over again.
When they were amongst themselves they used nicknames, but as these rarely appear in official documents the historian has a difficult task to disentangle one member from another.
The first boatman to be accepted into the freedom of the city was admitted in 1583.
The different nature of a boatman's work compared to that of a fisherman led to different forms of inheritance and to a contrasting family structure.
Primogeniture was not the inheritance system used by the bargemen for the successful bargemaster could provide openings for all his sons.
Having several sons in the trade worked to the general benefit of the family business which could thereby offer a wider range of services.
The nature of their work brought bargemen together in a mutually-dependent way.
Boat-haling demanded enormous cooperative effort and trips down the river to London could take anything from nearly two to eight weeks when drought, flood, frost or wind made the going difficult or impossible.
The families along the river were closely related and inter-marriage had fused them into a larger unit.
Fisher Row was similar to some of the contemporary rural communities which have been studied in depth in that it had a stable core of local families which remained for generation after generation while another group which included carters, drovers and seasonal workers who found cheap lodgings in the parish were always on the move.
Dr Prior makes the point that the mobility of the inhabitants of a parish does not depend on how many people leave the district but on who they are.
A high turnover of newcomers does not have a serious effect on the community if a substantial group of native families remain rooted in the same spot, but if over the years it is the oldest families that are emigrating then the parish structure will be unstable.
In St Thomas's, the riverside parish which contained Fisher Row, the older families stayed where they were; amongst the most stable groups were the bargemen and fishermen.
A list of the heads of households in Upper and Middle Fisher Row in 1772 shows that the area was inhabited by a series of closely-related families.
In Mary Prior's words, ‘the area had become a sort of large household under many adjacent roof trees.
It is perhaps a matter of definition whether such families are counted as extended families or not’.
The barging families were of two sorts; the rich and the powerful families such as the Tawneys and the Clarkes of Lower Fisher Row, and the numerous poorer ones like the Gardners and the Crawfords of Upper and Middle Fisher Row.
The Tawneys (ancestors of the great historian R. H. Tawney) were one of the oldest and most successful families in the community, for they married into the brewers who dominated eighteenth-century Oxford.
Families such as the Gardners, on the other hand, never made links with outside interests but confined their activities to the moving of boats along the river.
They suffered from this limitation of enterprise in times of depression.
The lack of developed commercial institutions at this time meant that businesses such as barging were inevitably family-based.
The world of Fisher Row — and no doubt of other occupational groups in early-modern times — was one that thought in terms of family duties and privileges, of family alliances and of inheritance through the family.
All households in the Row were inter-married, but whereas the nuclear family prevailed amongst the fishermen, the extended family was the norm for the bargemen and also for their nineteenth-century successors, the canal boatmen.
Different patterns of work made different demands on the family.
In the canal carrying business the number of sons who could be involved was limitless and women and children could help to work the boats.
While the canal boatmen were away without their families the women who remained were drawn together for mutual support.
It was the women, in fact, who provided stability for this new type of community.
The canal boatmen who came to live in Fisher Row upon the opening of the Oxford Canal in 1790 were a colourful group with distinctive dress, customs and style of boat decoration which had been developed in the previous two decades upon the canals of the Midlands.
Work on a canal was a very different experience from boat-haling.
Strong groups of men were not needed on the artificial waterways; two people and a horse sufficed.
Because of the length of a trip, canal boatmen began to live on their boats and by the 1820s their wives and children sometimes lived and worked alongside them.
Dr Prior writes:
The boatmen came and went, so that the boat-people's community ashore was largely one of women, often living together, helping and supporting each other in the absence of their husbands.
These households were not necessarily based on a home ashore at all times.
During the life-cycle of the family it was easier to maintain a  home ashore at some times than at others.
A home ashore was always regarded as desirable, but it was not always economically possible.
The age of the children, their number, the ability of the wife to earn a second income at home, whilst the elder children helped run the boat, the responsibility for dependent relatives, the possibility of sharing a house: such factors governed the decision to keep up a home on the land.
Focal points for the community were provided by the pubs and the chapel, which also reinforced the Row's sense of separateness from the rest of the parish.
For a boatman whose home was on the river, the pub was not only a social centre but a base where goods could be left, messages collected and horses stabled.
The families which ran the pubs were closely related to the rest of the community.
By the time of the 1841 census the three sections of Fisher Row were inhabited by one large kin-group.
At first sight these bonds are not obvious for the surnames were numerous.
The crucial links were provided by the women.
Because a boatman was always on the move, his wife remained in the Row when she married, staying amongst the relations and friends she had known since she was a child.
The nature of the work dictated the shape of the family and the particular ethos of this riverside community.
Fisher Row is a special case, but Dr Prior's fascinating study has much to teach us about other occupational groups within our urban societies.
CHAPTER THREE
Late-Georgian and Victorian England
BASIC RECORDS
The family historian's initial task of tracing his ancestors back through the nineteenth century is relatively straightforward, thanks to the information provided by civil registration certificates and census returns and by standardized Church of England registers.
However, Nonconformist ancestors can be rather elusive.
Census returns
In 1801, when the first national census was taken, the population of England and Wales was recorded at 8·9 millions.
It is generally accepted that large numbers of people evaded the attention of the enumerators on that occasion and that if allowance is made for under-recording the total should be raised to about 9·2 millions.
Later census figures are more reliable.
Substantial growth had already taken place during the course of the eighteenth century, but after 1801 the pace quickened so that by 1851 the population of England and Wales stood at 17·9 millions.
By 1911, shortly before the First World War, it had reached 36·1 millions.
It is essential for the local and family historian to grasp this basic demographic information and to understand its profound consequences for the nature of English society.
In 1801 most English people still lived in a rural environment; only one person in every three lived in a town and most of those towns were small by modern standards.
Half a century later the 1851 census provided clear evidence that an historic turning point had been reached; the returns showed that for the first time more people lived in towns  than in the countryside.
By 1881 two out of every three people were urban dwellers and by 1911 the transformation was complete with only one out of every five people still living in farmsteads, hamlets or villages.
A national census has been taken every decade since 1801, except for the year 1941 when Britain was at war.
The first four counts are of limited use to the historian for they do not list individual households, but they do provide population figures on a township basis.
These figures are printed in A Comparative Account of the Population of Great Britain in the Years 1801, 1811, 1821 and 1831, published as a parliamentary paper in 1831.
Later census figures were published as they became available.
It is usually easier, however, to turn to an early volume of the Victoria County History of England (in counties which have been covered by that enterprise), where all the nineteenth-century data are listed in tabular form.
From 1841 onwards much more information is available in the form of census enumerators' books.
At the time of writing, the 1881 census is the latest to have been made available for public consultation because of the restriction imposed by the 100 years rule.
The enumerators' returns can be consulted on microfilm at the Portugal Street annexe of the Public Record Office, just off Chancery Lane, and microfilm copies for local areas are often available at county record offices and major libraries.
The census taken in June 1841 is of less value than those taken in later years.
The exact place of birth is not recorded; all that was required was a tick in the Yes or No column in answer to the question of whether or not a person was born in the county of his or her present residence.
A further problem for the genealogist was caused by the decision to round down ages over fifteen to the nearest five.
Thus, anyone listed as aged fifty-five could have been any age between fifty-five and fifty-nine.
Nevertheless, the 1841 census is a useful source, close in date to the start of civil registration.
The returns may explain a family relationship, they record each person's occupation, and at the very least they demonstrate that an ancestor was still alive at that date.
From 1851 onwards the recorded ages were supposed to be accurate and the precise places of birth were noted.
Armed with this information, the genealogist should be able to track down the relevant baptism entry in a parish or nonconformist register in the years before civil registration began.
Locating a census return for a household in a rural area is a  relatively straightforward task, but those historians who are investigating a large Victorian town may at first be overwhelmed by the sheer bulk of the material.
For the 1851 census, for example, Sheffield was divided into 139 enumerators' districts, whose boundaries sometimes ran down the middle of a street.
A lot of time might be spent fruitlessly before the entry that one wants is found.
But then one often comes across other entries to amuse one on the way, such as the record of an enumerator's problems in compiling part of the 1871 census for Sheffield shown in Table 2.
The enumerators were amateurs who made mistakes and sometimes misunderstood their instructions, and human errors occurred when the original schedules were copied onto the printed forms.
Nor were the Attercliffe gypsies the only people who misled the enumerators through fear, ignorance or simple forgetfulness.
Nevertheless, census returns are amongst the most reliable records that a local and family historian is likely to use.
They were centrally organized, compiled on a uniform and universal basis, and backed by sanctions when co-operation was not forthcoming.
John Beckett and Trevor Foulds have recently used a computer to analyse the 1851 and 1861 census returns for the Nottinghamshire open field village of Laxton.
In ‘Beyond the Micro: Laxton, The Computer and Social Change Over Time’, published in The Local Historian, volume 16, no. 8 (1985), pp. 451–6, they remark on the contrast between a high turnover of individuals in the village and an underlying stability of households.
Laxton's population fell from 534 in 1851 to 500 a decade later.
Only 247 individuals appeared in both returns; the local parish register records the burial of 61 people in the intervening period, but another 226 individuals disappeared from the local scene.
Of the 500 inhabitants recorded in 1861, 247 had been there for at least ten years, 125 were children born since the previous census, and 128 (65 males and 63 females) were newcomers, mostly from neighbouring parishes.
But Laxton was a much more stable community than these figures might lead us to suppose.
No fewer than 75 of the 99 households recorded in 1861 had been there ten years earlier.
During that decade only 1 in 7 farms had changed hands and only 1 in 4 cottages.
Even 2 out of every 3 farm labouring families stayed put and overall 3 out of every 4 households remained virtually the same.
Half the personnel of the village had changed, but in terms of household structure Laxton    was a stable community.
Moreover, movement into the village was predominantly of people born within a few miles of its borders.
As in earlier times, people moved frequently within a wider neighbourhood than the parish, but usually they did not travel very far.
Civil registration
The civil registration of all births, marriages and deaths in England and Wales began on 1 July 1837 and continues to the present day.
Indexes of all these events can be consulted free of charge at St Catherine's House, Aldwych, London, and upon payment of a fee a copy of a certificate may be obtained.
Local registry offices will also supply copies of certificates if the event was recorded in their district, but they do not provide facilities for consulting indexes and so the genealogist has to have fairly precise information before a successful search for a certificate can be made.
At St Catherine's House, however, one has access to indexes covering events in every part of the country.
Providing one is fit enough to lift heavy indexes from the shelves and aggressive enough to elbow aside other searchers the task is relatively straightforward.
Registration districts usually cover very different areas from the administrative units that the local historian is more familiar with.
They are much larger than parishes or townships.
Even if one knows that an ancestor was buried in a certain parish, finding the appropriate registration district in the indexes can be problematic.
The Heys who were born, married and died in Thurlstone township within Penistone parish, were indexed under Wortley registration district, which was named after a small village 6 miles away.
A little elementary knowledge of the geography of the area that one is searching is usually sufficient to solve the problem of correct identification.
In this connection it is worth bearing in mind that a hospital birth will be recorded in the registration district in which the hospital stands and not in the district which contains the parents' home.
The Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies, Northgate, Canterbury, have published two maps showing the registration and census districts as they were between 1837 and 1851 and between 1852 and 1946, though they do not mark exact boundaries.
The registration procedure is as prone to human error as any other system of recording.
Names may be mis-spelt on the original    certificate, in the index or by the transcriber if a modern copy has been made.
When I obtained the death certificate of Thomas Batty (1882), I read that he had lived at Mastington; I eventually discovered that this was a copyist's error for Markington.
Such mistakes are easily made; the point is that one should not treat any historical document as gospel.
Ages recorded on death certificates (and to a lesser extent on marriage certificates) were not always accurate because the informant did not know for sure.
Sooner or later the searcher will fail to find a registration that he is looking for.
This may be explained by misspellings or  misread-.ings.
(Hey recorded as Key, for instance) or by the choice of alternative Christian names (e.g. the second one used in preference to the first) or by evasion of the system before penalties were introduced in 1875.
It has been estimated that in the early years of civil registration in some parts of England up to 15 per cent of births were not registered.
Apparently, the counties of Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, Essex and Shropshire were the worst recorded up to about 1860, after which time they were as efficient as anywhere else in the country.
Birth, marriage and death certificates each contain information that enables the researcher to take another step further back in time.
Thus, although the age at death is not recorded in the indexes before 1866, it does appear on the actual certificates right from the beginning of the system in 1837.
Marriage certificates, unfortunately, often enter ‘Of full age’ in the column marked ‘Age’, but where precise information is given it is an easy step to go on to discover the birth certificates of the married couple.
The information provided by the certificate of the marriage of two of my wife's ancestors, solemnized at the church of St Andrew, Newtown Kinson in the county of Dorset, is shown in Table 3.
It was a simple task to find Moses Downer's birth registered twenty-one years earlier under the registration district of Fordingbridge, not many miles away just across the Hampshire county boundary.
Even in Victorian times there were relatively few people named Moses.
His birth certificate, however, casts doubts on the marriage certificate's claim that a Charles Downer was his father.
This can be seen in the abstract of the details of the certificate shown in Table 4.
There was a time, not long ago, when families would do all they could to suppress such information.
An illegitimate birth in the degrading surroundings of the workhouse was about the deepest stigma that anyone could bear at the start      of life.
Thomas Hardy's story of the death of poor little Fanny Robin and her new-born child in Far From the Madding Crowd is etched on the memory of all who have read it.
Hardy was describing in fiction the real and very harsh position that unmarried mothers from the poorer sections of society found themselves in.
Fordingbridge was within the Wessex region where Hardy set his tales, and Elizabeth Downer gave birth to her son in the workhouse just seven years before his book was published.
Now that the workhouses have gone, the family historian is able to take a more detached view, to reflect on hardships endured and disabilities overcome, to ponder on the changing fortunes of families through the generations, and to feel a deep sympathy for those unfortunates whose lives were marred by remorseless poverty.
The study of family history in its wider setting soon dispels the myth of ‘the good old days’.
Nonconformity
The genealogist who has traced his family tree as far back as is possible through the use of the civil registration records kept at St Catherine's House, London, and local registry offices then turns naturally to the baptism, marriage and burial registers of the Church of England for the preceding generations.
He may find, however, that during the decades immediately before the commencement of civil registration in 1837 the answers to his queries are to be found not in the records of the Established Church but in the registers of one or more of the various Nonconformist sects.
Every local and family historian needs to acquire at least a working knowledge of the history of religious dissent in his selected region and a familiarity with the national background.
In particular he must be aware that Nonconformity flourished in certain types of local communities and that the social composition of the various denominations was often markedly different from sect to sect.
For a start he should read Alan Everitt's essay, The Pattern of Rural Dissent: the Nineteenth Century (1972), which makes many points of general interest through an analysis of the differing experiences of the counties of Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Kent and that part of Lincolnshire known as Lindsey.
Professor Everitt emphasizes that general comments on differences between each county carry less weight than observations based on local variations in parish type.
‘The significant fact’, he  writes, ‘is that in each county Dissent tended to be associated chiefly with certain forms of local society, while it was largely absent from others’.
One must, of course, always stress the human factor and beware the danger of geographical determinism; nevertheless, it is revealing to find that 86 per cent of estate villages in Kent had no Dissenting chapel, but that such places of worship were common in the scattered settlements of former forest or wood-pasture zones.
‘Open’ villages where landownership was ‘much divided’were receptive to Dissent and so were large parishes where population growth in the outlying parts had made nonsense of the old ecclesiastical arrangements.
Market towns, industrial villages and boundary settlements were all likely to have their Nonconformists.
Sometimes certain families adhered to the same religious beliefs for several generations.
The continuity in the Dissenting tradition in such places is often remarkable.
On Sunday 29 March 1851 a census was taken of the attendance at all religious services held that day.
This was the only occasion that the state made such a count.
The results were profoundly disturbing for the Church of England.
In the first place it was clear that well over half the population of England and Wales did not attend any form of religious service at all on that particular day.
In the great Victorian cities of Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle and Sheffield fewer than one in ten of the population went to church or chapel; the industrial working classes mostly stayed at home.
Secondly, about half of those who did attend for worship chose to go to a Nonconformist chapel.
In some parts of the country, e.g. Cornwall and the North-east, the proportion of Nonconformists was even higher.
Throughout the country Dissenters normally formed at least one-third of all worshippers.
The situation had been transformed radically since the mid eighteenth century when Nonconformist groups were relatively small and few in number.
Even further back, in Charles II's reign, the Compton ecclesiastical census of 1676 had suggested that Dissenters then formed only 4 per cent of the nation at large, though in some communities Dissent had taken a much stronger hold.
The Compton census figures probably understate the strength of Nonconformity, but it is clear that the number of adherents did not rise dramatically until the Evangelical Revival of the later-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Victorian Nonconformity was altogether different in tone and scale from the Old Dissent of 1660–1760.
The Old Dissenting sects consisted of the Presbyterians, Independents (also known as Congregationalists), Baptists, Unitarians and Quakers.
Some congregations changed their allegiance over time.
Moreover, the names were sometimes used loosely, so that for instance‘Presbyterian’ congregations might in fact have been Independent or Unitarian.
The family historian who wishes to use early Dissenting records should consult D. J. Steel, Sources for Nonconformist Genealogy and Family History (1972), but he should bear in mind that seventeenth and early-eighteenth century Nonconformists often used the baptism, marriage and burial services of the Established Church and that these events will be recorded in the Church of England registers.
Old Dissent gained a foothold where the Church of England was weakest, especially in isolated communities scattered throughout those large rural parishes that stretched over the moors, the marshlands and old wood-pasture areas and also in certain types of towns.
Thus in 1676 an estimated 300 of the 3,000 or so communicants in the industrial parish of Sheffield were said to be Dissenters.
The town and its surrounding rural communities already had a long tradition of Dissent, but just over 20 miles to the east the situation in Doncaster was very different.
Here only eight of the 3,000 communicants were Nonconformists.
In an address to Charles II in 1681 the mayor proclaimed that ‘We can truly say without boasting that we have neither in our town nor corporation one dissenter from the present government in church and state’.
Not until the Methodists came did Doncaster turn to Nonconformity.
The way in which an older pattern of Dissent was replaced by a newer one as a result of the Evangelical Revival is examined in my article, ‘The Pattern of Nonconformity in South Yorkshire, 1660–1851’, Northern History, Vlll (1973), pp. 86–118.
A few points of general interest might usefully be restated here.
Lay support from the ranks of the rural gentry and the urban tradesmen had been vital in preserving Nonconformity during the years of repression after the Restoration.
These determined sects emerged in the time of toleration as the early centres of Dissent.
Often a rural gentry family dominated a chapel in the same way as an Anglican squire of an estate village imposed his authority upon the local congregation of the Established Church.
If the family allegiance to a particular sect changed then the whole local membership might follow the same path.
Thus, at Great Houghton near Barnsley Sir Edward Rhodes built a chapel c. 1650   in his own grounds and Dissenting forms of worship were used there well into the eighteenth century, but it was reported at an archbishop's visitation in 1743 that the family had returned to the Anglican fold and ‘This Chapel is now united to the Church of England’.
In the towns a rich and influential group of merchants, retailers, professional men and the like led their chapels in all the important decisions such as whether or not to move to a  Unitarian position.
Dissenters normally formed only a minority of townsmen but they were often an influential one.
During the first half of the eighteenth century no other sect was as widely spread as the Quakers.
George Fox's original appeal had been to the poor, but soon the Friends were led by the ‘respectable classes’ in the same manner as the other early denominations.
All these groups lost in fervour what they gained in respectability and by the mid eighteenth century their force was largely spent.
The Presbyterians drifted into Unitarianism whose rational approach attracted the ministers and the merchants but had little appeal to the poor; there was no ‘enthusiasm’ about it.
The Old Dissenting sects failed as badly as the Established Church in meeting the challenge of population growth and the Industrial Revolution.
Both were unfitted to meet the spiritual and emotional needs of the masses.
Into this vacuum stepped Methodism.
Until late in the eighteenth century Methodism made only a limited advance.
In the towns and industrial villages the early preachers often met with violent opposition and their reverses sometimes caused them to abandon their efforts.
In 1764 the vicar of Ecclesfield told the Archbishop of York that the local Methodists would ‘not be of any long continuance’ and the vicar of High Hoyland wrote:
The group of congregations known as the Sheffield circuit (which embraced north Derbyshire and most of South Yorkshire, including Doncaster) had only 910 members in 1773 and only 1,070 members nine years later.
Methodism had clearly not yet achieved the success that was to come its way during the nineteenth century.
By 1851, however, Methodism had triumphed spectacularly.
Its initial success came chiefly in the traditional Dissenting districts, but by the beginning of Victoria's reign it attracted people of all social backgrounds in almost every type of community except the estate village.
Methodism had broken down the old geographical barriers so that now nearly all areas had their Nonconformists.
The growing industrial towns and villages were particularly receptive to the new forms of Dissent; in 1837 the vicar of Leeds observed that in his town ‘The de facto established religion is Methodism’.
In all parts of the country Wesleyan Methodism had become the chief alternative to the Established Church and in purely agricultural regions religious differences often amounted to a choice between either the Church of England or Wesleyan and Primitive Methodism.
In such areas as the industrial West Riding the combined members of the various Methodist sects now outnumbered the congregations of the Church of England.
The few ‘Crazy Visionaries’ of 1764 had become the most powerful religious body of all.
The two chief alternatives to the Wesleyan form of Methodism were offered by the Primitives and the New Connexion.
The appeal of the New Connexion was largely to the industrial poor; Primitive Methodism attracted humble folk not only in the towns but in the agricultural villages as well.
They found a receptive audience among farm labourers, particularly in eastern England.
By the 1870s the Primitives were strongly associated with agricultural trade unionism and the pulpit offered many an articulate labourer his first chance at public speaking.
They were known amongst the respectable classes as the Ranters.
Two of the older sects — the Congregationalists (Independents) and the Baptists — responded  enthusiastically to the Evangelical Revival and were able to increase their membership dramatically.
During the 1770s and 1780s the Congregationalists built more chapels in south Yorkshire than did the Methodists, but significantly they erected no new buildings between 1836 and 1851, whereas at that time the various forms of Methodism were building chapels enthusiastically.
Congregationalism appealed to the better-off sections of industrial society.
At first their meeting places were simple, box-like structures but by the middle years of Victoria's reign pompous new buildings in the Gothic style favoured by the Church of England were being built instead.
As the Wesleyan Methodists became increasingly respectable they too built grandiose chapels in the suburbs.
Meanwhile, the Established Church had made a substantial recovery.
In the towns many new churches were erected with the financial provision of the 1818 ‘Million Act’ and in the countryside squires and parishioners restored or substantially rebuilt thousands of medieval churches.
The Roman Catholic Church also entered a period of renewed growth, particularly in Lancashire and other parts of the country where Irish people settled in large numbers.
The Nonconformists continued to split into different sects — Particular Baptists and General Baptists, for instance— and  to form intense new groups, often with peculiar local names.
The 1851 returns record, for example, twenty-seven ‘Israelites’ who met in a room in Paradise Square, Sheffield and nineteen ‘Brethren and Sisters United by the Blood of Christ’who assembled in the Garden School Room at Low Ackworth.
At that time numerous Dissenting groups were meeting in private houses or cottages until the day when they had the resources to build their own little Zion or Bethel.
A lot of them failed to reach that desirable goal.
By the middle years of the nineteenth century many an estate village remained impervious to Dissent, whereas the new settlements that had gathered round textile mills, collieries or canal-heads were markedly Nonconformist in character.
Many of the old Dissenting centres now had thriving Evangelical congregations.
In Penistone parish, for instance, the seventeenth-century Bullhouse Independents and the High Flatts Quakers were still active, but the subsidiary Quaker meeting-place at Lumb Royd had gone, and there were now three Wesleyan chapels, a New Connexion meeting-house, a Primitive Methodist chapel, a Congregational or Independent chapel of the Evangelical type, and a Baptist chapel, all products of the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth century revival.
This large parish now had two Anglican churches but Nonconformity was as pronounced as it had been in the seventeenth century.
The success of Nonconformity depended in large measure upon the types of community that were found throughout England.
To recognize such forces is not to deny the human one.
Each chapel has its own individual story, different from that of any other.
But these histories are more intelligible when seen as part of a whole and when it is understood that the forces that encouraged or hindered their growth were deeply rooted in the local society of which they form so characteristic a part.
INDUSTRIAL TOWNS AND CITIES
At the beginning of the nineteenth century no provincial town had more than 100,000 inhabitants, though London was a colossus with a population of 865,000.
Even when Victoria came to the throne in 1837 only five places in England and Wales contained more than 100,000 people.
By 1891, however, twenty-three towns had reached that level of population.
Their spectacular  growth was partly due to natural increase but it was fuelled by immigration from the countryside, particularly after the railways had ushered in an era of cheap mass travel.
By the mid 1850s England's major railway lines had nearly all been completed or were being constructed.
Victorian cities caused our ancestors to gape with awe, admiration or horror, for the world had never seen anything like them before.
They must be seen by us not only as a new type of settlement but as places with individual characters and their own  idiosyncrasies .
Their inhabitants were fiercely proud of the unique nature of, say, Bradford as opposed to Leeds, Birmingham contrasted with the neighbouring Black Country towns, and Manchester compared with anywhere else in the world.
In his stimulating and pioneering book Victorian Cities (1963) Professor Asa Briggs shows how the new industrial settlements were very different from each other in terms of buildings and topography and their economic and social structures.
Amongst the largest cities, despite the similarities in working-class housing and common problems of public health, the sharpest contrast was between the two giants, Manchester and Birmingham.
By the 1780s, when the population of Manchester township was about 40,000, observers were already commenting upon the growing gulf between a small group of self-made, wealthy factory owners and the mass of the labouring poor.
In Lancashire the steam-powered cotton industry had created a form of society that was very different from anything that had gone before.
The Revd.
R. Parkinson thought that:
The population of Manchester rose by an astonishing 45 per cent in the 1820s so that by 1831 it had reached 142,000.
Birmingham's industrial structure was very different.
It was based on numerous small workshops rather than upon the large factories that characterized the Lancashire cotton industry.
The parallels here are with Sheffield before huge new steel works were erected there during the second half of the nineteenth century.
Industrial expansion in Birmingham and the Black Country meant the multiplication of existing types of unit.
Birmingham had a far  greater diversity of occupation than Manchester and indeed than most other Victorian cities.
A large proportion of the workforce was skilled and relatively well-paid.
Relations between masters and men were close and the opportunities for social mobility were considerable.
The West Midlands area offers family and local historians the chance to pursue rewarding avenues of research in tracing and explaining the rise of numerous small businesses and in demonstrating the importance of the family network in transmitting traditional skills and providing financial backing.
Most Victorian cities had been urban centres since at least the Middle Ages, though of course they had been tiny in comparison with the size they attained in the nineteenth century.
Newcastle upon Tyne had been an important medieval borough; other places had been small market centres whose burgesses had obtained some measure of independence from their manorial lords.
Nearly all of them had a pronounced industrial character long before the Industrial Revolution.
At the hearts of these industrial towns the old marketing and retailing functions remained of paramount importance.
Many a town centre was like the Square in Arnold Bennett's description of ‘Bursley’ in The Old Wives' Tale, i.e. a self-conscious commercial area which scorned the staple manufacture in the streets beyond as ‘something wholesale, vulgar, and assuredly filthy’.
But a few Victorian towns, notably Middlesborough, Crewe and Barrow-on-Furness, were entirely new creations, products of the railway age and decisions taken by entrepreneurs.
Barrow grew from a single house into a fishing village of some 300 people by the 1840s and into a town of 40,000 people a generation later.
In 1801 a mere twenty-five people lived in the four houses that comprised the settlement of Middlesborough and thirty years later the population stood at only 154.
Then in the 1830s thousands of immigrants arrived to seek homes and work in the new town that had been laid out by Joseph Pease, the Quaker industrialist who had extended the famous Stockton to Darlington railway so as to export coal from his Teeside wharves.
Later immigrants included Henry Bolckow and John Vaughan, ironmasters who exploited Cleveland's mineral resources and who more than anyone else were responsible for the town's replanning and rapid expansion.
Workers flocked to Middlesborough from all over the place; according to the 1871 census nearly half the town's population were born outside Yorkshire.
A Roman Catholic cathedral and a Jewish synagogue were prominent amongst its places of  worship.
This was a frankly proletarian town, laid out in regular rows of plain brick houses.
Even a local guide written in 1899 had to admit that:
The local historian must therefore search for the peculiar identity of his own town by getting to know the place thoroughly on the ground and from maps, old photographs and prints, together with newspapers, directories, census returns and whatever other documents come to light during the course of his enquiries.
He will also have to learn something about the administrative structure of his chosen place and how it has changed over time.
A borough might not have covered the same area as a township, and a parish might have been something completely different.
Ancient cities such as York or Norwich or Exeter were divided into numerous small parishes, whereas the burgeoning   industrial towns that straddled the foothills of the Pennines covered only a small part of huge parishes that contained villages, hamlets and scattered farmsteads within their bounds.
Leeds parish had eleven townships and Manchester had as many as thirty; Bradford parish covered about 40,000 acres and Halifax parish — the largest in England — was twice that size.
To take just one more example, the central urban township of Sheffield accounted for only one-twentieth of the 22,370-acre parish which stretched from the industrial villages of Attercliffe and Darnall in the east to isolated farms in the west.
It is obviously essential for the local historian to know, when dealing with population figures and other matters, whether his information relates to the urban area only or whether it encompasses the surrounding rural parts of the parish as well.
One can merely draw attention to the problem here, for local arrangements were complex and varied.
Family structure
Each Victorian town conjures up a distinctive image in one's  mind, an overall impression that blurs the differences that existed within a town between one quarter or district and another.
In Leeds, for example, the middle class suburbs to the north of the city had little in common with Hunslet and Holbeck, the working class townships to the south, where families were packed into rows of back-to-back houses or into cramped folds close to the mills, foundries, railway sidings and other places of work.
But in The Uses of Literacy (1957) Richard Hoggart showed that even in these dismal surroundings people could find all they wanted in terms of home, work, friends and relations, food, drink, clothing and suchlike provisions, churches, schools and facilities for leisure and entertainment.
A few terraced streets alongside a mill evoked as much community loyalty as did an ancient village.
It was not until the end of the Victorian period, when electric trams provided cheap public transport, that new working class suburbs could be built out of town and away from the vicinity of the workplace.
In Family Structure in Nineteenth Century Lancashire (1971) Michael Anderson has shown that far from weakening kinship ties the Industrial Revolution may well have strengthened them.
The Lancashire cotton industry grew so spectacularly after 1770 that by 1803 cotton had replaced wool as Britain's leading export, a pre-eminent position that it was to hold until 1938.
By the middle of the nineteenth century Lancashire was the most urbanized county in England, with over half its population living in the fourteen towns which contained more than 10,000 inhabitants each.
Most of these thriving places had been old market centres; only Oldham had grown from a few scattered moorland hamlets.
The cotton industry also flourished in industrial villages and small company towns so that by 1851 almost 17 per cent of Lancashire men over the age of twenty and 15 per cent of women worked at the manufacture of cotton.
Long hours of toil were nothing new, but the mills brought a discipline that at best was irksome and in many places was harsh.
Recent legislation had improved matters, however; the 1833 Factory Act prohibited the employment of young children and the 1847 Ten Hours Act had at last given working people some time for recreation.
Preston's experience was in many ways typical of the other old market towns that had been overwhelmed by the cotton industry.
In 1795 John Aikin could still describe Preston as ‘a handsome, well-built town…rendered gay by assemblies and other places  of amusement, suited to the genteel style of the inhabitants’.
By 1851 its population had soared to 69,542 and the cotton trade provided work for 32 per cent of adult males and 28 per cent of the women.
Preston had become a shoddy place to live, dominated by smoky factory chimneys and characterized by blackened rows of brick, terraced houses or crowded, insanitary courts and, worst of all, dark, damp cellars.
Disgusting privvies, inadequate sewers, atmospheric pollution and the lack of piped water each contributed to Preston's unprecedented public health problems.
Accommodation inside the houses was very cramped.
Anderson's analysis of Preston's immigration patterns, as revealed by the mid-nineteenth century census returns, shows that 70 per cent of the population were born outside the town.
In a sample area 3,345 migrants were identified and shown to have been born in about 425 different places.
Over 40 per cent of Preston's immigrants came from within a 10-mile radius and only about 30 per cent had come in from more than 30 miles away.
The pattern was thus similar to those of earlier times.
A major group of long-distance migrants came from Ireland.
The Irish had first come to Lancashire in significant numbers in the middle years of the eighteenth century, and their ranks began to swell considerably after the 1846 potato famine.
In 1841 Lancashire had about 106,000 Irish-born residents, and in 1851 about 192,000; in Preston the Irish formed 3·3 per cent of the population in 1841 and 7·4 per cent ten years later.
In almost all large towns in 1851 the immigrants outnumbered the native born.
Many immigrants were young, had only recently arrived when the census was taken, and were ready to move again soon.
Anderson's study of Preston has also emphasized the amount of movement that took place within the town.
In the area of closest scrutiny only 14 per cent of males (45/311) and 19 per cent of females (75/390) aged over ten at the time of the 1861 census were living in the same house as the one they had inhabited in 1851; but many of them had moved only a short distance.
Factory wages enabled young men and women to become economically independent of their families and some of them broke away completely, but most town dwellers maintained their family connections and were careful to preserve links not only with their immediate relatives but with a wider range of kin.
Neighbours often helped in times of need, but people more readily turned to their kin in critical life situations such as sickness, unemployment, homelessness, old age and death.
The family structure was a crucial source of aid in communities with a rapid turnover of personnel, poor health, uncertain employment prospects and deep poverty.
Charles Booth found that 31 per cent of London's population in the 1880s lived in primary or secondary poverty and a decade later Seebohm Rowntree claimed that 28 per cent of the people of York lived in equal hardship.
The great industrial changes of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries did not alter the traditional family structure of previous generations, but they did provide economic opportunities for earlier marriages and thus for more children.
Wrigley and Schofield have shown that between 1650–99 and 1800–49 the age at first marriage for women fell by 3·1 years; most of the fall occurred during the second half of the eighteenth century and it was most apparent in industrial communities.
Collectively, over five or six generations these small variations led to considerable population growth.
The incidence of bridal pregnancy and bastardy rose significantly at the same time.
Between 1680 and 1800 the proportion of brides who were pregnant at the time of their wedding grew from 15 to 35 per cent and the illegitimacy ratio rose from 1·5 to 5 per cent.
Local studies have established a direct connection between rising prices and annual illegitimacy ratios, suggesting that frustrated wedding plans rather than promiscuity were responsible for the increased number of bastards.
By the nineteenth century dearth and plague were tribulations of the past, but tuberculosis, typhus, typhoid and dysentery were major killers and the great cholera epidemics drew horrified attention to the need for urgent action to improve public health in the towns.
It was not until the 1870s, however, that the number of deaths from tuberculosis and typhoid fell dramatically and cholera and typhus almost disappeared.
Everton and the Mould family
As the Victorian cities burst their ancient bounds many a rural village was engulfed and its character transformed.
Thus Everton, a modest sized village since at least the time of Domesday Book, lost its separate identity during the middle decades of the nineteenth century and became a working-class quarter of Liverpool.
In 1801 the rural township of Everton contained only 499 people; eighty years later the same area accommodated 109,812 inhabitants.
At the beginning of the century an enthusiast described Everton as:
Thirty years later another observer wrote:
However, the first working-class terraced houses were already being built on Everton Road, a street that was to be described in 1875 as ‘a dense thoroughfare of a somewhat shabby and second rate character’.
Poor immigrants from Ireland, Wales and adjoining parts of Lancashire and Cheshire had moved in and the old wealthy elite that had previously enjoyed Everton's rural isolation had left for more secluded homes beyond the township bounds.
The focal point for the exclusive society that was Everton in the first half of the nineteenth century was St George's church, which was built in 1814 to the designs of Thomas Rickman; it was the first church in the world to use cast iron extensively.
In his account of The Iron Church (1977) Dr Richard F. Mould has interwoven the history of his own family with that of the Everton community in a way that enriches both subjects.
Subtitled ‘A short history of Everton, its Mother Church, and one of its mid-Victorian Churchwardens, including notes on how to start tracing a Family Tree’, it highlights the fortunes of the Mould family and by so doing it provides insights into the character of a place that was overwhelmed by its powerful neighbour's rapid expansion.
Richard Andrews Mould was born at Whitchurch, north Shropshire, in 1807 and became a successful wine and sherry merchant with extensive vaults in the Exchange Chambers, Liverpool.
He made annual visits to Spain and Portugal in connection with his business and he normally lived several months a year in London.
In 1843 he moved from central Liverpool to Percy Villa in Northumberland Terrace, Everton, and during the hey-day of St George's church he was one of the most  active parishioners.
He served as a churchwarden from 1856 to 1863 and as a county magistrate.
His estate was valued at £45,000 upon his death, and his status in local society was marked by the presence of the Lord Mayor of Liverpool at his funeral and the flying of the Town Hall flags at half mast.
R. A. Mould was a self-made man.
His ancestors had been much more humble people, mostly tailors.
His father, Thomas Mould (1781–1858), was a tailor, draper and hatter in Whitchurch and previous generations had lived nearby in Bronington, Welshampton, Hindford and Myddle.
The earliest recorded member of the family was John Mould who had enclosed an 8-acre tenement out of Myddlewood during the reign of Henry VIII.
Nearly all the Moulds, Molds, Mouldes and other variants of the name which appear in Shropshire parish registers can be placed on a single family tree.
The Moulds left Myddle shortly after the Civil War and their leisurely progress northwards along what is now the A 495 can be followed in local parish registers until they arrived at Whitchurch early in the nineteenth century.
Branches of the family then spread into Cheshire and Lancashire and two brothers emigrated to New Zealand.
One of these brothers, George Mould (1843–1908), was born in Whitchurch and worked as a railway clerk before he went in search of a new life on the other side of the world.
He left Gravesend on 22 January 1865 aboard the ‘Greyhound’ and arrived at Lyttelton on 7 May, fifteen weeks later.
The following month he and a partner bought some land nearby in Akaroa, Banks Peninsula, where some of his descendants still reside.
His granddaughter, Jessie Mould, has been keenly interested in the movements of her family over the generations and after she had discovered that her seventeenth-century ancestors were mentioned in Richard Gough's History of Myddle (1701–2) she published More Tales of Banks Peninsula and wrote in her foreword:
To read how my own ancestors lived in the time of the Tudors and the Stuarts and to even learn that they occupied the 10th pew adjoining the South Wall in the Myddle Church has been the inspiration to write down some reminiscences of my own childhood and of the stories related to me, in the hope that they will be of interest, not only to the present generation, but maybe, also to that 500 years hence!
The story of the progress of the Mould family over nearly five centuries — apart from the exceptional career of R. A. Mould — is  in many ways a typical one.
During the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the Mould family moved home frequently but their mobility was on a small scale and most members earned their living as tailors or smallholders or a combination of the two occupations.
Then in the nineteenth century some of the more adventurous men seized the new opportunities to make wealth in an urban environment or to tear themselves away from their ancestral roots to start life anew thousands of miles away.
But even in New Zealand they never forgot those roots and today they rejoice in the knowledge of their family history.
One day we shall have many more family sagas to set aside that of the Moulds and we will be able to speak with more confidence about general trends.
In particular, we need to know far more about those numerous families which moved from the countryside but which experienced only a hum-drum life in the towns or at best only a modest prosperity.
Suburbs
During the 1860s the rapid growth of suburbs became a noticeable feature of England's largest towns and cities; from the 1880s onwards it became a marked phenomenon.
Suburban life away from the noise and bustle of the work place was made possible by improved transport facilities in the form of horse-drawn omnibuses, suburban railways and eventually the electric trams.
London expanded at a remarkable rate.
It had already overshadowed all other places in 1801 when its population had reached 865,000, but a century later its inhabitants numbered over 4½ millions, i.e. more than one-sixth of the entire population of England.
The number of people in the capital's suburbs grew by about 50 per cent during each decade between 1861 and 1891 and by 45 per cent during the last ten years of the century.
‘Greater London’, as those parts that lay beyond the ring of the old county boundary became known, grew from about 414,000 inhabitants in 1861 to 1,405,000 in 1831 and to 2,045,000 at the turn of the century.
During these amazing years of unprecedented expansion Greater London grew at a much faster rate than the national population as a whole and faster than the suburbs of any provincial city.
Between 1881 and 1891 the most rapid population growth in England occurred in four London suburbs: Leyton (133·3 per cent), Willesden (121·9 per cent ), Tottenham (95·1 per cent ) and   West Ham (58·9 per cent ).
By the end of the nineteenth century London's population was rising by an extra 100,000 inhabitants per annum.
In Labour and Life of the People (1889–93), his two-volume study of Londoners, Charles Booth wrote:
The census returns show that when people left London they usually moved only short distances but that migrants into London came from all over the place.
Compared with the rest of the country London's population was relatively youthful.
Differences between the various districts within the capital were, however, marked.
The development of one south London suburb has been examined in detail by Professor H. J. Dyos in his classic work, Victorian Suburb: A Study of the Growth of Camberwell (1961).
In pre-Victorian times Camberwell was a middle-class suburb covering the 4,450 acres of the ancient parish of St Giles, which lay about 12 miles south of London Bridge; its population in 1841 already stood at 39,868.
Sixty years later Camberwell was a metropolitan borough whose population had multiplied more than six fold to 259,339.
Other Victorian London suburbs could tell a  similar story.
Professor Dyos calculated that of the 75,000 people by which Camberwell grew during the 1870s, about 52,000 represented the balance of migration into and out of the district and 23,000 were the result of natural increase.
After this decade of maximum development the stream of migrants dwindled until by the end of the Victorian era it had more-or-less dried up.
Net immigration during the 1880s accounted for only about 17,000 of the total increase of about 49,000, and during the last decade of the century all the net gain of about 24,000 people was accounted for by natural growth.
As the mass of the inhabitants of Camberwell could not afford to move further out to the wealthier suburbs, most families stayed put.
During the course of Victoria's eventful reign a rising proportion of London's immigrants headed south of the river.
They came from all parts of the kingdom and abroad.
In the 1840s only a quarter of London's newcomers ended up south of the Thames, but during the following three decades the proportion grew to a third.
Two or three out of every ten who came to live in south London were north Londoners who had merely crossed the river, but of course they themselves may have been second generation immigrants to the capital.
Professor Dyos estimated that newcomers never amounted to more than between 12 to 16  per cent of the total population of south London districts in any single decade, but that this rate of immigration was sufficient to create communities in which less than half the inhabitants had been born within that part of Greater London which lay south of the Thames.
Such statistics aid our understanding of population movements but they mask the bewildering complexity that was the reality of the situation.
The census returns show that the majority of Camberwell's population at any one time had been born in London — 65 per cent in 1861; 76 per cent in 1911 — but many families had moved frequently from district to district and from street to street.
Only the family historian can charter some of these kaleidoscopic patterns of mobility and reduce them to an understandable human scale.
Camberwell did not have a major industry that distinguished it from other London districts, but it offered sufficient variety of employment to engage a majority of the workforce; other breadwinners did not have to go far to reach central London.
Its former middle-class character was rapidly eroded as thousands of small houses were built on every available plot of land by speculative builders.
An intricate street pattern arose from the divided ownership of the land and numerous tiny variations in house types appeared because so many different builders were at work.
Between 1878 and 1880, at the height of Camberwell's feverish building activity, some 416 firms or individual builders erected a total of 5,670 houses.
Most of these businesses were on such a small scale that over a half of them built no more than six houses during these three years and nearly three-quarters built no more than twelve; the bankruptcy rate was high.
Altogether, these small builders were responsible for little more than a quarter of the houses.
At the opposite end of the scale, about 1,800 houses, or nearly a third of the total, were constructed by the fifteen largest firms, each of which was responsible for between seventy-five and 230 buildings.
In the London suburbs the general tendency was for practically every district to eventually deteriorate in status as the better-off families moved out and poorer ones moved in.
Otherwise, Professor Dyos concluded, the variety of human condition and physical environment to be found in Victorian Camberwell warns against the temptation to generalize further.
Each of London's districts possessed its own distinctive character, an individuality that marked it off from its neighbours either by topographical  features and architectural appearance or by social and occupational structure.
The Central Area pulled all these parts together, as it were, and made them interdependent portions of the whole.
Hampstead was transformed from a small, eighteenth-century satellite town separated from the metropolis by steeply-sloping open fields into a high-class residential suburb very different from Camberwell.
In Hampstead: Building a Borough, 1650–1964 (1974) Professor F. M. L. Thompson has shown how the old settlement preserved its isolated character well into the nineteenth century because it lay off the main lines of communication out of the capital.
Its population grew twenty times between 1801 and 1901 from 4,343 to 82,329 and the number of inhabited houses rose from 691 to 11,359.
But even this spectacular rate of growth did not match that of many London suburbs.
Hampstead's monastic past had led to the concentration of land in five compact estates, whose owners influenced the type of development permitted.
The Heath was preserved as an open space and by 1900 the country villas of prosperous businessmen and professional families made Hampstead ‘one of the largest and most prosperous of the well-to-do residential suburbs of London’.
Hampstead's genteel surroundings were a world apart from the East End of London, which comprised Stepney, Poplar, Bethnal Green and parts of Hackney, districts that attracted thousands of unskilled labourers to the docks, the street markets and sweated trades.
Charles Booth described how each district had its own peculiar flavour because of its distinctive occupational structure, a flavour that could be detected in the streets from observing the faces of the people who lived there and noticing what they carried:
The Irish and the Jews formed two particularly conspicuous groups in their own quarters.
In 1851 at least 5 per cent of London's population were of Irish origin.
The Jews came from Central and Eastern Europe to evade persecution in 1848–50, 1863 and the 1880s, until national legislation was passed in 1905 to restrict the scale of immigration.
Charles Booth's reports and the    need for bodies like the Salvation Army and Dr Barnardo's Homes show the other side of the coin to life in the Hampstead villas.
INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES
The Industrial Revolution was by no means merely an urban phenomenon.
During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries many villages were industrialized in the sense that the majority of their inhabitants worked as nailmakers or weavers, for example, or at some other ancient hand-craft or were employed in the new mills, ironworks, quarries and coalmines which had transformed so many parts of the English countryside.
Rural crafts and industries had long provided extra income for smallholders and cottagers, but by Victorian times population and economic growth had created a large, landless labour force whose members had to earn their entire living from a single craft or a manual occupation.
Craft villages were very different in character  from their predecessors of a century or two before, and the new settlements which were dominated by a single workplace and where even the houses and public buildings were owned by the ironmaster, millowner or colliery company had no antecedents in an earlier age.
Industrialized villages were naturally most numerous in the North and parts of the Midlands, but even in the South some nineteenth-century rural communities were sustained to a large extent by wages earned at a particular craft.
Far away from the great Victorian industrial districts, untouched even by the Midlands framework knitting industry, Northamptonshire conjures up an image of rural stability, great landed estates and ‘close’ villages.
Two out of every three parishes were dominated by a squire or a small group of rich farmers.
But even in this tranquil part of England many of the ‘open’ villages had a variety of local crafts, distributive trades and small industries, whose origins go back well into the eighteenth century.
This is evident from the series of Northamptonshire militia lists dating between 1762 and 1786 which record the occupations of men aged between eighteen and forty-five who were liable for military service.
Even the most purely agricultural villages had a handful of craftsmen and in a few parishes, notably Spratton, Moulton and Hardingstone, between 40 and 60 per cent of those liable for duty were employed in non-agricultural pursuits for the major part of their time.
Most of these rural craftsmen were still part-time farmers or cottagers with a few acres of land and rights on the commons and wastes.
The boot and shoe trade, which had become firmly established in the county town of Northampton during the Civil War, spread to Wellingborough before 1760 and soon afterwards to Earls Barton, Higham Ferrers, Irthlingborough, Raunds, Rushden and Wollaston.
The 1777 militia returns show how the two towns dominated the trade, for Northampton had 142 recorded shoemakers and Wellingborough 113, but Irthlingborough had only 17, Raunds 16, Earls Barton 11 and Hardingstone 7.
The rural industry developed in response to a growing national demand for boots and shoes, together with the need for military and naval footwear during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars; the construction of canals and later the railways opened up distant markets.
At first the boot and shoemaking industry was organized on an outwork basis from the towns.
By the middle years of the nineteenth century a high proportion of the male workforce were  without land and were working full time at the craft; women and girls also found employment in large numbers.
Hardingstone had 22 male and no female shoemakers in 1841 but twenty years later 83 males and 43 females were occupied in this way.
Long Buckby had 131 men and boys working at the shoemaking craft in 1841 and no females; ten years later numbers had risen to 273 males and 50 women and girls.
The same trend is evident in the towns.
In Wellingborough the number of male boot and shoe makers rose from 613 in 1841 to 814 in 1851 and to 861 in 1861; female numbers rose from a mere 37 in 1841 to 473 in 1851 and to 744 a decade later.
The statistics for these and other places are gathered together in V. A. Hatley and J. Rajczonek, Shoemakers in Northamptonshire, 1762–1911, published as the Northampton Historical Series no.6 in 1971.
Between 1841 and 1861 the number of male shoemakers in the county aged twenty or more almost doubled as both the urban and the rural population searched for employment.
Earls Barton is a good example of the way that an open agricultural village grew into a flourishing footwear centre from small beginnings in the third quarter of the eighteenth century.
Its population rose from 729 in 1801 to 2,602 in 1891.
By 1841, when 1,079 people lived in the village, 107 men and boys and just 3 females worked at the trade.
Twenty years later the population had risen by 478 but the proportion of the workforce employed in footwear had grown more dramatically, so that not only were 301 men and boys working at the trade but also 123 women and 118 girls.
A declining number of people  continued to sew shoes by hand in their cottages or little workshops right until the end of the nineteenth century.
Even today some Victorian houses in Earls Barton have a former ‘shop’ behind the kitchen or in a backyard; other cottagers worked in their living rooms.
The first local man who can be described as a manufacturer was Thomas Dunkley, who was born in 1802 and who began his working life as a shoemaker; in 1851 William Dunkley was employing fifty men and twenty women and concentrating on a range of cheaper shoes.
But factories never dominated the Northamptonshire villages and for most people the making of footwear remained a small-scale craft.
The opening of the Midland Railway in 1857 stimulated the boot and shoe trade in places that had a main line station.
Kettering's population rose from 5,198 in 1851 to 29,972 sixty years later and the villages of Burton Latimer and Desborough  grew spectacularly.
Northamptonshire's rural footwear centres were very different in character from the county's estate villages but they were unlike the new Victorian settlements that had grown alongside coal mines, iron foundries and quarries.
Their inhabitants were not totally dependent on the boot and shoe trade, nor were they so uncompromisingly working class.
England had many such villages that do not fit into neat categories.
Such settlements were profoundly characteristic of the Victorian age.
The census returns from the middle decades of the nineteenth century record an extraordinary wide range of rural occupations before mechanization and mass production destroyed so many of the traditional hand crafts.
In the South Midlands and a few other areas where farm labourers could earn only a pittance crafts that employed mothers and daughters provided welcome extra income.
Localized trades sometimes offered alternative employment, but the major crafts for women and girls were lace-making, straw-plaiting, glove-making and knitting.
The centres of pillow lace-making were to be found in the South Midlands and some districts in Devon, where the craft had been established as one of the many new projects of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
It did not expand in a big way until the late eighteenth century when population growth and parliamentary enclosure depressed the standard of living of the poorest sections of rural society.
The skills that were needed to make intricate patterns by manipulating bobbins and pins at speed were learned at an early age.
Young children went to lace-schools from the age of five upwards and after they had reached twelve they were expected to earn their keep.
Dr Pamela Horn has estimated that about a fifth of the Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire lacemakers who were recorded in the 1851 census were under the age of fifteen.
Though the Workshops Regulation Act of 1867 forbade the employment of children under eight in any handicraft and stated that those aged between eight and thirteen must attend school for at least ten hours a week, it was difficult to enforce these provisions and they were widely evaded.
The hand-made lace industry was destroyed by machine competition during the second half of the nineteenth century.
In Buckinghamshire the number of lace workers fell from a peak of 10,487 in 1851 to only 789 in 1901; in Bedfordshire the number declined less spectacularly from 5,734 to 1,144 during the same period.
Some females were able to switch to the plaiting of straw hats, bonnets and mats.
The most suitable straw for this purpose  was grown in Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and Essex, and Luton and Dunstable were the great centres of the trade.
Straw plaiters started work at an early age and the occupation was a common one in the South Midland counties; for instance, in 1871 about a third of all Bedfordshire girls aged between ten and fifteen were recorded in the census returns as plaiters.
The introduction of cheap plaits from China and Japan during the last quarter of the nineteenth century hit the industry hard just as fashion started to favour smaller hats and ones made from other materials.
Bedfordshire female plaiters declined in numbers from 20,701 in 1871 to as few as 485 thirty years later as wages tumbled from ten shillings a week to as little as one or two shillings.
By the end of the Victorian era female cottage industries no longer made much of a contribution to the family income of the labouring classes.
Framework knitting
The family historian who has traced his ancestors back to nineteenth-century Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire or south Derbyshire will have seen parish registers that time after time give a man's occupation as FWK.
It means of course framework knitter.
Not only men, but women and children too knitted stockings, socks, shirts, gloves, cravats and other fabrics on a frame in their cottage and continued to do so long after steam power had been applied to their craft during the middle years of the nineteenth century.
William Lee of the Nottinghamshire parish of Calverton had invented the basic frame in 1589 but the craft first took hold in London and did not really spread to the Midlands until after the restoration of Charles II.
By 1669 London had about 400 frames, Nottinghamshire 100 and Leicestershire 50.
Apprenticeship indentures amongst the Inland Revenue records in the Public Record Office show, however, that by the second decade of the eighteenth century the geographical distribution of the craft in the Midlands had been largely determined; shortly afterwards Daniel Defoe observed, ‘One would scarce think it possible so small an article of trade could employ such multitudes of people as it does, for the whole country seems to be employ'd in it’.
At least 118 Leicestershire villages and hamlets had framework knitters amongst their inhabitants by 1800.
Only the ‘close’ villages in the east of the county were immune.
Felkin's enquiry in 1844    reported the following number of frames: Leicester 4,140, Hinckley 1,750, Shepshed 1,209, Loughborough 906, Earl Shilton 650, Wigston 550, Sileby 500, Burbage 450, Whitwick 423, Thurmaston 400, Barwell 367, Oadby 350, Enderby 350, Blaby 322, Whetsone 297, Syston 280, Cosby 250, Sapcote 220, Countesthorpe 214, Barrow 210, Stoke Golding 206, Belgrave 200, Stanton 200, and so on in ever decreasing numbers.
Let us look at two or three of these framework knitting villages in more detail, starting with Countesthorpe to the south of Leicester.
The parish register from 1 January 1813 to 31 December 1817 records the occupations of 74 men, of whom 51 (that is nearly 70 per cent) were framework knitters; the rest comprised 12 labourers, 2 woolcombers, 2 blacksmiths, a framesmith, a farmer and grazier, a publican, a gardener, a tailor, a brick mason and a soldier.
Between 1833 and 1837 (inclusive) 61 per cent were framework knitters, but by 1867–71 the proportion had declined to 49 per cent.
None of these figures takes account of the women and children who worked at the craft, but the broad trends are clear.
A youth aged twelve-fourteen could work a frame with three months experience and could become proficient within six months.
In the neighbouring parish of Cosby the 1851 census returns show that both William and Mary Burbage, a couple in their forties, were working at frames, that the four eldest of their ten children were framework knitters, and that three more children worked at seaming; the youngest worker was Elizabeth, aged six.
These cottagers worked for middlemen known as baghosiers who were linked with the largest employers in town or with small rural factories nearby.
Workshops housing up to a dozen frames had been introduced into the villages by the beginning of the reign of Queen Victoria, but the craft remained essentially a cottage industry for most of the nineteenth century.
John Haines of Cosby told a parliamentary commissioner in 1845 that: William Sheen of nearby Littlethorpe said:
Thurmaston, just to the north of Leicester, was another village that had become dependent upon framework knitting by the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The parish register records 91 men between 1813 and 1817 (inclusive), of whom 60, that is 2 out of every 3, were framework knitters.
The rest comprised a hosier, 15 labourers, 3 farmers, 2 victualers, a gentleman, a carpenter, a blacksmith, a shoemaker, a publican, a butcher, a grocer, a bricklayer, a soldier and an alehouse keeper.
The occupational structure of the village was very different from what it had been just before the Civil War when the parish register entries had briefly given men's occupations; between 1636 and 1639 Thurmaston's register noted 8 labourers, 5 shepherds, 3 husbandmen, 2 innkeepers, 2 masons, 2 male servants, a carpenter, a miller, 1 curate, a weaver, a tailor, a shearman, a spinner and a mole catcher.
By the nineteenth century the range of occupations had not increased; the expanding population had simply turned to framework knitting.
Thurmaston had been a typical Leicestershire village with all its farmhouses and cottages clustered together and surrounded by its huge open fields until the enclosure award of 1763.
By 1801 the population had risen to 706 and by 1851 to 1,251.
A craft which had once been profitably combined with farming became a miserable cottage industry dependent upon the towns and the bag-hosiers.
Trade cycles rather than the state of the harvest were now the chief determinant of the well-being of the community.
A count of the 237 heads of households in the 1851 census returns reveals that 143 (that is 60 per cent) were framework knitters.
This figure does  not include the large numbers of younger men, children and females who were employed as knitters and seamers.
In 1845 Thomas Hartshorne had told a parliamentary enquiry that Thurmaston had about 400 frames, which specialized in the production of children's socks and a few gloves.
Frame rents were high and the six masters used the truck system of payment, whereby some of the wages were paid in goods.
Twenty years previously only Thurmaston and neighbouring Belgrave made socks, but now the craft had spread to eighteen villages.
Many women and children were employed.
Both Thurmaston and Countesthorpe had become industrial villages in the sense that the majority of the population were employed at a single craft.
Some of the Midland villages with a large number of framework knitters had a more diverse occupational structure than the examples we have just discussed; they were not as completely dependent upon a single trade.
Thurmaston's northerly neighbour, Syston, had 54 framework knitters, 5 framesmiths and 3 woolcombers recorded in the parish register between 1813 and 1817 (inclusive), but these craftsmen formed less than half of the 128 entries.
Whereas contemporary Thurmaston had 15 different occupations recorded, Syston had 32.
Syston's population rose from 1,124 in 1801 to 1,669 in 1851 and 2,930 in 1901, but this growth was not sustained by the hosiery trade.
By 1863–67 Syston's register shows that the proportion of framework knitters had declined to 25 per cent.
The village had always been larger than Thurmaston and had a healthy variety of crafts and trades.
The 1863–67 register records 30 framework knitters, 2 framesmiths and 21 labourers; 9 men worked on the railways, 1 was a coal merchant, 1 a gas house keeper and another a gas fitter; the other craftsmen comprised 4 bricklayers and a brickmaker, 3 blacksmiths, 2 tailors, 2 shoemakers, 2 potters, 2 carpenters, a wheelwright, a cooper, a plumber and glazier, and a painter; the rest included 2 gentlemen, a clerk in holy orders, a surgeon, 3 farmers, 2 general dealers, 2 grocers, a draper, 2 cattle dealers, 7 butchers, a tripe dresser, a pig jobber, a fellmonger, 2 gardeners, 2 grooms, a coachman and 2 commercial travellers.
West Riding textiles
When we turn our attention to the West Riding of Yorkshire, another ancient textile district, we find similar patterns of development.
About the year 1800, or just afterwards, my great-great-grandfather, John Hey, moved from Shelley in the parish of Kirkburton, where his ancestors had been settled for centuries, to the village of Thurlstone.
His new home was only about 5 miles away from Shelley, but in terms of family history his decision to move was momentous.
For the first time in at least three centuries my branch of the Hey family had set up home beyond the Kirkburton parish boundary.
The senior members remained in Shelley and Kirkburton but a new branch was now established further south.
Some of John Hey's descendants are still living in Thurlstone and others can be found nearby.
On 15 December 1806 John was married at the ancient parish church of St John the Baptist at Penistone, about a mile away from his new home, to a local girl named Mary Woodcock.
A few months previously his name had been included in a list of men aged between eighteen and forty-five who were liable for militia duty if the awful day ever dawned when Napoleon landed on the south coast.
He was described in this militia list as a weaver, the same trade that his ancestors had pursued over the generations.
In later records, notably the census returns of 1841 and 1851, he was said more specifically to follow the trade of fancy weaver, that is the manufacture of waistcoats and other garments with decorative patterns.
His death certificate, which is dated 3 February 1855, gives his age as seventy three, his occupation as fancy weaver and the cause of his death as ‘decay of nature’.
He had finally petered out after a lifetime's toil at the loom.
What sort of place was Thurlstone, this dour Pennine village where John Hey had come to live and work?
It must have been reassuringly familiar to him for it had many of the characteristics of the stone-built villages of the West Riding.
Even today the older houses have gables and mullioned windows which show that they were built in the seventeenth century and some of the later cottages that were erected in rows or clustered in folds during John Hey's lifetime retain their long ranges of upstairs windows which allowed the maximum amount of light to fall on the looms.
Thurlstone was described in 1837 in John Holland's Tour of the Don as ‘a somewhat poor looking and scattered village, or rather hamlet, consisting of stone houses built, for the most part, on the left bank of the Don’.
The village had been recorded in Domesday Book and had taken its name from the Old Danish personal name Thurulf and the earlier Anglo-Saxon suffix tun.
Thurlstone township was a sub-division of the large parish of  Penistone and comprised not just the village but several scattered hamlets and numerous isolated farms on the edge of the Pennine moors.
The open arable fields of the village had been enclosed by the agreement of the twenty-three owners of the strips in 1696, but 7,740 acres of common pastures and rough moorland wastes remained undivided until the enclosure award of 1816 created the rectangular fields and straight lanes that are now such a prominent feature of the landscape.
The farmers concentrated upon dairy cattle and sheep and were dependent upon weaving as a second source of income.
Some of the old farmhouses still have a range of windows that indicate the former position of a weaving chamber.
To have a dual occupation was an ancient way of life that lingered on in this area well into the Victorian period.
The Thurlstone militia returns of 1806 name 129 men, of whom forty-one were weavers and twenty-one were clothiers, each of them humble men who worked at a loom in their own home.
The recent growth of population meant that a smaller proportion of the workforce than before could also farm a smallholding in the manner of their ancestors; many of them were now occupied full-time at their craft and both their cottage and their loom were rented from the manufacturers.
The returns also list two cloth-dressers, a dyer, a yarn-maker and a slubber (who prepared the yarn for spinning).
No spinners were recorded because that task was performed by women.
Children assisted in the preparatory stages of combing and carding the wool, for in Thurlstone and many other parts of the West Riding the woollen industry was still largely at the domestic stage of manufacture.
Only four men aged between eighteen and forty-five were described in the returns as farmers.
No doubt there were also older men who were farming in the township, but most farms were smallholdings and their occupants were usually described by their craft names.
In 1806 Thurlstone also had 17 labourers, 3 millers, a millwright, 4 paper makers and an oil-presser.
By that time six water-powered mills had been erected along a two-mile stretch of the River Don.
They comprised the Bullhouse corn mill, a fulling mill (later a wire mill) which had given its name to a new settlement at Millhouse Green, the Ecklands bridge paper mill (later an umbrella works), the Plumpton cloth mill, the Thurlstone corn mill and another cloth mill which had been erected in 1740 as an oil mill for crushing rape and linseed.
It is very common to find that mills were adapted to a variety of different purposes during the nineteenth century.
Holland   reported in 1837 that Thurlstone village had three or four mills for grinding corn and for other uses.
He observed that:
In 1806 Thurlstone township had 6 masons and 3 colliers, for good stone quarries and the thin ganister seam of coal were at hand.
The rest of the men aged between eighteen and forty-five who were liable for militia duty comprised a merchant, 2 book keepers, 4 blacksmiths, 3 shoemakers, 3 tailors, 2 chandlers, and a cooper, a joiner, a carpenter, a roper, a gardener and a preacher.
As Thurlstone lay within the medieval parish of Penistone it did not have its own Anglican church until St Saviour's was built in 1904–5.
Rather than travel a mile or more to the medieval church, many Thurlstoners turned to Nonconformity.
The Independent chapel at Bullhouse had been erected by Elkanah Rich of Bullhouse Hall in 1692 in the early years of religious toleration and in 1786 another Independent chapel had been established 2 miles away at Netherfield, where the services were much more evangelical in tone.
Further chapels were built in Thurlstone township by the Wesleyan Methodists (1795), Particular Baptists (1828) and Primitive Methodists (much later in 1914).
The family historian in search of ancestors in this type of community has therefore several registers to consult.
One of my great-grandmothers, Clementina Roebuck, was born on 17 February 1817 and the event was entered in the Thurlstone Particular Baptist register.
At that time the Particular Baptists were meeting in a private house and it may have been that fact rather than family disagreements on doctrinal issues which led to her being baptized at Netherfield Independent chapel on 6 August 1817.
Her younger sisters, Elizabeth and Hannah, had their births recorded not only at Thurlstone but at Lockwood Particular Baptist chapel, a dozen or so miles further north, near Huddersfield.
The Roebuck family had probably been staunch Nonconformists for some time.
Clementina's father was Enoch Roebuck (1794–1865), who was described in the census returns as clothier (1841), woollen clothier (1851) and wool handloom weaver (1861).
Ebenezer and Hezekiah Roebuck, two woollen weavers in the same village, were probably his brothers; their Old Testament names give witness to their parents' religious beliefs.
In 1851 Enoch and Martha Roebuck and their unmarried children, Amos (27), Ruth (16) and Enoch (14), were described as woollen weavers.
Enoch also had an apprentice, George Watson (20), who came from Wentworth several miles to the east.
Ten years later the elder Enoch, Ruth (26), Henry (21) and a grandson, Enoch Roebuck Coldwell (15), were each earning their living as wool handloom weavers.
Meanwhile, on 17 September 1838  Clementina had married George Hey, the third of the four sons of John Hey, the fancy weaver, and the only one not to follow his father's occupation.
He became instead a boot and shoe maker.
Perhaps he served an apprenticeship with a neighbour but there is no obvious family connection with any of the three shoemakers named in the 1806 militia returns.
George was described as boot and shoe maker, born in Thurlstone, in the 1841 and 1851 census returns, but in 1861 was recorded as cordwainer, born in Penistone.
This is just the sort of problem the family historian has to be aware of.
Both descriptions were correct, for cordwainer was a somewhat old-fashioned term for a shoemaker and Thurlstone township lay within the parish of Penistone.
It sounds as if an officious enumerator was at work in 1861; he insisted on the full name Clementina rather than the pet form Clemmey, which had sufficed ten years earlier.
In later life George was able to combine his craft with farming work.
In 1871 he was described as farmer of 20 acres and ten years later he had 28 acres.
His death certificate shows that he was found on the floor of his cow house on Christmas Eve 1887, a day before his 71st birthday, having died from a heart attack.
Villages as well as towns expanded rapidly during the first half of the nineteenth century.
The population of Thurlstone township was 1,096 in 1801 and 2,018 in 1851.
The scribbling and spinning mills which were erected in the river valleys soon attracted workers' houses alongside them.
Such communities acquired their own distinctive character and many welcomed the Evangelical Revival with enthusiasm.
A few miles north of Thurlstone the new textile settlement at Clayton West had chapels for the Wesleyans, Independents, Particular Baptists, Methodist New Connection and Primitive Methodists, and the new Wesleyan Reform movement met in Aaron Peace's warehouse, but those who preferred the services of the established church had to climb the steep hill to the ancient parochial centre at High Hoyland.
Though the yarn was prepared and spun in the new water-powered mills in the valleys, weaving long remained a domestic craft that was practised in the older settlements on the hillsides.
Some hamlets were dominated by a single manufacturer whose influence was as great as that of a squire in an estate village, but most villages had several warehouses belonging to small manufacturers.
Independent clothiers of the old type who farmed a little land in addition to their work at the loom became outnumbered by a growing body of men who had no land to provide extra income but were simply wage-earners.
When the weaving stage of manufacture was finally adapted to steam power, mills were erected in the hillside villages alongside the homes of the workforce.
The extent to which some villages were involved in the woollen industry by the beginning of the nineteenth century is demonstrated by the 1806 militia returns which survive for the collection of West Riding townships which lay within Staincross wapentake.
Clayton West had 43 weavers, 7 dressers, 6 clothiers, a woolcomber, a cropper and 10 tradesmen alongside 32 other men.
Cumberworth township had 89 weavers, 6 clothiers, 3 cutters and 11 tradesmen, and only 31 men who were not involved in the manufacture of cloth.
Cumberworth township ranked fourth in terms of size of population within the wapentake but only fifteenth in range of occupation.
Even in this type of community, however, men did not always stay at the same job all their lives.
John Hey's eldest son, Melling (1808–65), was described as a fancy weaver when his elder children were baptised between 1836 and 1842, but when his last child was baptised in 1846 he was working as a labourer and in the 1851 census returns his occupation was given as groom.
The changeover from the domestic system of manufacture to that of the textile mill was completed during the next generation.
In 1851 Melling's son George (aged fifteen) was a ‘feeder in a woollen mill’ and eleven-year-old Benjamin Smith Hey was a ‘piecer in a woollen mill’.
Ten years later, George had become a woollen cloth dresser but Smith (as he was normally known) walked 3 miles each day to Samuel Fox's new steelworks at Stocksbridge to work as a steel temperer.
Upon his marriage he settled in Stocksbridge.
This movement into factories and steelworks was not all one way, however.
My grandfather, George Hey (1854–1916), worked in a Thurlstone cloth mill as a dresser or finisher when he was a young man, but on the occasion of his second marriage in 1900 he gave his occupation as waggoner.
He had moved a mile or so up the valley to live at Bullhouse Lodge and work at the nearby corn mill.
The lodge was an old farmhouse that had seen better days.
Like many a  similar building it had declined in status but in recent years it has been handsomely restored to its former glory.
The family historian who visits such a place would find it hard to believe that it was once the home of a mere waggoner if he had not seen old photographs that show its condition before the First World War.
Many old farmhouses were, of course, sometimes divided into two or three cottages once their gentry or yeomen owners had vacated them.
In districts where industrial crafts such as weaving or metalworking had been long established many families had a history of involvement in one or more of the local trades over several generations.
In 1851 the Ridge family monopolised the manufacture of brace bits and gimlets in the south Yorkshire village of Ecclesfield, with nine separate households working at the craft.
A Ridge had been recorded in a list of nailers in the village back  in Queen Anne's reign and the family's connection with metal hand crafts was not broken until 1970 when John Henry Ridge retired (at the age of ninety-one) from his part-time occupation of making gimlets in the last of Ecclesfield's little smithies.
But the dramatic, large-scale industrial developments of the nineteenth century produced a markedly different form of society where the majority of workers were often recent immigrants from all corners of the land.
Coal-mining
Until well into the nineteenth century the nation's coalminers were not regarded as a race apart, living and working in closely-knit communities dominated by the colliery's winding gear and huge, ugly muck stacks, but merely as one of a number of groups of village craftsmen and labourers.
In earlier times many miners had worked only a part of their time digging coal; the rest of their income came from labouring jobs or from a smallholding.
Geographical isolation and the hereditary nature of their job made the collier-farmers of the Forest of Dean a distinctive, inward-looking group, but they were a special case.
The North-east coalfield developed early because of access to sea routes to the capital; the other landlocked coalfields catered only for regional markets before canals and navigable rivers enabled them to lower their prices and until the railways opened up national markets.
Such was the rapid rate of expansion that ensued that the workforce in Britain's mines rose from a mere 50,000 at the beginning of the nineteenth century to over 1 million on the eve of the First World War.
Where did all these miners come from?
No two coalfields were the same, but if a general pattern can be discerned from the variety of experience it is that during the first half of the nineteenth century each region largely generated its own workforce from the natural increase of its population, but that the spectacular later developments drew not only upon local men who left the farms or rural crafts and industries in large numbers but also upon the surplus population of counties from all over the British Isles.
In Pit-Men, Preachers and Politics (1974) Professor Robert Moore has noted that in the Deerness Valley east of Durham City many old mining families recall the time when their ancestors had rural occupations.
Between 1851 and 1901 the agricultural labour force  in County Durham dropped from 10,004 to 5,049, and during the same period many others were thrown out of work when the lead mines closed.
Deerness Valley colliers with distinctive Weardale and Teesdale surnames such as Nattress, Vipond and Hewitson probably came from lead-mining stock.
When drift mines were first sunk in this valley during the 1850s the workforce walked in each day from the surrounding villages and hamlets, but from the 1860s onwards the coalmasters had to provide new accommodation; Pease and Partners, for example, had built 151 houses at Waterhouses by 1874.
The families that came to live in these new terraced rows came from far afield, including some from Ireland.
A similar pattern can be traced in the Yorkshire coalfield.
Until the 1860s or 1870s the natural increase in the local population was sufficient to fill the vacancies in the pits, but then the sinking of deep mines to work the Silkstone and Barnsley seams on a vast new scale increased the demand for labour to such an extent that immigrants poured in from Staffordshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, other parts of Yorkshire and elsewhere.
When Denaby Main colliery was sunk on the eastern edge of the old coalfield in 1868 hardly any of the workforce had local origins; of the 166 colliers recorded in the 1871 census for the new pit village only ten were born in Yorkshire.
Some pit villages were old agricultural communities which had been transformed by an influx of miners; others, such as Denaby Main and Fitzwilliam, were new creations founded at the edge of parishes and away from the older settlements.
They had little in common with neighbouring villages whose squires kept the collieries and colliers out of sight.
Dronfield
The small Derbyshire town of Dronfield provides a vivid illustration of the way that an old market centre hardly bigger than a village could be gradually changed by industrial development and then transformed in character when the decision was made to build a new steel works there.
A Thursday market had been established in 1662 and during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries many local families had prospered through their involvement not only in farming but in the lead smelting and millstone trades.
The fine stone houses that line the High Street reflect the change in architectural fashion from the gabled halls lit by  mullioned windows to the more symmetrical tastes of the Queen Anne period.
Then in the 1730s the vicar and the usher of the grammar school chose to build in brick; the usher's home was named the Red House because this material was so unusual in those parts at the time.
Several more substantial gentry houses can still be found in the rural parts of Dronfield's large parish.
In the Universal British Directory of 1792 the place was described as:
The coal that is referred to in this eulogy was mined in pits that did not have to be sunk far to reach the Silkstone seam.
These collieries were largely responsible for Dronfield's early industrial development, for when the 1861 census was taken 383 men, or 48 per cent of the workforce, were employed in local mines.
Metalworking was the other growth area, especially after Edward Lucas & son Ltd had established an iron foundry in the valley below the church in 1790.
By 1861 the edge tool and other metal trades employed 253 men, or 32 per cent of the workforce.
The population of Dronfield township had grown steadily from 1,182 in 1801 to 2,998 in 1861.
Ten years later it stood at 3,253, then over the next decade it shot up to 5,169.
Mrs K. Battye's local history class have mapped the information recorded in the 1881 census returns and have related much of it to existing buildings.
711 people formed 149 households in the central area of the town.
The older and more substantial houses were occupied by the professional and commercial classes.
Dr Thomas Brereton lived at The Grange, Dr Samuel Rooth at Grange House, Samuel Lucas, iron founder, resided at the Hall, the Manor House was divided between a farmer/cattle dealer and a farmer/coal owner, and at The Rookery Mr W. H. Rangeley was looked after by his ‘devoted begum’ who was born in  Tobago.
Behind the major properties were a number of cottages huddled together in yards or strung out along the lanes.
Farwater Lane and Goodwin's Yard provided accommodation for 190 people in 34 households, including 24 miners, 10 labourers, 10 metal workers, a grocer, a farmer, a carter, a shoemaker, a musician and many others.
Some are more easy for the genealogist to pick out than the rest.
A seventy-two-year-old boot and shoe maker living with his daughter's family in Outram's Yard had the splendid name of Euclid Shufflebottom.
The central core of the town was mostly occupied by those families which had lived in Dronfield before the momentous decision was taken in 1873 by the new company of Wilson Cammell to found a large steelworks specializing in the manufacture of rails made from Bessemer steel.
The chosen site was on Callywhite Lane and Mill Lane opposite the Dronfield Silkstone Colliery and close to the Midland Railway, whose nearby station had been opened in 1870.
The country's railway network was expanding rapidly and the manufacture of steel rails was a lucrative business for Sheffield firms.
In Steel Town: Dronfield and Wilson Cammell, 1873–1883 (1983) J. Austin and M. Ford have described the way that the town was changed by the coming of the steel works.
The heads of various departments, foremen and other key workers were recruited from just across the county boundary in Sheffield and south Yorkshire; the rest of the labour force came from many parts of Britain and Ireland.
In 1881, when the works employed some 500–600 men, the census returns noted that 19 per cent of the workforce came from the Dronfield area, 12 per cent from elsewhere in Derbyshire, 12 per cent from the Sheffield area and 57 per cent from further afield, especially from Staffordshire, Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire.
These newcomers were mostly housed in new areas on the fringes of the town, especially between Green Lane and Snape Hill to the north of the river valley.
Here ‘The Dronfield Freehold Land Society’ built both cottages and middle-class houses on a 19-acre site divided into 180 allotments; the streets were named after local landowners and after Princess Alexandra, the wife of the Prince of Wales.
A group of fifty company houses known as Cammells Row were built close to the works on Chesterfield Road.
For nearly ten years the company flourished and Dronfield thrived, but when the home market for steel rails was saturated and firms had to look overseas for customers the land-locked   position of the Sheffield area became a decided disadvantage.
On ‘Black Friday’, 2 April 1883 the last rails were cast at Callywhite Lane and Wilson Cammell moved their entire business to the Cumbrian coastal town of Workington.
By 11 April 221 houses were unoccupied; shops were closed and property values collapsed.
About a third of the town's population moved out, many of them following the company to Workington.
A Cumbrian newspaper observed that, ‘Never before had an almost complete community been transplanted into West Cumberland’.
The ‘Dronnies’, as the migrants were known, helped to swell  Workington's population from 14,400 in 1881 to 25,200 in 1891.
During the same decade Dronfield's population fell from 5,169 to 4,166.
It took forty years for Dronfield to recover to its 1881 level.
MARKET TOWNS
Victorian market towns tend to be regarded — if they are thought of at all— as slumbering relics of the past, places of little account that had been relegated to minor status by the new industrial cities.
Guide books and handbooks for travellers often dismissed them as being of little interest.
Thus in his guide to the East Riding (1906) Joseph Morris described Market Weighton as ‘a dull little town’ and Howden as ‘a dull and depressing little town’.
No doubt some of them were rather on the dreary side but that is not the full story by any means.
Though towns such as Thirsk which had been by-passed by the railways had lost some of their former vitality, others continued to expand, to rebuild and to prosper during the Victorian era.
Many if not most of them had doubled in size during the first half of the nineteenth century.
Characteristically, they ranged in size from about 1,000 to 4,000 people in the early years of Victoria's reign, but the ones that were administrative, legal or ecclesiastical centres as well as market towns were sometimes larger than that.
Most were of local importance only, serving a limited rural hinterland in the way they had always done since the Middle Ages.
Their leading families were professional people — clergy, solicitors, doctors, teachers, bankers, surveyors and so on— and also wealthy tradesmen such as millers, maltsters, tanners, ironmongers and innkeepers, but the characteristic figure in all these small towns was the craftsman.
Often, as many as half the inhabitants of a Victorian market town were craftsmen who both lived and worked on premises which were sited as near to the market place as possible.
They offered a wide range of services to the surrounding rural families.
For much of the time these small market towns may well have appeared sleepy to travellers who were familiar with the hustle and bustle of the big cities, but every week on market day and more especially at the time of the annual fairs they were transformed by an influx of visitors.
The Victorian age was not simply one of progress, measured in terms of population growth and economic activity.
Life in the countryside remained firmly rooted in the past.
The ancient rhythms still mattered; continuity was not destroyed by the unprecedented changes, but was the most obvious characteristic of rural areas.
No better picture of a mid-nineteenth century market town can be found than the portrait of Dorchester in Thomas Hardy's The Mayor of Casterbridge.
The ‘antiquated borough’ of Casterbridge ‘was the complement of the rural life around; not its urban opposite’.
It ‘lived by agriculture at one remove further from the fountain-head than the adjoining villages — no more’.
When the church struck eight:
Dorchester had a population of about 6,500 in 1851, half of whom resided in the parish of Fordington.
The Fordington end of town was notorious locally for its slums and rough characters.
Dorchester was at its busiest on market day but it was far from silent at other times.
In addition to the usual inns and shops, professional residences and a few town houses belonging to the local nobility and gentry, it contained two barracks, county courts, a prison, a workhouse, a hospital and a museum.
When Thomas Hardy was given the freedom of the borough in 1910 he made a comment of particular interest to family historians: he said that ‘of the shops as I first recollect them [he was born in 1840]not a single owner remains; only in two or three instances does even the name remain…
Nothing is permanent but change’.
Is this quick turnover of names typical of the experience of Victorian market towns?
We do not know, for this is an under-researched  topic and nineteenth-century market towns have not yet attracted much serious attention.
The family and local historian can make a significant contribution here.
One exemplary study is Early Victorian Country Towns: A Portrait of Ashbourne in the Mid Nineteenth Century (1978) edited by Adrian Henstock.
Under Henstock's guidance a group of local historians plotted information from the 1851 census enumerators' books on the near-contemporary tithe award map and filled out the picture from newspapers and other sources.
They were able to show that a high proportion of the buildings that still front the main street leading from the church to the market place were retail shops, public houses and other commercial properties whose owners lived on the premises, usually above or behind the shop.
The triangular market place was tightly packed with such properties and much of the original space had been filled with permanent buildings where once only stalls had been allowed.
The market places of many an old town throughout the country have been encroached upon in similar ways.
The craftsmen and working classes who formed the bulk of Ashbourne's population lived in small terraced brick cottages along the minor streets or in small yards behind the major properties.
These houses were rarely seen by travellers who passed through the town on their way from Derby to Manchester.
The yards were reached either by a narrow alley or through a tunnel entrance; they took their name from the owner or sometimes from the occupant of the property that fronted the street.
Yards were a typical feature not only of industrial cities but of many a small country town which had to accommodate a rising population.
Ashbourne had about 25 yards, whose houses provided shelter for some 750 people, or nearly a quarter of the town's inhabitants.
In addition to these yards terraced cottages that were similar in size and appearance were built to the north of Mutton Lane.
These properties formed a marked contrast to the fine Georgian brick buildings in the main streets and to the recently-acquired, impressive collection of public buildings that gave a prosperous air to the face of the town.
An analysis of the birthplaces of all the heads of households recorded in the 1851 census showed that 57 per cent were born outside Ashbourne.
The largest group of immigrants came from within a 5-mile radius, but almost as many came from 5–10 miles and as many again from beyond 20 miles; only half this number came from between 10 and 20 miles.
A more complicated pattern of movement was  revealed by an analysis of the birthplace of children in those sixty-four families which had children under the age of twelve.
This showed that many young families moved frequently; by 1851 the pattern for this group was fairly evenly distributed between the 5-, 10- and 20-mile radii and beyond.
Some Victorian market towns acquired a pronounced industrial character, especially after the railways had provided cheaper raw materials and had opened up distant markets.
But such places retained their ancient functions and the market area kept its traditional character intact.
At the other side of Derbyshire from Ashbourne, Chesterfield's population rose from 4,267 in 1801 to 7,101 in 1851, but most of the important industrial developments — especially the potteries, ironworks and collieries — took place beyond the borough boundary in the outlying parts of the parish, particularly in the township of Brampton.
The old market town was surrounded but not transformed by these activities.
The physical appearance of Chesterfield's market place was altered by the erection of a huge market hall in 1857, but even today the shape of the area is that determined upon back in the twelfth century when a decision was taken to found a new market at what was then the edge of the town.
Stalls are still set out in the open air and the market place is hemmed in by shops, banks and public houses whose frontages still respect the ancient property boundaries.
Lincolnshire examples
The various trade and commercial directories that were published at regular intervals during the nineteenth century are a particularly useful source for the study of old market towns.
They do not list all the inhabitants by any means, but as a large proportion of the workforce were employed in trades, crafts and services a good idea of the occupational structure of a town can be quickly gained from a scrutiny of the classified entries.
Moreover, there is much of interest to be gleaned from the general remarks that are made about each place.
William White's History, Gazetteer and Directory of Lincolnshire (1856) is a typical example of the genre.
At that time, Lincolnshire was the second largest county in England but it was thirteenth in terms of population; it had only 208,557 people in 1801 and 407,222 fifty years later.
Lincoln, Stamford, Boston, Grantham and Grimsby had reputations that had spread   beyond the county boundaries, but otherwise Lincolnshire's market towns were just neighbourhood centres.
On perusing the pages of White's 1856 directory it is noticeable how many of these small market towns had been rebuilt and improved during the first half of the nineteenth century.
We read, for instance, that Spalding ‘has now a very neat and generally modern appearance, having more than doubled its population and buildings since 1811, and most of its ancient houses and public buildings have been rebuilt; many of them during the last twenty-five years’.
Sleaford was described as a flourishing and important market town that had been ‘much improved and beautified during the present century’; its population had risen from 1,483 to 3,372  between 1801 and 1851.
And Bourne was said to be ‘a well-built and pleasant market town, which has doubled its population during the last forty years’.
The improved navigation schemes of the later eighteenth century had been beneficial in stimulating the local economy.
Even the small river Slea had been made navigable for light craft and Sleaford had benefited from ‘a cheap and easy transit for corn, coal, timber, stone, lime and other merchandise, to and from Boston, Lincoln and other places’.
Louth had prospered in this way after a canal had provided a direct link with the mouth of the Humber, 10 miles or so away.
‘By means of it’, the directory informs us, ‘vessels trade regularly to London, Hull, and various parts of Yorkshire, carrying out corn and wool, and bringing in return timber, coals, groceries, etc’.
Trading vessels went down the canal every week to Grimsby and Hull and every month to London.
Land transport to all parts was provided by seventeen carriers operating from the inns and by the railway which had reached Louth in 1848.
The directory told its readers that:
On the other side of the Lincolnshire Wolds, 13 miles south of Louth, Horncastle was ‘a thriving and well-built market town, distinguished for its extensive horse fairs’.
Between 1801 and 1851  its population rose from 2,015 to 4,921.
By then Horncastle had a handsome appearance and contained many well-stocked shops with elegant frontages: ‘The erection of the Corn Exchange, the Butter Market, the Railway station, the County Court Office, the new Vicarage House, and the chaste little Chapel of Ease have greatly improved the appearance of the town’.
The other places of worship comprised the ancient parish church and Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, Independent and Baptist chapels.
Eleven inns provided carrying services to other parts of Lincolnshire and vessels regularly left the wharf for Lincoln, Boston and Hull.
Our final example from this Lincolnshire directory is Gainsborough, ‘an ancient market town and port, with a railway station, situated on the Trent’.
Boatmen plied their trade down the Trent to Stockwith, Keadby and other river ports and up the Idle to Bawtry, while steam packets provided regular services to Hull, Newcastle, King's Lynn, and London, and intermediate places.
In 1856 Gainsborough had 13 wharfingers and shipping agents, 6 marine store dealers, 10 ship and sloop owners, 4 ship and boat builders and a sailmaker.
The 13 coal merchants and some of the 12 corn and seed merchants no doubt operated from the wharf.
An extensive network of carrying services was also provided from the 19 inns in or near the market place.
Gainsborough had:
As one reads the pages of classified entries the rich variety of professions, trades and crafts to be found in Victorian market towns is brought home in a vivid manner.
Gainsborough had 44 hotels, inns and taverns, 9 beerhouses and 4 eating and boarding houses.
Its professional people included 6 attorneys, 7 auctioneers, 6 surgeons, a physician and no less than 28 firms providing fire and  life insurance.
Amongst the familiar occupations were traders in more unusual commodities such as the 2 ginger beer makers, 7 guano, etc. merchants ( artificial manures, etc.), 5 gypsum merchants and 2 tobacco manufacturers.
The town provided a living for 15 bakers and flour dealers, 8 blacksmiths, 27 boot and shoe makers, 24 butchers, 11 confectioners, 21 grocers and tea dealers, 7 hatters, 10 hair dressers and perfumers, 18 joiners and builders, 9 drapers, 11 maltsters, 17 milliners, 24 tailors and drapers, 8 watch and clock makers and numerous others.
It is hard to think of any useful commodity that was not on offer in this thriving market town.
Gainsborough had 3 banks, several schools, and places of worship for Anglicans, Catholics and 6 different dissenting sects.
Its population in 1851 had risen to 7,261.
Pocklington
Further north, in Yorkshire, Pocklington was amongst those scores of ancient market towns which continued to  fulfil their traditional roles during the Victorian era.
Its inhabitants liked to call it the Woldopolis and to regard it as the hub of life in that part of the East Riding.
Markets had been held there from time immemorial, almost certainly from long before a royal grant was obtained in 1245 for an annual four-day fair.
Domesday Book shows that way back in the eleventh century Pocklington was the centre of a large royal manor containing a church and three water mills and that its inhabitants included fifteen burgesses.
Some sort of urban community was already there in embryonic form.
The church served an enormous parish which covered 26,000 acres and included seventeen townships within its bounds.
Pocklington was indeed the most important place for miles around.
During the later Middle Ages All Saints church was rebuilt, largely through the profits of the wool trade, and in 1514 the lord of the manor founded a school which attracted the sons of the richest families in the neighbourhood.
By the eighteenth century Pocklington society included a number of gentlemen, attorneys, apothecaries, merchants and those rural clergy who preferred to live in the town rather than in the cultural isolation of their rural parsonages.
By then the market place accommodated seven annual fairs (three for horses and four for cattle, cheese, cloth and leather) in addition to the weekly Saturday market, and all about the central area the full variety of shops, inns, businesses and workshops that one  associates with a market town were to be found.
For further information we need to turn to David Neave's booklet, Pocklington, 1660–1914: A Small East Riding Market Town (1984).
Pocklington's population rose from 1,502 in 1801 to 2,546 in 1851 but two excellent plans of the town, drawn up by William Watson in 1844 and 1855, show how little the medieval lay-out had been altered over the years other than by encroachments onto the market place.
Such plans are of great value to the local and family historian for they show all the buildings and properties in the town and give the names of every occupant.
Most of Pocklington's streets had been called gates (a word that had been introduced into this country by the Vikings), but during the nineteenth century Hungate was re-named George Street, Southgate became Regent Street, St Peter's Gate was changed to Union Street and the colourful name of Pudding Gate was altered to Pavement.
Only Chapmangate and St Helen's Gate retained their ancient forms.
Many an old street name up and down the country was lost in this way during the course of the nineteenth century.
A genuine improvement rather than the cosmetic change of renaming took place in Pocklington during the century after 1780 when the old timber, mud and thatch buildings were gradually replaced by newer homes, shops and public buildings that were constructed of brick and roofed with pantiles or slates.
Watson's 1844 plan shows at least twenty-eight thatched buildings, but eleven years later the town had only two.
Many of the new buildings were the work of Thomas Grant (1823–1907), a local builder-architect who, according to his obituary, was responsible for ‘the major part of the principal property in Pocklington’.
By the mid-Victorian era the parish church had been restored and the Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, Congregational and Roman Catholic chapels rebuilt, the town also had two National schools, Wesleyan and Roman Catholic schools and a revived grammar school, together with a library and a newspaper.
The professional people and the wealthy tradesmen ran the place but the characteristic figures in the town were the shopkeepers and the craftsmen.
The Wesleyan Methodist chapel in Chapmangate was built in 1864 on the site of its predecessor of 1813.
It was designed in the Grecian style by Edward Taylor, a York architect who used red brick for the body of the building and stone for the dressings.
A large portico supported by six Doric pillars provided a suitably impressive entrance to the chapel, for by then the leading   Wesleyans in the town had become rich and respectable.
Houses for the circuit ministers were built on either side of the chapel in 1864 and 1869.
They are a useful visual reminder that the chapel attracted worshippers from the surrounding countryside.
Amongst the rural members of the congregation that filled the chapel in its early days were my great-grandparents from Allerthorpe, a mile or so away.
They were married here on 15 July 1871.
George Webster was a twenty-four-year-old saddler, the son of John Webster, an Allerthorpe groom.
His bride, Mary Kell, was the twenty-six-year-old daughter of Thomas Kell, an Allerthorpe farm labourer.
George was probably already working  in Pocklington, walking into work each day, for a saddler would not have had much employment in the small village where he lived.
Earlier that year on census night George was residing with his parents in Allerthorpe.
His elder brother, Richard, lived nearby with his wife and young daughter, and like his father worked as a groom, possibly at nearby Waplington Hall, a large, gabled house that had been built some thirty years earlier.
Ten years later Richard was farming 12 acres in Allerthorpe and his family had grown to seven children; his parents were now living alone on another smallholding of 14 acres.
The 1871 census entry for their neighbours the Kells is summarized in Table 5.
When I started my enquiries into our family history I was told that Mary Kell was two years older than George Webster and that she had previously been engaged to his elder brother who had died before they could marry.
The presence of an illegitimate child to that elder brother had been kept a dark secret.
He was listed as Edwin Kell, boarder, aged fifteen in the 1881 Pocklington census, but when the family moved from the East Riding to Easingwold about 1888 he was passed off as George and Mary's eldest son.
Gorge and Mary Webster eventually had another twelve children and found it difficult to make ends meet.
In my grandmother's oft-repeated phrase, ‘Pocklington was riddled with saddlers’.
Upon their marriage they had moved from Allerthorpe to the market town and in 1881 were living and working in the Market Place, next door to Henry King the ratcatcher and close to two other saddlers.
The competition made them decide to move to Easingwold, some 22 miles away as the crow flies and nearer 28 miles along the winding roads.
I always regret that as a youth it never occurred to me to ask why they chose Easingwold and how they knew of a vacancy for someone who could combine the saddlery trade with being the landlord of the Jolly Farmers pub.
Nor did it occur to me then to enquire how it was possible in those days for a keen Wesleyan Methodist to become a publican.
I shall never know the answers now, for these things are passed on only by word of mouth and are not written down.
The move and the dual occupation are confirmed by a documentary source, however, for the entry under Easingwold in the pages of Bulmer's Directory of the North Riding of Yorkshire (1890) notes: ‘Jolly Farmer, Spring Street: George Webster’ and ‘Saddlers and Harness Makers: George Webster, Spring Street’.
Easingwold was described by Joseph Morris as ‘a quiet old town, with a number   of respectable houses’.
Its population had risen slowly from 1,467 in 1801 to 2,240 in 1851, but then it had declined steadily to 1,932 in 1891.
My grandfather remembered his father-in-law as a smallish man with black hair and dark brown eyes, a good singer who sang in choir festivals in York Minster.
He always insisted on saying grace before meals, but he was a very bad tempered man, a ‘clever sort’ who drank himself to death.
He collected the leftovers in his customers' beer mugs and afterwards re-sold them as a special brew.
It was perhaps no wonder that his ‘quiet, nice’ wife had hair that had gone white by the time she was thirty.
Nevertheless, the move to Easingwold, a small market town that was similar in many ways to Pocklington but with fewer saddlers, was a beneficial one, for the family certainly did better once they were there.
George died in 1906 at the age of fifty-nine and Mary lived to be eighty-four.
The Jolly Farmers has been demolished, but I remember it as a brick and pantile structure at the top end of the town.
And I remember the family story of how on the eve of my grandmother's wedding day her elder brother Ted had been locked out by her father and had broken a window to get in.
Now that I know that George was not his father I can better understand why they always clashed.