

Inhibition of binding of interferon-γ to its receptor by salicylates used in inflammatory bowel disease
Abstract
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5ASA), 4ASA, their N-acetylated metabolites N-acetyl-5ASA and N-acetyl-4ASA, olsalazine, and colchicine impair interferon-γ (IFN γ) induced HLA-DR expression on a colonic cell line, HT-29.
The mechanism of this effect is now reported.
HT-29 cells were cultured with 50 U/ml IFN γ with or without drug, and northern blot analysis was performed using a probe for the β chain of the DR molecule.
IFN γ led to a noticeable increase in HLA-DR mRNA which was attenuated by the drugs.
Analysis of the specific binding of increasing concentrations of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ by non-linear regression showed 2.3*10 5 binding sites per HT-29 cell.
Binding of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ was reduced by incubation with increasing concentrations of unlabelled IFN γ but not with IFN α.
Incubation with therapeutic concentrations of drugs led to the following reductions in binding: 10 mM 5ASA, 20% (p<0.001); 10 mM N-acetyl-5ASA, 24% (p<0.01); 10 mM 4ASA, 21% (p<0.005); 10 mM N-acetyl-4ASA, 29% (p<0.001); and 1 mM olsalazine, 29% (p<0.001).
Colchicine (10 7 M) and 10 5 M prednisolone had no effect.
Incubation with higher concentrations of the drugs revealed a dose-response effect on binding with complete inhibition by 100 mM 4ASA and 10 mM olsalazine, and lesser degrees of inhibition by 100 mM 5ASA, N-acetyl-5ASA, and N-acetyl-4ASA.
At concentrations found in the rectal lumen, the salicylates used in inflammatory bowel disease impair the binding of IFN γ to its receptor on colonic epithelial cells.
Products of the class II genes of the major histocompatibility complex are cell surface heterodimers consisting of α and β chains.
Three major products are described in man: HLA-DR, DP, and DQ.
CD44 + lymphocytes (the helper/ inducer phenotype) recognise foreign antigens carried by class II molecules on antigen presenting cells.
HLA-DR is constitutively expressed on B lymphocytes, some macrophages, dendritic cells, vascular endothelial cells, and some epithelial cells and can be induced in a wide range of tissues in inflammatory diseases.
In vitro, this is generally mediated by interferon-γ (INF γ), although this effect can be enhanced by other cytokines.
In the normal gastrointestinal tract, HLA-DR is constitutively expressed on small intestinal villus cells but not in the crypts or on gastric or colonic epithelial cells.
However, epithelial HLA-DR is induced in inflammatory conditions including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
The mode of action of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5ASA), the active moiety of sulphasalazine, and of the other salicylates used in inflammatory bowel disease is unknown.
We have recently shown that these drugs and colchicine, but not sulphapyridine, inhibit IFN γ induced HLA-DR expression on colonic epithelial cells and now report our investigations into the mechanism of this effect.
Materials
CELL LINE
The HT-29 colonic carcinoma line was obtained from Dr P Brandtzaeg, Oslo, Norway and grown at 37°C in Liebowitz-15 medium (L-15)(Gibco, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Flow Laboratories, Irvine, UK), 5×10 5 U/ml penicillin, and 50 µg/ml gentamicin.
INTERFERONS
Recombinant IFN γ and IFN α were gifts of Wellcome Biotech (Beckenham, UK).
They were diluted in culture medium and aliquots were stored at -20°C until the day of use.
1 2 5 I-IFN γ (specific activity 675 Ci/mmol) was purchased from Amersham (Alyesbury, UK), diluted in distilled water, and stored at -20°C.
DRUGS
5ASA, 4-aminosalicylic acid (4ASA), prednisolone, and colchicine were purchased from Sigma (Poole, UK).
N-acetyl-5ASA, N-acetyl-4ASA, and olsalazine were gifts of Pharmacia AB (Uppsala, Sweden).
Solutions (10 mM) of 5ASA, 4ASA, and their metabolites were used in most experiments, as the effects of IFN γ induced HLA-DR expression were seen at this concentration.
Solutions (1 mM) of olsalazine and colchicine (10 -7 M) were used for the same reason.
The concentrations of 5ASA and N-acetyl-5ASA are similar to those found in the rectal lumen in patients taking therapeutic doses of 5ASA-containing compounds.
Prednisolone was studied at 10 -5 M, which is within the plasma concentration ragne found in patients taking therapeutic doses of this drug.
Solutions of 5ASA, N-acetyl-5ASA, and N-acetyl-4ASA were made by dissolving the drugs in 0.2 M NaOH, diluting 1 in 10 in L-15, and then adjusting to pH 7.4 with 1 M HCl.
Olsalazine and 4ASA were supplied as sodium salts and were dissolved directly in Lp15, as was colchicine.
Prednisolone was dissolved in dimethylsulphoxide and then diluted 1 in 1000 in L-15.
All solutions were filtered before use.
Methods
NORTHERN BLOT ANALYSIS
Northern blot analysis of HLA-DR and actin mRNA was performed in the standard manner using diethyl pyrocarbonate treated solutions.
Briefly, HT-29 cells were incubated in L-15 medium containing 50 U/ml of IFN γ with or without drug for 72 hours.
The cells were detached with 0.2 mg/ml trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, NJ, USA) and 10 mM EDTA in calcium- and magnesium-free Hank's buffered salt solution and resuspended in L-15.
RNA was extracted with guanidinium thiocyanate (RNAzol B, Cinna Biotex, Friendwood, Texas, USA) and electrophoresed on a formamide/agarose gel for 12 hours at 35 V before transfer to a nitrocellulose filter.
The filter was probed for HLA-DR mRNA using a probe (provided by Dr J Bell, Oxford) labelled with 3 2 P (Oligolabelling kit, Pharmacia).
After repeated washes in sodium citrate/sodium dodecyl sulphate, an autoradiograph was developed.
The filter was then probed for actin (probe provided by Dr M Dallman, Oxford) in the same manner.
The autoradiograph was read by eye.
IFN γ BINDING
0–10 mM
HT-29 cells were detached with trypsin/EDTA, washed twice in L-15, and counted.
Cell (10 6 ) were added to 5ml Falcon polystyrene tubes (Becton Dickinson, Lincoln Park, NJ, USA), and centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 minutes.
The supernatants were discarded and replaced with solutions of combinations of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ, unlabelled IFN γ, IFN α, and drug dissolved in 1 ml of L-15.
In most experiments, 30 nCi (45 fmol) of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ were added to each tube.
The tubes were then agitated for two to four hours.
All binding studies were performed at 4°C to prevent receptor internalisation.
After incubation, the cells were washed three times with 2 ml L-15 and resuspended in 1ml L-15.
Before counting (LKB Wallac 1260 Multigamma II counter) they were transferred to a second Falcon tube to exclude 1 2 5 I-IFN γ bound to plastic.
Four tubes without cells were included in each experiment to measure non-specific binding.
Specific binding was calculated as cpm-mean cpm of these four tubes.
Dose-response curves
To maintain constant osmolality, experiments requieing drug concentrations greater than 10 mM were performed in Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS).
Solutions of 100 mM drug in PBS/10% FCS were made up with the concentration of NaCl reduced to maintain osmolality.
Thus, for 100 mM solutions of 5ASA, N-acetyl-5ASA, N-acetyl-4ASA, acetate, proprionate, and butyrate, 137 mM NaOH replaced NaCl and the pH was adjusted to 7.4 with HCl.
For solutions of the sodium salts 4ASA, olsalazine, and hydrocortisone, the concentration of NaCl was simply reduced by the appropriate amount.
These solutions were mixed with PBS/10% FCS to provide a range of drug concentrations and binding studies were performed as outlined above.
Results
NORTHERN BLOT
As shown in Figure 1, IFN γ induced HLA-DR mRNA in HT-29 cells.
There was a noticeable reduction in the amount of HLA-DR mRNA induced in cells incubated in 1 mM olsalazine, 10 -7 M colchicine, and 10 mM 4ASA.
Variation in mRNA loading was detected by hybridisation with the actin probe.
Adjustment for RNA oading suggests that IFN γ induction of HLA-DR mRNA was also reduced by 10 mM 5ASA and 10 mM N-acetyl-4ASA but not by 10 mM N-acetyl-5ASA or 10 -5 M prednisolone.
Apart from the lack of effect with N-acetyl-4ASA, the results suggest that these compounds are antagonising the effect of IFN γ at a pretranscriptional level.
This led to an investigation of the effect of the drugs on IFN γ binding.
IFN γ BINDING
Time course
Maximal binding was attained by 120 minutes (Fig 2).
All subsequent experiments were performed with 120–240 minute incubations.
Cell viability
Trypan blue exclusion was 90–100% after two hours incubation at 4°C in 10 or 100 mM 5ASA, 4ASA, N-acetyl-5ASA, and N-acetyl-4ASA and in 1 or 10 mM olsalazine.
Viability was lowest with 10 mM olsalazine.
In our previous study we performed simultaneous flow cytometric analysis of HLA-DR expression and propidium iodide exclusion to show that the effects of the drugs were not the result of impaired viability.
Binding isotherm
Increasing concentrations of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ, with or without excess unlabelled IFN γ (30000 U), were added to tubes containing 10 6 HT-29 cells.
Specific binding at each concentration was calculated by subtracting the cpm in the presence of excess IFN γ from the cpm without excess IFN γ.
A representative binding curve is shown in Figure 3.
Non-linear regression of the specific binding curve weighted by the inverse of the variance was performed using the Multifit computer programme on an Apple McIntosh computer.
This revealed a K d of 1.35×10 -10 M and 2.3×10 5 binding sites per cell (assuming one molecule of IFN γ binds to one receptor site).
Similar results were obtained by analysis of a Sctachard plot.
Competition with unlabelled IFN γ and IFN α
Increasing concentrations of unlabelled IFN γ led to complete abolition of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ binding.
IFN α had no effect (Fig 4).
Effect of therapeutic concentrations of salicylates on IFN γ binding
The effect of each compound on 1 2 5 I-IFN γ binding was studied by comparing 10 tubes in which cells were incubated in the presence of each of the drugs with 10 control tubes.
The coefficient of variation was calculated for each set of 10 tubes.
IFN γ binding was reduced by 20% by 10 mM 5ASA (p<0.001, unpaired Student's t test), 24% by 10 mM N-acetyl-5ASA (p<0.01), 21% by 10 mM 4ASA (p<0.005), 29% by 10 mM N-acetyl-4ASA (p<0.001), and 29% by 1 mM olsalazine (p<0.001).
Prednisolone (10 -5 M) and 10 -7 M colchicine had no effect (Fig 5).
The mean coefficient of variation was 12.7%.
Effect of increasing doses of salicylates
Increasing concentrations of 5ASA, 4ASA, their N-acetylated metabolites and olsalazine led to increasing inhibition of 1 2 5 I-IFN γ binding.
Olsalazine was the most potent compound, with complete inhibition of IFN γ binding to cells incubated in 10 mM olsalazine.
Sulphapyridine is insoluble at higher concentrations by acetate, proprionate and butyrate, the major anions in the colonic luman, did not alter binding.
The effect is not specific to salicylates, however, as 50 mM hydrocortisone (a much higher concentration than that seen in plasma after conventional doses) also abolished 1 2 5 I-IFN γ binding (Fig 6).
Discussion
We have previously shown that the salicylates used in inflammatory bowel disease, their N-acetylated metabolites, and colchicine impair IFN γ induced colonic epithelial cell HLA-DR expression.
We now show that this effect is also seen in the transcriptional level, that IFN γ binds to colonic epithelial cells, and that this binding is reduced in the presence of salicylates.
This inhibition occurs at concentrations of 5ASA and N-acetyl 5ASA found in the rectal lumen of patients taking therapeutic doses of 5ASA containing compounds and is of the same magnitude as the reduction in IFN γ induced HLA-DR expression.
IFN γ is a pleiotropic cytokine released by T and natural killer (NK) lymphocytes and has similar antiviral, antitumour, and pyrogenic activity to the IFN αs and IFN β.
IFN γ also has a wide range of immunomodulatory properties, including induction of class I and III histocompatibility antigens, Fc receptors, and adhesion molecules; activation of macrophages, T lymphocytes, and NK cells; stimulation of T and B lymphocyte proliferation; and differentiation and induction of ther cytokines.
IFN γ has also been shown to increase permeability across colonic epithelial monolayers.
IFN γ binds to a 95 kDa cell surface receptor which is present on most cell lines that have been tested and is distinct from the receptor mediating the actions of the IFN αs and IFN β.
Estimates of its K d have varied from 10 -1 1 to 10 -9 M and the number of receptors/cell from 100 to 10000.
The mechanism of signal transduction after IFN γ binding is unknown.
The mode of action of 5ASA and 4ASA in inflammatory bowel disease is unknown.
A variety of mechanisms have been proposed, including inhibition of prostaglandins, leukotrienes, or platelet activating factor; free radical scavenging; inhibition of neutrophil, macrophage, or mast cell function; alteration of colonic permeability; inhibition of humoral immunity; and impaired cytokine production.
N-acetyl-5ASA is the major metabolite of 5ASA and the primary site of metabolism is probably the colonic mucosa.
Two studies have failed to show any effect of N-acetyl-5ASA enemas in ulcerative colitis, although a third reported sigmoidoscopic and histological improvement.
These findings are possibly explained by poor rectal absorption of N-acetyl-5ASA.
The data presented here suggest that these compounds may act by impairing the binding of IFN γ to its receptor on the colonic epithelial cell.
It is possible that they may also affect IFN γ binding to other cells involved in the colonic mucosal immune response.
Although olsalazine was the most potent inhibitor, in vivo measurements have shown that it is almost completely metabolised in the colonic lumen.
In contrast, the reduction of IFN γ induced epithelial HLA-DR expression by colchicine is not caused by interference with receptor binding.
It is more likely to be an intracellular effect of tubulin binding.
As IFN γ has such a wide range of effects, an impaired ligand-receptor interaction would modulate the mucosal immune response by a number of mechanisms.
Maintenance of low epithelial permeability, inhibition of antigen presentation by epithelial or subepithelial antigen presenting cells, and inhibition of activation or proliferation of immune effector cells could all contribute to the prevention or control of colonic mucosal inflammation.
Selection, management, and early outcome of 113 patients with symptomatic gall stone treated by percutaneous cholecystolithotomy
Abstract
Between January 1988 and December 1990, 283 patients with symptomatic gall stones were referred for non-operative treatment.
After ultrasound scanning including a functional assessment, 220 (78%) patients were found to be suitable for percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
Of these, 113 underwent the procedure including 10 in whom extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy or methyl tert-butyl ether therapy.
Forty four patients underwent extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, methyl tert-butyl ether therapy or rotaty lithotripsy, 46 chose laparoscopic cholecystectomy or minicholecystectomy and 27 declined treatment.
Percutaneous cholecystolithotomy was successfully performed in 100 patients.
Thirty four patients were a high operative risk and 14 presented with an acute complication of gall stone disease.
Complications developed in 15 patients, all of which were managed conservatively and most occurred during development of the technique.
Outcome has been assessed clinically and by ultrasound scanning in 92 patients with a median follow up period of 14 months (six to 37 months).
Seventy nine per cent were completely cured of their symptoms.
Ninety three per cent of gall bladders were shown to be functioning and nine (9.8%) contained stones, although five of these are believed to have developed from residual fragments.
Percutaneous cholecystolithotomy is a safe, non-operative treatment for symptomatic gall stones and enabled the patient to fully recover within two to three weeks; it has a definite role in the management of the elderly and high risk patient but its use for the treatment of ther groups is likely to remain controversial.
In recent years, there has been a move away from open surgical techniques in biliary disease with an increasing use of therapeutic endoscopy for the extraction of bile duct stones and the stenting of biliary strictures.
Similarly in the past decade, as recently reviewed, several non-invasive and minimally invasive techniques have been pioneered for the management of gall bladder stones.
The ability to puncture the gall bladder percutaneously under radiological control has resulted in the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic techniques.
The transhepatic puncture of the gall bladder has been used for cholecystography and cholangiography, for aspiration of bile or pus for culture in suspected cases of acute cholecystitis or empyema, and for biopsy of lesions within the gall bladder.
Direct percutaneous access to the gall bladder has opened new avenues for the non-operative management of gall stone disease and is being increasingly used, particularly in elderly and high risk patients, for the treatment of acute cholecystitis, empyema and the perforated gall bladder with localised abscess formation.
Other therapeutic optins made possible by percutaneous puncture of the gall bladder include contact dissolution of gall stones with solvents and percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
The percutaneous extraction of gall stones was first described in 1985, for the treatment of high risk patients with acute cholecystitis, and was carried out in up to five stages using a transhepatic tract.
The technique evolved from the introduction of percutaneous cholecystostomy as an alternative to surgical cholecystostomy and utilised well established technicues for dilating percutaneous tracts and stone extraction.
In 1988, Kellett et al adapted the technique of percutaneous nephrolithotomy for the extraction of gall bladder stones.
The gall bladder is accessed transperitoneally and not transhepatically, as large cannulae, which make stone extraction easier, cause unnecessary trauma to the liver.
Percutaneous cholecystolithotomy avoids the disadvantages of conventional cholecystectomy which are pain related to a large, unsightly wound, a week of hospitalisation and four to six weeks' convalescence.
Less invasive methods of minicholecystectomy and laparoscopic cholecystectomy are replacing the conventional operation and offer similar advantages to percutaneous cholecystolithotomy without the risk of stone recurrence.
Not all patients, however, such as the elderly and high risk, are suitable for these new operative techniques.
There may also be a place for preserving a useful gall bladder in young patients with solitary or few stones, who may not reform stones.
In this prospective study, we describe our unique experience in the selection and management of 113 patients treated by percutaneous cholecystolithotomy and assess early outcome with regard to symptoms, stone recurrence and gall bladder function.
Methods
PATIENTS
Referral pattern
Between January 1988 and December 1990, data were collected prospectively on 283 patients with symptomatic gall stones referred for non-operative treatment.
Fifty four per cent of patients were referred by general practitioners, 43% were tertiary referrals from other consultant surgeons and physicians in England, Wales, and the Channel Islands, and 3% were admitted through the Accident and Emergency Department.
The reasons for referral were either at the patient's request because of an unwillingness to undergo an operation (70%) or because the patient was a high operative risk (30%).
Selection
Patients were assessed in a special gallstone clinic to determine their suitability for the various treatment techniques available in our unit.
These techniques included percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, contact dissolution therapy with methyl tert-butyl ether, minicholecystectomy, and latterly, laparoscopic cholecystectomy ahd percutaneous rotary lithotripsy.
Selection for these techniques depended on the clinical features including patient fitness, a detailed ultrasound assessment and patient preference.
Each patient was given an ASA grading as part of the anaesthetic department audit.
Ultrasound scanning was used to determine the stone size and number; gall bladder position, accessibility, wall thickness and function; and appearance of the bile duct.
Gall bladder function (emptying) was assessed by measuring the change in the fasting gall bladder volume after a fatty meal.
Long axis and transverse images of the gall bladder were obtained and the volume calculated, using the ellipsoid method, from the following formula:
A reduction in volume of 30% or more was regarded as satisfactory gall bladder emptying.
Computed tomography of the gall bladder was initially done on all patients but latterly, only patients who were being considered for extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (patients with one to three gall stones which were less than 3 cm in diameter) were scanned to determine stone density (calcification).
Patients with stones of any composition, size and number contained in a thin walled gall bladder with a fasting volume greater than 15 ml were found to be suitable for percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
Neither an acute complication of gall stone disease nor a non-functioning gall bladder, if caused by a stone impacted in Hartmann's pouch, was regarded as a contraindication to treatment.
Patients with thick walled, contracted gall bladders were excluded, not only because the gall bladder was diseased but also because of the technical difficulty in puncturing and dilating a track through a thick, fibrosed, gall bladder wall.
Technique
The procedure was adapted from the technique of percutaneous nephrolithotomy.
It was carried out under general anaesthesia or local anaesthesia with intravenous sedation.
A percutaneous cholecystogram was done and then the fundus of the gall bladder was punctured with a Kellett needle (152 mm long dwell sheathed needle, Becton Dickinson, Ontario, Canada), using a combination of ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance.
A guide wire was placed in the gall bladder for the entire procedure as a safety measure.
The track was dilated to 28–30F using Teflon (USCI) and telescoping metal dilators (Keymed, Southend-on-Sea, UK) before inserting an Amplatz Teflon sheath (Lewis Medical, London, UK).
The gall bladder was inspected with a rigid cholecystoscope (Olympus, Keymed, Southend-on-Sea, UK) and stones up to 10 mm in diameter were flushed out or removed with forceps.
Stones too large to pass through the Amplatz sheath were fragmented by intracorporeal electrohydraulic, or ultrasound lithotripsy and removed piecemeal.
The gall bladder was carefully inspected and a spot film taken to ensure that all the stones had been removed.
At the end of the procedure, a Foley catheter was introduced through the Amplatz sheath and placed on free drainage.
A ‘tubogram’ was carried out, as an outpatient 10 days later and the catheter removed, provided that the biliary tree was clear of stones and that there was no extravasation of contrast into the peritoneal cavity.
In patients with a stone impacted in Hartmann's pouch or with an acute complication caused by gall stones, the gall bladder was electively decompressed by percutaneous cholecystostomy, carried out under local anaesthesia, for seven to 10 days before the stones were removed.
The purpose of this was to allow the stone to disimpact or for the acute complication to resolve.
When the total procedure was done under local anaesthesia, staged dilatation of the track over five to seven days was undertaken.
Adjuvant therapy
Adjuvant therapy was not given to the first 44 successfully treated patients.
It was introduced after the observation that some tiny fragments, adherent to or embedded in the gall bladder mucosa, were difficult to remove completely and that some gall bladders showed cholesterolosis.
Therefore, in the subsequent 56 patients adjuvant therapy with chenodeoxycholic acid 7 mg/kg/day and ursodeoxycholic acid 5 mg/kg/ day was given for an arbitrary period of three months after the procedure.
Outcome
Patients were assessed clinically and by ultrasound scanning at approximately three months, six monthly to two years and then yearly after percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
Symptoms were compared with those before treatment and were scored as follows:(0) no symptoms;(1) major symptoms cured, patient pleased with result of treatment;(2) some improvement, patient not wholly satisfied with result of treatment;(3) no change in symptoms.
An ultrasound scan was done, as already described to assess stone status and gall bladder emptying.
Results
SELECTION
Two hundred and twenty of the 283 (78%) patients assessed for non-operative treatment of their gall stones were suitable for percutaneous cholecystolithotomy and have undergone treatment as shown in the Figure.
PATIENTS TREATED BY PERCUTANEOUS CHOLECYSTOLITHOTOMY
The 113 patients who underwent percutaneous cholecystolithotomy had a median age of 56 years (range 18–89) with a male to female ratio of 1:2.4.
Five were referred after failure of oral dissolution therapy and 10 were selected after unsuccessful extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy or methyl tert-butyl ether dissolution therapy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
All patients were symptomatic and had proven gall stones.
The majority of patients (89) gave a history of biliary colic and included 12 who had received treatment in the past for an acute complication (Table I).
The 14 patients who presented with an acute complication of gall stone disease had a median age of 70 years (range 31–78) and seven were regarded as high risk for surgery.
FITNESS FOR SURGERY
Twenty four patients were classified as ASA grade III (severe systemic disease which limited activity) and 10 patients as ASA grade IV (incapacitating systemic disease which was a constant threat to life).
These 34 patients were referred (68% by consultants from other hospitals) for non-operative treatment because they were high risk for surgery.
PROCEDURE
Percutaneous cholecystolithotomy was carried out under general anaesthesia except in the 10 patients with an ASA grade of IV.
The procedure was successful in 100 of 113 patients (89%) and completed in a single stage in 72.
Failures were because of failed puncture and dilatation (five), to loss of access (one), and to residual cystic duct stones (seven).
Bile peritonitis developed in the patient in whom access was lost and a surgical cholecystostomy was done, followed by a further percutaneous removal of residual stones.
Of the seven patients with residual cystic duct stones, five had patent cystic ducts and two had non-functioning gall bladders before treatment.
The first two of these patients were advised to undergo cholecystectomy which was done two and 10 weeks later and the remainder have been followed to determine outcome.
STAGED PROCEDURES
Twenty eight procedures were done in two to four stages.
The procedure was staged in 14 of 16 patients with a stone impacted in Hartmann's pouch (six of whom presented with an acute gall bladder).
The stone disimpacted in eight of these patients after seven to 10 days decompression and was removed successfully at the second stage, whereas five of six patients with persistent stone impaction required more than one session for stone clearance.
Cystic duct patency was regained in 15 of 16 patients with Hartmann's pouch stones (Table II).
Decompression of 13 of the 14 acute gall bladders for seven to 10 days resulted in resolution of acute cholecystitis (six), mucocoeles (two), perforated empyemas associated with liver abscesses (two), and jaundice alone, with empyema or with pancreatitis (three) before stone extraction was undertaken.
The procedure failed in one patient because of failed puncture and dilatation and in another, whose cystic duct became obstructed during extraction of a Hartmann pouch stone (Table II).
Two of three jaundiced patients underwent endoscopic sphincterotomy to remove duct stones after successful percutaneous cholecystolithotomy and the stone passed spontaneously in the third.
Eleven patients with incomplete stone clearance at the first procedure underwent a second (nine) or third (two) cholecystolithotomy after redilatation of the percutaneous tract.
This was done electively in 10 of the 11 patients because of a prolonged procedure time caused by excessive stone burden or difficult stone extraction.
DURATION OF PROCEDURE
The median total procedure time was 69 minutes (range 25–210).
The first 10 procedures were performed in a median 166 minutes but with increasing experience and modification of the technique, there was a gradual reduction in procedure time to 51 minutes for the last 50 patients.
The duration of the procedure depended on difficulties encountered during puncturing and dilatating, the stone load and the experience of the operators.
Multiple hard stones, greater than 1 cm in diameter, each requiring lithotripsy and removal piecemeal, took much longer to remove than a solitary stone of less than 1 cm in diameter.
GALL BLADDERS TONES AND MUCOSA
The number and mean size of the stones removed from each gall bladder are shown in Table III.
In 52 patients, the stones were 10 mm or less in diameter and were removed whole without fragmentation.
Intracorporeal lithotripsy was used in 30 of the 48 patients with larger stones.
The appearance of the gall bladder mucosa was documented for the last 53 patients and is noted in Table III.
POSTOPERATIVE COURSE
Complications
Complications occurred in 15 patients as listed in Table IV.
Transient cholangitis only occurred when antibiotic prophylaxis was omitted.
Subhepatic bile collections were managed by percutaneous drainage in one patient and conservatively in the other three.
The two gall bladder perforations were caused by an inexperienced radiologist learning the technique and were managed conservatively by percutaneously draining the gall bladder for seven to 10 days to allow the perforation to heal and performing stone extraction at a second stage.
Most complications occurred with the first few procedures when the technique was being developed.
Hospital stay
The overall median hospital stay from the first stage of percutaneous cholecystolithotomy was three days (range one to 33).
It was shorter for single stage procedures (median two days, range one to 14) than those done in multiple stages (median five days, range four to 25).
The median hospital stay from the first stage in patients with acute complications was 12 days (range three to 33).
The longest hospital stay was in a patient with an empyema associated with liver abscesses which required drainage until the abscess cavities resolved.
Recovery
The median time to full recovery as judged by the patient was 12 days — that is, two days after the Foley drainage catheter was removed and ranged from two to 28 days.
The median time for return to employment was 18 days.
Details of the procedure of percutaneous cholecystolithotomy are summarised in Table V.
Outcome
Of 100 patients who underwent successful percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, two have died unrelated to the procedure and six have been lost to follow up having left the country.
Ninety two patients have been followed for a median 14 months (range 6–37 months).
Clinical follow up Scores comparing symptoms before treatment and at follow up are shown in Table VI.
The majority of patients (90%) have been completely cured of their symptoms (score 0) or have had their major symptoms cured and occasionally experience minor discomfort (score 1).
Symptoms were unchanged in 7% of patients and therefore were unlikely to have been caused by gall stones.
Radiological follow up Nine of 92 patients (9.8%) have reformed stones (Table VI).
The number of patients with recurrent stones compared with the total number scanned was three of 72 at three to five months, two of 82 at six to 11 months, two of 56 at 12–17 months, one of 21 at 18–23 months, one of three at 24–35 months, and 0 of two at 36–47 months.
Stone recurrences in five patients are believed to be the result of residual stones as they reformed by the six month follow up examination and each of the post procedure contrast studies had shown a filling defect in the neck of the gall bladder or cystic duct.
They were classified as successes of treatment as subsequent radiological examination had been normal.
Seven of the nine patients with stone recurrence are asymptomatic (symptom score 0) and the other two have a symptom score of 1.
When gall bladder emptying was assessed 86 (93%) showed a reduction in volume of >30% after the fatty meal stimulus.
Gall bladder emptying was restored to eight of 10 patients managed with an acutely inflamed gall bladder and to 11 of 13 patients with non-function because of a stone impacted in Hartmann's pouch (Table II).
Of the six patients with poor or absent gall bladder emptying (non-function) two had patient cystic ducts after treatment of perforated empyemas but have since developed contracted, thick walled gall bladders.
Both are asymptomatic.
The other four patients had non-functioning gall bladders before and after treatment but their cystic ducts were patent at percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, and it is assumed that they do not respond to the fatty meal stimulus used to test gall bladder emptying.
Effect of adjuvant bile acid therapy
Adjuvant bile acid therapy was administered to the last 56 patients who underwent successful percutaneous cholecystolithotomies.
Only one of nine patients with stone recurrence received adjuvant bile acid therapy and treatment was stopped after two weeks in this patient because of side effects from the therapy.
This patient's stone recurrence was noted within three months of the procedure.
Residual cystic duct stones
Of seven patients whose percutaneous cholecystolithotomy failed because of residual cystic duct stones, only two were advised to undergo cholecystectomy and the remainder have been followed up for a median of 14 months.
Four are asymptomatic (symptom score 0) and one has minimal discomfort (sympton score 1).
There has been no gall bladder stone recurrence and function has returned to two of the five, possibly because of spontaneous passage of the cystic duct stone.
Discussion
Although, cholecystectomy is the most effective longterm treatment for gall bladder stones, not all patients are suitable even for the modern techniques of undertaking cholecystectomy, through mini-incisions or laparoscopically, and will continue to require non-operative management of their gall stones.
One of the main advantages of percutaneous cholecystolithotomy over other non-operative techniques is that it can be used for 78% of patients, with stones of any composition, number and size, and a patent cystic duct is not essential.
The treatment is successful in 89% of patients and is complete with full recovery of the majority of patients within two to three weeks.
How does this technique compare with other non-operative treatments for gall bladder stones?
Probably as few as 10% of patients are suitable for bile acid therapy, 10–25% for extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy combined with adjuvant bile acid therapy and 20% for contact dissolution with methyl tert-butyl ether.
Dissolution therapy with bile acids is moderately effective and dissolves cholesterol stones in 40–60% of carefully selected patients.
Although, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy with adjuvant bile acid therapy has been reported to produce stone clearance in 91% of patients at 12–18 months after stone fragmentation, 83% of these patients had solitary stones.
The value of this treatment for multiple stones, which would include 76% of our patients, is less certain.
These completely non-invasive techniques have the advantage of being carried out on an outpatient basis but the treatment may take up to two years.
Ultrasound guided minicholecystostomy with radiological stone removal and laparoscopic cholecystolithotomy are more invasive than percutaneous cholecystolithotomy but can be used if expertise to percutaneously puncture the gall bladder is not available.
In this study, 107 patients (95%) underwent successful clearance of gall bladder stones but seven of these had a residual cystic duct stone, reducing the overall success rate to 89%.
Only two of the patients with residual cystic duct stones were advised to undergo cholecystectomy and the remainder are asymptomatic.
In their separate experience, Kellett et al reported successful stone clearance in 56 of 60 fit patients (93%) with non-acute gal stone disease.
None of their patients had cystic duct stones.
Unlike other non-operative treatments, a non-functioning gall bladder with a stone impacted in Hartmann's pouch is not a contraindication to treatment and stones were removed successfully in 15 of 16 patients with a return of cystic duct patency.
Draining the gall bladder for seven to 10 days before stone extraction allowed the stone to disimpact in over half of the patients making stone extraction easier.
Patients with acute complications of gall bladder stones, were similarly managed by drainage to allow the acute inflammation to resolve before stone extraction was attempted.
The safety and efficacy of undertaking stone extraction in the acute gall bladder, when it is friable and difficult to examine thoroughly, is questionable.
There has been no mortality associated with percutaneous cholecystolithotomy and most of the complications occurred during development and refinement of the technique.
The transperitoneal approach to the gall bladder is usually avoided because of the risk of intraperitoneal bile leakage or bowel perforation.
The approach enables larger cannulae to be used for easier stone extraction, however, and avoids unnecessary trauma to the liver.
Hruby et al assessed 100 computed tomography scans of gall bladders in gall stone patients and predicted that safe peritoneal puncture was not possible in 34% of patients.
Our experience with the transperitoneal approach does not confirm these findings.
Intraperitoneal bile leakage only occurred early in the study, when it was our policy to spigot the drainage catheter after 48 hours, rather than maintain free drainage until a tract to the skin had formed.
There has been no injury to bowel in the 113 patients in whom the procedure was attempted, although others have reported this complication.
After cholecystectomy, 30–50% of patients develop post cholecystectomy symptoms and 34–50% of these complain of wound pain one to two years later.
Although the gall bladder is considered to be dispensible, its preservation may result in a reduction of post cholecystectomy syptoms.
In this study, 79% of patients were cured of their symptoms.
Seven per cent reported that their symptoms were unchanged which reflects the difficulty of being certain that symptoms are caused by gallstones.
With the minimal scarring of a 1 cm incision, wound pain has not been a problem.
Overall, there seems to be a lower incidence of symptoms after percutaneous cholecystolithotomy than cholecystectomy.
The main argument against any method which preserves the gall bladder is stone recurrence but to assume that all patients will develop stone recurrence is incorrect.
Stone recurrence after bile acid therapy occurs in approximately 50% of patients within five years of treatment and then reaches a plateau of 61% by the 11th year.
The early recurrences may be the result of incomplete clearance of the gall bladder which is not detected by radiological examination.
Stone recurrence after extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy is expected to be similar and has been reported as 9% in the first year.
It is too early to establish whether recurrent stone formation after percutaneous cholecystolithotomy differs from other non-operative treatments.
Recurrent stones in five of the nine patients followed up for a median of 14 months are believed to have developed from residual fragments.
Even with endoscopic clearance, which should be more thorough, it is often difficult to remove radiologically undetectable, tiny fragments adherent to or embedded in the mucosa and therefore, latterly, patients have been given adjuvant bile acid therapy for an arbitrary three month period.
The only patient given bile acid therapy who developed stone recurrence, stopped treatment after only two weeks because of side effects.
Stone recurrence in these patients seems to be less than those not given adjuvant therapy but the length of follow up is shorter.
In the future, it may be feasible to ablate the gall bladder by thermal or chemical injury or to prevent gall stone formation by altering bile metabolism.
After percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, the majority (93%) of gall bladders emptied satisfactorily including patients who had non-functioning gall bladders before treatment because of an acute complication or an impacted stone.
This finding adds support to the argument for the continued use of methods which preserve the gall bladder.
Percutaneous cholecystolithotomy is a highly successful, minimally invasive technique with a short hospital stay and rapid convalescence.
It has proved particularly useful for the management of high risk patients such as the medically unfit, frail and elderly in whom cholecystectomy is associated with mortality rates of 10%, or higher when carried out for acute complications.
Its use in other groups of patients is likely to remain controversial, particularly with the introduction of less invasive methods of cholecystectomy, such as minicholecystectomy and laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Adhesive and hydrophobic properties of Escherichia coli from the rectal mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis
Abstract
The adherent properties and hydrophobicity of Escherichia coli isolates have been compared from the rectal mucosa of patients with active and inactive ulcerative colitis and from a control patient group.
Patients with active colitis were colonised less frequently and with lower numbers of E coli than were control patients.
Mannose resistant adhesion to HEp-2 cells was determined for 124 isolates of E coli and surface hydrophobicity was estimated by salt agglutination in 96 of these isolates.
There was no significant difference in the distribution of adherent strains between the colitis patient groups or with disease activity.
E coli from the control patients were marginally less adhesive than those from colitics.
The hydrophobicity of isolates did not differ significantly between colitic and control groups nor were there significant differences correlated with disease activity.
Furthermore, for these mucosal E coli isolates, hydrophobicity, and mannose resistant adhesion were unrelated characteristics.
It is commonly believed that the intestinal microflora plays some role in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis but no aetiological agent has been identified and there are only relatively minor alterations to the balance of the faecal flora.
In some studies increased numbers of Escherichia coli have been reported in the faeces of colitic patients in comparison with control groups of patients and isolates from colitics are also more likely to produce haemolysin and necrotoxin.
Serum agglutinating antibodies against E coli are found more commonly and at higher titres in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Dickinson and colleagues reported that E coli from the faeces of colitics were markedly more adherent to HeLa cells in an in vitro assay than isolates from non-colitic control patients and showed that this adhesin was mannose resistant.
Burke and Axon described an alternative assay using human buccal epithelial cells with which they confirmed that enterobacteria from colitics were ‘stickier’ than those from healthy donors.
Subsequently, these authors have shown that faecal E coli from colitics were more hydrophobic than those from non-colitics.
Surface hydrophobicity has been shown to be correlated with adherence in E coli associated with gastroenteritis and pyelonephritis.
The significance of ‘sticky’E coli in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis remains unclear but their presence in stools of colitic patients does not appear to be as a result of treatment.
Interestingly, oral adjunctive treatment with tobramycin results in significant clinical improvement in patients with ulcerative colitis compared with a comparable group of patients given placebo.
The effects of the treatment on the faecal flora were not reported but this poorly absorbed aminoglycoside would be expected to deplete or eradicate intestinal E coli .
We have previously characterised the rectal mucosa associated microflora of patients with ulcerative colitis.
We isolated enterobacteria, usually E coli , less frequently and in lower numbers from patients with newly diagnosed active colitis or active colitis on relapse than from patients with quiescent colitis.
As it might be argued that this microflora is more likely to exert pathogenic or protective effects in the intestine than the lumen flora, we were interested to determine the adherent and hydrophobic properties of our mucosal E coli isolates by techniques comparable with those used by others studying faecal isolates.
Methods
PATIENTS
Rectal mucosal biopsy samples were taken from 25 patients presenting with their first episode of ulcerative colitis (new colitis), 20 patients with active relapse of ulcerative colitis, and 44 patients with quiescent ulcerative colitis.
Patients with active colitis were reexamined after three and 12 weeks of treatment.
Biopsy samples were also taken from a control group of 15 patients with irritable bowel syndrome or haemorrhoids and in whom inflammatory bowel disease had been excluded.
Experimental protocols were approved by local Ethics Committees and informed consent was obtained; biopsy procedures were performed at routine sigmoidoscopy.
Tissue samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or on dry ice in a cryoprotective broth and stored frozen.
MICROBIOLOGY
E coli isolates were collected during studies of the rectal mucosa associated microflora; the methods and anaerobic precautions used for the isolation and characterisation of this flora are detailed elsewhere.
Briefly, each biopsy sample was washed thoroughly in three changes of diluent to remove faeces and adherent mucus.
Tissue associated microbes were liberated by maceration and cultured quantitatively on a range of bacteriological media.
E coli and other enterobacteria were isolated on either Columbia horse blood or MacConkey agars (Oxoid Ltd) incubated aerobically or microaerobically at 37°C for between 18 and 48 hours.
Counts were expressed as log 1 enterobacteria/g wet weight of biopsy tissue.
Isolates were identified using biochemical galleries (Sensititre AP60, Radiometer (UK) Ltd or API 20E, API-bioMérieux (UK) Ltd) but were not serotyped routinely.
Strains were stored frozen in cryoprotective broth for subsequent adhesion and hydrophobicity assays.
The number of strains of E coli from each patient examined for these properties was determined by the variety of colonial or biochemical phenotypes present.
Control E coli strains for adhesion and hydrophobicity assays were obtained from the Division of Enteric Pathogens, Central Public Health Laboratory, London.
Enteropathogenic (EPEC) strains E851/71 (0142:H6) and E2348/69 (0127:H6) exhibited both mannose resistant adherence and the EPEC adherence factor phenotype (EAF + ); strain Sc13 (01:H7) was non-adherent.
Strains E851/71 and Sc13 had been included as controls in studies of faecal E coli .
ADHESION STUDIES: HUMAN BUCCAL EPITHELIAL CELLS
Buccal epithelial cells from eight healthy laboratory staff were prepared using established methods.
Briefly, cells scraped from the buccal mucosa were dispersed in phosphate buffered saline (2 mM, pH 7.4), washed thrice by centrifugation to remove contaminating salivary flora and resuspended to circa 10 cells/ml in phosphate buffered saline with D-mannose (1%).
Overnight cultures of E coli on nutrient agar slopes were gently resuspended in phosphate buffered saline with D-mannose to a standard turbidity (MacFarland's no 9).
Equal volumes of bacterial and cell suspensions were mixed and shaken gently at room temperature for 30 minutes.
The buccal cells were deposited by vacuum onto a membrane filter (5 µm pore size, Millipore Ltd) and washed free of unbound bacteria with phosphate buffered saline.
Impression smears of the filters on glass slides were air dried, acetone fixed and Gram stained.
The percentage of buccal epithelial cells with >50 adherent Gram negative bacilli was recorded.
ADHESION STUDIES: HEp-2 CELLS
HEp-2 (ATCC CCL 23), obtained from the European Collection of Animal Cell Cultures (ECACC, PHLS, CAMR, Salisbury), were maintained in Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium (MEM, Gibco Ltd) containing Earle's salts, fetal calf serum (10%) and antibiotics incubated at 37°C in humidified atmospheres of either 10% CO 2 in air of 10% CO 2 , 5% O 2 in nitrogen.
HEp-2 cells were transferred to tissue culture treated microplates with 15mm wells, each containing a sterile 13mm glass coverslip.
The cells were grown in antibiotic free medium for two days to give a semiconfluent monolayer of cells on each coverslip.
The medium was replaced with fresh antibiotic free medium with D-mannose (1%) and inoculated with 25 µl of an overnight culture of each E coli isolate grown in peptone water with D-mannose (1%).
Control strains were included with each assay.
After three hours incubation at 37°C the medium was replaced with fresh medium and reincubated for a further three hours.
Each cover slip was washed thrice with phosphate buffered saline, fixed in 50% ethanol, dehydrated in absolute ethanol, air dried and Giemsa stained.
At least 100 cells from at least 10 microscopic fields were counted and scored for adherent bacilli.
The percentage of cells with >10 adherent bacilli was recorded and a strain was scored as adherent if at least 40% of the HEp-2 cells had adherent bacilli.
The pattern of adhesion of each isolate was also noted and recorded as diffuse, localised, or aggregative adherence.
Patient isolates and control strains were coded and tested blind on at least two separate occasions.
SALT AGGLUTINATION HYDROPHOBICITY TEST
The method used was that of Burke and Axon as adapted from that of Lindahl et al .
Ammonium sulphate solutions were prepared in phosphate buffered saline (2 mM, pH 7.2) over a concentration range of 4 M to 0.02 M in two-fold increments.
Twenty five microlitre aliquots of bacterial suspensions, grown on nutrient agar slopes and prepared as described in the buccal cell adhesion assay, were mixed with equal volumes of sale solutions on a clean glass slide.
The mixtures were gently rocked for two minutes and the lowest final concentration that gave macroscopic agglutination when read against a dark background was recorded.
Strains which autoagglutinated in buffer alone were accorded the value 0 mM.
In this assay, bacteria with higher surface hydrophobicity agglutinated at lower ammonium sulphate concentrations.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
Data were compared by statistical procedures as appropriate and a p value of <0.05 was considered significant.
The tests used included: χ 2 test, Fisher's Exact test (two-tailed), analysis of variance (ANOVA), distribution free ANOVA (Kruskal-Wallis), Mann-Whitney procedure and linear regression analysis (Statgraphics 2.6; Mercia Software Ltd).
Results
Rectal biopsy samples from the control group of non-inflammatory bowel disease patients were more likely to include E coli (13/15, 87%) as part of the mucosa associated flora than biopsy samples from patients with new, untreated active colitis (nine of 25, 36%; p<0.005), active colitis in relapse (eight of 20, 40%; p<0.02), or colitis in remission (26/44, 59%; p=0.11).
Counts of E coli , and a few rare isolates of other enterobacteria, were low compared with the total flora and were commonly present at levels close to the limit of detection.
Mean counts of enterobacteria (log 1 /g tissue) were diminished (p<0.05) in patients with active disease (non-inflammatory bowel disease controls 4.32 (0.92), new untreated active colitis 3.50 (0.88), colitis in active relapse 3.60 (0.96), and quiescent colitis 4.01 (0.99)).
Usually only a single phenotype was found.
Thirty nine per cent of biopsy samples from colitic patients contained β-haemolytic E coli compared with 8% of samples from non-inflammatory bowel disease control patients (p=0.10); the distribution of β-haemolytic strains was unrelated to disease severity.
BUCCAL EPITHELIAL CELL ADHESION ASSAY
We were unable to discover a donor whose buccal epithelial cells gave reproducible and unambiguous adherence and non-adherence with the appropriate control strains; buccal cells which bound adhesive E coli strains also tended to have a resident salivary flora which was not readily removed by washing.
Consequently, the assay was abandoned.
HEp-2 CELL ADHESION
One hundred and twenty four isolates of E coli were tested for adherence in vitro; 23 were from 13 non-inflammatory bowel disease control patients, 36 from patients with new ulcerative colitis (nine from nine patients with untreated active disease), 29 from patients with relapse of ulcerative colitis (nine from eight patients on presentation) and 36 from 26 patients with quiescent ulcerative colitis.
Figure 1 illustrates the appearance of HEp-2 cells with the strongly adherent control strain E851/71, a weakly diffuse adherent biopsy isolate and the non-adherent control strain Sc13.
Both of the positive control strains adhered strongly to HEp-2 cells.
The results of the adhesion assay for each isolate from each patient are shown in Figure 2; the median adherence values (with lower and upper quartiles) were 2% (0–8%), 2.5% (0–22%), 7.5% (2–18.5%), and 1% (0–13%) for non-inflammatory bowel disease controls, new ulcerative colitis, relapsed ulcerative colitis and quiescent ulcerative colitis, respectively.
There was no significant difference in the distribution of adherent isolates between any colitis patient group or between patients and non-inflammatory bowel disease controls (Kruskal-Wallis).
Overall, the number of truly adherent isolates (defined as those which attached to >40% of the cells) in the control group compared with the colitis groups (one of 23 control versus 15 of 101 colitics) was not significantly different (χ 2 =1.84, p=0.18); similarly, no difference was evident when the ulcerative colitis patients were analysed with respect to disease activity.
The majority of isolates showed a diffuse pattern of adhesion.
No aggregative adhesion was observed.
Only 10 isolates showed localised adhesion and seven of these adhered to less than 40% of HEp-2 cells; there was no obvious relationship between the presence of localised isolates and patient group or disease activity.
SALT AGGLUTINATION TEST
The adherent control strains differed in their surface hydrophobicity; strain E851/71 agglutinated at 2 M ammonium sulphate (final concentration) whereas strain E2348/69 agglutinated at 0.1 M. The non-adherent strain Sc13 agglutinated at 1 M.
Ninety six of the 124 E coli isolates from 66 patients with ulcerative volitis and from eight non-inflammatory bowel disease control patients were tested for hydrophobicity.
The distribution of salt concentrations at which the isolates agglutinated is shown in Figure 3.
There was no significant difference between the groups (p=0.27, ANOVA) nor any difference attributable to disease activity within the colitis groups (data not shown).
The pattern of adhesion (diffuse or localised) was not obviously related to hydrophobicity, although only nine localised isolates were tested.
The relationship between hydrophobicity, measured by the salt agglutination test, and mannose-resistant adhesion to HEp-2 cells of the isolates is shown in Figure 4.
The two parameters were not related (p=0.68).
Discussion
Faecal E coli from patients with ulcerative colitis have been shown to differ from isolates from non-colitics in being markedly more adherent to human epithelial cells in vitro.
This adhesion was not inhibited by D-mannose and was demonstable with both HeLa cells and human buccal epithelial cells.
Mannose resistant adhesion is a common attribute of enteropathogenic and pyelonephritogenic E coli from man and animals.
We were interested to examine the adhesive properties of E coli which we had isolated in studies of the flora closely associated with the rectal mucosa, a flora in which the expression of adhesins and other adhesion associated characteristics might be expected to be favoured or prerequisite, and to compare our results with those reported for faecal isolates.
We found HEp-2 cells were easy to grow and manipulate and gave reliable results in the adhesion studies; this is the cell line recommended for adhesion assay of enteropathogenic and other pathogenic E coli .
In contrast, we were unable to show consistent adhesion of control strains to any preparation of buccal epithelial cells from a panel of eight donors.
The success of this assay is dependent upon the choice of buccal cell donor (Burke, personal communication) and this casts some doubt on its usefulness and reproducibility; it is clearly a difficult technique to standardise between laboratories.
Giaffer and colleagues have recently used a slightly modified buccal cell adhesion assay to show that E coli from ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease patients were significantly more adhesive than isolates from a control group, but thiat this property was independent of disease activity, anatomical site and treatment.
We followed standard protocols for the preparation of bacterial suspensions for adhesion and hydrophobicity assays because the expression of adhesins is known to be affected by nutrient and growth conditions; however, as repeat assays with both control strains and patient isolates confirmed, such properties are otherwise quite stable phenotypic markers.
E coli from ulcerative colitis patients were marginally more adhesive for HEp-2 cells than those from non-inflammatory bowel disease control patients, regardless of disease activity.
The magnitude of difference, however, was far less marked than that reported by others.
Mannose resistant adherent E coli isolates from colitics were also reported to possess higher surface hydrophobicity.
Our results with E coli isolates from the rectal mucosa do not support either finding, a paradoxical result for a tissue-associated flora.
We noted a discrepancy between the salt agglutination test result for the control strain E851/71 reported by Burke and Axon and that reported here; there strain agglutinated at 0.4 M (final concentration) whereas our strain agglutinated at 2 M. In contrast, results for strain Sc13 were comparable.
We obtained our strain E851/ 71 from a different source.
Our isolates of E coli were from the rectal mucosa and were presumably closely associated with, if not actually attached to, the epithelium; loosely adherent bacteria were removed from the tissue by the vigorous washing procedure.
The complex mechanisms controlling such bacteria tissue associations are obscure.
Although some of our E coli isolates were hydrophobic and others expressed mannose resistant adhesins for HEp-2 cells, these two properties were not related.
Properties such as surface hydrophobicity and adhesion to epithelial cells are important properties of bacteria which colonise mucosal epithelia, but the mechanisms involved are clearly more complex than those described by these two assays alone.
It would be interesting to compare the adherent and hydrophobic properties of faecal and mucosa-associated E coli isolates from individual patients in order to resolve the discrepancies between the data presented here and those reported by others.
In contrast with the differences in adhesins and hydrophobicity, the mucosal isolates from colitic patients were more commonly β-haemolytic than were isolates from non-inflammatory bowel disease controls, as has been well documented for faecal isolates from colitics and also for Crohn's disease.
In our studies of the mucosa associated microflora of the rectum in ulcerative colitis we showed that E coli were isolated relatively infrequently during active disease and that their numbers increased with clinical improvement.
This was not related to any change in adhesive properties.
The control group of non-inflammatory bowel disease patients had a higher carriage rate of E coli than either patients with active colitis or colitis in remission.
Both the frequency of detection and the numbers of E coli in the mucosa-associated flora increased during treatment and with clinical improvement.
These data would argue against a pathogenic role for E coli in ulcerative colitis.
It is conceivable, however, that the normal mucosa associated enterobacteria are displaced by a more sparse population of pathogenic phenotypes which do not express mannose resistant adhesins.
Influence of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Abstract
The influences of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), hypergastrinaemia, age, and sex on gastric endocrine cell densities were studied in 48 patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome of either the sporadic type (n=31) or associated with MEN 1 (n=17).
The mean fundic argyrophil cell density was higher in women (p<0.05).
It showed no appreciable difference between young and old women but it declined with age in men.
The mean argyrophil cell density, when adjusted for sex, was higher (48.5%, p=0.06) in patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome associated with MEN 1 than in those with sporadic type disease.
This measurement was not significantly different between the two groups of patients when antisecretory treatments were considered.
In patients with sporadic type disease, fundic argyrophil cells showed a normal pattern (16%) or diffuse (71%) or linear (13%) hyperplasia.
In patients with MEN 1 diffuse and linear hyperplasia were of the same order (53% and 47%).
Furthermore, fundic argyrophil endocrine tumours developed in five of 17 — that is, 29.5% of patients with associated MEN 1 while none was seen in patients with sporadic type disease.
These tumours showed an exclusive or prominent enterochromaffin like cell population.
Antral gastrin and somatostatin cell densities and fasting serum gastrin concentrations were similar in the two groups of patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome.
Whatever the underlying mechanism for carcinoidosis, the risk of developing fundic enterochromaffin like cell tumours in Zollinger-Ellison sydrome patients who present with MEN 1 is probably higher than was initially estimated and suggests that regular follow up of these patients is necessary.
Proliferation of fundic argyrophil endocrine cells, mainly enterochromaffin like (ECL) cells, is mostly under the control of gastrin in animals and in man.
Indeed, lifelong hypergastrinaemia, induced by long term administration of inhibitors of gastric acid secretion or partial fundectomy as well as exogenous gastrin administration, have been associated with pronounced hyperplasia of gastric argyrophil cells or development of ECL cell carcinoids in rats.
In patients with the Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, who have long standing hypergastrinaemia originating from the rumour, proliferation of fundic argyrophil cells, mainly fo the ECL type, has also been observed.
In those patients, we and others have reported scattered cases of fundic argyrophil carcinoids.
Factors other than hypergastrinaemia may influence gastric endocrine cell populations, these include age in man and female sex, which, in the rat, seems to promote ECL cell proliferation and carcinoid development.
Especially, in man with the Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, fundic argyrophil endrocrine tumours have been shown to be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) syndrome.
This study in a large population of patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome aimed to search for a differential pattern of gastric endocrine cells between patients with sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and those with the syndrome and MEN 1, and to establish whether there is a real predominance of ECL cell tumours in the second group.
The influences of age and sex were also analysed.
Our histological observations enable us to confirm the strong influence of the above mentioned factors on fundic argyrophil cells and particularly that of MEN 1 since fundic argyrophil cell tumours were found to occur only in patients with MEN 1 with a prevalence of 29.5%.
Methods
PATIENTS
Forty eight patients (31 men, 17 women) with clinically biologically, and/or histologically documented Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and a median age of 53.5 years (range 17–83 years) were studied.
The median duration of disease (as defined by duration of symptoms) was 8 years (range 0.2–36 years) and the median time since diagnosis was 4.5 years (range 0–15 years).
Thirty one patients had sporadic Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and 17 had the syndrome associated with MEN 1.
Sixteen of the 17 patients with MEN 1 had hyperparathyroidism.
Other associated endocrine involvements were pituitary adenomas in four (three with prolactin oversecretion), insulinomas in three, glucagonoma in one, and bilateral hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex in one.
The characteristics of the two groups of patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome are given in Table I.
The study was approved by the Human Studies Committee, Ho 4pital Bichat, France.
METHODS
Except for eight patients who had never been treated with antisecretory drugs at the time of the study, the remainder took part in a prospective follow up protocol with estimation of several parameters, at each visit (every 6–12 months).
Patients underwent gastric endoscopy with biopsy specimens taken for determination of the histological endocrine cell status.
They also had the fasting serum gastrin concentration determined using standard radioimmunoassay for detection of CT-gastrin 17/34, sulfated or not.
The evolution of the gastrinoma tumoural process was assessed by endoscopy (for duodenal tumours), ultrasonography, and computed tomography.
Quantitative estimation of gastric endocrine cells
After a 12 hour fast, detailed upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed by the same two well trained endoscopists, using an Olympus GIF-XQ endoscope.
Particular care was taken to detect any mucosal abnormalities or polypoidal formations, which, if present, were biopsied.
In addition, mucosal biopsy specimens (mean, 5) were taken from the greater curvature on well defined areas in the corpus (at 50 cm from dental arches) and antrum (at 2–3 cm above pylorus) as described elsewhere.
They were fixed in Bouin's fluid for 24 hours and routinely processed and embedded in paraplast.
Tissues were sectioned at a thickness of 4 µm.
Instead of biopsy specimens, gastrectomy specimens were investigated for 10 patients: five were untreated and five were being followed up and had finally to undergo total gastrectomy.
These specimens were all fixed in Bouin's solution.
On oxyntic tissue sections, argyrophil endocrine cells (mainly ECL cells) were stinaed with the Grimelius silver impregnation technique.
On antral tissue sections, gastrin and somatostatin cells were immunostained using antibodies raised in our laboratory diluted to 1:1000 and the peroxidase-antiperoxidase complex (ICN immunobiological IL, USA) or the avidin-biotin peroxidase complex (ABC)(Vectastain ABC kit, Vector Labs Inc, CA, USA) methods.
Counts were always performed by the same two independent observers.
Nucleated endocrine cells were counted in adjacent but non-overlapping areas, along the entire length of well oriented mucosal sections using a calibrated ocular grid, 240 µm wide, at magnification ×400.
In practice, the mean (SEM) number of counts made per patient was 32 (2) for argyrophil cells and 438 (3) for gastrin and somatostatin cells.
The cell count represented the number of endocrine cell nuclei seen in a column of mucosa extending through the muscularis mucosa to the surface.
This cell column underlies a unit area of mucosal surface, the dimensions of which correspond to the thickness of the section and to the width of the ocular grid — that is, 960 µm.
Density was expressed as the mean number of cells per unit mucosal area (for more detail, see ref 12).
When tumours were present in the oxyntic mucosa of the biopsy specimens taken at the standard sites, counts were always done outside these areas.
Although gastrectomy specimens were carefully examined for possible endocrine cell abnormalities, quantitative estimation of endocrine cell densities have been performed strictly in areas corresponding to the site of biopsy specimens during gastroscopy.
Fundic argyrophil cell densities in patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome were compared with previously published values in 10 healthy control subjects.
In these controls, gastric endoscopy, serum gastrin, and gastric acid secretion were normal.
Mucosal oxyntic biopsy specimens were taken from the same defined area and tissues were processed in the same way as in the present study.
Qualitative evaluation of fundic argyrophil cell growth
As a complement to the estimation of cell densities, qualitative evaluation of argyrophil cell growth, according to the graduation recently established by Solcia et al , was performed independently by the two observers on the fundic specimens of the 48 patients, without knowledge of the source of the samples.
Histopathological examination of tumours
When fundic endocrine tumours were found, they were stained with the Grimelius argyrophilic method and immunostained with other endocrine markers such as neuron specific enolase antibodies (Immunotech, France) and monoclonal chromogranin A antibodies (Biosoft, Clonatec, France).
Masson's argentaffin reaction was applied to detect enterochromaffin (EC) cells.
Immunoreactivity with antibodies against gastrin, somatostatin, enteroglucagon (from our laboratory), human pancreatic polypeptide (ICN immunobiological), and peptide YY (Milab, Sweden) was studied using ABC technique (dilution of primary antibodies 1:1000).
Ultrastructural examination of tumours was performed under a Joel JEM-1200 EX electron microscope after routine glutaraldehyde-osmium tetroxide fixation.
Granule morphometry was done by measuring the diameter of all granules in at least 4–5 tumoral cells from each carcinoid examined, at a final magnification of 27000.
Statistical analysis
Gastric endocrine cell densities were expressed as mean (SEM).
For patients with iterative studies, only mean gastric cell densities obtained from the last set of biopsy specimens or from the gastrectomy specimen were taken in consideration.
Serum gastrin concentrations were given as median and range.
Results of the two groups were compared using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test.
Means of argyrophil cell densities were also compared taking sex into consideration (analysis of variance according to Fisher).
The level of significance was set at p<0.05.
Results
QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATION OF GASTRIC ENDOCRINE CELL DENSITIES
Marked hyperplasia of fundic argyrophil cells by reference to values found in healthy controls (mean density/unit area: 9.8 (0.9) cells, range 6–15) was noted in the groups of patients with either sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome or MEN 1 associated Zollinger-Ellison sydrome (33.5 (3.5) cells and 49.8 (8.8) cells, respectively, p<0.0001).
Comparison of these two groups showed that the mean argyrophil cell density was higher in the patients with MEN 1 than in those with sporadic disease (+48.5%), however, the difference did not reach statistical significance with the Mann-Whitney U test (p<0.10, Fig 1).
No change was noted between the group of patients with MEN 1 and that with sporadic Zollinger-Ellison sydrome when antral gastrin cell densities (30.8 (6.0)v 27.5 (2.6) cells-unit area, respectively), somatostatin cell densities (5.8 (0.8)v 6.0 (0.7) cells/unit area, respectively), or fasting serum gastrin concentrations (Table II) were compared.
Influence of antisecretory drugs
Further analysis according to the treatment administered indicated that the mean fundic argyrophil cell densities were always higher in MEN 1 than in sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome patients, whatever the treatment, but the difference was never significant (Fig 1).
Influence of sex and age
For all patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and independently of the groups to which they belonged, the mean fundic argyrophil cell density was significantly higher in women than in men, p<0.05 (Table III).
Analysis of this parameter in terms of age showed that argyrophil cell densities were roughly stable in young and old women while they declined in old men (Table III).
The mean fundic argyrophil cell density was higher in women with MEN 1 than in those with sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome but the difference was not significant.
A similar observation was made for men.
The decrease in argyrophil cell density was noted in old men whatever the group of Zollinger-Ellison sydrome patients to which they belonged (data not shown).
When mean fundic argyrophil cell densities in the group of patients with sporadic Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and that associated with MEN 1 were adjusted for sex, the difference almost reached statistical significance (analysis of variance F=3.965, p=0.06)(Fig 1).
QUALITATIVE OBSERVATION ON FUNDIC ARGYROPHIL CELLS
According to the recently proposed histopathological classification for fundic argyrophil cell growth, 16% of patients with sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome had normal values, 71% showed diffuse hyperplasia, and 13% linear hyperplasia.
Neither dysplasia nor carcinoid growth were seen.
In patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome associated with MEN 1, all cell densities were above the highest control value; 53% of these patients had diffuse hyperplasia and 47% linear hperplasia.
One patient had a dysplastic (precarcinoid) growth and five fundic argyrophil carcinoids associated with linear hyperplasia.
The latter developed within two of six women and three of 11 men — that is 29.5% of the MEN 1 patients.
Characteristics of patients with carcinoids are indicated in Table IV.
All these patients exhibited biological stigmata of primary hyperparathyroidism.
Progression of the gastrinoma was found in only three of the five patients.
Macroscopically, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed sessile polypoid formations, covered with normal or erythematous mucosa, sometimes eroded on the surface and difficult to visualise because of enlarged gastric folds.
At the time of first detection, they were usually located in the transitional zone between the corpus and antrum.
When they developed, they were distributed throughout the oxyntic mucosa.
Their diameter varied from 0.5–1.3 mm (cases no 3 and 5), 5–8 mm (case no 4), to several cm (3–4 cm on the gastrectomy specimen, case no 2).
In all patients tumours were intramucosal, infiltrating the muscularis mucosa (n=5) and the submucosa (n=4).
They were stained with the Grimelius silver method, reacted rather weakly with neuron specific enolase antibodies, and in general strongly with chromogranin A antibodies, while they did not express argent affinity or immunoreactivity for gastrin, somatostatin, enteroglucagon, human pancreatic polypeptide, and peptide YY.
Electron microscopy provided a conclusive diagnosis of ECL cell tumours in two cases.
A mixed population of ECL cells and cells resembling P cells by the granule size was observed in patient no 5 while very heterogeneous cellular proliferation with a prominent ECL cell component was found in a fourth case (case no 1).
In case no 3, microcarcinoids were discovered by chance on gastrectomy specimens, thus electron microscopy was not performed and cellular type(s) could not be determined.
Tumoral ECL cells were either typical, containing vesicular electron dense granules or atypical with non-vesicular granules displaying a coarsely granular structure.
Both aspects were seen in case no 2.
The mean diameter of ECL cell granules was 208 (16) nm (case no 4), 220 (10) nm (case no 5), and 246 (17) nm (case no 2)(Fig 2A and B).
The ultrastructural aspect of case no 1 has already been described.
Discussion
The present results provide new data on the influence that sex and age many have on fundic argyrophil endocrine cell populations in patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and emphasise the role that MEN 1 play in the ECL cell carcinoidosis development.
Our work indicates that fundic argyrophil cell densities were significantly higher in women than in men.
A difference in these cell numbers related to sex has already been pointed out in rats given omeprazole.
Furthermore, the percentage of animals who developed tumours was much higher in females than in males.
It has also been shown recently that, in patients with untreated duodenal ulcer, argyrophil cells were significantly more numerous in women than in men.
However, the influence that sexual hormones per se may have on fundic argyrophil cell proliferation is unknown.
We also confirm in our patients the previous observations made in normal subjects by Green et al , concerning the evolution of endocrine cell densities with age.
Indeed, while fundic argyrophil cell densities declined with age in men, no such tendency was evident in women.
Comparing the two groups of patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, there was no difference in gastrin and somatostatin cell densities or in the fasting serum gastrin concentration.
However, as reported by others in a few patients, higher numbers of dundic argyrophil cells (+48.5%) were observed in patients with MEN 1 associated than sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome.
Although the difference was not quite significant (p=0.06), this observation is certainly of biological interest since it seems that the risk of ECL cell carcinoidosis exists essentially in those with MEN 1 associated Zollinger-Ellison sydrome.
Moreover, histopathological examination of fundic argyrophil cell growth allowed us to make several observations.
In patients with sporadic type Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, in addition to a normal pattern of argyrophil cells (in 16%), cell hyperplasia was mainly diffuse (71%).
In patients with MEN 1 associated Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, howeve, diffuse and linear cell hyperplasia were roughly of the same order (53% and 47%, respectively).
No hyperplasia strictly corresponding to the micronodular definition or as described in atrophic gastritis was observed.
Nevertheless, argyrophil micronodules were often seen, scattered in the fundic mucosa.
In our series, fundic argyrophil cell tumours developed in five of 17 patients with MEN 1 while none was seen in the 31 patients with sporadic Zollinger-Ellison sydrome, even when argyrophil cell hyperplasia was as marked as in some patients with tumours.
Furthermore, a precarcinoid growth was also noted in another patient with MEN 1.
In an earlier report, we have mentioned two patients with fundic argyrophil carcinoid growths among those studied.
One case was previously published and the second was in a patient in whom the first polyp was discovered and biopsied in December 1986.
Since that time the second patient's lesion had progressed in such a way that gastrectomy had to be performed in January 1991 and fundic argyrophil cell tumours were discovered in three other patients and were progressing in two of them.
Although ECL cell type was predominant in all tumours, other endocrine cell types have been noted in two tumours.
The clinical and biological profiles of Zollinger-Ellison sydrome patients who develop fundic ECL cell tumours cannot be determined from the study of such a small number of cases.
Indeed, gastrinoma growth did not appear as an essential factor and, as shown in Table IV, neither sex, level of hypergastrinaemia, duration of disease, nor the type and duration of antisecretory treatment can, independently, account for neoplastic changes.
Solcia et al , in a recent review of the published reports, gathered 14 cases of fundic argyrophil carcinoids (including our first two cases), all occurring in patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and MEN 1.
Detailed information on nine cases indicated that carcinoids were found in five women and four men: this did not suggest a prominent sex influence.
In addition, these authors reported the personal communication of three possible unpublished cases of carcinoids developing in patients with sporadic Zollinger-Ellison sydrome.
All patients with MEN 1 who had fundic carcinoid tumours had hyperparathyroidism and one may question the role played by humoral factors such as serum calcium or parathormone, or both.
In our patients, values for these two factors varied considerable between individual as well as within individuals, during the period of follow up.
The causal factor in carcinoidosis is perhaps genetic, as discussed by others.
Whatever the underlying mechanism, the risk of developing fundic argyrophil endocrine tumours within the patients with Zollinger-Ellison sydrome and MEN 1 is probably higher than initially estimated and suggests regular survey of these peculiar patients.
Coeliac disease: characterisation of monoclonal antibodies raised against a synthetic peptide corresponding to amino acid residues 206–217 of A-gliadin
Abstract
A dodecapeptide of A-gliadin, which shares amino acid homologies with the E1b protein of adenovirus 12, was used to produce murine monoclonal antibodies.
Five monoclonal antibodies were produced and were screened by enzyme linked immunosorbant assay, immunodot assay, and immunoblotting.
The antibodies were tested against whole wheat gliadin and its α, β, and γ subfractions, and the prolamins of rye, barley, oats, maize, millet, rice, and sorghum.
Four of the five antibodies cross reacted with one or more of the coeliac non-toxic cereals — maize, millet, sorghum, and rice.
The monoclonal antibody that did not cross react with these non-toxic cereals, did not recognise Frazer's fraction III, a peptic-tryptic digest of wheat gluten which is known to be toxic.
The results suggest that the A-gliadin dodecapeptife shares a region of homology with cereals that do not exacerbate coeliac disease.
This study does not support the hypothesis that prior infection with adenovirus 12 is a precipitating factor in coeliac disease.
Coeliac disease is characterised by malabsorbtion secondary to damage of the normal villous architecture of the small bowel.
The condition is thought to represent an aberrant HLA class II restricted immune response, mediated by antigen specific T cells sensitive to certain cereal peptides.
Coeliac disease is exacerbated by ingestion of wheat, rye, barley, and probably oats.
The toxic fraction resides in the ethanol soluble storage protein, the prolamin fraction.
Related cereals including mazie, millet, sorghum, and rice, are not toxic to patients with coeliac disease.
Efforts to identify the coeliac toxic amino acid sequence, which presumably acts as a T cell immunogen, have focussed on the wheat prolamin, gliadin, whose four subfractions α, Β, and γ, are thought to be toxic to patients with coeliac disease.
The complete amino acid sequence of A-gliadin, one of the α gliadins, has been reported.
Kagnoff has reported a region of sequence homology between part of A-gliadin and the 54 kD E1b protein of adenovirus 12.
This homology is found in domain V of A-gliadin, between amino acid residues 206–217, which shares an identical pentapeptide (residues 211–215) and three other amino acid identities with the E1b protein.
It was postulated that prior infection with adenovirus 12 might predispose genetically susceptible individuals to the later development of coeliac disease.
There have been conflicting reports of raised levels of neutralising, circulating antibodies to adenovirus 12 in coeliac disease patients.
Persistent infection with adenovirus 12 has not been detected in the small bowel of patients with coeliac disease.
We wished to demonstrate whether epitopes contained within the amino acid sequence 206–217 of A-gliadin are specific to coeliac toxic cereals.
Monoclonal antibodies have been raised against a synthetic peptide corresponding to this part of A-gliadin and their cross reactivities with prolamins that are toxic and non-toxic to patients with coeliac disease have been investigated.
Methods
PREPARATION OF ANTIGENS
A synthetic dodecapeptide of A-gliadin (residues 206–217) was kindly provided by Dr D Jewell, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, and was conjugated to tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) to act as a carrier using 0.05% gluteraldehyde.
Whole gliadin and its α, Β, γ, and  ta; subfractions were prepared.
The purity of the subfractions was checked by aluminium lactate starch gel electrophoresis.
Visualisation of the gel, which had been overloaded with protein, showed only minimal cross contamination of the subfractions, with the exception of Β gliadin, which may have been contaminated with 5% of α and γ gliadins.
Prolamins from rye, barley, oats, millet, sorghum, maize, and rice were extracted from their respective flours at a concentration of 500 mg/ml in 50% ethanol.
Frazer's fraction III was prepared as described.
The protein contents of the cereal fractions were measured.
IMMUNISATION
Balb c mice that had been maintained on a gluten free diet for many generations in order to overcome oral tolerance to gliadin, were primed subcutaneously with 0.1 ml of BCG, vaccine.
Two, 4, and 6 weeks later, the mice were injected with 30 µg of the synthetic peptide conjugate in Freund's adjuvant.
Murine antisera were screened against unfractionated gliadin by ELISA, as described below.
Non-immunised mice on a gluten free diet served as controls.
Thirty µg of peptide conjugate were then injected intravenously.
PRODUCTION OF MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
Splenocytes were fused with murine myeloma cells (P3X63/Ag 8.653) using standard techniques.
Hybridomas were screened by ELISA against unfractionated gliadin and those giving an optical density (OD) greater than 1.5 were single cell cloned.
Clones were screened against unfractionated gliadin and expanded.
ELISA
ELISAs were performed as previously described.
Plates were coated with unfractionated gliadin; its α, Β, γ, and  ta; subfractions; rye; barley; oats; maize; millet; or sorghum prolamins, at concentrations of 50 µg/ml in 70% ethanol.
Frazers fraction III (25 µg/ml) was dissolved in carbonate-bicarbonate buffer, pH 9.6.
Bovine serum albumin (BSA), 50 mg/ml, served as a negative control.
An irrelevant monoclonal antibody, J13, to human small intestinal brush border membranes served as a negative control.
IMMUNODOT BINDING ASSAYS
These were performed as previously described.
Solutions of wheat gliadin and its subfractions, FFIII, rye, barley, and oat prolamins were used at a concentration of 500 µg/ml of Lowry positive protein.
Casein and ovalbumin, 500 µg/ ml, served as negative controls.
Extracts of 500 mg/ml of the flours of maize, rice, millet, and sorghum were applied directly to the nitrocellulose sheets irrespective of prolamin content.
Monoclonal antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:2.
A control antibody was used as above.
SAS-PAGE AND IMMUNBLOTTING
This was performed as described.
Seven µg of antigen were used per track.
Blots were probed with monoclonal antibody supernatant at a dilution of 1:2.
Results
IMMUNISATION
Two mice immunised with the synthetic peptide conjugate showed serum titres to whole gliadin of 1:6400 and 1:12800 compared with a titre of 1:800 for a non-immunised mouse.
The mouse with the highest titre was used.
PRODUCTION OF MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
The supernatants from 33 of the 108 wells gave positive ELISA readings against unfractionated gliadin; 12 with an OD greater than 1.5 were cloned.
Five stable clones originating from five separate hybridomas were obtained.
ELISA
The titres of the five monoclonal antibodies produced against the synthetic A-gliadin peptide and the control antibody J13 are shown in Table I. Figure 1 shows titration curves for three of the antibodies.
All antibodies cross reacted with gliadin and its α, Β, and γ subfractions.
Titres against  ta; gliadin were generally low.
The monoclonal antibodies showed no, or very low, titres to Frazer's fraction III, with the exception of KG42.
Three of the antibodies — KG9, KG42, and KG62 — showed cross reaction with the non-toxic cereals, particularly millet and maize.
IMMUNODOT ASSAY
The results for the test and control antibodies are presented in Table II.
The dot assay obtained for KG42 is shown in Figure 2.
All five antibodies cross reacted with gliadin and its α, Β, and γ subfractions.
Spots obtained with  ta; gliadin were generally very weak, with the exception of KG42 which gave a strong spot.
KG9, KG42, and KG62 cross reacted with non-toxic maize, millet, sorghum, and rice confirming qualitatively rhe results of ELISA assays.
KG53 reacted with gliadin and its subfractions, but did not react with the non-toxic cereals.
KG32 showed cross reaction with rice, which was not apparent using ELISA.
KG42 gave only a faint trace with Frazer's fraction III, the others did not react.
SDS-PAGE AND WESTERN BLOTTING
Binding was observed between antibody KG9 and rice and millet prolamins; maize prolains displayed very weak bands and sorghum did not react in this system.
Discussion
Coeliac disease probably represents an aberrant immune response by antigen specific T cells of the small intestine to certain cereal peptides.
It has been suggested that a peptide within A-gliadin, which has sequence homology with the E1b protein of adenovirus 12, may be an important epitope in the generation of such an aberrant immune response.
We wished to establish whether epitopes within this peptide are specific to those cereal prolamins known to be toxic to patients with coeliac disease.
We have raised five monoclonal antibodies against a synthetic dodecapeptide of A-gliadin.
Four of these antibodies showed cross reactivity with cereals that are not toxic in coeliac disease.
Some differences were observed between the results obtained using ELISA and those with dot assay, which is considered to be more sensitive than ELISA.
This may be explained, at least in part, by the greater antigen binding capacity of the solid phase, and might explain why some of the antibodies showed reactivity with antigens bound to nitrocellulose which they failed to recognised by ELISA.
SDS-PAGE did not show the binding of antibody KG9 to sorghum prolamins which was observed using dot assay.
This may be the result of a reduction in antigenicity caused by SDS.
Antibody KG53 did not react with the non-toxic cereals, suggesting that part of the dodecapeptide is unique to the toxic cereals.
However, KG53 did not react with Frazer's frunction III, a physiological peptic-tryptic digest of gluten that is toxic in coeliac disease.
This implies that the antibody is recognising an epitope that is cleaved by one of the digestive enzymes pepsin or trypsin.
Thus, it seems unlikely that KG53 recognises a toxic amino acid sequence within A-gliadin.
The amino acid sequence of the A-gliadin peptide that has homology with the E1b protein of adenovirus 12 is: -Leu-Gly-Gln-Gly-Ser-Phe-Arg-Pro-Ser-Gln-Gln-Asn-.
The amine and carboxyl linkages of phenylalanine residues are susceptible to attack by pepsin and it is probable that the action of pepsin, either in vivo or during the preparation of Frazer's frunction III, cleaves the dodecapeptide.
Controversy exists as to the nature of the toxic moiety within gliadin.
Analysis of A-gliadin peptides, including amino-acid residues 211–217, has shown that a potentially antigenic Β-reverse turn is the predominant structural feature, involving residues -Arg-Pro-Ser-Gln-, which are also present in adenovirus 12.
Organ culture studies have shown that the tetrapeptide, -Pro-Ser-Gln-Gln-, is found in all coeliac active peptides.
Residues 206–217 of A-gliadin incorporate this motif; however, in adenovirus 12 the final glutamine is replaced by a cysteine residue.
In vitro studies have shown significant reactions to both synthetic A-gliadin and adenovirus 12 peptides from the regions of homology by leukocytes from coeliac disease patients.
However, a recent report using similar methodology, failed to show coeliac activity of a peptide containing the amino acid sequence 211–217 of A-gliadin.
Infusion of 100 mg of the A-gliadin dodecapeptide caused some, but not significant, histological abnormalities in the jejunal mucosa of two treated ccoeliac disease patients.
However, we have shown that 600 mg of infused unfractionated gliadin produced significant changes in the crypt/villus ratio and epithelial cell height, with a doublingof the intraepithelial lymphocyte count within four hours of the challenge.
Even assuming that gliadin contains more than one toxic moiety, a pure peptide would contain considerably more of the toxic moiety on a molar basis than whole gliadin.
Allowing for intersubject variability, one night still expect to see marked changes in the histology of the small bowel after infusion of 100 mg of pure peptide.
The data presented here suggest that there are sequence homologies between amino acid residues 206–217 of A-gliadin and non-toxic prolamins.
Coeliac disease is thought to be a T cell mediated disorder, and since we have used monoclonal antibodies to dissect the antigenicity of these cereal peptides, we will have detected B cell epitopes within the peptides.
The possibility therefore exists that there are specific T cell epitopes within the adenovirus 12 E1b protein — A-gliadin sequence homology that are confined to coeliac toxic prolamins.
Despite this qualification, we feel that the data presented do not support the hypothesis that prior infection with adenovirus 12 is a precipitating factor in coeliac disease.
Correlation between echographic gastric emptying and appetite; influence of psyllium
Abstract
The correlation between ultrasonographic gastric emptying and appetite was studied.
Echographic evaluation of gastric emptying by measurement of the antral vertical diameter and assessment of sensations of hunger and satiety using analogue visual scales were performed simultaneously in 12 healthy volunteers.
Measurements were carried out after the intake of 19.8 g psyllium or placebo in a randomised, crossover, double blind trial.
The correlation between echographic gastric emptying and sensations of hunger and satiety was excellent (p<0.001) after the intake of either psyllium or placebo.
Psyllium significantly delayed gastric emptying from the third hour after a meal.
It increased the sensation of satiety and decreased hunger at the sixth hour after the meal.
The association between echographic measurement and visual scales is a simple method of evaluating the relationship between the stomach and appetite.
The pharmacodynamic effect of psyllium should be confirmed by longterm therapeutic trials.
Real time ultrasound is a simple method of measuring gastric emptying which has been validated by previous studies.
Correlated with scintigraphic measurements, it could become the method of choice in evaluating the role of gastric distention in the regulation of appetite and assessing the efficacy of drugs on sensations of hunger and satiety.
The main aim of this study was to determine whether there was a correlation between postprandial gastric volume measured by echography and the sensations of hunger and satiety evaluated by a validated visual analogue scale.
The second aim was to assess whether, as a bulking agent, psyllium could modify echographic gastric emptying time and, in parallel, sensations of hunger and satiety.
Methods
SUBJECTS
This study was designed as an eight day randomised, crossover, double blind, placebo controlled trial.
Twelve healthy volunteers with no past medical history but weighing at least 10% more than their ideal weight gave written informed consent to the protocol which was approved by the ethics committee of the Ho 4pital Lariboisière.
After fasting for four hours, at midday on the first day, the patients received three sachets each containing 3.6 g psyllium or three sachets of placebo dissolved in 100 ml water.
One minute later, the patients consumed a standard meal (444 Kcal, 600 ml, 40 g carbohydrates, 23 g lipids, 21 g proteins).
Echographic evaluation of gastric emptying was obtained by measuring the prespinal vertical antral diameter just before the intake of drugs, and every hour over a six hour period, using an ATL Ultramark 4 ultrasound scanner equipped with a 3.5 MHz probe.
Before and after eating the meal and every hour for six hours, the subjects were asked to record hungr sensations on a 100 mm vertical visual analogue scale, placing crosses on lines representing ranges from ‘not hungry at all’ =0 to ‘as huntry as possible’=100.
The satiety sensation was recorded after the meal and every hour for six hours using the same kind of visual analogue scale with ‘empty stomach’ =0 and ‘full’=100.
They were also asked to record the time at which hunger returned.
After a seven day washout period, the same measurements were taken under the same conditions after intake of the other treatment being studied.
For the six hours after the test meal, the subjects were instructed to remain quiet.
Data are expressed as mean (SEM) ANOVA, a bilateral paired t test and linear correlation coefficients using X-Y pairs were performed for statistical analysis.
Results
The trial was conducted in nine women and three men with a mean age of 43.2 (4.3) years (18–65) and a mean weight of 73.3 (1.8) kg (68–85).
All weighed at least 10% more than their ideal reference weight (63.0 (1.3) kg).
As shown in the Figure, the correlation between the echographic measurements of gastric emptying and the visual analogue scale was excellent.
This correlation was observed between gastric emptying and hunger during psyllium intake (R=0.989, p=0.0001) or after placebo (R=0.957, p=0.0007).
It was also observed between gastric emptying and satiety during psyllium intake (R=0.987, p=0.0001) or after placebo (R=0.961, p=0.0006).
This study confirmed that the decrease of the sensation of satiety is correlated with the increase of hunger.
Compared with placebo (AVONA), psyllium slowed echographic gastric emptying from the third hour (Table).
Between the third and sixth hour, the relative increase in gastric emptying time under psyllium was between 10% and 20% (p<0.05).
As far as the hunger and satiety sensations (Table) were concerned, a significant difference was only observed at the sixth hour with hunger being significantly more marked under placebo than under psyllium (73 (6)v 54 (6), p=0.05) and satiety more prolonged under psyllium than under placebo (44 (7)v 21 (6), p=0.05).
The absence of any period effect or period treatment interaction was checked.
The return of hunger after the test meal was slightly delayed by psyllium (342 (30) minutes v 285 (23)) but the difference was not statistically significant.
During the course of the trial, one patient complained of regurgitation and another of diarrhoea, but in both cases these mild signs of intolerance occurred under placebo.
Discussion
The role of gastric distention in the regulation of appetite is well established.
A simple, non-invasive method which could be used in clinical pharmacology to monitor the close relationship between these two variables has so far been lacking.
Our study clearly shows that a simple echographic measurement of the antral diameter correlates perfectly with sensations of hunger and satiety.
Our echographic measurement of the antrum is too schematic for a physiological study of gastric motility but it is sufficient for use in crossover trials where each subject acts as his/ her own control.
The reproducibility of the measurement and the correlation between antral surface, echographic gastric volume and scintigraphic measurements are well demonstrated.
Our study confirms the reliability and validity of the visual analogue scale in short term trials.
The combination of these two measurements could be very useful in studies involving food intake in obese patients and its pharmacological regulation and also provide a clearer understanding of the physiological relationship between the stomach and appetite.
In this study, we found that in obese patients psyllium moderately but significantly delays gastric emptying of a solid meal.
This is associated with an extension of the duration of satiety and a delay in the appearance of hunger.
Like pectin, psyllium forms a gel which is not digested or absorbed, thereby increasing the viscosity of the meal.
By slowing gastric emptying, it increases the duration of gastric distention which explains the persistent impression of satiety at the sixth hour.
This short, single dose study, however, is not sufficient to confirm the therapeutic value of psyllium in the longterm reduction of food intake in overweight patients, but by delaying the return of hunger, it could help patients to comply with diets.
In conclusion, we have shown that it is simple to simultaneously measure echographic gastric emptying and sensations of hunger and satiety.
Perfectly correlated among themselves, these measurements allow us to propose a simple and non-nvasive model for use in clinical pharmacology.
It has been shown that with psyllium that a drug which delays the gastric emptying induces changes in the sensations of satiety and hunger.
A single dose of psyllium has a moderate effect on gastric emptying and appetite, but further research is needed to define its efficacy on weight loss.
Anorectal function in patients with complete supraconal spinal cord lesions
Abstract
Anorectal manometry and sphincter electromyography were performed in 23 patients with complete supraconal traumatic spinal injuries and 30 age and sex matched control subjects.
Basal pressures in the spinal group were similar to those in normal subjects but conscious control of sphincter activity was abolished in all spinal patients.
Discriminant rectal sensation was also abolished during rectal distention, but 40% of patients experienced a dull pelvic ache at maximum levels of distension.
Phasic rectal contraction and anal relaxation were present but exaggerated and induced at lower distending volumes than in normal subjects.
The configuration of the rectal pressure/volume relationship was linear in patients compared with a reversed ‘S’ shape in normal subjects.
The external anal sphincter response to rectal distension was noticeably attenuated, reinforcing the view that this spinal reflex is heavily modulated by supraspinal centres under normal circumstances.
The external anal sphincter response to increases in abdominal pressure was also attenuated, and the anal pressures were strongly correlated with the level of the lesion and the abdominal pressure the patient could generate.
No spinal patient showed a decrease in external anal sphincter activity during straining ‘as if to defecate’.
The exaggerated anorectal smooth muscle responses to rectal distension and the attenuated external sphincter response explain why patients with complete supraconal spinal lesions experience uncontrollable reflex defecation, while the persistance of external anal sphincter contraction and the absence of any external anal sphincter relaxation during straining ‘as if to defecate’ might explain the difficulty that these patients have in consciously expelling rectal contests.
One of the most distressing aspects of spinal injury is an inability to regulate bowel function.
Patients with complete supraconal lesions lose conscious control of defecation.
Although they may be able to defecate reflexly by anorectal stimulation, evacuation is often inefficient and incomplete, resulting in a high incidence of constipation and faecal incontinence.
A number of studies have investigated the disorders of defecation in spinally injured people, but most involve patients with incomplete lesions at different sites and caused by different mechanisms.
In a previous study from our unit, we found that although patients with incomplete supraconal lesions retained the ability to contract their spincters, damage to the long sensory and motor pathways was evident in the weak squeeze pressures and blunted rectal sensation.
In addition the external anal sphincter response to rectal distension and increased intra-abdominal pressure was often enhanced in patients compared with normal subjects, rectal compliance was abnormally low, anal relaxation and rectal phasic contractile responses to rectal distension were exaggerated, and there was no rebound increase in internal anal sphincter tone after rectal distension.
This study aimed to use the same methods to examine anorectal function in 23 patients with complete supraconal spinal cord lesions and to determinate the relationship between the site of the lesion and the existence of inconsistent phenomena.
The results are compared with those from 30 age and sex matched controls.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Twenty three patients with complete traumatic supraconal spinal cord lesions were studied.
The level of lesions was determined by detailed clinical neurological tests (both motor and sensory functions)(Table I).
The group comprised 18 men and five women, aged 18–53 years (mean 30.3).
The mean time since injury varied from 2–13 years (mean 4.4).
Twenty one patients stimulated bowel movements with either stimulant solutions (Dulcolax or Biscocodyl) or suppositories, though 15 of these had to complete rectal evacuation manually.
Two patients used digital evacuation alone.
The control group consisted of 30 healthy subjects.
There were 20 men and 10 women aged 16–60 years (mean 35).
All passed stools of normal consistency at a frequency that varied from twice a day to three times a week.
None had evidence of neurological disease or bowel disturbance.
Each subject gave written informed consent for the study to be carried out and the protocol was approved by the ethical committee of the Sheffield Area Health Authority.
METHODS
With the subject in the left lateral position and the hips flexed to 90°, a polyvinyl, seven lumen manometric probe with an external diameter of 4 mm was inserted into the rectum so that the manometric side holes were situated 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 15, and 18 cm from the anal verge.
Each side hole was perfused with water at a rate of 0.2 ml/ minute using a hydraulic capillary infusion system (Andorfer Medical Specialities Inc, Greendale, Wisconsin, USA).
Pressures were measured using external strain gauge transducers (Druck Ltd, Groby, Leicestershire, UK) which were situated in each infusion line and connected via amplifiers to an eight channel chart recorder (Lectromed MT8 PX, Ormed Ltd, Welwyn Garden City, UK).
A 6 cm length of distensible latex balloon was tied between 5 and 11 cm from the anal verge and used to inflate the rectum.
The pressure in the rectal balloon was monitored using a non-perfused water filled catheter with a separate side hole within the balloon.
The electrical activities of the internal and external anal sphincters were recorded using bipolar electrodes, consisting of two trimel coated wires (diameter=0.025 mm) with their ends bared, hooked and offset to avoid electrical contact.
In al of the patients and 50% of the control subjects, one pair of electrodes was inserted through the perianal skin into the superficial external anal sphincter and another pair was inserted through the anal epithelium into the internal anal sphincter.
The remainder of the controls had a single pair of electrodes inserted into the intersphincteric groove, where they could detect the activities of both sphincters.
The electrodes were attached to the chart recorder via an amplifier (Gould Electronic Ltd, Ilford, Essex, UK).
The filter settings were 0.1 to 10 Hz for the internal and 10 Hz-10 KHz for the external anal sphincter.
The activity of the internal anal sphincter was displayed on the chart as regular oscillations while the external anal sphincter signal was integrated and displayed as an elevation above the baseline.
PROTOCOL
No bowel preparation was used.
The spinal patients were instructed to empty their bowels in their usual manner the night before the test while the normal subjects were encouraged to defecate before the study if they felt the need to do so.
Digital rectal examination was performed before insertion of the tube to ensure that the rectum was empty.
After insertion of the tube, anorectal motility was measured under resting conditions for 20 minutes.
Subjects were then asked to carry out the following manoeuvres:(1) maximum voluntary contraction of the sphincter for 20 seconds;(2) strain as if to defecate for at least five seconds; and (3) increase intra-abdominal pressure by forcibly expiring against a resistance (blowing up a party baloon).
Each manoeuvre was repeated after a gap of one minute.
After a rest of five minutes the rectal balloon was serially inflated with 10, 20, 40, 60, and 100 ml of air (intermittent inflation).
Each inflation was maintained for one minute and separated by a gap of at least one minute for inflation with the subsequent volume.
After a further rest period of 10 minutes the balloon was inflated with water at a constant rate of 50 ml/minute using a peristaltic pump (Minipuls 3, Gilson 312, Villiers Le Bel, France)(ramp inflation).
ANALYSIS OF RECORDS
The resting record was analysed to determine the highest pressure recorded in the anal canal after insertion of the probe (maximum basal pressure) and then 20 minutes later, after it had achieved a stable baseline (minimum basal pressure).
The presence or absence of increases in anal pressures and external sphincter electromyographic activity during a maximum squeeze, straining ‘as if to defecate’, and forcibly expiring against a fixed resistance (blowing up a party balloon) were noted, and where relevant the responses quantified.
During intermittent rectal distension, the following indices were recorded:
(1) The number and amplitude of rectal contractions recorded 15 cm from the anal verge.
(A rectal contraction was defined as a pressure increase of more than 5 cmH 2 O sustained for at least three seconds).
(2) The lowest anal pressure achieved during anal relaxation (residual pressure) and the duration of relaxation.
(3) The occurrence and duration of external anal sphincter activity during rectal distension.
The following indices were recorded during ramp inflation:(1) the rectal pressure/volume relationship (pressures recorded during inflation of the balloon outside the body were subtracted from the values obtained in situ);(2) the frequency and amplitude of rectal contractions;(3) maximum distension volumes.
In normal subjects inflation was ceased when pelvic discomfort was experienced.
In the spinal patients, the maximum distension volume was taken to be either when the patients experienced autonomic symptoms or when the balloon was expelled automatically.
The statistical significance of the differences in pressure obtained was assessed using analysis of variance followed by Sheffe's method for multiple comparison.
χ 2 tests with Yates's correction were used to determine the differences between the proportion of subjects in each group.
Results
No differences were observed between male and female spinal patients for any of the variables tested in this study.
BASAL PRESSURE
In all control and spinal patients studied, there was an initial increase in external anal sphincter electromyographic activity on insertion of the anorectal tube which then declined in concert with the anal pressure to reach a stable baseline.
The time taken to achieve a stable baseline was shorter in spinal patients compared with controls (median (range): 5 (0–10) minutes v 15 (10–15) minutes; p<0.05).
The minimum basal pressures in patients with complete supraconal spinal lesions were similar to those seen in control subjects (mean (SD) 50 (8)v 55 (6) cmH 2 O), although the maximal basal pressures recorded immediately after tube insertion were lower (77 (9)v 95 (6) cmH 2 O, p<0.005).
CONSCIOUS CONTROL OF THE EXTERNAL SPHINCTER
All normal subjects could control their external sphincter at will, producing a rise in pressure (maximum squeeze pressure=238 (18) cmH 2 O) and an increase in electromyographic activity of the external sphincter.
In contrast, none of the spinal patients produced an increase in anal pressure or an increase in external anal sphincter activity when asked to contract their sphincter.
RESPONSE TO INCREASES IN INTRA-ABDOMINAL PRESSURE
Blowing up the balloon
Increasing intra-abdominal pressure by asking subjects to blow up a balloon produced an increase in anal pressure in both controls and spinal patients, returning to the baseline after the action ceased.
The rise in anal pressure during the manoeuvre was much lower in spinal patients than in controls (Fig 1) and varied according to the level of the spinal lesion.
Patients with cervical lesions produced the smallest rise (mean (SD) 3 (1) cmH 2 O) compared with upper (T1-T5) and lower thoracic (T6-T12) injuries (22 (5) cmH 2 O and 54 (13) cmH 2 O respectively; p<0.01).
These values were directly proportional to the increase in intra-abdominal pressure, indicated by the rise in rectal pressure (Fig 2).
Straining
Increasing intra-abdominal pressure by straining as if to defecate in control subjects produced a variety of anal pressure waveforms incorporating both anal contraction and anal relaxation (Table II), and corresponding with the external anal sphincter myoelectrical activity.
The anal pressure profile in spinal patients always resembled that seen during rises in intra-abdominal pressure caused by inflating the balloon and did not show any anal relaxation or reduction in external anal sphincter activity.
RESPONSES TO RAMP DISTENSION OF THE RECTUM
Rectal sensation
Normal subjects experienced a range of sensations during inflation of a rectal balloon, starting with an initial perception at volumes of around 10 ml and ranging through sensations of wind and desire to defecate to pain when the inflation was stopped.
Fourteen patients with complete supraconal lesions did not report any sensation during rectal distension, the remaining nine reported a non-specific pelvic sensation that did not prevent further inflation of the rectal balloon.
None of the four patients with cervical lesions experienced pelvic sensation.
Maximum tolerable volume
As rectal volumes increased, all spinal patients with lesions above T6 (n=11) experienced some degree of autonomic dysreflexia that prevented further rectal distension.
This was manifest principally as flushing of the skin and sweating above the level of the lesion.
The remaining 12 patients expelled the balloon automatically.
The maximum tolerable volumes during ramp inflation were not significantly different in patients with complete supraconal lesions compared with normal subjects (subjects: mean (SD) 203 (14) ml; spinal patients: 238 (16) ml), although clearly the criteria for the end-point differed in each group.
Rectal pressure/volume relationships
The average pressure/volume relationship did not have the characteristic reversed ‘S’ shape characteristics seen in normal subjects and was linear in configuration (Fig 3).
The initial slope was more shallow than in normal subjects (median: 0.19 v 0.57 cmH 2 O/ml, Kruskal-Wallis test, p<0.05) but later the slope became steeper (median: 0.12 v 0.04 cmH 2 O/ml, p<0.05).
Rectal contraction
Rectal contractions occurred in all normal and spinal patients on ramp inflation with increasing frequency, duration, and amplitude as distension of the rectum increased.
Both the mean amplitude (spinal patients 31 (1) cmH 2 O, controls 15 (2) cmH 2 O) and duration (spinal patients 25 (6) seconds, controls 8 (1) seconds) of contractions in the spinal group were greater than in normal subjects (p<0.001), although the number of contractions seen throughout ramp inflation to 200 ml were similar in both groups (total number, median, spinal v normal 7 v 5.5; p>0.05).
Large rectal contractions (pressure rise >20 cmH 2 O persisting for 10 seconds or longer) were seen significantly more frequently throughout ramp rectal distension in spinal patients (total number to 200 ml distension, median; spinal patients v normal subjects: 2 v 0.5, p<0.01).
Rectal contractions were associated with prolonged increases in external anal sphincter activity and anal pressure in all normal subjects.
In 17 of the spinal injury patients (74%) the external anal sphincter activity was either absent or much attenuated (p<0.0001 compared with that in normal subjects).
RESPONSES TO INTERMITTENT RECTAL DISTENSION
Rectoanal inhibitory reflex
The rectoanal inhibitory reflex was present in all spinal and normal subjects.
Internal anal sphincter relaxation increased in amplitude and duration in all spinal patients and normal controls as the rectum was distended intermittently with increasing volumes.
The amplitude of the internal anal sphincter relaxation at low distension volumes was greater in spinal patients than in controls, and the residual pressures at each distending volume were significantly smaller (p<0.05)(Fig 4).
Similarly, the duration of anal relaxation was greater at low distension volumes in spinal patients compared with controls (Fig 5).
On inflation with 100 ml, 19 of the 23 spinal patients (83%) had maximal anal relaxation for the full 60 seconds of rectal distension compared with only 10 (33%) of the control group (p<0.02).
There was no relationship between the level of the spinal lesion and the responses of the internal anal sphincter to rectal distension.
In normal subjects, the internal anal sphincter showed anal pressure increases upon deflating the rectal baloon that exceeded the predistending values (rebound response).
The duration and amplitude of rebound pressure increased as the distension volume increased.
This phenomenon was observed in only 4 of 23 spinal patients (p<0.001 compared with normal) but the duration was shorter and the amplitude was smaller (Fig 6).
All four patients had cervical lesions.
External anal sphincter responses
The external anal sphincter responses to intermittent rectal distension were noticeably attenuated in spinal patients compared with normal subjects.
In spinal patients, rectal distension caused an immediate increase in external anal sphincter activity, which never lasted longer than 10 seconds (Fig 6).
In normal subjects, the duration of the external anal sphincter response was closely related to the duration of rectal contraction and the duration of rectal sensation and increased as the distending volume increased.
Rectal contractions
In normal subjects, rectal distension at lower volumes induced an initial pressure rise followed by a plateau, but at higher distending volumes (>60 ml) two normal subjects showed repetitive rectal contractions that were compensated for by increased external anal sphincter activity (Fig 7).
In all spinal patients the distension evoked uninhibited giant rectal contractions (pressure rise >40 cm H 2 O persisting for 10 seconds or longer)(Fig 8).
The amplitude of these contractions became larger as the distending volumes increased (Fig 8).
Giant contractions were always associated with enhanced internal anal sphincter relaxation and induced spontaneous balloon evacuation in nine patients (40%)(Fig 7).
Giant rectal contractions were never seen in normal subjects.
Discussion
The absence of both voluntary contraction of the external sphincter and rectal sensation confirms that patients with complete supraconal lesions lose conscious control of sphincter activity.
These patients are unable to defecate voluntarily and must therefore rely upon stimulation of bowel reflexes with or without manual evacuation to complete defecation.
Increases in intra-abdominal pressure induced by inflating a balloon by mouth normally generate a compensatory increase in external anal sphincter activity that enhances the anal pressure barrier and maintains continence.
This response is attenuated in patients with supraconal lesions, and is very strongly linked to the increase in intra-abdominal pressure; the higher the lesion, the lower the intra-abdominal pressure generated, and the lower the external anal sphincter response.
Similar observations were made by Melzak and Porter who showed that the external sphincter contractile response to a cough was greater, the lower the lesion.
Patients with spinal lesions above T5 are unable to contract their abdominal muscles voluntarily but generate abdominal pressure by intercostal and diaphragmatic contraction.
Those with cervical lesions, however, rely totally on diaphragmatic contraction.
These observations reinforce the notion that the external anal sphincter response to increases in intra-abdominal pressure is a spinal reflex, triggered by tension receptors in the pelvis floor.
Defecation requires the cortical inhibition of the external sphincter contraction in response to increases in intra-abdominal pressure.
This may explain the biphasic external anal sphincter pressure response when some normal subjects strain ‘as if to defecate’.
None of our patients with supraconal lesions showed inhibition of the external anal sphincter when straining, confirming the importance of descending inhibitory pathways to facilitate defecation in normal subjects.
This observation could explain why straining is often ineffective in promoting normal defecation even in low spinal patients with intact abdominal musculature.
Distension of the rectum facilitates defecation in patients with complete supraconal lesions by generating rectal contractions and anal relaxations in much the same way as in normal subjects.
Both responses, however, were exaggerated in spinal patients, demonstrating giant contractions associated with deep anal relaxations and spontaneous expulsion of the balloon.
These observations suggest that the rectal contractile response, which is thought to be a spinal reflex and the internal sphincter relaxation, an enteric reflex, are both normally suppressed by descending inhibitory pathways.
It is likely that this inhibitory influence is conveyed via the sympathetic nervous connections.
Stimulation of the sympathetic nerves is known to increase internal anal sphincter tone and inhibit colorectal contraction.
The absence of a rebound internal anal sphincter response after deflation of the rectal balloon in all patients with a spinal transection at a level that would involve the sympathetic outflow would support interruption of sympathetic reflexes conveyed through the spinal cord.
Inhibition of responses mediated via the sympathetic nervous system could also explain the absence of receptive relaxation of rectal tone during ramp distension of the rectum producing a linear pressure volume relationship.
It is unlikely that all sympathetic influence to the anorectum is abolished in spinal patients.
Since the tone of the internal anal sphincter is normally modulated by its sympathetic nerve supply, the observation that the minimum basal pressure is no lower in spinal patients than in normal subjects suggests persistance of a tonic sympathetic influence on the intenral anal sphincter, supporting previous studies, and probably mediated via autonomous activity of the inferior mesenteric ganglion.
Although the spinal patients had no specific rectal sensation during rectal distension, almost half of them experienced a dull pelvic sensation at maximum distension.
The origin of this is unclear, although it could derive from afferent impulses conveyed to the brain along sympathetic nerves that enter the thoracic spinal cord above the level of the lesion.
The absence of pelvic sensation in the four patients with cervical lesions supports this interpretation.
The external anal sphincter response to rectal distension is very closely associated with both rectal sensation and rectal contraction in normal subjects, and presumably acts to prevent soiling.
This response is either absent or very much attenuated in patients with supraconal lesions.
This would explain the much lower residual pressures.
It would also facilitate reflex defecation and predispose to faecal incontinence.
These observations support previous conclusions that the external anal sphincter response to rectal distension is a spinal reflex, that has become extensively modulated by conscious mechanisms.
Comparison of the results of this study with those from our previous study shows that the major differences in anorectal function between patients with complete supraconal lesions and those with incomplete lesions are that the almost complete loss of rectal sensitivity and the ability to contract the sphincter at will.
Patients with complete lesions are also unable to generate such high abdominal pressures.
Thus while patients with incomplete lesions retain some control of sphincter function, which can be enhanced by training, those with complete lesions have no control, are at the mercy of often unpredictable reflex defecation, and are best treated by transection of the dorsal sacral roots followed by manual evacuation or spinal stimulation, or both.
Effects of α-glucosidase inhibitors on mouth to caecum transit time in humans
Abstract
The α-glucosidase inhibitors acarbose and miglitol have been successfully used to control postprandial hyperglycaemia in diabetics.
They probably work by slowing carbohydrate digestion and absorption, but their effect on mouth to caecum transit time has not been studied.
The effect of acarbose (100 mg), miglitol (100 mg), and placebo on mouth to caecum transit time (380 kcal breakfast with 20 g of lactulose) was investigated in 18 normal volunteers using breath hydrogen analysis.
Both miglitol and acarbose significantly increased breath hydrogen excretion (F 2 ,3 4 =6.31, p=0.005) and shortened the mouth to caecum transit time (F 2 ,3 4 =3.49, p=0.04) after breakfast compared with placebo.
There was a significant negative correlation between breath hydrogen excretion and mouth to caecum transit time suggesting that with shorter transit times significantly more carbohydrates were spilled into the colon.
These results indicate that α-glucosidase inhibitors accelerate mouth to caecum transit time by inducing carbohydrate malabsorption.
BAY g 5421 (acarbose) and BAY m 1099 (miglitol) are competitive inhibitors of small intestinal α-glucosidase.
Acarbose is a pseudotetrascaccharide and has been used in clinical trials with insulin dependent and non-insulin dependent diabetes to control hyperglycaemia, improve the diabetic metabolic condition, and, if possible, to reduce the insulin requirements.
Miglitol is a new α-glucosidase inhibitor with the chemical structure of a 1-desoxynojirimycin.
It has already been used in a few clinical trials in normal volunteers and diabetics.
Though intestinal α-glucosidase inhibitors inferfere with sucros and starch digestion, glucose absorption is not affected.
This slowing of carbohydrate digestion, and therefore of glucose absorption, caused by α-glucosidase inhibitors had a beneficial effect in the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
It does, however, result in a considerable degree of carbohydrate spilling into the colon that stimulates bacterial fermentation causing flatulence and occasionally diarrhoea.
It is logical to hypothesise that the incomplete small intestinal carbohydrate absorption, by increasing the flow rate of the luminal contents, may stimulate peristalsis and shorten the small bowel transit time.
However, to the best of our knowledge, this has never been investigated.
Thus, the objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of acarbose and miglitol on mouth to caecum transit time (MCTT).
Methods
SUBJECTS
Eighteen healthy male volunteers aged 18–40 years (mean (SD) 30.3 (6.5) years) participated in the study.
All were of normal body weight, taking a normal diet, and had a normal bowel habit.
None had symptoms or a history of gastrointestinal disease or surgery or had received antibiotics in the two months before the study.
Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals tested.
The protocol of the study was approved by the Ethical Committee on Human Studies of the Department of Internal Medicine, University of Athens, in October 1985.
TEST MEAL
The breakfast used to measure MCTT consisted of two slices of toast (17 g), butter (15 g), marmalade (20 g), one hard boiled egg, and 200 ml of weak tea containing 20 g of lactulose (30 ml of Duphalac, Duphar, Southampton, UK) and 10 g of sucrose.
The complete meal contained 380 kcal.
Forty two per cent of the calories were derived from carbohydrate, 10% from protein, and 48% from fat.
Since the prevalence of incomplete lactose digestion in Greece is 75%, milk was no included in the breakfast.
The amount of lactose (2.4 g) contained in 30 ml of Dulphalac has been shown not to affect breath hydrogen excretion.
This meal has been previously tested and proved to produce reproducible MCTT measurements.
MCTT AND CARBOHYDRATE ABSORPTION STUDY
These were investigated in a placebo controlled, double blind, randomised, three fold, cross over study with complete block design experiments.
Each volunteer was studied three times.
The washout periods were seven days.
Acarbose (BAY g 5421) and miglitol (BAY m 1099)(Bayer AG, Leverkusen, Germany) were supplied as 100 mg tablets.
The tablets and placebo were identical in size, shape, and colour and were distributed in cellophane bags labelled with each subjects random number and test day.
The amount of lactose contained in the tablets was negligible (120 mg).
They were swallowed half an hour before the ingestion of the test meal.
After an overnight fast (10–12 hours), the volunteer consumed the test meal within 15 minutes.
The breath hydrogen concentration was measured at -60, -30, and 0 minutes and at 10 minute intervals thereafter, over a four hour period.
End expiratory breath samples were collected in 50 ml polyethylene syringes, while the volunteer exhaled through a modified Haldane-Priestley tube, and the H 2 concentration was measured by a research chromatograph (Hewlett-Packard 5750G) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector.
The operating conditions have been published elsewhere.
The minimum hydrogen concentration detectable was 3 ppm, which gave a recorder deflection of 2 mm.
A breath hydrogen concentration 20 ppm over the baseline was taken as indicating the arrival of lactulose and/or malabsorbed carbohydrate into the caecum.
MCTT was therefore defined as the interval between finishing the meal and the first of two sequential increases in breath hydrogen concentration 20 ppm over the base line.
If after four hours no such a rise in breath hydrogen occurred, the transit time was recorded as 240 minutes.
CALCULATIONS AND STATISTICS
The area under the breath hydrogen curve was calculated using the trapezoid rule.
Results in the text and figures are presented as mean (SEM).
The statistical significance of the results was assessed by randomised blocks analysis of variance (ANOVA) and paired t test as appropriate.
Correlation between breath hydrogen excretion and MCTT was evaluated by regression analysis and comparisons between slopes and correlation coefficients by covariance analysis.
Probabilities of <0.05 were regarded as significant.
Results
All volunteers (n:18) ate the breakfast within 15 minutes and found it palatable.
Non-hydrogen producers were not encountered in this study, since all volunteers excreted 20 ppm of breath hydrogen in at least one of the experiments after eating the breakfast marked with lactulose.
Treatment significantly affected MCTT (randomised blocks ANOVA: F 2 ,3 4 =3.49, p= 0.042).
This effect was dur to the shorter MCTT after miglitol (107 (14) minutes) as well as after acarbose (106 (13)) in comparison with placebo (139 (18) minutes)(paired t =2.16, p=0.023 and paired t =1.98, p=0.032 respectively).
The mean breath hydrogen curves after acarbose, miglitol, and placebo are shown in Figure 1.
Significantly more hydrogen was excreted after acarbose (122.56 (14.67)) or miglitol (112.67 (18.91)) than in placebo experiments (74.00 (11.40) ppm.4 hours, F 2 ,3 4 =6.31, p=0.005).
When individual breath hydrogen excretion was plotted against MCTT (Fig 2), there was a significant negative log-linear correlation between the two variables after acarbose (), miglitol (), and placebo ().
The slopes of the regression lines, as well as the correlation coefficients of acarbose and placebo did not differ significantly (), nor did those of miglitol and placebo ().
Discussion
This is the first published report on the effects of α-glucosidase inhibitors on MCTT.
Our results indicate that after ingestion of a solid-liquid meal (breakfast) miglitol and acarbose at a dose of 100 mg induce carbohydrate malabsorption and therefore shorten the MCTT.
These results agree with those of a preliminary study of eight normal subjects given 200 mg of acarbose after a 380 kcal breakfast, where we had also observed a significant acceleration of MCTT in comparison with placebo.
The negative correlation we have found between MCTT and breath H 2 excretion suggests that with shorter transit times more carbohydrates are spilled into the colon.
This is compatible with experiments in normal subjects ingesting increasing doses of lactulose, where an inverse relation between carbohydrate malabsorption and MCTT has been shown.
Though the inhibition of absorption induced by the α-glucosidase inhibitors is the primary phenomenon, under the present experimental conditions, it is not possible to estimate whether the acceleration in the intestinal transit time contributes to carbohydrate malabsorption by reducing the contact time between the intestinal contents and small intestinal mucosa.
However, it is known from ileal intubation studies that acarbose may induce carbohydrate malabsorption of up to 50% of the ingested carbohydrate, and that glucose absorption is least efficient from the most rapidly moving front of an ingested bolus of glucose.
Despite this evidence, one cannot preclude the possibility that the α-glucosidase inhibitors produce their effect solely by inhibiting absorption and that the acceleration of MCTT is a secondary phenomenon, more or less irrelevant to the percent absorption.
It may also be argued that the negative correlation we have found between breath H 2 exretion and MCTT was due to the lactulose taken with the breakfast.
However, Rumessen et al did not observe significant changes with regard to the area under breath H 2 excretion curves, compared for the same dose of lactulose despite significant changes in MCTT induced by metoclopramide.
Studies published to date assume that α-glucosidase inhibitors exert their control on postprandial hyperglycaemia by delaying carbohydrate absorption from the small intestinal lumen.
However, as we have shown, α-glucosidase inhibitors accelerate MCTT by inducing carbohydrate malabsorption.
This unquestionable carbohydrate malabsorption, leads to a pronounced change in colonic function and metabolism by stimulating bacterial proliferation.
Malabsorbed polysaccharides are fermented to short chain fatty acids which are rapidly absorbed from the colon in humans, providing 90–240 kcal/day in normal subjects — that is, 5–10% of daily energy requirements.
Thus, in patients with carbohydrate malabsorption the colon may play an important role in meeting total energy needs.
Furthermore, fermentation does not increase the colonic osmotic pressure and diarrhoea is not longer considered to occur as a side effect since most of this osmotic load is rapidly absorbed.
In conclusion α-glucosidase inhibitors inhibitors, by inducing carbohydrate malabsorption, accelerate MCTT.
We speculate that the beneficial effect on blood glucose concentrations of α-glucosidase inhibitors, is mediated by small intestinal carbohydrate malabsorption, compensated by colonic short chain fatty acid absorption as an alternative source of energy.
Prolonged monitoring of the upper gastrointestinal tract using echo planar magnetic resonance imaging
Abstract
Upper gastrointestinal motility and transit has been studied in five human volunteers with the ultra hgh speed, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tehnique MBEST (Modulus Blipped Echo-planar single pulse Technique), a variant of echo planar imaging.
Snapshot images requiring a data acquisition time of ony 64–128 msec allowed visualisation of peristalsis in the antrum and duodenum in real time, without motional image degradation, as would normally be seen using conventional MRI.
Gastroduodenal flow of the luminal contnts was visualised using water as a contrast medium, with appropriate adjustment of the time constant (T2) weighting of the system.
Rapid (0.3 Hz) imaging of gastroduodenal motility in both transverse and coronal planes was achieved by respiratory gating to the imaging frequency, allowing repetition rates of up to 20 frames per minute for 2–3 hours.
Fast replay of stored images, to produce a ‘movie loop’, allowed identification of fasting motility patterns of the gastric antrum and proximal small intestine, with depiction of the phases of the migrating motor complex.
Images of the fed patterns after the ingestion of a test meal showed good separation of solid and liquid particulate matter and mixing waves in the gastric body.
The potential for quantitative measurements with this new imaging modality of the gastrointestinal tract is under development which will allow us to measure transit and correlate this with motility data.
In the last decade magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become an established diagnostic tool in clinical medicine and improvements in experimental technique and equipment are still continuing at a considerable pace.
Standard MRI techniques require repeated sampling of the nuclear magnetic resonance signal in a series of experiments which may take several minutes to complete and are therefore only suitable for the study of static organs.
Imaging of organs that are characterised by periodic motion, such as respiration or the beating heart are more difficult to obtain and require synchronisation of the MRI scanner with, for example, the QRS signal of the ECG waveform.
Abdominal imaging so far has been disappointing because of the aperiodic motion of the gut wall and its contents.
This results in image artefacts and blurring of the spatial detail of the organ.
Investigators have resorted to paralysing the smooth muscle with spasmolytics to obtain artefact free images of the gastrointestinal tract.
This prevents, however, dynamic studies of peristalsis and motility patterns, an area of great interest at the present time.
Gastrointestinal tract imaging has been achieved using the ultrafast, echo planar imaging, variant technique MBEST (Modulus Blipped Echo planar Single pulse Technique).
MBEST produces a complete two dimensional image in acquisition times of either 64 or 128 ms for 128×64 or 128×128 pxel matrices respectively.
These times are sufficiently short to freeze abdominal motion and thus overcome motional blurring.
Additionally, rapid repetition of the experiment allows the production of abdominal movies without any harmful effects to the subjects.
We have reported a series of experiments of short term gastrointestinal tract imaging using breathholding to overcome respiratory movement.
This paper presents an improvement of this technique in which we have used voluntary, respiratory gating and have been able to obtain images for periods of 2–3 hours.
Thus, for the first time, recordings of fasting and fed motility patterns of the upper gastrointestinal tract have been achieved.
Methods
IMAGING PRINCIPLES
Echo planar imaging is a real time magnetic resonance imaging method capable of producing snapshot images in times ranging from 64–128 ms.
The details of the technique have been presented elsewhere but the main features are as follows.
The patient is placed in a static magnetic field.
In our case the field strength of the Nottingham home built imaging system utilises a 0.52 tesla superconductive magnet, corresponding to a resonance frequency for protons of 22 MHz.
After an initial slice selection procedure, the nuclear magnetic resonance signal is subjected simultaneously to two modulated magnetic field gradients.
One, G y , is in the form of a bipolar trapezoidal modulation, the other, G x , in the form of monopolar short duration blips.
These two gradients effectively define the coordinate structure of the image in the x-y plane.
The strengths and modulation periods define the in plane pixel resolution.
The effect of these gradients s to cause the nuclear magnetic resonance signal to form a series of spin echoes.
These signals are sampled, ourier transformed, and following data reordering, are presented to an image display device.
The initial data sampling period is typically 128 ms for abdominal images.
The Fourier transform times depend on the computer used, but in our case can take around 100 ms.
The display refresh time is around 80 ms which limits our real time frame rate to a maxmum of three frames per second.
In our current work, however, we run somewhat slower at about 1 frame/2 secs.
The MBEST technique is a variant of echo planar imaging and currently produces images with an in plane spatial resolution of 3 mm for a 128×64 pixel matrix.
The spatial resolution may be increased to 1.5×3 mm using a 128×128 image pixel matrix but with some loss in signal intensity.
The slice thickness was 1 cm.
MBEST images have an inherent contrast that discriminates against tissues with a short spin spin relaxation time.
This time constant (T2), characterises the duration of the nuclear magnetic resonance signal from water and depends on how water is bound in the tissue.
Free water, as in cerebrospinal fluid and urine has a long T2 of up to several seconds, whereas water bound in protein, as in muscle tissue, has a shorter T2 of some 100 ms.
In MBEST, the main magnetic resonance signals (nuclear magnetic resonance spin echoes) occur midway through the imaging sequence, gving periods of 32 ms or 64 ms in the 128×64 or 128×128 experiments.
During this time signals from tissue from tissue with a short T2, for example, the gut wall, can experience appreciable decay and thus appear dark.
Free water — that is, luminal content, with a long T2, will appear as a bright image.
Image contrast also depends on the spin lattice relaxation time (T1), which again is long for free water and shorter in tissue.
As the T1 determines how long it take for the magnetic resonance signal to recover after each image, a long T1 — that is, 1–3 seconds as in water, determines the maximum image frequency achievable in continuous, long duration experiments.
Chemical shift artefacts are excluded by selective presaturation of the undesired proton species (fat).
Pure water images also help delineation of abdominal organs from mesenteric fat.
The values of static field strength, gradient switching rates, and resonance frequency values all fall within the NRPB guidelines for clinical MRI.
At 22 MhZ the mean resonance frequency power used during initial slice selection procedure is 5 W per pulse.
This is equivalent to a specific absorbed power of 0.002 W/Kg over the frame repetition period of 3 sec per pulse.
SUBJECTS AND PROTOCOL
Three male and two female volunteers aged 20–43 with no history of gastrointestinal diseases and in a healthy state, were studied.
Subjects gave written informed consent after ensuring that they had no metal implants or foreign bodies (metal implants, excluding dental fillings, will degrade the potential images obtained using MRI).
All subjects were given 1 l of tap water before imaging, the water acting as a positive — that is, bright, contrast medium, to outline the gut lumen without affecting motility state.
Images were obtained from all subjects lying supine, within the scanner, in the transverse or coronal planes at the height of the gastric antrum.
The best image resolution was obtained from transverse images because of the orientation of the resonance frequency coils.
We felt, however, that coronal imaging might give more detailed information regarding the anatomical detail of the antropyloric region and therefore attempted to image in the coronal plane using reorientation of the nuclear magnetic resonance signals by signal processing methods.
As yet, coronal images are not of such high resolution as the transverse sequences.
Examples of both imaging modalities are shown in the results for comparison.
SCANNING PROCEDURE
The MBEST technique, with real time data processing, takes only a fraction of a second to generate and display an image on the video screen, therefore correct positioning of the subject was achieved by simply moving him/her within the coil until the plane of interest was identified.
In all subjects the following imaging technique was used.
Subjects were instructed to breathe in synchrony to the imaging frequency of 20 frames per min.
This was easily avhieved as an audible ‘ping’ is produced by the scanner as each snapshot is taken.
In this way a continuous recording of antroduodenal motility could be achieved.
We attempted to visualise the two major physiological states of upper gastrointestinal motility.
The fasting state, which consists of a rhythmic cycle of contractile events occurring in the stomach and small intestine in the interdigestive state and termed the migrating motor complex.
The migrating motor complex consists of a cyclical period of activity with a length of about 120 minutes in man.
This period is divided into three distinct phases, phase I total quiescence (30–80% of cycle), phase II intermittent contractions (0–75% of cycle), and phase III, a short period (4–10 minutes) of intense contractions at the maximum contractile rate, determined by slow wave frequency (11–12 cycles per minute in the duodenum in man) and followed by a new phase I. These patterns of contractile activity occur in all healthy subjects and are normally recorded with tube mounted pressure sensors.
The fed state replaces fasting activity during ingestion of a nutrient meal and this motility state was also examined using the MBEST scanning technique.
After a variable period of fasting recording, depending on the assessment of the occurrence of a phase III, subjects were given an egg and mayonnaise sandwich, to stimulate the fed pattern.
The meal was given with an additional volume of 500 ml water and imaging was continued for a further 40 minutes after the meal.
DATA PRESENTATION AND ANALYSIS
The two dimensional images were displayed at the time of acquisition and simultaneously stored into computer hard disc memory by an array processor.
Each image occupied 16 Kbytes of computer storage, thus for a three hour study, a total of 57.6 Mbytes was required.
Data were downloaded on to magnetic tape for long term storage.
After the experiment, magnetic resonance images were reconstructed by one dimensional Fourier transform and Fourier filtering techniques, including spatial correlation to reduce unwanted noise.
Images could then be viewed as still sequences (Fig 1) or displayed as a continuous real or accelerated sequence or ‘movie’ loop, or parts, or of the whole study.
Calculations of frequency and wave velocity of motility could be derived directly from the screen.
Results
ANTRODUODENAL MOTILITY: THE MIGRATING MOTOR COMPLEX
Figure 1 shows transverse images through the abdomen of a volunteer in the fasted state at the height of the gastric antrum.
This series of frames was taken during a 90 minute period; the subject was given 1 l of tap water to highlight the antrum and duodenum.
Sixteen, consecutive frames, viewed from top left to bottom right, imaged at 0.3 Hz are shown in A, B, and C. The transverse 1 cm slice is as viewed from below.
The left and right kidneys are marked (K l & K r ).
The right lobe of the liver (L) and cerebrospinal fluid in the spinal cord (s) are also easily seen.
Water, seen as a bright image, fills the stomach and delineates the corpus (c), the antrum (a), and the duodenal bulb (d).
The pylorus is seen as an incisure (p), and shows closure of the viscus.
A fluid level (arrowed), shows the presence of a gas bubble which appears black.
Each image was comprised of 128×128 pixels and took 128 msec to take.
The images in Figure 1 were taken from sections of a movie loop with a total of 912 frames, the stills have been selected to illustrate the phases of the migrating motor complex.
Figure 1A represents phase I. This sequence shows no visible peristaltic activity, was present for the first 35 minutes of the study, and is typical of the pattern seen in conventional manometric recordings.
Figure 1B represents phase II of the migrating motor complex and depicts periods of intermittent antroduodenal activity interspersed with quiescent periods.
The figure shows two such quiescent/active cycles.
On viewing the whole sequence as a video movie the phasic pattern is more obvious.
This pattern occupied 45 minutes of the total sequence which approximates to the phase III period in conventional studies.
Swirls of activity, denoting movement of the gastric content can be seen in the fundus in some of the frames.
Figure 1C represents the final 10 minutes of the fasting sequence and depicts the late phase II/ phase III of the migrating motor complex cycle.
During the final five minutes of this sequence a period of intense activity was obvious and coincided with the emptying of water from the stomach and duodenal bulb.
It was also associated with vigorous coordinated antroduodenal contractions.
The movie loop of this sequence showed a reducing volume of fluid in the stomach when compared with Figure 1A and alos, as in Figure 1B ‘swirls’ of activity are apparent, especially in the fundic region, denoting considerable movement of fluid and eddy currents as the contents are propelled towards the pylorus and on into the duodenum.
The frequency of peristalsis in the duodenum was calculated from this sequence at 14 contractions per minute.
This value is similar to previously reported values for duodenal contractile frequency of 12 to 13 contractions and supports the proposal that these images are phase III like activity patterns.
ANTRODUODENAL MOTILITY: FASTING AND FED PATTERNS
Figures 2 and 3 were taken from a series of images from a man (Fig 2) and women (Fig 3) volunteer.
The images were taken in the coronal plane with a repetition time of 5 seconds and represent fasting (A) and fed (B) activity.
Morphologically the stomach is similar to that seen with a conventional anterior/posterior view barium meal.
Because coronal images are derived from the transverse plane by signal processing, the resolution is influenced by susceptibility artefacts.
These can be seen as ‘ripples’ within the image and reduce the clarity in some frames.
Figure 2A depicts alternative frames from the 13 to the 17 minute of a 20 minute fasted sequence after preloading with 1 l of tape water.
The lumen of the stomach appears bright with a near homogeneous content because of the long T2 of the water.
In this subject the stomach is crescent shaped and the pylorus can be seen as an incisure at its distal end (arrowed).
Contractile changes in the stomach wall can be seen throughout the sequence, depicting mixing waves and fasting phasic contractions.
Fast video replay of these frames illustrate the contractile activity more clearly than the freeze frames of this figure.
Figure 2B depicts a similar sequence after ingestion of the egg sandwich.
The stomach now appears more distended when compared with the fasted sequence and powerful pyloric contraction can be seen (arrowed).
This four frame sequence is equivalent to 20 seconds real time thus giving a contractile frequency of 3 per minute, the reported maximum rate in man.
In the first frame, individual dark particles of the sandwich show clearly in the fundus and body.
Later in the sequence the gastric contents take on a slightly more homogeneous quality, which may be caused by a reduction in particle size, although more prolonged imaging would be required to confirm this conclusively.
Figures 3A and 3B illustrate a similar sequence in the female subject.
The stomach in this subject is pear shaped, with good resolution of the antrum and pylorus.
Frames showing definite antropyloric contractions are arrowed.
The fed sequence (Fig 3B) again shows marked antropyloric activity but little apparent particle reduction or gastric emptying of the meal.
Discussion
This paper has shown the feasibility of using echo planar magnetic resonance imaging for prolonged imaging of upper gastrointestinal motility.
The ability of the technique to simultaneously assess morphology and function, makes it an ideal medium for investigation of the physiology of the human gastrointestinal tract.
We have already shown that this type of imaging technique can overcome the problems of conventional MRI.
With the addition of gated respiration and adjustment of the flip angle and relaxation time, together with reconstruction of longer imaging periods, we have been able to extend studies to facilitate the investigation of fasting periodic phenomena and some patterns of gastroduodenal fed activity.
This had only been possible before using invasive manometric techniques or ionising radiation.
Limitations of this system at present are that subjects can only be studies in the supine position within the magnet, thus imposing constraints on both posture and movement.
This may well inluence gastrointestinal motility, as others have shown changes as a result of ambulation and stress.
Also, this technique requires the use of a contrast medium, in this case, tap water.
Water is an ideal contrast medium as it does not abolish the fasting migrating motor complex, but it has a T1 long relaxation time of at least 3 seconds and that limits the imaging frequency of our system to 20 frames per minute.
In future, experiments may be performed using Gadolinium DTPA, a paramagnetic contrast agent, which predominantly shortens the T1 relaxation time to allow faster imaging.
This substance, however, is not yet available in an oral form.
The use of such substances would enhance the resolution of the images by increasing the signal to noise ratio between tissue and contrast media and allow for a greater imaging frequency because of the shorter relaxation time.
This would facilitate the calculation of peristaltic velocity and the speed of contractility of gut smooth muscle with high temporal resolution.
The ability to visualise the stomach in the fed state may help to increase our knowledge of gastric function, especially in tracing the passage of gastric chyme during the initial stages of digestion.
This may help in the investigation of conditions where gastroparesis is a clinical problem.
Because MRI is particularly well developed to differentiate between lipid and water, with further development, it may be possible to simultaneously measure transit and absorption of different nutrients in the gut, an area of measurement at present not possible with existing methods.
Further stages of investigation using this technique will be to simultaneously measure gastrointestinal motility using conventional manometric methods and to compare this with echo planar imaging as a validation of the imaging technique.
Rapid development is taking place in MRI technology.
Recently, another ultrafast MRI technique has been introduced under the name of ‘snapshot’ or turboFLASH.
This technique, which derives its name from the Fast, Low angle, single-Shot method, provides images in about 500 ms, fast enough to resolve peristaltic motion.
‘Snapshot’ flash may be superior to echo planar imaging in some instances, especially where appreciable amounts of bowel gas are present.
This is because considerable local signal loss can occur with echo planar imaging where gas tissue interfaces cause susceptibility artefacts which may obscure adjacent tissues, such as the bowel wall.
‘Snapshot’ flash is insensitive to this effect and allows imaging of gas filled bowel without loss of detail.
At present, however, echo planar imaging provides better spatial and temporal resolution as well as a better signal to noise ratio than ‘snapshot’ flash.
It also allows three dimensional imaging without time penalty which is advantageous for dynamic studies of motility and transit in the gastrointestinal tract.
If susceptibility artefacts with echo planar imaging can be overcome, the method will be even better for non-invasive imaging of the gut and more sophisticated imaging will be possible.
At present echo planar imaging is only available in a few research centres worldwide.
Several major manufacturers of magnetic resonance systems, however, are currently developing echo planar imaging on their systems: as an add-on feature, echo planar imaging is now commercially available.
(Advanced NMR Systems, Mass, USA).
With more efficient magnetic gradient coils and more sophisticated, cost effective computer power, echo planar imaging will be an available option on most conventional MRI scanners in the next couple of years.
routine imaging of gastrointestinal motility could then become as commonplace as conventional MRI.
Intrahepatic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 antigens in chronic hepatitis B virus infection in relation to hepatitis B virus replication and hepatitis delta virus superinfection
Abstract
Hepatocyte expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in relation to hepatitis B virus replication (hepatitis B virus-DNA in serum and HBcAg in the liver), histological activity and hepatitis delta virus superinfection was studied by indirect immunofluorescence on frozen sections of liver specimens from 68 patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
All 44 patients with chronic type B hepatitis had pre-S1 and pre-S2 display in the liver.
The distribution of pre-S1 in the liver was membranous in one, mixed membranous and cytoplasmic in 12, and cytoplasmic in 31.
The distribution of pre-S2 was membranous in one, mixed membranous and cytoplasmic in 26, and cytoplasmic in 17.
Membranous expression of pre-S1 was significantly more prevalent in patients with active hepatitis B virus replication than in those without (13/28 v 0/16, p<0.001), regardless of the histological activity, as was membranous expression of pre-S2 (27/28 v 0/16, p<0.001).
In contrast, a significantly higher extent of cytoplasmic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 was noted in patients without active hepatitis B virus replication than in those with.
Of 24 patients with chronic type D hepatitis, eight had active hepatitis B virus replication, and the other 16 did not.
The distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver in these patients also correlated significantly with the status of hepatitis B virus replication and, moreover, showed little or no difference from those without hepatitis delta virus infection.
In conclusion, all patients with chronic type B hepatitis had synthesis and display of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver.
The distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2, however, were closely related to the status of hepatitis B virus replication, but not to the histological activity.
Hepatocyte expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in chronic type D hepatitis also correlated significantly with status of hepatitis B virus replication, and was not modulated by concurrent hepatitis delta virus infection.
The three envelope antigens of hepatitis B virus are now well characterised: the major protein (HBsAg) with 226 amino acids encoded by the S gene, the middle protein (pre-S2) containing HBsAg and additional 55 amino acids encoded by the pre-S2 region, and the large protein (pre-S1) encoded by entire S open reading frame, including the pre-S1 region, pre-S2 region and S gene.
Both pre-S1 and pre-S2 proteins are expressed on the surface of HBsAg particles and may be essential components of complete virions and HBsAg filaments.
It has also been postulated that the attachment of hepatitis B virus to hepatocytes is mediated by a receptor like function of pre-S proteins.
Pre-S1 and pre-S2 proteins are detectable in the serum of patients with acute and chronic hepatitis B virus infection when there is high levels of viral replication, and the clearance of these antigens from serum usually correlates with the prognosis of hepatitis B virus infection.
Monoclonal antibodies against pre-S proteins have recently become available for tissue staining.
Intrahepatic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 proteins has been studied in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection, but the results still remain controversial.
Studies of the molecular biology of hepatitis B virus have shown that the expression of HBsAg and pre-S2 protein is controlled by the same transcriptional promoter, whereas the expression of pre-S1 protein may be regulated independently by a second, usually less active, promoter.
In addition, there is a complex interaction between HBsAg/pre-S2 and pre-S1 that can lead to the cosecretion or the inhibition of secretion of these antigens, depending on the relative concentrations of HBsAg/pre-S2 and pre-S1.
It seems that, in evaluating the significance of pre-S protein display in liver in chronic hepatitis B virus infection, special emphasis should be made on their topographical (cytoplasmic or membranous) distribution as well as the quantitative expression, as suggested in the study of intrahepatic expression of HBsAg and HBcAg in chronic type B hepatitis.
Furthermore, it has long been suggested that there is an inhibitory effect on hepatitis B virus replication by hepatitis delta virus in chronic hepatitis B virus infection, but it remains unclear whether hepatitis delta virus might interfere with the expression of hepatitis B virus envelope antigens in the liver or not.
In the present study, intrahepatic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 antigens was studied in patients with chronic type B hepatitis, and the results were correlated with the status of hepatitis B virus replication, histological activity, and hepatitis delta virus superinfection.
Methods
PATIENTS
The study consisted of 68 patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
All had been HBsAg positive for more than six months and had histologic features of chronic hepatitis.
Forty four patients were chronic type B hepatitis without hepatitis delta virus superinfection, and the remainder 24 patients were chronic HBsAg carriers with hepatitis delta virus superinfection.
Of the latter, all were positive for antibody against hepatitis delta virus (anti-HDV) and had hepatitis delta virus antigen (HDAg) detectable in the liver.
None admitted intravenous drug abuse, nor had received antiviral or immunosuppressive treatment.
The histologic diagnosis of chronic hepatitis was made according to the standard criteria.
The clinical and laboratory data of the patients studied are listed in Table I.
LABORATORY METHODS
Serum aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase were measured by sequential multiple autoanalysers.
HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBe and anti-hepatitis delta virus were assayed using commercially available radioimmunoassay kits (Ausria-II, HBeAg, -RIA, and anti-delta, Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, Illinois, USA).
Serum hepatitis B virus-DNA was assayed by spot hybridisation with P-labelled cloned hepatitis B virus-DNA, as reported previously.
DETECTION OF VITAL ANTIGENS IN THE LIVER
Liver specimens were obtained by percutaneous needle biopsy with a Menghini needle.
Fragments of specimens were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen cooled isopentane and stored at -70°C until use.
Samples of the same biopsy specimens were also fixed in 10% formaldehyde and embeded in paraffin wax for routine histologic diagnosis.
Cryostat sections of 5 µ were dried overnight at room temperature and fixed in carbon tetrachloride at 4°C for 10 minutes, followed by extensive washing with phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.2) before staining.
HBsAg was detected by indirect immunofluorescence using mouse monoclonal antibody against the ‘a’ epitope of HBsAg (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA).
HBcAg was detected by indirect immunofluorescence using rabbit anti-HBc (Dako Corporation, Santa Barbara, CA, USA), and HDAg was detected by direct immunofluorescence using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) labelled anti-hepatitis delta virus, kindly supplied by Dr Rizzetto, as previously reported.
Pre-S1 and pre-S2 were detected by indirect immunofluorescence using mouse monoclonal antibodies against pre-S1 and pre-S2, respectively, followed by FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories, West Grove, Pennsylvania, USA).
Monoclonal anti-pre-S1 and anti-pre-S2, which were produced by cell line T0606 and 5520, respectively, were obtained from Institute of Immunology, Tokyo, Japan.
As a control, sections were incubated with phosphate buffered saline instead of the primary monoclonal antibodies in the first step.
In addition, sections of liver tissues from patients without serological markers of hepatitis B virus infection were stained using the identical techniques as negative controls.
Only if the control preparations were negative was the staining considered positive.
The expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2 in the liver was semiquantitatively scored according the the proportion of positive cells on a 0 to 4+ scale corresponding to positivity in 0%, 1–10%, 11–25%, 26–50%, and >50% of hepatocytes examined.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The significance of difference between two proportions was assayed using χ 2 test with Yates' correction.
The difference in the number of hepatocytes positive for pre-S1 or pre-S2 between two groups of patients was compared using Wilcoxon's rank-sum test.
Results
All of the 68 patients, with or without hepatitis delta virus infection, had the three hepatitis B virus envelope proteins detectable in the liver, on the plasma membrane and/or in the cytoplasm.
The expression of the hepatitis B virus envelope proteins on the plasma membrane was usually diffuse, while that in the cytoplasm was either focal or in cluster.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the representative findings of the expression of pre-S2 in the liver.
The distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S2 were essentially the same as those of HBsAg.
The expression of pre-S1 was solely membranous in one, mixed membranous and cytoplasmic in 16, and exclusively cytoplasmic in 51.
The expression of pre-S2 was solely membranous in one, mixed membranous and cytoplasmic in 32, and exclusively cytoplasmic in 35.
Membranous expression of pre-S2 is significantly more frequent than that of pre-S1 (48.5% or 33/68 v 25% or 17/68, p<0.01).
Of 44 patients with chronic type B hepatitis without hepatitis delta virus infection, 28 were positve for hepatitis B virus-DNA in serum and HBcAg in the liver, and the remainder 16 were negative for both.
The distribution of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in chronic type B hepatitis without hepatitis delta virus infection, in relation to the status of hepatitis B virus replication and histological activity, is listed in Table II.
Diffuse membranous expression of pre-S2, usually in combination with focal cytoplasmic expression, was found in 27 (96.4%) of 28 patients with active hepatitis B virus replication, irrespective of serum HBeAg or histological activity, but in none of 16 patientswithout active hepatitis B virus replication (p<0.001).
Membranous expression of pre-S1 also correlated significantly with the status of hepatitis B virus replication.
Cytoplasmic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 was noted in 43 and 43 patients, respectively.
Semiquantitative analysis revealed that the degrees of cytoplasmic expression of pre-S1 as well as pre-S2 were significantly higher in patients without active hepatitis B virus replication than in those with (Table III).
Of the 24 patients with chronic type D hepatitis, eight were positive for hepatitis B virus-DNA in serum and HBcAg in the liver, and the remainder 16 were negative for both.
Table IV shows the distribution of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver in chronic hepatitis delta virus infection.
Membranous expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 correlated significantly with active hepatitis B virus replication.
Moreover, a significantly higher degree of cytoplasmic expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 was noted in patients without active hepatitis B virus replication than in those with (Table V).
The distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver in patients with chronic type D hepatitis were comparable with those without hepatitis delta virus infection.
Discussion
The present results showed that all patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection had pre-S1 or pre-S2 detectable in the liver, irrespective of the status of hepatitis B virus replication or histological activity.
These findings are in keeping with the previous observations, but are in contrast with the suggestion by other groups that the expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2 in liver varied with the status of hepatitis B virus replication.
This discrepancy may be because of the difference in the choice of antisera, tissue manipulation or staining protocols.
Furthermore, the expression of HBsAg in liver was essentially identical to that of pre-S2 but not that of pre-S1, in keeping with the suggestion that transcription of mRNAs for HBsAg and pre-S2 is controlled by the same promotor, and that for pre-S1 is controlled independently by a second promotor.
This observation also implies that there is control at the level of translation of pre-S2 v HBsAg.
Perhaps the more important finding of the present study is that the distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver differed remarkably with the status of hepatitis B virus replication.
During active replication of hepatitis B virus, nearly all patients had pre-S2 expression on the plasma membrane, regardless of serum HBeAg or liver inflammatory activity.
Similarly, membranous expression of pre-S1 also correlated significantly with active HBV replication (Table II).
Previous studies by others have shown a close association between high levels of pre-S1 or pre-S2 in serum with hepatitis B virus-DNA in serum, in keeping with the observation that pre-S1 and pre-S2 are the essential components of complete virion.
Taken together, it seems that, membranous expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2 in the liver is closely related to its presence in serum, and thus might reflect the secretion of the hepatitis B virus particles containing pre-S peptides by liver into the circulation, suggesting a pathway through membranous system in assembly or secretion of hepatitis B virus particles.
On the contrary, in patients without active hepatitis B virus replication, there is little or no membranous expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2, and, moreover, cytoplasmic expression of pre-S peptides increased remarkably compared with those with active hepatitis B virus replication (Table III).
These findings might suggest that in the non-replicative phase of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, pre-S1 or pre-S2 is non-secretable, and thus will be retained within the cytoplasm of the hepatocytes.
The reason for the relatively less prevalence of pre-S1 than of pre-S2 on the liver cell membrane during active hepatitis B virus replication, as shown in Table II, is not clear.
A similar finding, however, has been reported recently by Suzuki et al .
It remains possible that monoclonal antibody against pre-S1 used in the present study has less affinity to the plasma membrane of hepatocyte than that against pre-S2.
The mechanism responsible for secretion or intracellular retention of pre-S peptides in chronic hepatitis B virus infection is uncertain.
Studies in cultured cells have suggested that the cosecretion or the inhibition of secretion of HBsAg/pre-S2 and pre-S1 might depend on their relative concentrations.
On the other hand, it has been suggested that, unlike HBsAg, the pre-S peptides do not undergo the spontaneous budding process; rather the initiation of budding might be triggered by interaction with the nucleocapsid or matric components of the virus.
It seems more likely that, in the absence of active hepatitis B virus replication and intracellular nucleopcapid protein (HBcAg), sureplus pre-S peptides can not migrate to the plasma membrane as part of new assembling particles and thus will accumulate in the cytoplasm.
Several studies have shown a close association between liver inflammatory activities and membrane associated pre-S1 or pre-S2 in chronic hepatitis B virus infection, suggesting that membranous pre-S1 or pre-S2 might be a possible target antigen in T-cell mediated lysis of hepatocytes.
Studies of the in vitro microcytotoxicity assays, however, have suggested hepatitis B virus capsid protein, rather than envelope protein, as a target viral antigen.
The present results revealed that membranous expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2 was found in patients with hepatitis B virus-DNA in serum of HBcAg in liver, regardless of the histological activity, suggesting that membranous expression of pre-S1 or pre-S2 is closely related to active replication of hepatitis B virus, rather than the extent of liver inflammatory activity.
With regard to the interference of pre-S1 or pre-S2 expression in the liver in chronic hepatitis delta virus infection, a recent study by Hadziyannis et al has suggested that intrahepatic expression of pre-S peptides in chronic hepatitis delta virus infection appeared to be independent of hepatitis B virus and hepatitis delta virus replicative status.
In the Hadziyannis's series, however, the vast majority of patients were negative for HBeAg in serum or HBcAg in the liver, and there was no quantitative data of pre-S peptide expression in the liver.
The present results showed that the topographic distribution of pre-S1 and pre-S2 in the liver in HBsAg carriers with hepatitis delta virus infection correlated significantly with the status of hepatitis B virus replication (Table IV), and that, moreover, the distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S1 and pre-S2 were comparable with the hepatitis delta virus negative patients (Tables III, V).
These findings suggested that in HBsAg carriers with chronic hepatitis delta virus infection the synthesis and expression of pre-S peptides in liver correlated closely with the underlying hepatitis B virus replicative status and did not appear to be modulated by the concurrent hepatitis delta virus infection.
In conclusion, the present results suggested that all patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection had pre-S1 or pre-S2 display in the liver.
The distribution and quantitative expression of pre-S peptides in the liver, however, were closely related to the status of hepatitis B virus replication, but not to the histological activity.
Concurrently hepatitis delta virus superinfection did not appear to modulate the synthesis and expression of pre-S peptides in the liver.
Value of exfoliative cytology for investigating bile duct strictures
Abstract
The cause of a biliary tract stricture may be difficult to determine radiologically.
Exfoliative biliary cytology was evaluated in 62 patients (median age 65 years, range 30–94) with biliary tract strictures presenting to the Hepatobiliary Unit between January 1984 and December 1989.
Bile samples were taken during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in 43 patients, percutaneous cholangiography in 15, and both in four.
The site of stricturing was upper third of the bile duct in 43% (n=27), middle third in 10% (n=six), and lower third in 47% (n=29).
Of the 47 patients with radiological appearances of a malignant stricture, 22 (47%) had histological confirmation by biopsy either under computed tomography guidance, at endoscopy, at operation, or at necropsy.
Fourteen of the 47 patients had positive cytology (30%).
In seven patients cytology alone established the presence of malignancy (15%) and in the other seven positive cytology was confirmed by histology.
The addition of cytology to tissue biopsy therefore allowed malignancy to be confirmed in 29 of the 47 patients (62%).
None of the 15 patients subsequently shown to have benign disease had positive cytology.
Sensitivity of the technique was 30% and specificity 100%.
Samples for exfoliative cytology are simple to obtain, the results are highly specific and should be a routine part of the investigation of biliary strictures.
Patients presenting with obstructive jaundice caused by bile duct stricture may be managed by either surgery or stenting.
Which treatment is most appropriate is dependent on the clinical state of the patient and whether the stricture is benign or malignant — information which may be difficult to obtain.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography allow visualisation of the site and give some information on the nature of the stricture but are not diagnostic.
Imaging is able to define a mass lesion in about 40% of cases on ultrasound and 70% by computed tomography scanning in patients with extrahepatic biliary obstruction.
Percutaneous aspiration cytology has been reported as confirming malignancy in about two thirds of pancreatic cancers and one half of bile duct tumours but cannot be done unless a mass lesion is established on imaging.
It is now over 40 years since exfoliative cytology was first used for the diagnosis of pancreatobiliary disease, Lemon and Byrne diagnosing pancreatic cancer from cells exfoliated into the duodenum.
Despite this initial success the popularity of exfoliative cytology declined because of occasional reporting of false positive results, caused by degenerative cellular changes in the duodenal juice.
Since the early 1970s, however, it has been possible to collect bile samples at either endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography and a few small series of patients have been reported with good diagnostic yields and no falsely positive results.
We have reviewed our experience of exfoliative cytology in the management of patients with biliary tract strictures.
Methods
PATIENTS
Over a six year period (January 1984 to December 1989) 62 patients with bile duct strictures had exfoliative cytology carried out.
There were 33 men and 29 women with a median age of 65 years (range 30–94).
The majority of patients presented with painless obstructive jaundice (Table I).
Bile samples were collected at diagnostic or therapeutic endoscopic (ERCP, n=42) or percutaneous (n=14) biliary procedures or during both (ERCP and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, n=6).
ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was carried out under intravenous sedation using a side viewing endoscope (Olympus TJF-10 or JF-IT10) after intravenous administration of broad spectrum antibiotics and crystalloids.
After visualisation of the stricture at cholangiography a guide wire was inserted across the stricture followed by an endoscopic transpapillary endoprosthesis (10 Fr (French gauge), Meadox Surgimed).
Bile for cytology was aspirated through a catheter within or above the endoprosthesis by the endoscopist and sent on the day of sampling to the Cytology Department.
PERCUTANEOUS TRANSHEPATIC CHOLANGIOGRAPHY
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography was carried out under intravenous sedation after intravenous administration of broad spectrum antibiotics and crystalloids.
A Chiba needle (23 Fr) cholangiogram was obtained and the biliary stricture shown.
A further percutaneous puncture allowed the insertion of a sheath needle (Surgimed 5 Fr) into the dilated intrahepatic ducts under flourscopy.
The needle was withdrawn and a guide wire passed into the biliary tree.
After establishing external drainage (8.3 Fr catheter) a sample of bile were taken from the region of the stricture by the radiologist and sent on the same day to the Cytology Department.
After a period of external biliary drainage (usually 48 hours) the guide wire was reinserted and advanced through the stricture to allow insertion of an endoprosthesis.
PROCESSING OF SAMPLES
Bile samples were processed on the day of sampling.
After centrifuging the samples at 1500 rpm for five minutes the supernatant was discarded.
The deposit was then resuspended and cytospin (a cell smear produced by centrifuging) preparations made.
From each bile sample at least four slides were prepared, two for Papanicoloau (PAP) staining and two for May-Grunwald Giemsa (MGG).
The slides from this entire series of patients were examined by a single experienced cytologist (AD).
The cytologist was provided with basic patient details such as name, age, sex, and unit number but only limited clinical information such as‘biliary stricture’.
FOLLOW UP INFORMATION
The results of imaging investigations, surgery and histological examination of tissue samples were reviewed by reference to the patients notes.
Follow up information was obtained from out patient clinical notes.
In addition all patients in whom a histological diagnosis was not obtained at the initial admission to hospital had follow up information obtained by consultation with their general practitioners.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results were compared between groups using a χ 2 test.
Results
Red blood cells, white cells, granular bile pigment, and benign ductal epithelial cells were a common finding and are shown in Figure 1.
Positive cytology was based on the presence of cells with established characteristics of malignancy as shown in Figure 2.
Cholangiopgraphy (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography) showed an upper third bile duct stricture in 27 patients, 18 being malignant and six having positive cytology (33%).
There were six middle third strictures of which four were malignant and two had positive cytology (50%).
Of the 29 lower third strictures 25 were malignant and six had positive cytology (24%).
The final diagnosis and the results of cytology are given in Table II.
One third of the patients with cholangiocarcinoma and a quarter of those with cancer of the pancreas had positive cytology.
The results of cytology are compared with the method of sampling in Table III.
Six patients, all with malignant strictures, had bile samples taken at both endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography.
Two of these patients had positive cytology, in one at both endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography and in the other at percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography alone.
Positive cytology was obtained more frequently in patients with malignant strictures undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (11 of 35, 31%) than in those undergoing percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (four of 18, 22%) although this was not statistically significant (χ 2 =0.50).
Of the 15 patients with benign strictures five were caused by sclerosing cholangitis, five secondary by bile duct stones, and one each because of chronic pancreatitis, Mirizzi syndrome, Caroli's disease, biliary cystadenoma, and polycystic liver.
The clinical details, basis for the diagnosis and the follow up of this group of patients is shown in Table IV.
Of the 15 patients with benign strictures follow up information has been obtained in 13 (87%) with a follow up period of three to 10 years (median six years).
Exfoliative cytology was negative in all 15 patients with benign disease resulting in no false positive results and a specificity of 100%.
Of the 47 patients diagnosed as having malignant bile duct strictures on radiological findings 29 (62%) had confirmation of this diagnosis by cytology and/or histology.
The clinical details and follow up of the seven patients in whom the diagnosis was based on cytology alone are given in Table V. This group of patients all followed a clinical course suggestive of malignancy with progressive deterioration and death in two to six months from the time of discharge.
Eighteen patients who were diagnosed on radiological grounds as having malignant bile duct strictures had negative cytology and no histological confirmation of malignancy.
Insufficient follow up information was available in six of these patients (33%).
Of the remaining 12 patients one died of acute renal failure during the initial investigation and treatment and the remaining 11 patients died at a median period of four months (range one to 18 months) because of progressive cahexia.
The overall contribution of exfoliative bile cytology to the diagnosis of bile duct strictures is shown in Figure 3.
Discussion
There are many well documented cases in which a seemingly benign stricture on radiological grounds has been subsequently shown to be malignant.
A hilar stricture produced by sclerosing cholangitis may easily be confused with a cholangiocarcinoma or a distal stricutre from chronic pancreatitis with a carcinoma of the pancreas.
These distinctions are often crucial to the management decision as treatment options vary from palliative stenting or radio/chemotherapy to curative resection or transplantation.
Improved methods of obtaining a tissue diagnosis are therefore becoming essential to the management of biliary tract strictures.
The ‘no tissue diagnosis’ rate of 38% reflects the difficulty of diagnosis in some patients, many of whom are not considered suitable for surgery and who do not have a mass on imaging.
This high incidence of failing to establish a tissue diagnosis is due to reliance on imaging by some clinicians who are reticent, perhaps rightly, about invasive diagnostic techniques in a predominantly elderly and frail population.
Although the possibility of this resulting in misdiagnosis is obviously present, follow up on this group of patients did not reveal any who had been falsely diagnosed as having malignancy.
In contrast with most other studies on exfoliative cytology for bile duct strictures this study has not focused on a particular primary site of tumour but rather the overall use of cytology with biliary strictures.
Results by origin of tumour show that one third of patients with cholangiocarcinomas and one quarter of those with pancreatic cancer were positive on cytology.
Most importantly in 15% of the patients suspected of malignancy on radiological grounds cytology was the only method of establishing a tissue diagnosis.
Suggested reasons for the high false negative rate on exfoliative cytology of pancreatic cancer include the enzymatic digestion of cells, pancreatic duct stenoses, intramural or extramural tumour growth and the distance between the sampling site and the tumour.
Sampling directly from the pancreatic duct provides a more proximate sample for cytological diagnosis and may improve the diagnostic sensitivity.
With cholangiocarcinomas the reported diagnostic sensitivity of exfoliative cytology varies from 44–100% and may depend on the method and site of sampling as well as its timing during the biliary manipulation.
The high sensitivities obtained in some centres would suggest that it is technically feasible to obtain tissue confirmation by cytology in all patients with hilar strictures.
The positivity rate for samples collected at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was 31% in comparison with 22% at percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography.
This difference may be explained by the technique involved.
At percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography bile is often sampled on initial puncture of the liver at a site distant from the stricture whereas at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography sampling is usually carried out at the site of the stricture after it has been disrupted by insertion of an endoprosthesis.
An alternative explanation for the more favourable results at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is that the type of stricture encountered by the two techniques is different, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography being preferred when imaging suggests a high stricture and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography when it is low.
This is not substantiated by analysis of the high strictures according to the method of diagnosis.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was carried out as often for high strictures (20 of 27 (74%) as it was for the group as a whole (48 of 62 (77%)).
These results would suggest that endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography may be a better method of sampling for biliary cytology than percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography although larger numbers of patients within a randomised study would be required for conformation.
Methods are obviously required to improve the sensitivity of diagnostic biliary cytology.
Multiple sampling for exfoliative cytology has been shown to improve the sensitivity of the technique but is time consuming.
Of more practical value is the use of a cytology brush, either percutaneously or endoscopically which greatly improves the number of viable cells for analysis and may be carried out without removal of the guide wire used for stent insertion.
A prospective study comparing exfoliative and brush cytology has not yet been reported.
A satisfactory alternative or addition to biliary brush cytology is direct biopsy of the stricture using small forceps under fluoroscopic control.
The results from this technique remain preliminary.
We would conclude from this study that exfoliative cytology for biliary strictures is simple to perform, highly specific, able to provide a diagnosis when other methods fail and should, therefore, be carried out routinely.
Complications and limitations of injection sclerotherapy in portal hypertension
The pioneering work of Whipple in 1945 began an era of portosystemic shunt surgery for portal hypertension which remained the primary form of treatment for nearly 30 years even though the consequences of portal diversion such as liver atrophy and encephalopathy were soon recognised.
Repeated trials in patients with bleeding varices confirmed that the complications of medical management were related to recurrent bleeding whereas surgical treatment was followed by liver failure and encephalopathy.
Refinements of surgical technique eventually culminated in the selective shunt procedures developed by Warren et al which were designed to decompress the gastro-oesophageal varices while preserving portal blood flow and liver function.
Endoscopic sclerotherapy as an alternative form of treatment for bleeding varices was first reported in 1939 in a young patient with extrahepatic portal vein occlusion and was eventually popularised as an alternative to surgery by the work of Johnston and Rodgers.
A number of controlled trials rapidly established the effectiveness of this treatment and the value of sclerotherapy in the initial management of bleeding varices, particularly in the cirrhotic patient, is now generally recognised.
The variety of complications that may be associated with schlerotherapy is less well known, and the role of surgery in the management of recurrent bleeding and other sequelae is not always appreciated.
Uncontrolled oesophageal bleeding
Randomised controlled trials in patients with chronic liver disease have shown that endoscopic sclerotherapy reduces the risk of rebleeding from oesophageal varices and may prolong survival.
Rebleeding during a course of endoscopic sclerotherapy treatment occurs in 23%-55% of patients and remains a significant cause of death in the cirrhotic patient.
The reported figures for failure of sclerotherapy vary widely from 5% to 60%, but this variation can be partly explained by the lack of a universal definition of ‘failure of treatment’.
Westaby defined a failure of sclerotherapy as an inability to control an episode of variceal bleeding rather than episodes of recurrent bleeding easily controlled by further injections.
Using this definition at King's College Hospital, surgical intervention was necessary in 12 of 252 children (4.4%) and 25 of 540 of adults (4.6%) with bleeding oesophageal varices treated by injection sclerotherapy over a five year period.
A similar failure rate for sclerotherapy of 6% was reported by Jenkins and Shields in patients presenting with their first episode of variceal haemmorhage.
There was a recurrent bleeding rate of 42% in this series, only 13% of whom were uncontrolled by conservative treatment.
The failures usually occurred in patients with poor liver function.
The options available for the surgical treatment of variceal haemorrhage during or after sclerotherapy now include hepatic transplantation as well as devascularisation or portosystemic shunting.
Control of bleeding with a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube followed by emergency transplantation has been suggested for patients with poor hepatic reserve, and Iwatsuki et al have proposed that transplantation is the best option for most patients with advanced liver disease and recurrent bleeding.
This ideal management, however, cannot be offered to most patients, who will either not be on a transplant programme or who may be too ill for such a radical procedure.
Other forms of surgery are, therefore, still necessary for the many patients who suffer uncontrollable or repeated haemorrhage after sclerotherapy.
It is now clear that an emergency portosystemic shunt or a devascularisation procedure does not necessarily prejudice the subsequent performance of liver transplantation.
Emergency portosystemic shunting is still recommended by some centres as the most effective therapy for bleeding while others prefer staple gun transection of the oesophagus which is the safer technique for the less experienced surgeon.
Emergency oesophageal transection which includes devascularisation of the lower oesophagus and the upper two thirds of the stomach is associated with mortality rates of up to 30%, which are similar to mortality figures reported after emergency shunting.
The King's College Hospital series showed mortality rates of 10% for portosystemic shunt therapy and 40% for emergency devascularisation procedures, but these treatment groups were selected on the basis of portal anatomy and liver function status and were not therefore comparable.
Millikan et al made an interesting comparison of biochemical and physiological data in 24 patients who had undergone transplantation and a group of patients treated with shunt surgery and sclerotherapy.
The authors concluded that patients with good liver function usually progress well after appropriate shunt surgery whereas those with advanced disease will need transplantation.
They also proposed that the aetiology of the portal hypertension might influence the type of surgery offered for recurrent bleeding from failed sclerotherapy.
Gastric varices
Gastric varices are not uncommon in cirrhotic patients with portal hypertension.
Most are a direct continuation of oesophageal varices and may respond to injection sclerotherapy from reflux of sclerosant below the cardia.
Sarin et al found that gastric varices disappeared in 28% of patients with endoscopic obliteration of oesophageal varices while Terblanche et al reported the disappearance of all gastric varices after successful sclerotherapy.
Approximately 5% of patients have a risk of bleeding from gastric varices after successful obliteration of their oesophageal veins.
Fundal varices originate from the short gastric and epiploic veins in about 12% of patients and occasionally follow an isolated splenic vein thrombosis.
They are usually inaccessible to endoscopic injection sclerotherapy, particularly when accompanied by acute bleeding, although Sarin et al did control haemorrhage in 6 of 8 patients.
Gastric varices are particularly difficult to diagnose during active bleeding.
Under-running of the bleeding varix with or without devascularisation or portosystemic shunting are possible surgical options.
Ectopic varices
Ectopic varices, defined as varices arising in sites other than the oesophagus or cardia of the stomach, may develop spontaneously following endoscopic obliteration of oesophageal varices or occur as a result of surgery and subsequent adhesion formation.
The prevalence of bleeding from this type of varix has been reported in 1.4% to 5% of patients with intrahepatic portal hypertension and in 27% to 40% of patients with extrahepatic portal hypertension.
Duodenal varices account for one third of all ectopic variceal bleeding and usually occurs in adults.
However, they are well recognised in children with extrahepatic portal hypertension and almost half of these patients have a history of previous surgery.
Successful treatment of duodenal varices has been reported with injection sclerotherapy, but surgical ligation or portosystemic decompression is usually required.
Jejunal and ileal varices account for approximately one third of bleeding ectopic varices.
These patients usually have a history of previous abdominal or pelvic survery and collaterals develop via adhesions between the gastrointestinal tract and the abdominal wall.
Patients bleed from large submucosal veins within the small bowel and although surgical excision of the affected segment may provide long term relief, recurrent bleeding can occur as further adhesions are formed.
A portosystemic shunt is the treatment of choice if liver function is satisfactory.
Bleeding from colonic varices is a rare clinical problem but may account for up to 25% of bleeding ectopic varices, particularly in cirrhotic patients.
Approximately half of the varices are localised to the distal colon and rectum, and 20% of patients have had previous surgical operations.
The varices may be seen on barium enema or at colonoscopy and aortoportography is diagnostic.
The mortality after partial or total colectomy in adult patients with cirrhosis is more than 60% and portosystemic shunting or transplantation, depending on the status of the liver disease, is preferable.
Anorectal varices represent collateral formation between the superior rectal vein which drains the submucosa of the lower rectum and upper part of the anal canal and the systemic venous drainage at the anus.
In a prospective study of 100 cirrhotic patients, Hosking et al found anorectal varices in 44% and haemorrhoids in 63% of patients.
There was no clear relationship between the severity of portal hypertension and the prevalence of haemorrhoids, which have previously been shown to have no direct communication with the portal vein.
Anorectal complications of portal hypertension may occur early in life and in a recent study of children 4.7% presenting with bleeding oesophageal varices had symptomatic rectal varices or haemorrhoids.
The treatment of bleeding anorectal varices includes injection sclerotherapy, banding, cryosurgery, under-running of varices, haemorrhoidectomy, embolisation, and portosystemic shunt.
Injection sclerotherapy is usually satisfactory for treating true haemorrhoids, but direct suture or banding are probably the more effective treatments for anorectal varices.
The formation of varices at the mucocutaneous junctions of small or large bowel stomas in patients with portal hypertension can be a source of massive or recurrent haemorrhage.
Haemorrhage can be controlled by intraperitoneal closure of a temporary stoma, but the management of a permanent stoma is more difficult.
Resuture of the stoma edge will be followed inevitably by recurrent bleeding and we have found that the therapeutic options are either a portosystemic shunt, if liver function is well preserved, or transplantation.
Spontaneous rupture of intraperitoneal varices is a rare complication in adults.
The typical presentation is one of sudden onset of acute abdominal pain, hypotension, and increasing abdominal girth in a patient with cirrhosis.
Urgent surgical treatment by direct suture ligation is the treatment of choice, but the prognosis for most patients is extremely poor.
Adhesion related varices should be suspected in patients with recurrent melaena with a history of previous surgery and in whom upper intestinal endoscopy is unhelpful.
Varices may form along adhesions between the abdominal wall and the gastrointestinal tract, particularly the small bowel.
Labelled red blood cells and selective visceral angiography have been recommended to establish the diagnosis.
Localised resection of the affected segment has been performed, but adhesion varices tend to recur and are best treated by portosystemic shunting.
Massive splenic enlargement often accompanied by discomfort or pain in the left side of the abdomen is another uncommon but difficult problem in patients with unrelieved portal hypertension who have undergone variceal sclerosis.
Abdominal symptoms or haematological changes of hypersplenism can be severe enough to warrant surgery.
Specific complications associated with endoscopic sclerotherapy
LOCAL COMPLICATIONS
The commonest complaints after injection sclerotherapy are of fever, retrosternal discomfort, and transient dysphagia which resolve within 24–48 hours.
The inflammatory reaction underlying this local complication occasionally becomes more widespread and causes mediastinitis, pericarditis, and even cardiac tamponade.
Pleural effusions are found in up to half these patients, although most are small and without clinical significance.
Patients developing these complications have usually had large volume injections of sclerosant and postsclerotherapy chest pain.
Other rare local complications of injection sclerotherapy include perforation of the thoracic duct with the development of a massive chylothorax, oesophageal perforation, and broncho-oesophageal fistula from delayed oesophageal necrosis.
Oesophageal ulceration is uncommon, usually asymptomatic, and more likely to follow large volume or frequent injections of sclerosant.
Bleeding from these ulcers is often related to portal hypertension and may be controlled with an infusion of somatostatin, but occasionally it is related to arterial damage which will only respond to prompt surgical intervention.
Oesophageal strictures are probably caused by a combination of chemical oesophagitis, ulceration, and acid reflux.
They were found in 16% of 98 children who had completed a course of sclerotherapy, all of whom responded to simple dilatation.
Three patients continued to complain of intermittent dysphagia suggestive of a motility disturbance and these changes are probably permanent.
There is no clear correlation between the number of injections and the degree of abnormality recorded.
Minor falls in the mean resting pressure of the lower oesophageal sphincter and increased gastro-oesophageal reflux have been noted, but the most striking abnormality has been the incoordinated passage of oesophageal pressure waves.
Severe respiratory complications have also been reported after sclerotherapy including respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia and atelectasis.
SYSTEMIC COMPLICATIONS OF INJECTION SCLEROTHERAPY
More widespread complications of sclerotherapy have been described and may be commoner than previously suspected.
Portal vein thrombosis may occur.
Barsoum et al reported a post mortem finding after sclerotherapy of portal veing thrombus extending into the left gastric vein and the submucosal plexus of the oesophagus.
Another post mortem study of three patients showed portal vein thrombosis with fresh thrombus extending from recently injected varices.
Intimal thickening, medial fibrosis, and microthrombus formation in the splenic vein have also been observed at the time of portosystemic shunt surgery in patients treated previously by injection sclerotherapy.
However spontaneous portal vein thrombus may occur in portal hypertension and the infusion of vasopressin may also play a part.
Case reports of rare complications of sclerotherapy include spinal cord paralysis after injection of sclerosant in the mid-oesophagus, brain abscess, digital gangrene, and acute renal failure.
Mild and transient disseminated intravascular coagulopathy has been described, and transient bacteraemia occurs in 5–8% of patients during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Staphylococcus aureus and alpha haemolytic streptococci were the most commonly identified organisms and were usually isolated from the biopsy channel of the endoscope and it seems likely that needle tip contamination is the chief culprit.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is imperative for immunosuppressed patients or for those with valvular heart disease or prosthetic graft material.
Anaphylactic shock has also been recorded after injection sclerotheraphy using ethanolamine oleate.
Summary
Injection sclerotherapy is now the accepted first line treatment for bleeding oesophageal varices, although it is associated with an impressive list of rare complications.
The main problem concerns the strategy for uncontrollable or recurrent bleeding.
Patients with uncontrolled bleeding may be referred for surgery after considerable blood loss and are then extremely difficult to assess.
The effects of blood loss on liver function can lead to an unduly pessimistic assessment of liver status.
An effective choice of emergency surgical procedure may require considerable surgical expertise.
Oesophageal transection and devascularisation are satisfactory for many patients with oesophageal varices secondary to cirrhosis and should nearly always control bleeding.
Difficulties arise in patients who are grossly obese and in those who have undergone extensive surgery in the upper abdomen.
Problems may also be encountered in those treated by repeated sclerotherapy, which may have caused severe inflammatory change and thickening around the lower oesophagus and upper stomach.
We believe that an emergency mesocaval shunt using either a vein graft or a synthetic material such as polytetrafluoroethylene is the procedure of choice for this difficult group of very sick patients.
The surgical exposure is satisfactory and not unduly prolonged in even the largest patients and the technique does not interfere with any subsequent transplant operation.
There is a greater choice in the management of the patient with less urgent bleeding from recurrent varices after sclerotherapy.
Repeat sclerotherapy may be effective for small oesophageal varices while liver transplantation may be indicated in the patient with deteriorating liver function.
A selective distal splenorenal shunt should be considered for patients with intact splenic and left renal veins and a mesocaval vein graft for the remainder.
We would therefore suggest that surgery should still be considered for the management of portal hypertension, particularly in the following circumstances:
(1)
Uncontrollable bleeding during the initial course of sclerotherapy;
(2)
Life threatening haemorrhage from recurrent varices;
(3)
Bleeding from ectopic varices not accessible to sclerotherapy;
(4)
Uncontrollable bleeding from oesophageal ulceration secondary to injection sclerotherapy;
(5)
Severe, symptomatic hypersplenism;
(6)
For patients who live in communities remote from blood transfusion facilities and adequate medical care.
A prospective trial of endoscopic sclerotherapy v oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation in the long term management of bleeding oesophageal varices
Abstract
In a prospective three centre study oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation have been compared with endoscopic sclerotherapy in the long term management of bleeding oesophageal varices.
Cirrhotic patients (Child's A or B grade) with documented bleeding oesophageal varices were treated initially with emergency sclerotherapy, and after five days stability; were allocated to one of the two treatment regimes.
The endoscopic sclerotherapy group underwent regular sclerotherapy until variceal obliteration while those undergoing surgery were not endoscoped unless bleeding recurred, when they were treated by sclerotherapy if appropriate.
Ninety two patients were eligible for analysis (68% alocholic cirrhosis; mean age 50.1 years) and follow up was achieved for a mean of 52.5 months (range 17–83).
Mortality in the first three months was greater in the oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation group (20% v 1%) but by two years the survival curves were the same and thereafter there was no difference in mortality.
Rebleeding occurred in 13/41 (31%) patients, undergoing oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation.
The costs incurred during the first year of oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation treatment were significantly greater than with endoscopic sclerotherapy (£4369 v £1067, p<0.0001) and the high rate of rebleeding in the surgical group meant that no cost savings occurred in subsequent years.
It is concluded that oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation confers no benefit over endoscopic sclerotherapy in terms of long term survival and that it is not cost effective as judged by the current health care costs in the United Kingdom.
While there is little doubt that endoscopic sclerotherapy provides a valuable and effective means of controlling acute variceal haemorrhage its role in the long term management of the problem remains controversial.
Although repeated injection therapy eradicates oesophageal varices in most patients, life long follow up with check endoscopies and repeated injections places a significant demand upon patients and hospital resources and the procedures are not without complications.
Porta caval shunt operations have not found favour in recent years because of the increased incidence of postoperative hepatic encephalopathy.
The distal splenorenal shunt was designed to overcome this problem, but comparison with endoscopic sclerotherapy suggests that this operative procedure is associated with an increased mortality.
Several studies have compared endoscopic sclerotherapy with transection of the oesophagus; these involved urgent or emergency treatment with relatively short follow up periods.
Extensive oesophagogastric devascularisation combined with splenectomy, pyloromyotomy, vagotomy, and oesophageal transection has been widely practised in Japan while a modified version of this operation has been used in Great Britain.
The theoretical advantage of this technique is that it deals directly with the oesophageal varices without affecting liver perfusion: a prospective study has shown it to be superior to standard and distal splenorenal shunts in patients with portal hypertension secondary to schistosomiasis.
We report here the results of a three centre prospective randomised controlled trial comparing repeated endoscopic injection sclerotherapy with the modified transection and devascularisation procedure in the long term management of patients with cirrhosis and oesophageal variceal haemorrhage.
In addition to morbidity and mortality, we have examined and compared the economic costs of the two management strategies.
Methods
TRIAL DESIGN
The major objective of the trial was concerned with the long term management of patients after their initial variceal bleeds.
In otder to minimise the influence of complications from the initial bleed, patients were only considered to be eligible for entry into the trial once they were stable with no evidence of any bleeding for five days and also no evidence of any other destabilising medical conditions (such as septicaemia and renal failure).
All patients admitted with their first variceal haemorrhage were resuscitated and treated by urgent endoscopic sclerotherapy.
After a minimum period of five days stability they were eligible for randomisation and inclusion into the trial.
Those who rebled within the first five days were then treated by further sclerotherapy and were randomised if and when they were free of bleeding for this period of time.
Specific entry criteria were:(1) Endoscopically proven oesophageal variceal bleeding;(2) biopsy proven cirrhosis;(3) age 18–65 years;(4) written informed consent;(5) child's grading A or B (Pugh's modification).
Patients who were grade C on admission and subsequently improved to grade A or B were eligible for inclusion.
Exclusion criteria were:(1) Patients whose overall medical condition rendered them as unduly high risk for elective surgery — for example, severe chronic obstructive airways disease;(2) patients considered unsuitable for surgery because of technical reasons such as (a) gross obesity,(b) fixed hiatus hernia,(c) previous major upper gastrointestinal surgery;(3) patients who had received previous therapy for bleeding oesophageal varices;(4) patients already taking beta blockers;(5) patients on waiting list for liver transplantation;(6) HBsAg positive subjects.
Once eligible for inclusion in the study, the nature of the trial was explained to the patients and they were offered the treatment allocated by randomisation.
In cases where continuing clinical improvement was taking place, such as the treatment of ascites, randomisation was deferred until the patient had reached an optimal state of health.
Those assigned to surgery were scheduled for the next available or convenient operating list.
Bleeding occurring between randomisation and surgery was treated by resuscitation and endoscopic sclerotherapy.
OESOPHAGOGASTRIC DEVASCULARISATION WITH OESOPHAGEAL TRANSECTION
The abdomen was opened through a bilateral subcostal or midline incision and the spleen was only removed if there was a direct indication — for example, severe hypersplenism.
The upper half of the stomach was devascularised on its greater and lesser curves, the vessels being carefully ligated and divided close to the gastric wall.
The dissection was continued 5–6 cm up the oesophagus, leaving the vagal trunks intact while some surgeons divided the perioesophageal vessels, others did not.
The circular stapling gun was then introduced through an anterior gastrostomy and opened in the lower oesophagus when a nylon or silk ligature was tied round just at the gastrooesophageal junction.
The gun was then ‘fired’ cutting and stapling the oesophagus in one movement and excising a ‘doughnut’of oesophageal wall.
If there was any doubt about its completeness or any continued bleeding into the stomach, further sutures were inserted into the anastomosis from outside.
The gastrostomy was then closed with two layers, and the abdomen closed either in layers or with mass closure.
No drain was inserted in view of the likelihood of ascites developing in the postoperative period.
After surgery patients were not routinely endoscoped and injection of varices was only carried out if and when bleeding occurred.
ENDOSCOPIC SCLEROTHERAPY
Patients allocated to long term endoscopic sclerotherapy underwent regular intra variceal injection of all patent varices using ethanolamine oleate.
This was carried out in two centres on an outpatient basis using local anaesthesia and intravenous sedation where indicated at one to four weekly intervals until obliteration of all varices had been achieved.
After this, regular endoscopic checks at three to 12 monthly intervals were carried out with reinjection as, and when, varices recurred.
In Belfast endoscopic sclerotherapy was performed under general anaesthesia using a rigid endoscope, for which patients were admitted to hospital for 48 hours.
REBLEEDING
Patients presenting with clinical evidence of gastrointestinal haemorrhage were endoscoped urgently, the source of bleeding identified, and appropriate treatment instituted including endoscopic sclerotherapy irrespective of which arm of the trial they had been randomised to.
TRIAL CENTRES
The trial was carried out in three major centres with particular expertise in the surgery of portal hypertension and the control of variceal bleeding by endoscopic sclerotherapy.
Patients were recruited in Sheffield and Belfast from the 1 February 1984 and in Glasgow from the 1 January 1985 until recruitment was terminated in all centres on 30 September 1989.
The trial was analysed up to the 31 January 1991 and a minimum of 16 months after the last patient was recruited into the study.
RANDOMISATION
Randomisation was conducted separately in each centre by randomly assigned blocks of four with patients being recruited consecutively.
In addition they were stratified according to Child's classification (A or B).
END POINTS
Death
At the outset of the trial death was accepted as the major end point of the study whether caused by variceal harmorrhage or other causes.
The increasing availability of liver transplantation during the course of the study meant that some individuals became eligible for this procedure.
When performed, this was analysed as a censored event in life table analysis.
In addition the failure of surgery and sclerotherapy was assessed in terms of recurring variceal haemorrhage and the need to resort to alternative measures in order to control it.
Surgical failure
Patients readmitted to hospital with gastrointestinal bleeding shown endoscopically to be from oesophageal varices were classified as having failed surgical therapy.
Such patients were subsequently managed by long term sclerotherapy using the regime outlined earlier.
Sclerotherapy failure
Those assigned to long term sclerotherapy who presented with oesophageal variceal rebleeding were treated by further sclerotherapy as detailed above.
Patients requiring more than 10 units of blood on a single admission were defined as failures of sclerotherapy and were referred for surgery — the type of operation being left to the discretion of the clinician involved.
Bleeds from non-oesophageal sources — for example, peptic ulcers, congestive gastropathy, gastric varices — were classified separately and treatment was at the discretion of the individual centre.
ETHICS
Approval was obtained from the local Ethical Committee in each centre.
COST ANALYSIS
An analysis was undertaken for a subsample of 20 patients in each treatment group sampled from trial patients in Sheffield to derive a mean hospital cost per patient.
The hospital services used by patients includes the time spent in the operating theatre; medical, nursing and hotel services provided on the ward, services provided in out patient checks and injection endoscopy procedures, units of blood, and prescribed drugs.
The costs of theatre and endoscopic procedures were estimated by direct observation of a sample of procedures on trial patients.
Costs for each patient were then calculated by multiplying the mean cost per procedure by the number of procedures performed on them.
Assessment of drug therapy was restricted to the costs of the diuretic spironolactone as this was the only drug which could be identified as having significant financial implications.
The cost of other services have been derived from estimates provided by the hospital (Royal Hallamshire Hospital) Finance Department.
All costs are expressed in 1989/90 prices, and where costs have been incurred beyond the first year, then the Treasury's recommended discount rate of 6% has been applied to obtain a present value estimate.
The results were analysed by treatment group to generate mean annual costs for five years and the accumulated mean costs of treating patients since entering the trial.
Both mean cost estimates have been compared between treatment groups, and the significance of any difference tested using randomisation test procedures.
The results have also been subjected to a sensitivity analysis to see if any differences are sensitive to changes in the costing assumptions used, such as the discount rate or ward stay costs.
Results
One hundred patients of a total of 335 presenting for the first time with variceal haemorrhage were recruited into the study and randomised.
Child's grade C and age were the main criteria for exclusion and many patients were ineligible for more than one reason.
HBsAg positive individuals (accounting for 3% of our cirrhotic population) were excluded because at the outset of the trial hepatitus B virus immunisation was not widely available to theatre staff and it was not deemed acceptable to expose such staff to the risks of infection undergoing elective surgery.
Patients, taking B blockers were not randomised as these drugs were considered to influence the risk of rebleeding.
Three subjects were excluded from final analysis because of protocol violation (two patients aged over 65, one patient with portal vein thrombosis).
Of the remainder 51 were randomised to sclerotherapy and 46 to surgery.
Three patients assigned to surgery subsequently refused operation and received no further treatment until bleeding recurred.
They have been included in the surgical group for analysis on the basis of ‘intention to treat’.
Table I shows the demographic data.
The age and sex distribution in both groups were similar as was the proportion of patients with alcoholic liver disease.
The aetiology of the non-alcoholic liver disease group was cryptogenic cirrhosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, chronic active hepatitis, and miscellaneous, which were evenly distributed between the two groups.
The time between bleed and randomisation as well as the measures required to stabilise patients was similar in both groups as was the length of follow up.
Table II compares the surgical and sclerotherapy groups after randomisation in terms of hospital stay, gastrointestinal bleeding and endoscopy workload.
The unexpectedly long time between initial bleed and randomisation in the surgery and sclerotherapy groups (26 and 20 days respectively) was caused by several factors:(i) If rebleeding occurred randomisation was delayed until stability for a minimum of five days and been achieved.
(ii) Several patients who were Child's grade C on or shortly after admission improved with medical treatment to grade A or B, thereby ultimately becoming eligible for inclusion int he study.
(iii) Some individuals, when eligible for randomisation, requested a period of time in convalescence before agreeing to participate.
(iv) Development of oesophageal ulceration after emergency sclerotherapy delayed randomisation as it was felt that its pressure would increase the hazards of oesophageal transection in patients randomised to this arm of the trial.
After randomisation, the number of days spent in hospital by patients undergoing surgery was significantly greater than for those randomised to sclerotherapy (26.9 v 10.3, p<0.001).
While this is almost largely as a result the initial surgical procedure there is little difference in the hospital stay with rebleeding caused by the unexpected high frequency of recurrent haemorrhage in patients undergoing oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation.
Thus the surgical group required a significant amount of blood transfusion as well as injection and check endoscopies, although there were fewer episodes than in the sclerotherapy group.
The sources of non-variceal bleeding were oesophagitis 12, gastropathy seven, and Mallory-Weiss tears, peptic ulcers, gastric varices and rectal varices (two each).
The excess of non-variceal bleeds among patients receiving surgery is almost entirely accounted for by a single patient who experienced numerous bleeds for oesophagitis (unrelated to the surgical procedure).
MORTALITY
The Figure compares the survival of the two groups of patients.
It can be seen that there is an initial 20% mortality during the first three months in those randomised to surgery, with virtually no further deaths occurring during the next 24 months.
In contrast patients subjected to sclerotherapy showed no early mortality but a steady decline in survival in the first two years.
Thereafter the two survival curves are identical.
Thirty three patients died during the course of the study, the causes of death being shown in Table III.
There is no significant difference in the causes of death between those treated by surgery and those receiving sclerotherapy.
None of the patients dying of sepsis had undergone splenectomy and only one of these deaths occurred in the early post operative period.
Variceal bleeding was responsible for only four deaths.
Three patients underwent successful liver transplantation and two others died of hepatic failure while awaiting transplant surgery.
The survival rates for alcoholic and non-alcoholic patients were identical.
There is no significant difference in long term survival between Child's A and B patients except for a higher mortality in the first two months after surgery in Child's B (six of 19 v three of 24); this largely accounts for the difference in the overall survival between the surgery and sclerotherapy groups.
TREATMENT FAILURE
Surgery
Seventeen of the 46 patients allocated to surgical therapy experienced documented bleeding from oesophageal varices after randomisation.
Two patients bled before surgery could be carried out and two further subjects were among the three who declined surgery.
Thus 13 of 41 (31.7%) of those who underwent oesophageal transection with gastric devascularisation rebled.
This included a third patient who bled after randomisation and before surgery and who subsequently rebled four months after the operation.
In three cases technical difficulties were encountered at the time of surgery and the procedure was acknowledged to have been inadequate in terms of gastric devascularisation.
Assessment of drug therapy was restricted to the costs of the diuretic spironolactone as this was the only drug which could be identified as having significant financial implications.
Early rebleeding (at one month, three months, and five months) was observed in these three individuals.
In the other cases bleeding recurred between seven and 50 months after surgery.
In almost all cases variceal rebleeding was documented as having occurred below the staple line.
Sclerotherapy
Twenth five of 51 (49.0% of patients experienced further variceal bleeding after randomisation to long term endoscopic sclerotherapy.
Half of the first rebleeds occurred within 12 months of initiation of sclerotherapy.
Satisfactory control of bleeding was achieved in all cases except one individual who underwent successful emergency surgery for uncontrollable haemorrhage.
COST ESTIMATES
The results on Tables IV and V are based on the following service cost estimates.
An oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation has a mean cost of £783 based on an average time in theatre (including induction and recovery) of around three hours and includes the cost of the staples £130).
Check and injection endoscopies cost £49 and £60 respectively, based on timings of nine and 15 minutes per procedure and 10 minutes preparation for each (nine).
The cost per day of medical, nursing, and hotel services on a ward was estimated to be £128.
The collection, processing, and storage of blood has been estimated from NHS charges per unit of £28.
The mean cost in the first year of treatment of sclerotherapy patients (£1094) was a quarter of the mean cost of surgery patients (£4368), and this difference is highly significant (p<0.0001).
In the second year sclerotherapy patients also cost less, although this difference is not significant.
In subsequent years, the number of patients in the trial were too small to compare mean annual costs.
There is no evidence, however, of surgery patients beginning to cost substantially less, and thereby reversing the large differences in the first year.
The overall mean cost difference in the first year is insensitive to large changes in the Health Service cost estimates.
From Table V it is evident that the cost difference is principally caused by the expenses incurred in ward stay associated surgery (£2483), and to a lesser extent the theatre costs (£783).
The costs of the increased number of endoscopies after sclerotherapy (£235) are lessl than 10% of those associated with surgery.
In one of the centres (Belfast) endoscopic sclerotherapy was conducted under general anaesthesia.
This was associated with a substantial reduction of injection endoscopies but, although not formally costed, the increased theatre and postoperative vosts possibly balanced the reduction in endoscopic procedures.
Discussion
Two major conclusions emerge from the study.
The first is that the long term survival after oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation and endoscopic sclerotherapy are identical and the second is that the surgical procedure is significantly more expensive than repeated sclerotherapy.
In the short term patients randomised to surgery clearly did worse because of an initial mortality of 15% in the immediate post operative period (up to one month).
Death was the result of sepsis, bowel infarction, and renal failure none of which appear to have been readily preventable in retrospect.
There was no significant mortality in this group during the next two years in contrast with the sclerotherapy treated patients, and this resulted in a convergence of the survival curves.
Thereafter both curves are identical suggesting that the patients who died immediately after surgery might possibly have been those whose life expectancy was less than two years.
The overall three and five year survival after variceal harmorrhage was 68% and 54% respectively, which compares favourably with other published series for grade A and B patients.
This is the first study from the United Kingdom to examine the cost of maintaining patients on long term sclerotherapy, and it is also the first to compare this with a surgical procedure in such patients.
From an economic point of view the results of surgery are disappointing.
The major costof the surgical procedure relates to the operation itself and to the postoperative hospital stay.
These items were almost identical in each of the centres and, given the underlying liver disease it is unlikely that this could be significantly reduced.
Such is the cost of the initial surgical admission that even if the surgical patients incurred no further costs at all after discharge from hospital it would be five years before the cumulative expenditure associated with sclerotherapy reached that of the operation.
An unexpected finding of this study was the high incidence of recurrent variceal haemorrhage (31%) among those patients undergoing oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation.
Although in three cases it was recognised that the operation was technically unsatisfactory and early rebleeding was encountered in each case, in the rest there appeared to be no obvious explanation for these surgical failures.
The time interval between surgery and rebleeding was very variable, in one case occurring over four years after the initial operation.
It is unlikely that recurring or increasing alcohol abuse played any significant role in rebleeding as surgical failure occurred more frequently in the non-alcoholic patients (seven of 27 v six of 16 alcoholics).
In each case rebleeding was seen to take place below the staple line, suggesting perhaps that while the oesophageal transection was satisfactory better results could conceivably be obtained with a more radical gastric devascularisation.
Against this, however, was the experience in one patient who had to undergo an emergency gastrectomy for ischaemia after oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation.
Surgical inexperience cannot be considered as an explanationfor the high failure as rebleeding was noted in all three centres and in each centre the operations were carried either directly or under the close supervision of a highly experienced hepatobiliary surgeon.
It seems probable that even less satisfactory results would be obtained by surgeons with lesser experience.
Despite the high incidence of recurrent haemorrhage in patients treated by both techniques only four of the 33 deaths in the study occurred as a result of bleeding varices.
This is consistent with the observation that while there is a significant mortality associated with the first variceal bleed (20% Child's B patients) survival rate from subsequent bleeds is substantially better.
This study did not explicitly compare these two treatments in terms of time costs and discomfort.
Nevertheless these are likely to be higher for oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation patients, given the major operation and the long postoperative stay.
While the regime for patients undergoing sclerotherapy is more inconvenient, it is undoubtedly less traumatic.
In conclusion oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation appears to confer no benefit over endoscopic sclerotherapy in terms of long term survival after variceal haemorrhage.
Although fewer patients bled after surgery the number of bleeds was still significant and was great enough to negate any potential long term reductions from the operation.
In economic terms, sclerotherapy was clearly the most cost effective treatment.
A further potential disadvantage of oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation is that the extensive upper adbonimal surgery may complicate subsequent orthotopic liver transplantation.
While this was not a major consideration when the trial was originally planned the considerable advances in recent years have meant that the significant proportion of the patients recruited into studies such as this are likely to be potential transplant recipients.
The discouraging results of oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation in this trial do not mean that the operation has no place in the management of variceal bleeding.
This study has confirmed early observations that oesophageal transection and gastric devascularisation is not followed by any significant degree of chronic encephalopathy and it would certainy be a useful procedure in patients where endoscopic sclerotherapy fails to control bleeding.
This was infrequent in the units participating in this study, but in centres where the relative surgical and endoscopic expertise is different such a situation may well arise more commonly.
Such conditions may well apply in other parts of the world where the relative availability and skills of both surgery and sclerotherapy may differ.
Anti-lactoferrin antibodies and other types of ANCA in ulcerative colitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and Crohn's disease
Abstract
Fifty two serum samples from patients with Crohn's disease, 24 from patients with ulcerative colitis, and 12 from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis were analysed for the presence of anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA) of IgG and IgA class by means of enzyme linked immunosorbent assays using lactoferrin, myeloperoxidase, and antigen extracted from azurophil granules, ‘αantigen’(that is, an antigen preparation containing proteinase 3) as substrates.
A high frequency of positive tests for IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies was found in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis (50%) and primary sclerosing cholangitis (50%).
In Crohn's disease only 4 of 52 (8%) sera had nti-lactoferrin antibodies — in all four instances the sera belonged to patients with disease involving the colon.
All patients with sclerosing cholangitis and positive tests for anti-lactoferrin had ulcerative colitis.
Low levels of IgG antibodies against myeloperoxidase or antigen were also found occasionally in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
IgA antibodies directed against lactoferrin and antigen (but not myeloperoxidase) were seen in all three conditions.
Since the description of anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA) in active Wegener's granulomatosis, the interest in anti-granulocyte antibodies has increased vastly.
ANCA is now recognised as a family of autoantibodies directed against cytoplasmic antigens, mainly lysosomal enzymes, in polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes (PMNL).
In Wegener's granulomatosis, ANCA are typically directed against proteinase 3, a serine proteinase located in azurophilic granules of human PMNL.
Anti-proteinase 3 antibodies may also occur in isolated, rapidly progressive glomeruloneophritis and occasionally in systemic vasculitic conditions other than Wegener's granulomatosis.
Antibodies directed against other lysosomal enzymes in PMNL azurophilic granules, for example myeloperoxidase and elastase, also occur in primary systemic vasculitic diseases and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
After ethanol fixation of PMNL, proteinase 3 remains within the cytoplasmic granules, whereas myeloperoxidase and elastase become extracted and locate close to or on the cell nucleus.
At indirect immunofluorescent microscopical determination of ANCA, anti-proteinase 3 antibodies produce a typical pancytoplasmatic granular staining pattern (C-ANCA), whereas anti-myeloperoxidase and anti-elastase antibodies give rise to a blurry perinuclear staining pattern (P-ANCA) or staining of the PMNL nuclei (granulocyte specific anti-nuclear antibodies, GS-ANA).
A detergent extract of isolated azurophil granules (α antigen) can be used for the detection of anti-proteinase 3 antibodies (C-ANCA) by means of enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) but does not allow detection of anti-myeloperoxidase.
Also, antibodies against lactoferrin, an iron binding protein residing in specific granules of PNML, produce a P-ANCA pattern owing to perinuclear/nuclear localisation of lactoferrin after ethanol fixation.
Apart from the artifactual GS-ANA staining pattern caused by antibodies directed against nucleophilic cytoplasmic antigens, it is possible that true GS-ANAs also exist.
Apart from the occurrence in primary systemic vasculitides and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, P-ANCA/GS-ANA may be seen in other disease states, for example rheumatoid arthritis without signs of vasculitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Recent evidence favours the idea that inflammatory bowel disease may be caused by mesenteric vasculitis.
In a preliminary study of 16 frozen sera from patients with Crohn's disease we found low levels of anti-α antigen antibodies, anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies, and anti-lactoferrin antibodies in some sera.
The present study was done to extend these observations and to include sera from patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Patients and methods
CROHN'S DISEASE
Fifty two patients, 27 men aged 21–71 years (mean 48 years) and 25 women aged 17–55 years (mean 38 years) were enrolled in the study.
The mean duration of the disease was 17 years (range 4–33 years).
Eight patients had disease limited to the colon and/or rectum, 19 patients had disease in the small bowel alone, and 25 patients had disease manifestations in both small bowel and colon/rectum.
Forth patients had been operated on, 14 of whom had been subjected to only ileocoecal resection.
Three patients had ileorectal anastomosis, and six patients had ileostomy after proctocolectomy.
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Twenty four patients, 11 men aged19–65 years (mean 46 years), and 13 women aged 20–68 years (mean 42 years) participated in the study.
Nineteen patients had left sided colitis and five patients had more extensive or total colitis.
Fourteen of the patients had active disease — that is at least five loose stools with visible blood (all had visible inflammation at endoscopy)— and the remaining 10 patients were in clinical remission.
PRIMARY SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS
Twelve patients, seven men aged 20–59 years (mean 38 years) and five women aged 35–63 years (mean 48 years), took part in the study.
The diagnosis had been made by endoscopic retrograde cholangiography 3 years (range 1–6 years) before the study.
Two patients had only intrahepatic cholangitis and 10 had both extra- and intrahepatic cholangitis.
In four patients cirrhosis of the liver had been diagnosed at histopathological examination of liver biopsies.
One patient had undergone liver transplantation 6 years earlier.
Nine of the 12 patients had also suffered from ulcerative colitis for 8 years (range 0–21 years) and one had non-specific colitis.
In the two remaining patients no accompanying disease had been diagnosed.
None of the patients had Crohn's disease.
One of the patients originally participating in the study had to be excluded as she proved to have suffered from acute Campylobacter jejuni colitis.
ANTIGEN PREPARATIONS
Azurophil granules were prepared from isolated normal peripheral granulocytes after low pressure homogenisation of the cells and centrifugation of the homogenate in a Percoll (Pharmacia Fine Chemicals, Uppsala, Sweden) gradient as described elsewhere.
The granules were lysed with 0.01% (final concentration) Triton X-100 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
The extract thus achieved (α antigen) was diluted in carbonate-bicarbonate buffer pH 9.5 and used as substrate for ELISA.
Lyophilised preparations of myeloperoxidase (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA), human milk lactoferrin (Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO, USA), and bovine milk lactoferrin (Sigma) were dissolved in carbonate-bicarbonate buffer (10 µg antigen/ml) and used for ELISA.
ELISA
High binding plastic microtitre plates (Nunc Immunoplate, Roskilde, Denmark) were coated with α antigen, myeloperoxidase, or human lactoferrin solutions by incubation at 4°C for 12 hours.
After washing with buffer (phosphate buffered saline, PBS, with 0.05% Tween 20), serum samples (diluted 1:10 in PBS-Tween) were applied for 30 minutes at room temperature.
Normal human serum diluted 1:10 served as a blank.
The microtitre plates were washed thoroughly with PBS-Tween and incubated for another 30 minutes with alkaline-phospatase (ALP) conjungated rabbit anti-human γ chain or rabbit anti human α chain antisera (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) diluted 1:400 in PBS-Tween.
After washing, the substrate buffr was pplied and the optical density (OD) read at 405 nm when the positive reference samples had reached OD1.0.
OD values exceeding 2 SDs of the reference material from healthy blood donors (n=218 for IgG tests; n=211 for IgA tests) were considered positive.
The IgG autoantibody analyses were performed on all sera from patients with Crohn's disease (n=52), ulcerative colitis (n=24), and primary sclerosing cholangitis (n=12).
IgA autoantibody tests were done on sera from 51 patients with Crohn's disease, 21 ulcerative colitis sera, and 11 sera from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis.
IgG anti-bovine lactoferrin antibodies were measured essentially as described above, except that no negative or positive serum references were used.
OD values were read after 30 minutes incubation with substrate buffer.
Eleven positive and 10 negative sera in the test for IgG anti-human lactoferrin were selected for this analysis.
RABBIT ANTI-LACTOFERRIN ANTISERA
Serum containing polyclonal rabbit anti-human leukocyte lactoferrin was the kind gift of Dr Johan Richter, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
To produce anti-human milk lactoferrin antibodies, rabbits were immunised by subcutaneous injections of 2 mg human milk lactoferrin (that is, the same antigen as that used for the ELISA and western blot assays) togetherwith Freund's incomplete adjuvant (Sigma) on three occasions with 4 week intervals.
The reason for not using Freund's complete adjuvant was to avoid immunisation against hsp-65, because of its immunological cross reaction with human lactoferrin.
Two weeks after the second booster dose, the animals were anaesthetised with barbiturate, and exsanguinised by heart puncture.
Serum was pooled.
Anti-lactoferrin activity of the serum was confimed by agarose double radial immunodiffusion against human milk lactoferrin.
WESTERN BLOTTING
Lactoferrin (1 µg per lane) was electroporesed in 5–20% sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gels (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore Continental Water Systems, Bedford, MA, USA).
Blocking was done with 5% bovine serum albumin (Sigma) in PBS.
Anti-lactoferrin positive patient sera (as judged by ELISA) were diluted 1:20 or 1:200 in PBS-Tween with 1% bovine serum albumin, and applied for 1 hour.
The rabbit anti-human leukocyte lactoferrin served as a reference.
ALP conjugated anti-human IgG and anti-rabbit IgG (Dako) were used as secondary antibodies.
INDIRECT IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE (IIF) MICROSCOPY
To study the distribution of lactoferrin in ethanol fixed granulocytes cytocentrifuged onto microscope sides, the slides were incubated with rabbit anti-human milk lactoferrin in a moist chamber for 30 minutes.
After washing with PBS and incubation for another 30 minutes with sheep fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated anti-rabbit Ig (Wellcome Diagnostics, Temple Hill, Dartford, UK), the slides were again washed with PBS, mounted with PBS-glycerin, and inspected under a fluorescence microscope with a mercury lamp (HBO 50) epi-illumination and filters for FITC activation/ emission.
STATISTICS
Differences in ELISA results between the control sera and the patient sera were evaluated by the χ 2 test, and divided into four groups: p0.05 =not significant (NS); p<0.05 (*); p<0.01 (**); p<0.001 (***).
Results
The frequencies of IgG antibodies directed against α antigen, myeloperoxidase, and lactoferrin are shown in Figure 1.
In Crohn's disease 4 of 52 sera had IgG anti-α antigen, which is not statistically different from the control group, although two of the sera had remarkably high antibody levels.
In ulcerative colitis 4 of 24 of the sera contained IgG anti-α antigen antibodies (p<0.05), and in primary sclerosing cholangitis 4 of 12 sera (p<0.001) were positive.
IgG anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies occurred in 3 of 52 of the sera taken from patients with Crohn's disease (not statistically different from the control group), and in 7 of 24 of the ulcerative colitis sera (p<0.001).
Four of 12 sera from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis were positive (p<0.001).
Four of 52 (8%) of the sera from patients with Crohn's disease contained IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies (not significantly different from the control group).
All of these sera proved to come from patients with Crohn colitis.
However, colitis also occurred in 33 of 48 (69%) without IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies.
Both in ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis, IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies were found in 50% of the sera (p<0.001 in both instances).
All of the anti-lactoferrin positive cholangitis sera belonged to patients suffering from concomitant ulcerative colitis — that is, 6 of 9 (67%) sera from patients with sclerosing cholangitis and concomitant ulcerative colitis contained IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies.
Two of the sera from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis and one serum from a patient with ulcerative colitis were positive in all three ELISA tests.
However, in all three instances the ELISA tests gave quite different OD values in the different assays, indicating true positive ELISA test results.
Positive anti-lactoferrin ELISA results were blocked by preincubation of the lactoferrin-coated microtitre plates with rabbit IgG anti-lactoferrin (not illustrated).
The occurrence of IgG anti-lactoferrin was also confirmed by western blotting, revealing a single reaction band with an antigen of molecular weight about 80000 and corresponding to rabbit anti-human leukocyte lactoferrin (Fig 2).
One patient originally included in the study had acute colitis and a high level of IgG anti-lactoferrin at the first sampling occasion, and a further raised anti-lactoferrin level in a later serum sample (not illustrated).
This patient was, however, excluded from the study since her symptoms were explained by infection with Campylobacter jejuni .
Figure 3 illustrates the lack of correlation between levels of IgG anti-human lactoferrin and IgG anti-bovine lactoferrin as tested by Elisa with 10 sera positive in the anti-human lactoferrin and 12 sera negative in the same test.
Figure 4 shows the occurrence of IgA antibodies directed against α antigen, myeloperoxidase, and human lactoferrin.
Raised levels of IgA anti-α antigen were seen in 12 of 51 (24%) sera from Crohn's disease (p<0.001), in 5 of 11 (45%) sera from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (p<0.001), but in only 2 of 21 (10%) sera from patients with ulcerative colitis (NS).
The levels of IgA anti-myeloperoxidase did not differ from the control group in any of the disease states, whereas IgA anti-lactoferrin was significantly (p<0.01) more common in Crohn's disease, although it was seen only in a minority of the patient sera (6 of 51= 12%).
IgA anti-lactoferrin was found in significantly (p<0.001) increased frequency also in ulcerative colitis (7 of 21=33%), but not in sclerosing cholangitis (1 of 11=9%).
The levels of IgA-ANCAs were not explained by the occurrence of agglutinating rheumatoid factors (not illustrated).
Figure 5 shows the frequency of positive IgG and/or IgA tests for either anti-a > antigen, or anti-myeloperoxidase, or anti-lactoferrin in sera from blood donors, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Taken together, positive IgG tests for one or more of the three granulocyte antigens were found in 11% (24 of 218) of control sera, in 19% (10 of 52) of Crohn's disease (NS), in 67% (16 of 24) of ulcerative colitis (p<0.001), and in 67% (8 of 12) of primary sclerosing cholangitis sera; IgA anti-granulocyte antibodies were found in 7% (15 of 211) of the controls, in 29% (15 of 51) of Crohn's disease patients (p<0.001), in 48% (10 of 21) of ulcerative colitis patients (p<0.001), and in 55% (6 of 11) of primary sclerosing cholangitis subjects (p<0.001).
Antibodies of either IgG or IgA class were found in 49% of the sera from patients with Crohn's disease (p<0.001), in 74% of the sera from patients with ulcerative colitis (p<0.001), and in 82% of the chlangitis sera (p<0.001).
There was no obvious correlation between disease activity or extraintestinal disease (arthritis, arthralgia, skin involvement) and the presence of IgG or IgA anti-granulocyte antibodies, although as many as 5 of 7 Crohn's disease patients with IgA anti-lactoferrin containing sera had extraintestinal complaints.
The level of IgG and IgA anti-granulocyte antibodies did not correlate to the total serum levels of IgG and IgA (not illustrated).
Figure 6 shows the GS-ANA/P-ANCA immunofluorescence pattern of cytocentrifuged ethanol-fixed human polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes after staining with rabbit anti-human milk lactoferrin.
This, taken together with the western blot analysis (Fig 2), shows that antibodies against human milk lactoferrin recognise human leukocyte lactoferrin and vice versa.
Discussion
In this study we report high frequencies of IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies (corresponding to P-ANCA) in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
In Crohn's disease, however, serum anti-lactoferrin antibodies of IgG were rarely detected, and then only in patients with colonic disease manifestations.
IgA anti-lactoferrin antibodies were, however, found in some cases of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
Several different types of autoantibodies have been described in inflammatory bowel disease and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Although none of the autoantibodies have been proved to be of pathogenetic significance, it has been shown, both in Crohn's disease and in ulcerative colitis, that IgG and complement can be present on the apical surface of enterocytes in vivo, possibly indicating a pathogenetic role for anti-epithelial/anti-brush border antibodies in inflammatory bowel disease.
In this connection, and considering the high frequency of anti-lactoferrin antibodies found in the present study, it is interesting to hote that lactogerrin has been reported to lind to intestinal brush border via a specific receptor.
Antibodies of IgA class directed against Saccharomyces cerviciae are common in Crohn's disease but not in ulcerative colitis, and determination of such antibodies may be of diagnostic help.
It is possible that many of the anti-microbial antibodies described in inflammatory bowel disease and other inflammatory disease states, may in fact be reflections of immunisation against microbial heat-shock proteins, which has been implied in the pathogenesis of several autoimmune disease states and which may induce anti-lactoferrin antibodies (see below).
Wakefield et al presented evidence that vasculitis and microthrombosis in mesenteric vessels can be important pathogenetic factors in inflammatory bowel disease.
Furthermore, P-ANCA/GS-ANA, which occures in several primary vasculitis diseases, can frequently be demonstrated in inflammatory bowel disease and primary sclerosing cholangitis also.
P-ANCA/GS-ANA is more common in ulcerative colitis than in Crohn's disease, which is confirmed in the present study by the high frequency of IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies in ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis but not in Crohn's disease.
In Crohn's disease the frequency of IgG anti-α antigen and anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies did not differ statistically from the control group, although in a few instances the antibody levels were surprisingly high.
In both ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis the frequency of positive IgG anti- α/anti-myeloperoxidase; tests differed statistically from the control group, but in general the levels were low and, considering the small number of patients with positive anti- α/; anti-myeloperoxidase tests, the relevance of these results is uncertain.
However, it is interesting that these types of ANCAs were found at all, since they are considered to be reliable markers of primary systemic vasculitis.
ANCAs of IgA class have been reported in Hennoch-Schönleins purpura and IgA nephropathy, although these findings are sometimes explained by the presence of rheumatoid factor.
The appearance of antibodies directed against α antigen in some cases of ulcerative volitis (IgG) and in Crohn's disease (IgA) could possibly favour the hypothesis of primary vasculitis as a pathogenetic factor in these diseases.
Lactoferrin is an iron binding protein that occurs abundantly not only in the specific granules of granulocytes, but also in tears, milk, and secretions at mucosal surfaces.
Raised levels of circulating lactoferrin are seen during active inflammatory disease.
It exerts antibacterial effects by depriving bacteria of iron required for growth, and it has anti-inflammatory poperties — for example, by preventing complement activation through inhibition of classical C3 convertase.
Lactoferrin can also present for formation of hydroxyl radicals by iron binding.
Lactoferrin may thus be of great importance as a non-specific anti-phlogistic defence factor at the primary immunological barriers.
It has been shown experimentally that binding of lactoferrin by anti-lactoferrin antibodies increases the amount and duration of hydroxyl radical formation by granulocytes.
Hypothetically, anti-lactoferrin autoantibodies could, by counteracting the anti-inflammatory effects of lactoferrin, aggravate and prolong mucosal inflammation induced by several different mechanisms, and the antibodies may therefore have pathogenetic significance even though their occurrence does not seem to correlate with disease activity.
It is speculated that, anti-lactoferrin antibodies could also have pathogenetic effects by activation of primed granulocytes infiltrating the gut mucosa or adhering to vessel walls, in analogy with the effects of other types of ANCA.
In addition, mucosal lactoferrin/anti-lactoferrin complexes may stimulate intestinal goblet cells to excessive mucus secretion, as do other immune complexes.
On the other hand, the occurrence of anti-lactoferrin autoantibodies may, of course merely be an epiphenomenon without pathogenetic significance.
The fact that the individual types of ANCA were found only in a minority (<50%) of the sera tested is an argument in favour of this.
On the other hand, consumption of circulating antibodies cannot be ruled out in the seronegative instances.
The origin of anti-lactoferrin autoantibodies is unknown.
Although bovine and human lactoferrin have molecular and antigenic similarities, immunisation of experimental animals with bovine lactoferrin seldom seems to result in cross immunisation against human lactoferrin, and the lack of correlation between levels of anti-human lactoferrin and anti-bovine lactoferrin shown in this study contradicts the hypothesis that cross immunisation against dietary bovine lactoferrin explains the appearance of anti-human lactoferrin autoantibodies.
An exciting possibility is the antigenic mimicry between the 65 kD mycobacterial heat-shock protein (hsp-65) and human lactoferrin, and the fact that immunisation against hsp-65 results in the production of anti-lactoferrin antibodies.
Mycobacterial infection and immunisation against mycobacterial antigens/hsp-65 have been implicated in several autoimmune disease states, both experimental and clinical.
Considering the occurrence of IgA anti-lactoferrin antibodies in some cases of Crohn's disease in the present study, we find it interesting that IgA (but not IgG) anti-hsp-65 antibodies have been reported in Crohn's disease.
Furthermore, the registration of anti-lactoferrin antibodies in a case of Campylobacter colitis in this study is interesting with regard to the possibility of cross immunisation against microbial antigen(s).
We therefore intend to analyse additional sera from patients with infectious gastroenteritis for the presence of anti-lactoferrin antibodies.
In conclusion, we have shown high frequencies of IgG anti-lactoferrin antibodies in ulcerative colitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis, but not in Crohn's disease, whereas IgA autoantibodies directed against lactoferrin were found in some cases of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
We suggest that anti-lactoferrin may be of pathogenetic significance by counteracting the antiphlogistic properties of lactoferrin at mucosal surfaces, thereby aggravating and/or sustaining mucosal inflammation initiated by other factors.
Effect of histamine on the growth of human gastrointestinal tumours: reversal by cimetidine
Abstract
The proliferative effects of histamine were examined on the human gastric tumour cell lines; MKN45, the gastro producing subline, MKN45G, and the colorectal lines; LoVo and C170.
The proliferation of MKN45 as assessed by 7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake and cell counts was increased by histamine concentrations of 10 -7 and 10 -9 M. Histamine concentrations between 10 -6 and 10 -7 M maximally stimulated MKN45G proliferation which titrated out at lower histamine concentrations.
The accumulation of cyclic adenosine 3',5' monophosphate (cAMP) in response to the same histamine concentrations was also increased in the two gastric cell lines.
The histamine receptor antagonist, cimetidine (10 -5 M) reversed the histamine stimulated proliferation of both gastric cell lines despite having no effect on basal growth.
The proliferation of the colorectal lines was unaffected by histamine.
Histamine given locally at the subcutaneous implantation site of the tumour (1 mg/kg/day) increased the growth of MKN45G xenografts in nude mice.
This was reversed by coadministration of cimetidine (100 mg/kg/day, given in the drinking water).
Cimetidine also inhibited the basal proliferation of MKN45 xenografts.
Histamine acting locally may enhance the proliferation of tumours arising within the stomach.
Such effects may be blocked by administration of histamine receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine.
Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer in the United Kingdom causing about 10000 deaths annually in England and Wales alone.
Major advances in both surgery and anaesthesia have lowered the death rate from operations.
yet the five year survival remains around 5% (OPCS Monitor).
These dismal survival figures are due to the fact that most patients in the United Kingdom present with advanced disease.
Radiotherapy has no proved value in the treatment of gastric cancer and while there have been numerous trials of various chemotherapy regimens, none have proved to be valuable either as an adjuvant treatment or for advanced disease.
An enhancement in the survival of gastric cancer patients has been reported by Tonnesen et al , after treatment with the histamine 2 receptor antagonist, cimetidine.
The median survival in the cimetidine treated group was significantly greater then in the placebo group (450 days compared with 316 days).
It is imperative to investigate the mechanism of action of this tratment because of the small therapeutic benefits found with older regimens of treatment, which have been used for patients with gastric cancer.
One of the mechanisms postulated to play a part in the anti-tumour effect of cimetidine is immunomodulation mediated by the inhibition of suppressor T cell activity, an increase in interleukin 2 production inhelper T cells, and an enhancement of natural killer cell activity.
In this study the role of histamine as a mitogenic agent for tumours in the gastrointestinal tract was investigated to discover if cimetidine may block such proliferation enhancing effects.
Methods
CELL LINES
MKN45 is a human gastric adenocarcinoma and MKN45G is a gastrin producing subline of MKN45.
LoVo is a human colon adenocarcinoma and C170 a human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line derived in the Cancer Research Campaign Laboratories, Nottingham.
The two gastric lines were maintained in Dulbecos modified Eagles medium (Flow Laboratories, Irvine, Scotland, UK) with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum (Gibco, Paisley, Scotland, UK).
The two colon lines were grown in RPMI medium (Gibco) with 10% fetal calf serum.
All lines were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C, gassed with 5% CO 2 , and were refed/harvested twice weekly.
EFFECT OF HISTAMINE AND CIMETIDINE ON IN VITRO CELL GROWTH
Direct cell counts
Cells were plated into 24 well plates (Gibco) at a concentration of 10 5 well -1 , in Biorich serum free growth medium (Flow Labs).
After allowing for cell adherence, increasing concentrations of histamine (10 -6 to 10 -10 M, Sigma, Dorset, UK) or cimetidine (10 -5 to 10 -10 M) were added to the wells either alone or in combination giving a final well volume to 500 µl.
After three to four days incubation at 37°C the cells were harvested with 0.025% trypsin/0.5% EDTA (Sigma) and viable cells were counted with a haemocytometer (viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion).
Three replicates were performed per dilution.
7 5 [Se]selenomethionine incorporation 7 5 [Se]selonamethionine uptake is a measure of protein synthesis and thus is an indirect measure of cell proliferation.
Cells were plated into 96 well plates (Gibco) in Biorich at a concentration of 10 4 well -1 .
After the cells had adhered, the histamine and cimetidine concentrations described above were added to the wells giving a final well volume of 200 µl.
After three to four days incubation the cells were pulsed with 0.1 µCi 7 5 [Se]selenomethionine (CIS UK, High Wycombe, Bucks, UK) in a volume of 50 µl for 18 hours.
The cells were then vigorously washed and radioactivity associated with individual wells counted on a gammacounter (counting efficiency >80%).
Five replicates were performed per dilution.
Effects of cimetidine and histamine of the cells were calculated as a percentage of the untreated controls.
Measurement of histamine (H2) receptors
This was performed by an indirect method in which the concentrations of intracellular cyclic adenosine 3',5' monophosphate (cAMP) are assessed, after incubation of histamine with the cells.
cAMP functions as a second messenger after binding of histamine to the histamine 2 receptor.
The assay was performed by the use of a cAMP radioimmunoassay kit (NEN DuPont, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK).
Briefly, cell monolayers were harvested by gentle scraping.
Washed and suspended in Krebs Ringer phosphate buffer; pH 7.5 at 5×10 6 cells ml -1 .
The cells were agitated gently for one hour in the absence/presence histamine.
The reaction was stopped by the addition of 11 N HCLO 4 and the cells were centrifuged at 4000 g, 10 minutes.
9 N KOH was added to the supernatant to remove perchlorate ions followed by succinic anhydride (6.15 mg/ml).
To assess recovery of cAMP a 3[H] cAMP marker (DuPont) was added to alternate tubes (4000 cpm/tube) and percentage recovery assessed.
cAMP concentrations were acetylated before measurement to increase the sensitivity of the assay.
cAMP standards were prepared ranging from 0.1 to 4 pmol ml -1 and standards and unknowns were competed with 1 2 5 [I]succinyl cAMP tyrosine methyl ester (4.5×10 4 cpm tube -1 ) for binding to a fixed concentration of cAMP antiserum in sodium phosphate buffer, pH 6.
All tubes were mixed, incubated overnight at 4°C.
After precipitation by trichloracetid acid, the tubes were centrifuges at 2–8°C for 15 minutes at 1200 g .
The supernatant was discarded and the precipitate counted on a gammacounter.
EFFECT OF HISTAMINE/CIMETIDINE ON THE IN VIVO GROWTH OF MKN45
MKN45G xenografts were started in male nude mice (Harlan-Olac, Bicester, UK)(weight 35 g, age 8–10 weeks) by a subcutaneous injection of 10 7 cells (in a 200 µl volume of sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS)) into the left hand flank.
Once the xenografts were established, they were aseptically excised, mechanically minced, and 3 mm 3 cubed pieces of tissue grafted into the experimental animals.
The animals were then randomised into different treatment groups.
Histamine was given in doses of 1, 5, and 10 mgkg -1 day -in a 100 µl injection directly into the site of the grafted tissue.
The control group were injected in an identical manner with 100 µl volume of the histamine diluent (PBS).
The mice were injected daily from day 0 until the experiment was finished.
Cimetidine was given at a dose of 100 mgkg -1 day -1 in the drinking water of the animals studied.
This dose produces a murine plasma concentration of 0.16 to 0.35 µg ml -1 , which was the most effective dose in a syngeneic tumour model.
The dose in the water was calculated from the observation that a 35 g mouse drank 6 ml of water day -1 .
The cimetidine was replenished every day and was given from day 0 to the end of the experiment.
UKCCCR Guidelines were adhered to throughout all animal experimentation.
Histological analysis of the MKN45 xenografts
After the finish of the in vivo experiments, xenografts were surgically removed and fixed in 0.1% paraformaldehyde.
Sections were cut on a microtome and stained with haematoxylin and eosin to show the nucleii and cytoplasm of cells within the xenografts.
The xenografts were examined blind by an independent pathologist and assessed for percentage of necrosis within the tumour, shape of nucleii, and cohesiveness of cells.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
In vitro data were analysed by a one way analysis of variance.
The in vivo data were analysed by the Mann-Whitney U Wilcoxon analysis of variance and multiple analysed variance (MANOVA) tests by use of the SPSS/PC+ and the mini-tab statistical packages for the IBM PC.
Results
IN VITRO STUDIES
Effects of histamine on the in vitro growth of established gastrointestinal cell lines
In vitro growth, in the presence of histamine was measured by both 7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake and direct cell counts.
Results are expressed as the percentage of the untreated control.
Five replicates were performed per drug dilution and the standard deviation of the mean is shown.
Table I shows the effect of increasing histamine concentrations (10 -9 to 10 -6 M) on MKN45 as assessed by (a)7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake (n=four sequential experiments) and (b) direct cell counts (n=four sequential experiments).
Histamine at concentrations of 10 -6 , 10 -7 , and 10 -9 M significantly increased the growth of MKN45 as assessed by both assays, in all experiments.
Histamine also increased the growth of MKN45G cells (Table II).
A dose response curve was obtained as assessed by label uptake, with histamine concentrations of 10 -8 , 10 -7 , and 10 -6 M all increasing uptake significantly but with the maximum response obtained between 10 -6 and 10 -7 M in four sequential experiments with both (a)7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake and (b) direct cell counts.
Histamine at concentrations greater than 10 -6 M were shown to affect the viability of the cells in the in vitro culture system and so could not be examined satisfactorily.
Histamine had no effect on the in vitro growth of the colorectal cell lines: LoVo and C170 as assessed by the two assays (data not shown).
Histamine receptor status of the gastrointestinal cell lines as assessed by cAMP accumulation
Histamine receptors, indirectly measured by cAMP accumulation were found to be present on MKN45, MKN45G but not C170 or LoVo (Table III).
All cell lines were found to have the same basal concentration of cAMP.
In response to histamine, MKN45 cells had significantly raised concentrations of cAMP in the presence of 10 -7 and 10 -9 M histamine, which corresponds with the proliferation data previously shown.
MKN45G cells responded in a dose dependent way to histamine from 10 -6 to 10 -9 M, with 10 -6 M histamine inducing the highest concentration of cAMP accumulation.
Effect of cimetidines on the basal in vitro growth of MKN45 and MKN45G
Cimetidine used at concentrations from 10 -5 to 10 -10 M had no significant effect on the basal growth of MKN45, MKN45G, C170, and LoVo cells as assessed by both 7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake and direct cell counts (data not shown).
Effect of cimetidine on the histamine stimulated growth of MKN45 and MKN45G
Histamine concentrations of 10 -9 , 10 -7 , and 10 -6 M significantly increased the growth of MKN45, and these were significantly reversed to concentrations of the untreated control by coincubation with 10 -5 M cimetidine as shown by label uptake (Fig 1 (A) mean of four separate experiments) and direct cell counts (Fig 1 (B) mean of four separate experiments).
Cimetidine has no significant effect on the basal growth.
Cimetidine at a fixed concentration of 10 -5 M significantly reduced growth stimulated by 10 -8 , 10 -7 , and 10 -6 M histamine of MKN45G as assessed by 7 5 [Se]selenomethionine uptake (Fig 2 (A), mean of four separate experiments) and direct cell counts (Fig 2 (B), mean of four separate experiments).
Cimetidine had no significant effect on the basal growth.
IN VIVO STUDIES
As MKN45G responded to histamine in a dose dependant manner, it was decided to perform in vitro studies with the cells grown as xenografts.
Effect of histamine on the basal growth of MKN45G xenograft in nude mice
Four groups of five nude mice were grafted with MKN45G xenograft tissue and treated with PBS the histamine diluent, 0.1, 1, and 10 mgkg -1 day -1 histamine, locally at the site of the xenograft (Fig 3).
After 21 days growth, xenografts treated with a histamine concentration of 1 mgkg -1 had significantly raised mean cross sectional areas (2.2 greater than the control, p<0.02, Mann-Whitney).
A two way analysis examining treatment by time was also performed.
An analysis of variance for growth was significant (p<0.001) showing that at least one treatment group was significantly different from the control.
A MANOVA was performed, which allows serial measurements to be analysed, and xenografts treated with the histamine concentrations of 1 mgkg -1 were significantly different from the controls (p=0.008) whereas xenografts treated with histamine concentrations of 0.1 and 10 mgkg -1 were not.
Effect of histamine with/without cimetidine on the growth of MKN45G xenografts
Four groups of five nude mice were grafted with MKN45G xenograft tissue and treated with either PBS or histamine at a single concentration of 1 mgkg -1 day -1 , locally at the tumour site.
One group treated with PBS and one group with histamine were also dosed with cimetidine orally in the drinking water at a dose of 100 mg -1 kg -1 day -1 (Fig 4).
At day 21, histamine had significantly increased the basal growth of MKN45G to 1.6 more than the control, p<0.002, Mann-Whitney) and this was significantly reversed by coadministration of cimetidine (p<0.02, Mann-Whitney).
Cimetidine inhibited the basal growth of MKN45G to 0.7×the control (p<0.05, Mann-Whitney).
These differences were also achieved at day 27, the day the study finished.
Analysis of the data by an analysis of variance for growth showed that the treatment groups were significantly different from the controls (p<0.001) and that there was a treatment with time interaction — that is, the rate of growth was not the same for all treatments (p<0.001).
Visual analysis of the data showed that the growth rates of the treatment groups were parallel until day 19 and then diverged.
Based on this data a MANOVA was performed on the data from day 19 to day 27.
It was found that xenografts treated with histamine were significantly greater than the controls (p=0.034).
Cimetidine treated xenografts were also significant from the controls (p= 0.048) but cimetidine and histamine treated xenografts were not.
Histamine stimulated growth was significant from growth in the presence of cimetidine only (p<0.001) and cimetidine and histamine (p<0.001).
Histological analysis of histamine and cimetidine treated MKN45G xenografts
Xenografts from the four experimental groups in Figure 4 were analysed blind by an independent pathologist.
The histamine treated xenografts were identical to those from the PBS treated control with respect to the number of inflammatory cells, showing that the increase in tumour size was as a result of an inflammatory response to the injected histamine.
All xenografts were mainly of tumour cells (as deduced from nucleii) and very little tumour stroma.
Necrotic areas were prsent in all tumours in the centre of the xenograft because of the lack of tumour vascularisation.
The cimetidine treated xenografts were identical in all respects to the xenografts from the other groups apart from having less necrotic areas, possibly because thy had not outgrown their blood supply to the same extent as the other tumours.
Discussion
In this study it has been shown by two independent methods that histamine increases the in vitro proliferation of the two gastric tumour cells; MKN45 and MKN45G but not the two colorectal lines; C170 and LoVo.
The effects seem to be mediated by the histamine 2 receptor as shown by cAMP accumulation in response to histamine, in the first two cell lines.
The optimum histamine concentrations for increasing both proliferation and cAMP accumulation is about 10 -6 M for MKN45G.
For MKN45 there seems to be two concentration optima; 10 -6 and 10 -9 M.
Histamine has previously been shown to be 10 times less potent in stimulating cAMP concentrations in gastric glands isolated from guinea pig antrum when compared with glands isolated from the fundus (9×10 -5 M compared with 10 -5 M).
The histamine concentrations effective in stimulating antral gastric glands are close to those inducing optimal effets in the MKN45G cell line, which is gastrin producing.
It is not stated by the originator as to the exact site of the primary tumour from which MKN45 and MKN45G were derived but because of the gastrin secretory nature of MKN45G it could possibly have been in the antrum.
MKN45 cells responded optimally to two different histamine concentrations, both ower than that seen with MKN45G.
The reason for this is not known but the proliferative effects seen at both histamine concentrations were effectively reversed by the histamine 2 receptor antagonist, cimetidine, indicating the presence of histamine 2 receptor with differing affinities on MKN45 cells.
Evidence for the presence of histamine 2 receptor on MKN45 has also been shown by Arima et al .
It is interesting to note that the human gastric tumour cell line HGT-1, which was derived from a primary tumour originating in an non-antral part of the stomach, had histamine 2 receptor which responded, maximally to much higher histamine concentrations of 10 -3 to 10 -4 M. Cells from the duodenum did not possess the histamine 2 receptor and in this study it was shown that two colorectal tumour cell lines did not seem to possess histamine 2 receptor indicating location of histamine 2 receptor may be confined to the gastric area.
Cimetidine had no direct anti-tumour effects on the basal growth of the two gastric and two colorectal tumour cell lines examined in this study, which is in accord with the findings of Scotcher et al .
Cimetine reversed the histamine stimulated proliferation of the first two cell lines, however, at a concentration of 10 -5 M, which corresponded to the cimetidine concentration that induced complete inhibition of histamine on cAMP accumulation in guinea pig fundus and antrum
When given locally, in vitro, histamine increased the proliferation of grafted MKN45G tumour tissue in nude mice.
Histological analysis showed that the size increase was not due to a local inflammatory response.
Also both control and histamine treated tumours had a similar proportion of malignant cells, stroma, and vascularisation, suggesting direct proliferative effects on the xenograft may have been responsible for the increased size.
Cimetidine was shown to reverse this histamine stimulated growth, in vitro.
Unlike the in vitro findings, however, cimtidine reduced the basal growth of MKN45G xenografts.
Previous studies examining the in vivo effects of cimetidine have been performed on syngeneic tumour models with immunocompetent animals.
Cimetidine slowed the metastatic development and increased the survival in mice with the Lewis lung carcinoma, 3LL despite the tumour having no histamine 2 receptor.
While having no direct anti-tumour effect on the cells in vitro, it was found that cimetidine inhibited suppressor T cells allowing the initial anti-tumour response affecting cytotoxic T cells to persist and be effective.
In a second study by Gifford et al , cimetidine had a protective effect in mice implanted with two different syngeneic tumours; lymphoid ascitic cells and a fibrosarcoma despite the cells being unaffected by the agent in vitro.
Again, inhibition of suppressor cell activity was postulated to be responsible.
In this study, nude mice were used that do not possess mature T lymphocytes but do have natural killer cell activity.
As cimetidine has been shown to enhance natural killer cell cytoxicity it is postulated that this may be a mechanism partly responsible for the inhibition of basal xenograft growth achieved in this study.
To find out if inhibition of the proliferative effects of histamine also occurred by cimetidine blockade of histamine 2 receptor, the experiment will need to be repeated with animals that are further immune depleted such as severe combine immune deficiency mice or with nude mice treated with anti-asialo GM1 antiserum, which is known to eliminate natural killer activity in nude mice.
A combination of cimetidine or ranitidine and histamine has been reported to increase survival in tumour bearing mice when compared with histamine 2 receptor antagonist and histamine only controls.
In a clinical study by the same authors, a histamine 2 receptor antagonist histamine combination resulted in enhanced survival over untreated controls.
The authors postulated that while histamine 2 receptor blockade decreased T cell suppression, stimulation of histamine 1 receptor by histamine increased vascular permeability and enhanced intraumoral penetration of humoral and cellular elements of the immune response.
In this study, when only histamine was given to nude mice, increased vascular permeability mediated by intercation with histamine 1 receptor may have led to an enhancement of xenograft growth due to increased diffusion of nutrents etc, in addition to direct proliferative effects by a histamine 2 receptor.
When cimetidine was given together with histamine, blockade of histamine 2 receptor may have reversed histamine stimulated growth.
If natural killer cell activity is increased, the growth promoting effects of enhanced vascular permeability may be counterbalanced by greater access of the natural killer cells to the tumour.
This may be why in our study, histamine and cimetidine together had similar inhibitory effects in vivo as cimetidine alone.
Tumours arising within the stomach may be in direct contact with local agents, capable of increasing their proliferation.
This should be taken into account in the development of potential anti-tumour and anti-ulcer treatments.
Complex carbohydrate malabsorption in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Abstract
The magnitude of complex carbohydrate malabsorption in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency has not been well quantified in the past.
The quantity of carbohydrate malabsorbed after a rice starch (100 g) meal in 20 patients with chronic pancreatitis (n=10) or pancreatic cancer (n=10) was therefore estimated.
Patients had a three day stool fat collection (80 g/24 hour fat intake), a lactulsoe (20 g), and a rice flour (100 g) breath hydrogen test.
Normal controls (n=29) had a postprandial H 2 increase 14 ppm and malabsorbed (mean (SEM)) 1.12 (0.44)(range 0–11.10) g of the 100 g of carbohydrate ingested.
Patients malabsorbed significantly more carbohydrate (11.36 (2.23)(range 8.90–32.60) g, F 1 ,4 7 = 29.92, p<0.001).
The number of patients with fat (>7 g, n=8) of carbohydrate (increase in H 2 20 ppm, n=10) malabsorption was not different (x=0.01, p=0.75).
There was a significant correlation between faecal fat and amount of malabsorbed carbohydrate (r=0.60, F 1 ,1 7 =9.70, p=0.006) and faecal fat and stool wet weight (r=0.57, F 1 ,1 8 =8.67, p<0.009), but not between stool wet weight and amount of malabsorbed carbohydrate (r=0.28, F 1 ,1 7 =1.45, p=0.25).
Although patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency malabsorb 10%-30% of the ingested complex carbohydrate, the main determinant of stool wet weight could be faecal fat.
Although malabsorption of fat and protein have been extensively investigated, malabsorption of complex carbohydrate has not attracted much attention in patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Based on pioneer work by Fogel and Gray, the notion that symptomatic carbohydrate malabsorption is uncommon in patients with chronic pancreatitis has not been challenged until recently, when it has been noticed that patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency may malabsorb complex carbohydrate.
As the magnitude of this carbohydrate malabsorption has not been investigated, the aim of the present study was to quantify the extent of complex carbohydrate malabsorption in patients with chronic pancreatitis and cancer of the pancreas.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Twenty ambulatory patients (16 men, four women) with a mean (SEM) age of 50.70 (2.36)(range 39–72) years, suffering from chronic idiopathic pancreatitis (n=10) or pancreatic cancer (n=10) and suspected malabsorption syndrome, participated in the study (table I).
None of the patients were alcoholic or had any history of small intestinal disease, gastric operation, or small bowel resection and had not lost more than 10% of body weight in the six months preceding the study.
Diagnosis of pancreatic disease was made by both computed tomography (CT) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in all patients and documented at laparotomy in those with pancreatic cancer.
Twenty nine normal volunteers (18 men, 11 women) with a mean (SEM) age of 36.66 (2.28)(range 20–60) years served as controls.
None of the patients or the normal volunteers had received antibiotics in the two weeks before the test period.
All 49 subjects participated in this study after giving written informed consent.
The protocol was approved by the ethics committee on human studies of the Department of Internal Medicine, University of Athens, in December 1985.
TESTS PERFORMED
Quantitative faecal fat excretion
All 20 patients were placed on a 2200 kcal diet containing 80 g/day of fat.
This diet was consumed for six days.
Stools were quantitatively collected for the last three days (72 hours) of the test.
After stool wet weight had been measured, they were analysed for fat content by the Van de Kramer method.
Stool wet weight and far content were expressed as g/24 hours.
The excretion of normal subjects is less than 7 g/24 hours.
Complex carbohydrate malabsorption
After an overnight (12–14 hours) fast all subjects drank a solution of 20 g lactulose in 250 ml of water.
Three days later the same subjects again fasted and then are a standard meal of rice cake made of 1000 g rice flour, one egg, butter (7 g), and baking powder (5 g).
This meal has been shown to be totally absorbed producing less than 20 parts per million (ppm) of peak breath H 2 concentration, when consumed by normal volunteers.
After the ingestion of the lactulose drink or the rice flour meal end expiratory breath samples were collected in 50 ml polyethylene syringes at time 0 and 15 minute intervals thereafter over a 5.5 or seven hour period for the lactulose or the rice flour test respectively.
During the test periods subjects were instructed not to smoke or eat anything but drank water ad libitum.
Breath H 2 concentration was measured with a research chromatography (Hewlett-Packard 5750G) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector.
The operating conditions have been published elsewhere.
The minimum H 2 concentration detectable was 3 ppm, which gave a recorder deflection of 2 mm.
DEFINITIONS, CALCULATIONS AND STATISTICS
Carbohydrate malabsorption was defined as an increase of breath H 2 concentration 20 ppm over the base line.
The amount of carbohydrate malabsorbed was estimated by comparing the area under the breath hydrogen curve (BH 2 AUC) after the rice flour meal with that after lactulose.
Lactulose, a non-absorbable disaccharide, that is rapidly metabolised on entering the colon by the colonic flora into H 2 , CH 4 , CO 2 , and short chain fatty acids.
The H 2 produced in the colon is absorbedand excreted in the breath.
It has been shown that there is a rough linear correlation between breath H 2 excretion rate and the quantity of malabsorbed carbohydrate.
As it has been assumed that equal amounts of lactulose or other carbohydrate malabsorption will produce equal changes in breath H 2 excretion, rice starch malabsorption has been calculated as g malabsorbed carbohydrate according to the formula:
The BH 2 AUC was calculated by the trapezoid rule.
Results in the text and figures are presented as mean (SEM).
The statistical significance of the results was assessed by one way analysis of variance (ANOVA), χ 2 test and regression analysis as appropriate.
Probabilities of <0.05 were regarded as significant.
Results
All subjects consumed the lactulose drink within five minutes and the rice flour pancake within 15 minutes.
Most of them complained about the taste of lactulose and the amount of the pancake but consumed it all.
Figure 1 shows the mean (SEM) breath H 2 curve, after lactulose or the rice flour meal, of normal volunteers.
The mean postprandial increase in breath H 2 after the rice flour meal was 2.93 (0.72)(range 0–14) ppm.
When comparing the area under the breath H 2 curve after the rice flour meal with that of lactulose, normal subjects malabsorbed 1.12 (0.44)(range 0–11.10) g of carbohydrate.
Tables 1 and 2 show diagnoses, stool fat, and wet weight, as well as breath H 2 excretion data of the 20 patients and Figure 2 shows the mean (SEM) breath H 2 curves after lactulose or rice flour ingestion.
One patient was an occasional non-H 2 producer, as he did not produce breath H 2 after lactulose, but he had an increase in H 2 of 9 ppm after the rice flour meal.
His faeces produced significant amounts of H 2 when they were incubated in vitro with lactulose.
Patients malabsorbed significantly more carbohydrates (11.36 (2.23) range 8.90–32.60) g) compared with normal volunteers (F 1 ,4 7 =29.92, p<0.001).
The number of patients with carbohydrate (increase in H 2 20 ppm, n=10) or fat (>7 g/24 hurs, n=8) malabsorption was not significantly different (χ 2 =0.10, p=0.75).
Patients with an increase in H 2 20 ppm malabsorbed 18.30 (2.60) g of carbohydrate and those with >7 g/24 hours of faecal fat malabsorbed 15.55 (1.90) g of fat.
There was a significant correlation between faecal fat and amount of malabsorbed carbohydrate (y=3.25+0.88x, r=0.60, F 1 ,1 7 =9.70, p=0.006)(Fig 3), as well as between faecal fat and stool wet weight (y=146.70+7.13x, r=0.57, F 1 ,1 8 =8.67, p<0.002), but not between stool wet weight and amount of malabsorbed carbohydrate (r=0.28, F 1 ,1 7 =1.45, p=0.25).
Discussion
Recently it has been shown that normal volunteers efficiently absorb an oral load of 100 g of rice starch with minimal generation of breath H 2 .
These results proved to be reproducible in the present study, indicating that a cut off value of 20 ppm of H 2 increase is a safe indicator of rice starch malabsorption.
Kerlin et al were the first to use the rice flour breath H 2 test to study complex carbohydrate malabsorption in deases of the pencreas and small intestine.
They have shown that patients with chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer may malabsorb carbohydrate, but the amount malabsorbed had not been quantified.
Even more recently Hammer et al measured the magnitude of faecal carbohydrate excretion in five patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
They showed that three of the five patients had excessive faecal excretion of carbohydrate and organic acids.
Although the breath H 2 test is sensitive and non-invasive and widely applied for the study of carbohydrate malabsorption, there are certain problems in the interpretation of its results.
It is assumed that the H 2 producing bacteria are limited to the colon and that the fermentation of carbohydrates occurs rapidly on entering the caecum.
There is a wide interindividual variation, however, in breath H 2 excretion, when given a constant dose of lactulose repeatedly.
It is also assumed that all complex carbohydrate malabsorbed are converted to H 2 with the same degree of rapidity as is the case with lactulose.
There are indications that certain complex carbohydrates such as fibre are converted to H 2 more slowly and less completely than lactulose resulting in an underestimation of the amount entering the colon.
Another peroblem that researchers face when using breath H 2 tests is their duration.
Many volunteers complain when fasted for more than six hours.
As a result, most experiments end after six to eight hours, when the breath H 2 concentration has not returned to the fasting value.
All these assumptions and practical problems concerning the breath H 2 test have been discussed in detail by Bond and Levitt and Levitt et al who suggest that ‘quantitative data of the breath H 2 test should be considered to be estimates of malabsorption of fermented material rather than precise quantitative measurements of polysaccharide malabsorption’.
Despite its limitations, the breath H 2 test is the only acceptable non-invasive method to estimate complex carbohydrate malabsorption in humans.
In the present study, it has been shown that 50% of the patients with chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer had evidence of polysaccharide malabsorption (increase in H 2 20 ppm) and malabsorbed 10%-30% of the ingested complex carbohydrate.
This finding challenges the notion that carbohydrate malabsorption is uncommon in patients with chronic pancreatitis.
Recent experimental data support our results suggesting that faecal pancreatic type isoamylase activity is lower in patients with chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer who have moderate to severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency when compared with normal subjects.
In these patients gastric acidity does not affect faecal pancreatic isoamylase activity, but faecal salivary type isoamylase activity is raised in patients with gastric hypoacidity, indicating the important role of H 2 receptor antagonist administration with pancreatic supplements.
All our patients who had evidence of fat malabsorption (faecal fat >7 g/24 hours) malabsorbed complex carbohydrate (increase in H 2 20 ppm) as well, and there was a significant correlation between faecal fat and amount of malabsorbed carbohydrate.
This correlation is explained if there is a parallel reduction of pancreatic lipase and colipase combined with low pancreatic type isoamylase secretion.
Indeed, Moriyoshi et al have shown that there is a good positive correlation between faecal pancreatic isoamylase activity and grade of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency as assessed by the secretin test.
The second important finding from this study is the significant correlation between faecal wet weight and stool fat.
Similarly a significant correlation between these two variables can be calculated from the data shown in Table I in the study by Kerlin et al (y=117.99+5.58x, r=0.81, F 1 ,1 5 =27.72, p<0.001) who investigated rice flour absorption in patients with chronic pancreatitis, and from the data shown in Table I (patients 1 to 19) in the study by Bo-Linn and Fordtran (y=38.54+7.07x, r=0.89, F 1 ,1 7 =67.57, p<0.001) who investigated faecal fat concentration in patients with pancreatic steatorrhoea.
Figure 4 shows the correlation between faecal wet weight and stool fat of the pooled data derived from these two studies as well as the present study.
This significant correlation between faecal fat and wet weight indicates that malabsorption of fat could be the main determinant of faecal weight in patients with mild to moderate exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Despite this evidence, patients with severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (faecal fat 40–120 g/day) may have osmotic diarrhoea due to carbohydrate malabsorption.
In patients with mild to moderate pancreatic insufficiency, however, there is no correlation between the amount of complex carbohydrate malabsorbed and stool wet weight.
This is explained if malabsorbed polysaccharides are fermented to short chain fatty acids, most of which are rapidly absorbed, decreasing the colonic osmotic pressure and thereby preventing an increase in faecal water.
In conclusion, we have shown that patients with chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer, who have mild to moderate fat malabsorption, may malabsorb up to one third of the ingested carbohydrate.
These malabsorbed carbohydrates are probably metabolised by the colonic flora to short chain fatty acids and subsequently absorbed by the colon, so that malabsorbed fat could be the main determinant of faecal weight.
Increased absorption of polyethylene glycol 600 deposited in the colon in active ulcerative colitis
Abstract
A defect in the barrir function of the intestinal mucosa has been proposed as important in both the pathogenesis and systemic mainifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.
After colonscopy, polymers of polyethylene glycol (PEG) with molecular weights of 414–810 (mean 600), were instilled in the descending colon of patients with ulcerative colitis (n=17) and in controls without intestinal inflammation (n=8).
The patients with active ulcerative colitis (n=6) had a significantly increased uptake of PEGs in the molecular weight range 458–810, measured as urinary excretion over the first 6 hours after instillation.
The median values for their excretion were 2.85–3.80% of PEGs instilled compared with 0.32–0.94% for patients in remission (n=11)(p<0.05–0.01) and 0.17–0.60% for the controls (p<0.05–0.01).
The differences in absorption of PEG 414 did not reach the preset level of statistical significance.
There was a positive correlation between PEG absorption and the endoscopic and histological grading of inflammatory activity in the sigmoid colon (p<0.01–0.001).
These findings support a correlation between the presence of active inflammation and PEG absorption.
There was little evidence to support the presence of a primary defect in the colonic barrier in patients with ulcerative colitis.
A defect in the barrier function of the intstinal mucosa has been proposed as an important factor in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
Assessment of intestinal permeability in ulcerative colitis after the ingestion of various markers has yielded conflicting results.
An intrinsic colonic permeability defect has been proposed in ulcerative colitis, regardless of disease activity, after studies with 9 9 m technetium-diethylene-triamino-pentaacetic acid (9 9 m Tc-DTPA) and 5 1 chromium-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (5 1 Cr-EDTA).
In the latter study, excretion of ingested 5 1 Cr-EDTA was increased in active and extensive colitis, although not in quiescent and distal disease.
The absorption of ingested polyethylene glycols (PEGs) has been found to be normal in patients with active ulcerative colitis.
In three other studies using 5 1 Cr-EDTA, no change in intestinal permeability could be shown in patients with ulcerative colitis when compared with controls.
Oral permeability tests are more likely to reflect small intestinal permeability, and oral sugar markers may be degraded by colonic bacteria before they cross the mucosa rendering them less suitable for assessing colonic permeability.
Besides this, there is little, if any, evidence of small bowel pathology in ulcerative colitis, whch makes the use of oral markers in this context questionable.
Regional studies seem more appropriate if one is to assess colonic permeability.
Three studies on regional intestinal permeability in patients with ulcerative colitis have been published.
In two, a tendency towards lower uptakes was noted in patients with ulcerative colitis compared with controls after the rectal deposition of sodium 1 3 1 iodide, phenolsulphonphthalein, and sulfisoxazole diethanolamine.
An increased uptake of 5 1 Cr-EDTA was shown in active disease, returning towards normal during remission.
These data on colonic permeability are limited and have not been correlated to the degree of inflammation present.
There are, however, experimental studies suggesting a relationship between active intestinal inflammation and permeability.
In the present study, we investigated colonic permeability and its relationship to the presence of inflammation by measuring the absorption of PEG 600 after intracolonic deposition following colonscopy in patients with ulcerative colitis and in controls.
methods
ENDOSCOPY
At colonoscopy the macroscopic appearance of the mucosa in the splenic flexure, the sigmoid colon, and the rectum was graded according to a modified Baron scale: grade 0=normal vascular pattern; grade 1=loss of vascular pattern, mucosal oedema but no bleeding; grade 2=granularity, friability, mucosal bleeding on instrument contact; and grade 3=discrete ulcerations and spontaneous bleeding — that is free blood in lumen when introducing the endoscope.
HISTOLOGICAL GRADING
Biopsy specimens taken a few cm distal to the splenic flexure and in the sigmoid colon were staiend with haematoxyline and eosin and were assessed blindly for the degree of inflammation.
We used a four grade scale, originally described by Watts et al and slightly modified to reflect the intensity of the inflammation present.
Grade 1=normal appearance with intact epithelium, small numbers of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages in the lamina propria; grade 2=intact epithelium but increased numbers of chronic inflammatory cells in the lamina propria, occasional foci of polymorphonuclear leukocytes; grade 3=mild epithelial changes, leukocytes within the epithelium or the crypts and ducts, pronounced inflammatory cellular infiltration in the lamina propria; grade 4=severe inflammatory changes with evidence of crypt abscesses with destruction, inflammatory erosions, or frank ulceration.
Grade 2 was not interpreted as a sign of active colitis, since it has been found in about one third of patients with a normal macroscopic mucosa and no history of colitis.
PEG 600 COLONIC ABSORPTION TEST
Polymers of ethylene glycol with a molecular weight averaging 600 (PEG 600; HO- (CH 2 -CH 2 O) nH, n=9–18; supplied as Macrogolum by Apoteksbolaget, Sweden) were used as a marker of intestinal permeability.
After colonscopy, 3.6 g of PEG in 30 ml water were passed through the working channel of the colonoscope and deposited in the descending colon just below the splenic flexure.
The working channel was flushed thereafter with 30 ml sterile water.
The procedure was performed with the patient in the left lateral position, which was retained for at least 10 minutes.
The patient was thereafter allowed to move about freely apart from lying on the right side.
Urine was collected over the first 6 hours after PEG deposition.
After measuring the volume, two aliquots of 10 ml each were frozen and stored at -20°C pending analysis.
All urine samples were analysed on one occasion.
ANALYSIS
A modification of a previously described reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography technique was used for the analyses.
Five ml urine were mixed with 5 ml deionised water and 10 ml methanol, and then applied to kieselguhr (Extrelut, E Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) without filtering.
Elution was carried out with chloroform (30 ml) and the entire eluate was evaporated under air at 60°C.
Two ml of ethanol-water (40°60) were added to the dried residue.
The test tube was then put in an ultrasound bath for 5 minutes.
The amounts of PEGs were determined in the extracted samples by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography.
The individual PEG species were identified in the chromatogram by comparing their retention times with the retention time for a pure PEG 634 standard.
A sample from the original PEG batch given to the patients was analysed at the same time.
Absorption of the various PEGs was expressed as the urinary excretion as a percentage of total dose (3.6 g) given.
To describe size selective absorption from the intestinal lumen, a recovery ratio (PEG 766/458) was calculated by dividing the recovery of a large PEG molecule (PEG 766) with the recovery of a smaller PEG molecule (PEG 458).
The originally described analytical method has a variation coefficient of 2.4–5.5% and a recovery of 102.0 (3.8) % (mean (SD)).
patients
ULCERATIVE COLITIS PATIENTS
Seventeen patients, 10 men and seven women, with ulcerative colitis were investigated.
The median age was 42 (range 18–64) years.
The median disease duration was 8 (range 0.5–33) years.
All patients had normal serum creatinine values at the time of investigation.
One patient with active disease underwent colectomy 2 months later and developed renal insufficiency because of amyloid deposits 6 months later.
ACTIVE DISEASE
Six patients had active disease as judged by the combination of symptoms requiring steroid treatment and active inflammation seen endoscopically.
All six patients had a friable mucosa that bled on instrument contact (grade 2) at at least one of the splenic flexure, sigmoid colon, or rectum levels.
Furthermore, three of these had a spontaneously bleeding mucosa (grade 3) at one or more of these levels.
Four patients had total colitis and two patients had extensive disease — that is, reaching the transverse colon but with an upper limit distal to the hepatic flexure.
All patients were on maintenance treatment with sulphasalazine (n=5) or olsalazine (n=1).
Four patients had prednisolone treatment at the time of colonscopy.
REMISSION
Eleven patients were in remission.
Previously performed colonoscopy and/or barium enema had shown that seven had had total colitis, one patient had disease affecting the transverse colon, and three patients distal colitis — that is, the most proximal extension was below the splenic flexure.
None of the patients in remission required treatment other than sulphasalazine or olsalazine.
One patient had no current treatment at all.
All patients in remission had endoscopic grading 0–1.
CONTROL PATIENTS
Eight patients, four men and four women, with a median age of 64 (range 44–67) years, underwent colonoscopy because of radiologically suspected polyps (n=3), control after previously removed rectal or colonic polyps (n=4), or as surveillance after right-sided hemicolectomy due to colonic carcinoma (n=1).
The investigation showed no abnormalities in any of the control patients.
All had an endoscopic grade 0.
Three patients had current medication: one had atenolol, one chlorpropramide, and the third took vitamins.
All controls had normal serum creatinine concentrations.
ETHICS
The study was approved by the Committee of Research Ethics at the Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University.
The participants gave their informed consent before participation.
STATISTICAL EVALUATION
Median and interquartile (25th to 75th centiles) range (IQR) values are given for each group, since the data do not conform to a Gaussian distribution.
The Kruskal-Wallis and the two tailed Mann-Whitney U test were used for comparison between groups.
The Spearman rank order correlation coefficient, r s , was used for correlation between PEG absorption and endoscopic and histological data.
Analysis of variance was used for assessing any influence of age on PEG absorption.
A probability of less than 5% was accepted as statistically significant (p<0.05).
Results
The median absorption of different PEG fractions varied between 2.85 (IQR 1.37–3.85) and 3.80 (1.86–4.62) % in patients with active ulcerative colitis, between 0.32 (0.20–0.66) and 0.94 (0.31–1.72) % in patients in remission, and between 0.17 (0.07–0.62) and 0.87 (0.70–1.33) % in controls (Figure).
With the exception of PEG 414, the differences in absorption were statistically significant when comparing patients with active ulcerative colitis with patients in remission (p<0.05–0.01) and controls (p<0.05–0.01).
When comparing patients in remission with controls, absorptions of the various PEG fractions were similar (p>0.05).
There were no differences between any of the groups when comparing the recovery ratios (PEG 766/458).
Maximal endoscopic and histological gradings of inflammation are given in the Table.
A positive correlation was found between the endoscopic grading of inflammation in the sigmoid colon and the absorption of PEGs 458–810 (r s 0.58–0.77, p<0.01–0.001) as well as between the histological grading of inflammation in biopsy specimens from the sigmoid colon and absorption of PEGs 502–810 (r s 0.55–0.63, p<0.01–0.001).
Patients with active disease receiving steroids (n=4) did not differ from the active group as a whole: the absorption of PEGs in the range 502–810 in these patients was raised (p<0.05) when compared with patients in remission and controls.
Two patients with active disease had no steroids at the time of investigation.
One had the highest absorption over the whole PEG range, recovery in the urine varying from 5.43 to 9.13%.
The other patient had values (1.37–1.86%) below the medians for the other five patients with active disease, but still higher than those in remission.
In the active group, the lowest excretion (typically below 1%) was found in one patient who later developed renal insufficiency.
He had, however, at the time of investigation a normal serum creatinine value.
Patients with active disease and patients in remission were significantly younger than the control patients, p<0.05.
The age distributions in patients with active disease and patients in remission were similar (p>0.05).
When age was introduced as a concomitant variable, the differences in absorption of PEGs were still significant (p<0.01).
Discussion
This study showed an increased absorption of PEG600 in active ulcerative colitis, indicating an increased colonic permeability, whereas absorption in patients in remission was similar to that in controls.
There was no size selective absorption in any group as judged from the recovery ratios of PEG 766/458.
Although the patients in remission showed a slightly higher absorption of PEGs, this rise was not statistically significant.
We found little evidence for the existence of an intrinsic colon permeability defect in ulcerative colitis regardless of disease activity, which has been proposed after studies with oral 9 9 m Tc-DTPA and 5 1 Cr-EDTA.
Our findings agree with a previous study that showed an increased absorption in active ulcerative colitis after the colonic administration of 5 1 Cr-EDTA.
An increased absorption of PEGs has also been shown in Crohn's colitis, using the same method as in this study, during both active disease and remission.
The patients with active disease and the patients with disease in remission were younger than the controls.
The age distributions of patients with active disease and in remission were, however, very similar and analysis of variance did not show any influence of age on PEG absorption.
No change in intestinal permeation ratios with age has been shown using oral double sugar absorption tests.
It is not known whether there is an increase in colonic absorption of PEGs with age in humans such as is seen in rats, and whether this could have influenced the results.
An increased absorption of PEGs in active ulcerative colitis could be explained by the presence of inflammation resulting in the loss of mucosal integrity.
The importance of active inflammation is underlined by the positive correlation we found between the endoscopic and histological grading of inflammation and PEG absorption.
In Crohn's disease intestinal permeability for 5 1 Cr-EDTA has been shown to parallel inflammatory activity measured using labelled leukocytes.
There are probably other factors also responsible for the differences in permeability observed between patients with and without active disease.
It is possible that an increased mucosal blood flow due to the inflammation per se can contribute to increased absorption.
Ultrastructural changes in colonic mucosa consistent with increased absorption have been described in ulcerative colitis, in both affected and unaffected areas.
However, there seem to be no morphological studies on the actual uptake of trace substances and their route through the epithelial barrier.
Although the kinetics of intestinal absorption of different PEG sizes is not fully known, absorption of PEG 900 is compatible with simple passive diffusion and only minimal transport occurs through the brush border.
This implies transport through paracellular tight junctions, and disorganisation of tight junctions has been described in Crohn's colitis.
Furthermore, a change in the physicochemical properties of the mucus in the colon may contribute.
The ‘leakiness’ of the colonic epithelial cells in ulcerative colitis shown in vitro, is probably of minor importance since PEGs do not cross lipid cell membranes.
The inflammatory cell infiltrate and its chemical products may influence intestinal permeability in various ways.
It has been suggested that increased permeability is the result of changes in the epithelial cell mediated immune response.
In cultured human intestinal epithelial cell monolayers, the transepithelial resistance fell and the macromolecular permeability increased parallel to the numbers of polymorphonuclear leukocytes that migrated through intercellular occluding junctions.
In animal experiments, increased mucosal permeability could be prevented by depletion of granulocytes with antineutrophil serum, and ileal mucosal permeability increased after exposure to neutrophil derived oxidants.
The role of chemotactic N-formylated peptides in the regulation of mucosal permeability has recently come to light.
These peptides are produced by bacteria normally found in the human bowel and in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenyl-alanine (FMLP) is the major chemotactic peptide produced by Escherichia coli .
N-formylated peptides bind to specific receptors on polymorphonuclear leukocytes thereby activating the cells to release such substances as lysosomal enzymes, oxidative metabolites and eicosanoids.
They produce severe colitis after instillation in the colon.
They cause an increase in gut permeability when installed in the small bowel, an increase that is abolished after granulocyte depletion using antineutrophil serum.
Furthermore, FMLP activated neutrophils can evoke histamine release from mast cells, and histamine and histamine monochloramine enhance ileal permeability.
Mucosal prostaglandin E 2 is raised in ulcerative colitis, and its possible influence on colonic permeability is not known.
In a segmental perfusion model, however, prostaglandin E 2 has been shown to decrease small bowel absorption of PEG and water.
All these data point to the importance of leukocytes in the regulation of intestinal permeability.
Indeed it has been proposed thatany increase in permeability in patients with inflammatory bowel disease results from polymorphonuclear transmigration through the intestinal mucosa.
Four of our six patients with active disease were on steroid therapy and they still had a greater absorption of PEGs than the patients in remission and controls.
This is in agreement with one study comparing patients with and without cortisone and sulphasalazine therapy where no influence on intestinal permeability was shown.
In conclusion, we have shown an increase in absorption of PEG 600 molecules after deposition in the colon of patients with active ulcerative colitis.
Moreover, PEG absorption correlated to the degree of inflammation as observed endoscopically and histologically.
These findings indicate an increase in colonic permeability that most probably represents a change in mucosal barrier function depending on the presence of inflammation, and is not the result of a primary epithelial defect.
Phospholipid composition of human gastric mucosa: a study of endoscopic biopsy specimens
Abstract
Gastric mucosal phospholipids, and in particular those of the surface layer, play an important role in mucosal barrier function.
This study examined whether the phospholipid composition of the full thickness gastric mucosa is changed in peptic ulcer disease and gastritis.
The phospholipid composition of gastric mucosa from endoscopic biopsy specimens in 28 subjects (eight healthy controls, 12 patients with duodenal ulcer, and 8 with chronic atrophic gastritis) was studied.
In addition, the phospholipid composition of gastric mucosa was compared with that of duodenal mucosa in 10 patients with duodenal ulcer.
As expected phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine prevailed in all three groups.
Lysolecithin was the smallest component in the duodenal ulcer and chronic atrophic gastritis groups.
The phosphatidylethanolamine value was higher in duodenal ulcer and lower in chronic atrophic gastritis compared with the control group.
In chronic atrophic gastritis there was an appreciable amount of phosphatidylglycerol not present in patients with duodenal ulcer or in the control group.
There was no significant difference in phospholipid composition between antral and duodenal sites in duodenal ulcer patients.
In conclusion, the phospholipid composition of gastric mucosa changes in human gastrointestinal diseases but its relation to cellular functions needs further study.
The gastric mucosa resists the corrosive effects of peptic hydrochloric acid secretion and noxious extrinsic agents.
This function is helped by mucous and bicarbonate secretion, epithelial cell turnover, and mucosal vasculature: a complex and dynamic defence system known as the ‘gastric mucosal barrier’.
The cytoprotective mechanism of this barrier is not yet completely understood, although surface active phospholipids have been reported to play a key role in gastric cytoprotection.
It is difficult to separate the phospholipid surface layer of the gastric mucosa from the structural lipids of the cell membranes.
So far, this has only been attempted in animals, using the technique of mucosal scraping.
A recent study showed, however, that the lipid composition of full thickness mucosal tissue from the rat stomach does not differ from that of the surface layer.
Data on the phospholipid composition in gastric mucosa differ, but there is general agreement on the predominance of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine.
We investigated the total phospholipid composition of human gastric mucosa from endoscopic biopsy specimens in patients with peptic ulcer disease or gastritis, and in normal subjects.
Methods
Gastric endoscopies were performed with Fujinon UGI FP3, and biopsies with Fujinon K24 H forceps.
Precoated silica gel thin layer high resolution plates (Whatman HP-KF 10×10 cm) were used for chromatography.
Phospholipid standards: lysolecithin (LL), sphingomyelin (SM), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), cardiolipin (CL), phosphatidylinositol (PI), and Phosphatidylglycerol (PG), were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co.
The phospholipid chromatographic spots were detected by Phospray (molybdate ammonium, hydrochloric acid, mercury, sulfuric acid) supplied by Supelco Milano.
The plates were developed with high performance thin layer chromatography and read with a scanner densitometer (Shimadzu CS 920).
All chemicals were of reagent grade.
Subjects
The study population consisted of 28 patients (19 men and nine women; age range: 27–70) with dyspepsia who had not taken non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and alcohol for at least one week before the study.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and biopsies were performed after mild sedation (N-butilbromuro joscina 20 mg and diazepam 10 mg).
As a result of endoscopical and histological tests, eight subjects were classified normal (healthy controls with functional dyspepsia), 12 had duodenal ulcer disease, and the remaining eight had chronic atrophic gastritis.
Microscopical examination with Giemsa strain was negative for Helicobacter pylori contamination in all subjects.
The study was approved by the local Ethics Committee and informed written consent was obtained from all subjects.
PHOSPHOLIPID ANALYSIS
The biopsy tissue specimens taken from the gastric antrum or the second half of the duodenum were collected to make a pool from each subject of about 25 mg (range 20–30 mg) of fresh tissue.
The pools were homogenised in a Potter glass with chloroform/methanol (1:2 vol/vol), sonified for 10 minutes, and agitated overnight at 4°C as previously reported.
Phospholipids were then extracted in chloroform/methanol (2:1 vol/ vol) according to Folch.
The extract was dried under a stream of nitrogen, redissolved in 30 µl cloroform and spotted onto gel plates coated with silica (Whatman HP-KF 10×10 cm).
Phospholipids were separated by two dimensional chromatography.
The plates were developed for the first migration in a solvent saturated chamber consisting of chloroform/methanol/ammonium hydrate/water 184:105:7.5:7.5 vol and then dried in cold air.
For the second migration, the plates were turned through 90° and the same solvents were used in a ratio of 120:160:5:5 vol.
The phospholipid spots were detected by Phospray dye vaporisation and identified by comparing the migration of standard single phospholipis with their mixtures (Figs 1 and 2).
Spots were read with the densitometer scanner at 360 nm and the phospholipid classes were quantified by comparing the densitometric values with standard curves of each phospholipid class (Fig 3).
The reproducibility of this method was confirmed with two recovery tests, as follows.
Gastric mucosa, obtained by pooling 10 antral endoscopic biopsy specimens (40 mg) from a single subject, was divided into two equivalent samples.
Two equal mixtures containing the six phospholipid classes at known concentrations (about 10–15 µg of each class) were prepared simultaneously.
The procedure described above (homogenisation, extraction, two dimensional chromatography, and densitometric reading) was carried out with the gastric mucosa sample (A), the phospholipid mixture (B), and the mucosa sample and phospholipid mixture together (C=A+B).
Table I gives the results which are expressed as absolute mean values (µg) of the two concordant experiments.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean value (SEM).
Data of independent groups (healthy controls, patients with duodenal ulcer, patients with chronic atrophic gastritis) were compared using analysis of variance to one channel and Scheffé multiple range tests.
Differences were considered significant at p<0.01.
Data of dependent groups (antral gastric and second portion duodenum in the same patient with duodenal ulcer) were compared using the paired Student's t test.
The overall data were examined using the SPSS/ PC programme on an IBM PS2 personal computer.
Results
Tables II and III show the absolute and percentage values respectively of each phospholipid class from the gastric mucosa of the three groups studied (controls, patients with duodenal ulcer, and patients with gastritis).
In each group there was a prevalence of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine.
In normal subjects the rank order of the various phospholipid classes was: PC>PE>PI>SM>LL>PS.
Patients with duodenal ulcer showed a significant increase, in both absolute and percentage values, in phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, and phosphatidylserine, and a decrease in phosphatidylinositol and lysolecithin compared with controls.
The group of chronic atrophic gastritis patients had a reduction in total phospholipids and in lysolecithin, phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylinositol, and an absolute and percentage increase in phosphatidylcholine; variations in the other phospholipid classes were not significant.
Phosphatidylglycerol was detectable in patients with chronic atrophic gastritis, but not in controls or in patients with duodenal ulcer.
Figs 4 and 5 show the positive or negative percentage variation of absolute gastric phospholipid values in the duodenal ulcer and chronic atrophic gastritis patient groups v controls.
There was no difference in the phospholipid composition between antral and duodenal sites in patients with duodenal ulcer (see Table IV).
Discussion
Recently, Schmitz and Renooij analysed the phospholipid composition of the gastric mucosa in surgical samples from four patients who had partial gastrectomy (Billroth II) for peptic ulcer.
Despite differences in method and in the number of the patients studied, their values for phospholipid composition (%) in patients with duodenal ulcer are very similar to ours.
Using endoscopic biopsy we were able to compare patients with different diseases and control subjects with gastric mucosa histologically free of significant alterations.
Our results confirm the constant prevalence of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, which together account for over 60% of all phospholipis identified in human gastric mucosa.
In a previous study we found a constant phospholipid composition in different parts of the stomach (fundus, corpus, and antrum).
This study, showing no difference between antral and duodenal mucosa in patients with duodenal ulcer, confirms the earlier finding of a structural similarity with the phospholipid composition in the first part of the digestive tract.
The overall evaluation of phospholipid composition compared with healthy controls showed that the lysolecithin part becomes the lowest phospholipid componentin both peptic ulcer and atrophic gastritis.
The widest variations were seen in chronic atrophic gastritis: a lysolecithin decrease and a phosphatidylcholine increase much greater than in duodenal ulcer.
There was a small but significant increase in phosphatidylethanolamine in duodenal ulcer patients compared with controls, whereas the lipid component was consistently and significantly lower in chronic atrophic gastritis patients.
Only the chronic atrophic gastritis patients showed some phosphatidylglycerol.
In their study of patients with peptic ulcer, Schmitz and Renooij report the presence of cardiolipin in quantities comparable with the phosphatidylglycerol values we obtained in chronic atrophic gastritis.
Results on phosphatidylglucerol and cardiolipin values should be viewed with some caution, however, because with the thin layer chromatography procedure these two fractions migrate in close juxtaposition (Fig 1).
It is difficult to interprete the varioations in phospholipid composition found in our study.
The cellular density of the inflammatory infiltrate in the mucosa may affect phospholipid composition, as has been reported for colon mucosa.
The patients with chronic atrophic gastritis in our study had little or no inflammatory infiltrate, whereas all those with duodenal ulcer had a variable amount of inflammatory infiltrate in the gastric antrum.
The difference in phosphatidylethanolamine values between the two patient groups could perhaps be related to the type of cellular rarefaction typical of chronic atrophic gastritis and to the difference in quantity of inflammatory infiltrate between the two groups.
The reduced LL/PC ratio and the increased PC/PE ratio in patients with chronic atrophic gastritis and duodenal ulcer is difficult to interpret in functional terms.
It has been reported that, at least in the mucogel of the mucosal surface, the increase in phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine is related to the hydrophobicity and viscosity of the surface although the chain length and the amount of saturation of the fatty acid side chain of phospholipids plays an even more important role in protecting mucosa against the back diffusion of hydrogen ions.
The functional interpretation of our data, however, should be considered in the context that the contribution of surface phospholipid to the total phospholipid content of the biopsy specimens is relatively small.
In 1986, Orchard and Bickerstaff reported a reduction in all phospholipid classes, particularly phosphatidylcholine, in gastritis and especially in gastric ulcer patients compared with controls, whereas we found a significant phosphatidylcholine increase in both chronic atrophic gastritis and duodenal ulcer patients.
The two studies cannot be compared, however, because Orchard and Bickerstaff did not define the type of gastritis because the patients in their study had ulcerative disease that affected the stomach and not the duodenum.
The results of this study provide evidence that phospholipid composition is changed in patients with gastroduodenal diseases.
Little is known about the lipid metabolism in gastric mucosal cells and its relation to the cellular function; therefore, studies are required to determine the specific role of total mucosal phospholipids in gastric secretion and cytoprotective action.
The importance of phospholipid adherence to the mucosal surface in gastric cytoprotection was first reported by Lichtenberger et al .
The studies on gastric phospholipid composition and function, however, have been conducted on total thickness mucosa and in laboratory animals, because it is difficult to obtain human mucosal biopsy specimens suitable for biochemical study.
Hence, the analysis of phospholipid composition in endoscopic biopsy specimens such as those used in this study, provides a way to investigate the various phases of individual gastric diseases, and also allows investigations on the length and the saturation level of phosopholipid linked fatty acid, and on the relation with the cell peculiarities of mucosa.
Study of the proliferation in human gastric mucosa after in vivo bromodeoxyuridine labelling
Abstract
Studies to measure human gastric crypt or gland cell proliferation may have a number of practical clinical applications in relation to both benign and malignant gastric conditions.
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) labels human gastric mucosal cells in the S phase.
Computer aided data analysis of labelled mucosa allows static proliferative indices to be estimated, including the crypt labelling index (LI), the peak labelling position, the distribution of labelled cells and indirectly the crypt growth fraction.
Multiparameter flow cytometric analysis of labelled nuclei allows the S phase duration (Ts) of mucosal cells to be estimated.
Specimens of histologically normal gastric body (GB, n=16) and antral mucosa (GA, n=10) were obtained from 25 patients with gastric carcinomas who received a bolus dose of 250 mg BrdUrd between 3.0 and 15.7 hours before surgery.
Tissue sections were stained by an immunohistochemical method and subjected to detailed counting of up to 50 longitudinal crypts per specimen.
The total crypt labelling index was calculated by a grid counting method.
A significant difference existed between the proliferative compartments of gastric antral and body mucosa measured by a number of criteria.
The median lengths of the crypts were 137 cells (GB) and 188 cells (GA).
The median peak labelling positions were cell 26 (GB) and cell 61 (GA) from the crypt orifice.
The mean crypt labelling indices were 2.8% (GB) and 4.8% (GA).
The mean Ts of GA cells was 7.7 hours and of GB cells was 10.8 hours.
Gastric mucosal proliferation has been characterised in animals using tritiated thymidine, including the mouse and dog.
Some aspects of the sequence of migration and differentiation of cells in mammalian gastric crypts have been reported.
Limited studies have been published on human gastric mucosal cell proliferation and a detailed overview of such work has been published.
In vivo studies in man have been limited by ethical and technical constraints.
The clinical study of human tissue proliferation has been advanced by the use of the halogenated pyrimidine S phase markers bromo- and iodo-deoxyuridine (BrdUrd and IdUrd), which share S phase labelling characteristics with tritiated thymidine.
In vivo BrdUrd labelling is suitable both for histochemical and multiparameter flow cytometric analysis.
We have adapted a proprietary computer based data analysis programme for intestinal mucosa to study and assess the distribution of S phase cells and to estimate the crypt labelling index in surgical gastric mucosal biopsy specimens from various anatomical sites.
Multiparametric flow cytometric analysis allows dynamic data on cell kinetics to be obtained from a single injection and biopsy specimen.
In particular, for the purposes of this study, it can measure the S phase duration (in hours) of crypt cells in gastric mucosa.
From these data, the crypt growth fraction, the cell cycle time, and the crypt turnover time can also be estimated.
The relative complexity of gastric crypt anatomy compared with colorectal mucosa has discouraged its use as an experimental model in proliferation research.
Gastric mucosa is nevertheless a structured, spatially organised tissue of considerable clinical and biological importance.
The study of the proliferation of human gastric mucosa may provide clues to the development of invasive adenocarcinoma, ulcers, mucosal erosions, and to the actions of putative mutagenic drugs in the stomach.
Methods
DRUG ADMINISTRATION
The study was made on full thickness tissues excised from surgical resection specimens in conjunction with an in vivo labelling study of primary gastric or oesophageal carcinomas.
Each patient gave consent to have a single intravenous dose of 250 mg 5-bromo 2-deoxyuridine (BrdUrd)(Takeda, Japan) given over 30 seconds in 10 ml saline, between 3.0 and 15.75 hours before surgery.
No detectable side effects were noted with this procedure.
Hospital Ethical Committee approval was obtained.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL LOCALISATION OF BRdUrd
Histologically normal mucosal strips were excised at least 5 cm from the tumour and stored in 70% ethanol.
Nine 3 micron sections (every fourth section) were cut from each formalin fixed, wax embedded block and placed on gelatinised slides.
Dewaxed slides were air dried and the endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked in 1% H 2 O 2 in methanol for 30 minutes.
Slides were hydrolysed in 1 N HCl at 60°C for eight minutes and then neutralised in boric acid buffer.
After washing in phospate buffered saline the sections were covered with normal rabbit serum diluted 1:20 in phospate buffered saline for 30 minutes and kept moist.
The primary antibody (rat anti BrdUrd, Sera Labs, Crawley Down, Sussex) was then added (1 in 5 in phospate buffered saline) for one hour at 20°C.
This was followed by washing with phospate buffered saline and the addition of the secondary antibody (rabbit anti rat peroxidase, Dako, High Wycombe, Bucks) 1 in 100 in 10% normal mouse serum for 1 hour at 20°C.
The slides were then rewashed in phospate buffered saline and treated with diamino-benzidine tetrahydrochloride (Sigma, Poole) for 15 minutes in the dark.
Finally, the slides were weakly stained with haematoxylin for one minute before dehydrating and mounting in Xam (BDH, Poole).
SCORING AND METHOD OF COUNTING OF STAINED SECTIONS
The anatomy of gastric crypts varies through the stomach.
Gastric pits become progressively deeper and more convoluted from the proximal cardia to the distal pyloric region.
Each crypt consists of a superficial, longitudinal segment and a sonvoluted deep segment, the second usually appearing in transverse or oblique view on cut sections.
Crypts were categorised by site of origin into proximal, or gastric body (n=16) and distal, or gastric antrum (n=10).
The study of labelled crypt cells is helped by computerised data analysis, as described for colorectal crypts.
A trained observer selected longitudinal crypts and counted labelled and unlabelled cells in the proliferative compartment, entering data directly into a BBC Microcomputer.
BrdUrd labelling was confined to the superficial zone of human gastric crypts (Fig 1).
Up to 50 histologically normal crypts were analysed from each specimen where the entire proliferating compartment was contained within the longitudinal fragment of the crypt selected for counting.
Position one was chosen as the first cell in the vertical column at the crypt orifice (Fig 2) as a reference point for the computer programme.
This was in contrast with other scoring studies, where the reference point was fixed at the crypt base.
Fifty half crypt sections were scored for each sample.
Scoring was performed for each cell along the crypt column to a point immediately beyond the proliferative zone where crypt continuity was lost.
Slides were scored under a ×40 oil objective.
The abscissa scale has been reversed to aid comparisons with colorectal data.
INDIRECT ESTIMATION OF THE TOTAL CRYPT SIZE
Entire crypts are rarely displayed on single sections.
Indirect estimates of total crypt length were therefore made.
The total number of labelled and unlabelled cells was counted under an optical grid over the full thickness of the mucosa at a number of sites chosen at random on each specimen (approximately 1000 cells per site).
The average number of labelled cells (x) per 50 hemicrypts in the proliferation zone was used to extrapolate to the total crypt size.
For example, if x=4, and there were 20 labelled cells in a population of 1000 cells, it could be assumed that the cell population represented 20/4, or five hemicrypts.
Hence the mean hemicrypt length was 1000/5, or 200 cells.
Factors such as oblique and transverse cuts and cell overlap would affect the accuracy of this estimation.
CALCULATION OF THE FLOW CYTOMETRY S PHASE DURATION
Suspensions of mucosal cells were prepared from fragments of mucosa by a pepsin extration technique.
The method of preparation and of the analysis used to calculate the S phase duration, Ts, was identical to that reported elsewhere.
DYNAMIC INDICES OF MUCOSAL PROLIFERATION
The crypt turnover time (Tt) can be estimated from the crypt labelling index (LI) and the S phase duration as follows: LI=Ts/Tt; assuming that the growth fraction (GF) at the position of the peak LI is unity, the cell cycle time (Tc) can be calculated: Tc= (Ts/peak LI) ×GF.
The overall crypt growth fraction is the ratio of Tc/Tt.
PARAMETERS MEASURED
Data which were derived from this analysis included:(a) the size and location of the proliferative zone;(b) the cell position of the peak labelling index (peak LI), and the upper and lower limits of proliferation, the 95%ile and 05%ile;(c) the mean, median, and peak labelling indices;(d) the crypt growth fraction;(e) the cell cycle time;(f) the crypt turnover time.
STATISTICAL METHODS
Comparisons between the various subgroups of patients were performed using the Mann-Whitney U test.
A Wilcoxson signed rank test was used for the paired testof samples.
A significance value of p=<0.05 was used.
Results
PATIENT DETAILS
Twenty six mucosal specimens were obtained from 25 patients who had palliative or radical surgery for gastric adenocarcinoma (n=19), pancreatic adenocarcinoma (n=2), or oesophageal squamous carcinoma (n=4).
There were 17 male and eight female patients, with ages between 43 and 82 years (median 66).
Three had gastrotomy and intubation or gastroenterostomy and biopsy only, four had partial oesophagectomy for squamous tumours, 10 had total gastrectomies, and seven had partial gastrectomies.
There was one modified Whipple's procedure.
CELL COUNTING
There were 780 pooled hemicrypts of gastric body mucosa (n=16) and 500 pooled hemicrypts of antral mucosa (n=10).
The Table and Figure 3 shows the results.
STATIC INDICES
The total mean crypt labelling index was 2.8% in gastric body mucosa compared with 4.8% in antral mucosa, with a significantly larger proliferative range of cell positions in the gastric antrum (90 v 60 cells).
The position of peak labelling was deeper in the antral crypts at position 61 compared with position 26 in body mucosa.
Antral crypts were estimated to be longer than gastric body crypts.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the crypts described by the median value, 5th and 95th per centiles.
Significant differences (p=0.001) were found between these two gastric regions with regard to crypt length, size of the proliferating compartment, and the position of peak labelling.
The overall growth fraction (<20%) was similar in both antral and body mucosa.
DYNAMICS AND FLOW CYTOMETRY DATA
The flow cytometrically derived S phase duration was similar in gastric body and antral cells.
(All normal mucosal specimens had diploid DNA profiles).
The median Ts of gastric body mucosa was estimated to be 10.4 hours (range 3.8–19.7 hours) and of antral mucosa to be 7.3 hours (4.1–12.8 hours).
the cell cycle time was estimated to be similar in both regions of mucosa, but the crypt turnover time seemed to be significantly longer (28.1 days) in gastric body than in antral (11.5 days) mucosa.
Discussion
Human gastric mucosa is a complex proliferation model when compared with colorectal mucosa, because of the convolution of the crypts and because the proliferation zone is located in the middle or upper part of the crypt, possibly producing bidirectional movement of maturing cells.
A opportunity arose from a primary study of proliferation in gastric malignancy to investigate BrdUrd labelled gastric mucosa.
There were no controls from non-malignant cases, but all specimens were well separated from the tumour, were normal on microscopy, and by all histological criteria were representative of normal gastric mucosa.
We have previously reported how mucosal proliferation may be influenced by proximity to a tumour.
This would be difficult to test in gastric mucosa, because crpt anatomy varies throughout the stomach, and normal anatomical variation might mask any tumour associated changes.
There is no simple method to assess proliferation in single gastric crypts.
We have adopted a pregmatic method to estimate the crypt size and the total crypt labelling index.
We acknowledge the limitations imposed by the small size of this pilot study, and the arbitrary grouping of specimens into proximal and distal mucosa.
In practice the changes in crypt structure along the stomach are almost a continuum.
Multiparameter flow cytometry adds the dimension of time to static analyses, where cells have been pulse labelled in vivo and where adequate time has elapsed between labelling and biopsy.
The technique does not distinguish between crypt and stromal cell nuclei in suspension, but S phase estimations are valid because most S phase cells are demonstrably cryptal rather than stromal in stained sections.
Because of the variable time between pulse labelling and biopsy, there will be a trend to higher crypt labelling subsequent on cell division over the longer time periods.
We were unable to show a statistically significant effect, however, of this time on the labelling index in a large and similarly prepared series of colorectal mucosa.
Valid comparisons are difficult to draw from existing publications, particularly between species.
Similar labelling index distributions have been published for the dog and in the rat, as reviewed in.
With regard to man, Lipkin et al studied tritiated thymidine labelling in the gastric mucosa of a patient with oesophageal malignancy and a gastrostomy in serial biopsies.
In the gastric body crypts, intense labelling occurred in the proliferative zone, with cell migration up the crypts taking place over 96 hours.
The S phase duration was calculated to be 10 hours.
There were a mean 58 cells per column, of which 6.8 were labelled within 60 minutes.
In the proliferation compartment, the labelling fraction was 30%, and the crypt cell birth rate was estimated to be 3 cells per 100 cells per hour.
Our data describe a technique which has allowed detailed study of the proliferation compartment of human gastric mucosa, about which little has been published.
The study of gastric mucosal proliferation may have important clinical applications.
The stomach is exposed to dietary hazards and potential carcinogens throughout life, but the origins of gastric carcinoma within normal mucosa remain unknown.
Other fields for study include the proliferative response in healing gastric ulcers and the changes which may contribute to the clinicopathological diagnosis of Barrett's oesophagus.
We suggest that in vivo labelling of gastric mucosa offers considerable physiological and technical advantages over in vitro and crypt squash techniques, because the delivery of a thymidine analogue throughout the three dimensional structure of a tissue (or tumour) is assured in the presence of normal vascularisation.
S phase gastric crypt cells display BrdUrd consistently (Fig 1).
In vivo BrdUrd based studies, however, have serious practical limitations.
Although BrdUrd appears to be safe for in vivo pulse labelling studies in low dose by the intravenous route, its use in vivo is confined to the study of malignancy.
In vitro incubations of fresh gastric mucosal biopsy specimens with BrdUrd or tritiated thymidine overcome the constraints of in vivo labelling at the cost of the loss of the dynamic function of pulse labelling.
Studies of crypts labelled in vivo with BrdUrd may provide a reference against which other putative intrinsic proliferation markers such as Ki-67 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen may be assessed.
By these means it is hoped that further understanding of gastric mucosal proliferation and its controls in normal conditions and in disease may be achieved.
Early acute heparitis with parenteral amiodarone: a toxic effect of the vehicle?
Abstract
A 72 year old white man developed acute hepatic impairment and renal failure within 24 hours of starting intravenous amiodarone for paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia.
After normal initial investigations, there was a noticeable rise in serum transaminases as well as an increase in clotting times, a decrease in renal function and a thrombocytopenia.
These changes returned to normal within 7 days of withdrawal of the drugs without specific treatment, and the patient was later treated with oral amiodarone without any further evidence of hepatotoxicity.
Intravenous amiodarone has been implicated in acute hepatic disease on four previous occasions, but it is suggested that polysorbate 80, an organic surfactant added to the intravenous infusion, is a more likely cause of this complication.
Similar reactions have been described with polysorbate 80 in association with the ‘E-ferol’ syndrome in infants.
The occurence of acute hepatic impairment with intravenous amiodarone does not necessarily preclude the use of this drug by mouth.
A 72 year old man with ischaemic heart disease and poor ventricular function was admitted to hospital after collapsing at home.
He had previously had three vessel coronary bypass grafts in 1977 and then had a myocardial infarction after cardiac catheterisation for unstable angina in April 1991.
At the time of admission he was in mild congestive cardiac failure, with a mildly raised jugular venour pressure at 3cm but no other evidence of oedema, ascites, or hepatomegaly.
His electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with widespread ST-T wave abnormalities.
He was on long term treatment with frusemide (80 mg twice a day), enalapril (10 mg once a day), isosorbide mononitrate (10 mg once a day), and aspirin (150 mg once a day).
These drugs had not been changed over the previous 3 months.
During the first 24 hours in hospital, he had three sustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia, at a rate of 200 per minute, associated with circulatory collapse and syncope.
All three episodes were self terminating after 1–4 minutes.
He was started on intravenous amiodarone at a rate of 300 mg over the first hour followed by 900 mg over the next 24 hours.
The results of initial laboratory investigations were normal for hepatic, renal (Table I), and thyroid function but there was mild hypokalaemia for which supplementation was started with Sando-K (two tablets three times a day).
Within 12 hours of starting the intravenous amiodarone the liver function tests were noticeably abnormal and hge had developed signs of hepatic encephalopathy (grade 1).
He became oliguric with increases in creatinine and urea.
There was a neutrophil leukocytosis with appreciable derangement of the clotting times.
He subsequently became thrombocytopenic with hypokalaemia and hypocalcaemia.
A toxic hepatitis was suspected and the amiodarone was stopped after 24 hours.
The hepatitis and the renal failure were treated conservatively.
Fresh frozen plasma was given to correct the clotting.
Within 48 hours there was a symptomatic improvement and the chemical and haematological abnormalities had begun to improve.
At day 7 oral amiodarone (200 mg three times daily) was reintroduced with no adverse effects.
The liver function continued to improve.
There was no recurrence of his ventricular tachycardias while he remained in hospital.
The patient was discharged home 17 days after admission with no further arrythmias or biochemical dysfunction.
He went home feeling better than he had done for some time but he died suddenly during sleep 3 days later, presumably from a breakthrough cardiac arrythmia.
All other drugs, with the exception of Sando-K had continued unchanged throughout.
Discussion
Amiodarone is an iodinated benzofurane derivative which is used in a wide variety of cardiac arrythmias resistant to other treatments.
It has a long half life and may be administered either orally or intravenously.
It has the benefit of having no negative inotropic properties.
The drug has many extracardiac side effects, including corneal microdeposits, photosensitivity, and hypo- or hyperthyroidism.
Some 15–40% of patients taking it long term develop an asymptomatic hepatic dysfunction, which is both dose dependent and reversible on stopping treatment.
A similar biochemical picture to this may be seen with severe heart failure.
It is unlikely, however, that the rises seen in the alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase activities in this patient have anything other than hepatic cause.
The biochemical test to prove this would have been the differentiation between the cardiac and the hepatic lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes.
Unfortunately, these were not available.
Severe acute hepatitis immediately after intravenous amiodarone has been reported four times.
Never before, however, has oral amiodarone been reintroduced after this type of reaction.
As oral amiodarone had no adverse effect on the liver function in our patient, we suggest that it may have been one of the other constituents of the intravenous solution which was responsible for the hepatotoxicity.
In order to obtain stable solutions of amiodarone for intravenous use, the drug is dissolved in a mixture of polysorbate 80 (polyoxenethylated sorbitan ester) a small amount of benzylacohol, and water.
Polysorbate 80 has been implicated in the E-ferol syndrome which has been described in infants.
The E-ferol syndrome is characterised by hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cholestatic jaundice, renal failure, and thrombocytopenia.
It is associated with the use of an intravenous preparation of vitamin E, E-ferol, which contains polysorbate 80 and polysorbate 20.
The liver histology in this syndrome shows Kupffer cell exfoliation, centrilobular accumulation of cellular debris, and panlobular congestion, especially in central areas.
The polysorbates are deemed responsible for these changes.
The clinical features of the E-ferol syndrome show noticeable similarities to those found in our cases of acute hepatitis after intravenour amiodarone and similar cases described by others.
Although this particular adverse reaction of intravenous amiodarone is rare, it remains important because of the popularity of amiodarone for the treatment of severe life threatening cardiac arrythmias.
Amiodarone, with its lack of negative inotropism, broad spectrum of action, and high efficacy is the only drug of its kind available for use in life threatening arrythmias in patients with severe left ventricular impairment.
We feel that the occurence of acute hepatitis with the intravenous preparation does not necessarily preclude the subsequent use of the oral preparation in these patients.
We would advocate caution, however, and recommend careful monitoring of hepatic and renal parameters.
Intestinal epithelial cells contribute to the enhanced generation of platelet activating factor in ulcerative colitis
Abstract
Generation of platelet activating factor by intestinal mucosal epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells was evaluated to elucidate the possible role of this mediator in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
Epithelial and lamina propria mononuclear cells were isolated from surgical specimens from control, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis patients.
Platelet activating factor was extracted from highly purified cell preparations with 80% ethanol following stimulation with and without 0.2 uM calcium ionophore A23187 and was measured by platelet aggregation assay.
Both cell types generated platelet activating factor activity and this was generally comparable for epithelial and lamina propria cells.
Basal and stimulated platelet activating factor activity of epithelial and lamina propria cells from ulcerative colitis but not Crohn's disease patients was appreciably higher than that of control.
Stimulation with calcium ionophore increased appreciably platelet activating factor activity in lamina propria cells from all groups.
In contrast, only epithelial cells from ulcerative colitis showed an appreciable increase after calcium ionophore induction.
These results suggest that epithelial cells are important contributors to intestinal platelet activating factor generation under normal and inflammatory conditions and that epithelial cells actively play a part in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.
The pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease is unknown and probably multifactorial, resulting from the interaction of a variety of different genetic, environmental, immunological, metabolical, and bacterial components.
Both local cells and soluble mediators participate in the intestinal inflammatory process.
Until recently most of the attention had been focused on the function of the intestinal mucosal immune system and its secreted products as these are known to have defined regulatory and proinflammatory activities.
Gut epithelial cells, however, have also been shown to play an active role in normal and inflamed intestine: epthelial cells probably interact closely with the underlying immune cells by displaying a unique antigen presenting activity.
In addition, gut epithelial cells may be the focus of destruction by the action of mucosal mononuclear cells or a complement mediated process, express potential autoantigens, secrete abnormal mucins, or be metabolically abnormal.
We reported recently that colonic mucosa from patients with ulcerative colitis produce high values of platelet activating factor (PAF), a potent proinflammatory lipid mediator.
Drugs of proved benefit to Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis patients, including steroids, salazopyrine, and 5-aminosalicylic acid, inhibit its production in a dose dependent way, suggesting that PAF may play a part in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
This study was carried out to understand better its role in intestinal inflammation and to investigate whether PAF production is also raised in Crohn's disease.
Also, considering the increasing evidence that not only immune cells but also epithelial cells play a part in the synthesis of inflammatory substances, we investigated the cellular source of PAF using highly purified preparations of autologous epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells.
Methods
PATIENT POPULATION
Crohn's disease patients
Twenty patients with Crohn's disease, admitted to the Cleveland Clinic Hospital for bowel resection treatment, were studied.
The group included 12 women and eight men, ages ranging from six to 84 years.
Four patients had only ileal involvement and 16 had ileocolic or colonic disease.
At the time of resection most patients were receiving corticosteroids and sulphasalazine.
Ileal segments were available from six patients and colonic segments from 14 patients.
Ulcerative colitis patients
Nineteen patients with ulcerative colitis undergoing colectomy were also studied.
Six women and 13 men with ages ranging from 14 to 66 years.
Most patients were receiving corticosteroids and sulphasalazine.
Control subjects
Twenty five surgical control patients, admitted for bowel resection for malignant and non-malignant conditions, were studied.
Eighteen had adenocarcinoma of the large bowel, anywhere from the caecum to the rectum.
Seven patients were women and 11 were men, and their ages ranged from 49 to 84 years.
Seven patients (four women and three men, ages ranging from 40 to 73 years) had a variety of non-malignant conditions, including three with diverticular disease, two with villous adenoma, one with arteriovenous malformation, and one with rectal prolapse.
All diagnoses were confirmed by clinical, macroscopical, and histological criteria.
This project was approved in 1990 by the Research Committee of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
CELL ISOLATION
Lamina propria mononuclear cells
All surgical specimens were obtained immediately after resection, opened longitudinally, rinsed, examined for gross morphological changes, and a representative full thickness sample obtained.
Lamina propria mononuclear cells were isolated by a modification of the original technique of Bull and Bookman.
This method has been reported in detail.
In brief, the dissected intestinal mucosa is freed of mucus and epithelial cells in sequential steps with dithiothreitol (DRR)(Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, Missouri) and ethylenediaminetetra-acetate (EDTA), and then digested with collagenase and deoxyribonuclease (both from Worthington Biochemical Corp, Freehold, New Jersey).
The resulting crude cell suspension is purified using a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient and resuspended in culture medium.
Purity of lamina propria mononuclear cells was mean (SEM) 92 (5%) and viability checked by 0.1% trypan blue exclusion was 85 (5%).
Epithelial cells
Intestinal mucosal strips were treated at room temperature for 30 minutes in a 1.5 mg/ml DTT solution, after which the strips were washed in Hanks's balanced salt solution (HBSS) and then gently stirred in a 1 mM EDTA solution for two periods of 60 minutes to release the epithelial cells.
The supernatants were centrifuged for five minutes at 500 rpm and the epithelial cells contained in the pellets were treated with dispase (Boehringer Mannheim Corp, Indianapolis, Indiana) at a concentration of 3 mg/ml RPMI 1640 (Whittaker Bioproducts, Walkersville, Maryland).
Epithelial cells from both EDTA stirrings were pooled, washed with RPMI, and placed in a tube with the disapase solution and 1 mg/ml deoxyribonuclease I (Worthington) in a total volume of 15 ml.
The tube was then incubated in a 37°C water bath, vortexing every five minutes for 30 minutes.
The entire suspension was then passed over a nylon wool column.
At this point microscopical examination showed a single cell suspension consisting of epithelial cells and a small number of mononuclear and red blood cells.
Viability was 95–100%.
Final purification of epithelial cells was achieved by running the cell suspension over a 40% Percoll (Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology Inc.
Piscataway, New Jersey) gradient (adjusted to 287 mmol with HBSS and 2.5% hydroxyethylipiperazine-ethanesulphonic acid (HEPES) buffer).
spun at 1500 rpm for 20 minutes.
After the epithelial cells were equilibrated at the interface of the Percoll layer they were collected and washed twice in RPMI 1640.
Cytospin preparations of purified epithelial cells were stained by immunoperoxidase to ascertain purity and contaminating mononuclear cells.
Only cells with epithelial cell morphology were stained diffusely by the anti-keratin mononuclear antibody AE1/AE3 (Boehringer Mannheim Corp).
Their purity was 92.2 (1.0%) and viability 98 (2%).
Contaminating lamina propria mononuclear cells were 2% as assessed by staining with a mononuclear antibody directed to a leucocyte common antigen (CD45RB)(Dako Corp, Carpinteria, California).
There was no evidence of platelet contamination in the lamina propria mononuclear cell or epithelial cell preparations.
CELL EXTRATION
Extraction of PAF from cells was done using a previously described method with some modifications.
Autologous lamina propria mononuclear cells and epithelial cells were suspended at 110/0.5 ml of Tyrode's buffer (137 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na2CO3, 2.7 mM KCl, 0.5 mM NaH2PO4, 1 mM MgCl2, 1.3 mM CaCl2, 0.1% glucose, 0.05% albumin, pH 7.4) and stimulated with 0.2 uM calcium ionophore (CaI) A23187 (Sigma Chemical Co) at 37°C for 30 minutes.
The suspensions were then centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 minutes.
Supernatants were collected while the cell pellets were suspended in 0.5 ml 80% ethanol, and both were stored at -70°C until assayed.
Basal levels of PAF were obtained by testing the same cells to the above treatment without CaI.
PLATELET PREPARATION
Rabbit venous blood (50 ml) was collected into Falcon tubes, mixed with 1 ml of 0.2 m ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid, and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 1600 rpm.
Plasma was transferred to another Falcon tube and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 3000 rpm.
The platelet pellet was reconstituted with a washing buffer (pH 6.5) containing 2.6 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 137 mM NaCl, 12 mM NaHCO3, 0.2 mM ethyleneglycol-bis (beta — aminoethylether)— N, N' — tetraacetic acid (Sigma Labs, Israel), 5.5 mM Glucose and 0.25% gelatine, and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 3000 rpm.
The platelet pellet was resuspended in the above buffer and treated with 0.1 mM aspirin (Aspegic Lab, Egic, Amilly, France) for 15 minutes at room temperature, followed by another centrifugation of 15 minutes at 3000 rpm.
Platelets were resuspended in washing buffer at appropriate concentrations for platelet aggregation measurement.
AGGREGATION ASSAY
PAF activity was measured by platelet aggregation using a Chrono-log Corporation aggregometer.
Platelets were stirred in 400 ul of buffer containing 2.6 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl1, 137 mM NaCl, 12 mM NaHCO3, 1.3 mM CaCl1, 5.5 mM glucose, 0.25% gelatine, 1 mM creatine phosphate and 10 U/ml creatine phosphokinase (pH 7.4).
ANALYSIS OF DATA
Statistical analyses were performed using Student's t test for paired and unpaired data and non-parametric Mann-Whitney test.
All data are expressed as mean (SEM).
A probability of p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
Results
PAF activity was present in extracts of both epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells, spontaneously, as well as after induction by CaI (Figure).
In epithelial cells basal and stimulated activity was not significantly different between control and Crohn's disease cells, whereas epithelial cells from ulcerative colitis cells contained significantly (p<0.05) higher PAF values than both control and Crohn's disease cells.
Using lamina propria mononuclear cells similar results were obtained, with ulcerative colitis cells producing significantly (p<0.05) higher PAF values than control and Crohn's disease cells.
Unstimulated PAF actvity of control, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis epithelial cells was found to be similar to that of lamina propria mononuclear cells when epithelial and mononuclear cells were compared.
After stimulation, however, a different pattern of PAF inducation was seen between epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells (Table).
Control epithelial cells failed to respond to CaI, while cells from both forms of inflammatory bowel disease augmented their PAF activity.
Only those cells from ulcerative colitis, however, increased their activity significantly (p<0.05) above that of unstimulated cells.
In contrast, lamina propria mononuclear cells from all groups responded to CaI stimulation, the increase in PAF activity being similar among them and significantly greater when compared with that of unstimulated cells.
In patients with Crohn's disease basal PAF activity in epithelial cells isolated from ileal segments (12.6 (1.9) pg/10 mg wet wt (n=6)) was similar to its activity in epithelial cells isolated from colonic segments (15.1 (2.0) pg/mg wet wt (n=12)).
Basal PAF activity was also similar in ileal and colonic lamina propria mononuclear cells (13.4 (2.4)(n=6) and 15.2 (3.4) pg/mg wet wt (n=13), respectively).
There was also no significant difference in stimulated PAF activity between ileal and colonic epithelial or lamina propria mononuclear cells (results not shown).
Discussion
The results of this study show that in normal human intestinal mucosa PAF activity is generated by both epithalial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells.
during inflammation PAF activity is differentially expressed, being significantly higher in ulcerative colitis but not in Crohn's disease cells when compared with control.
PAF is a proinflammatory lipid mediator shown to play a part in inflammatory conditions of the gut, such as pouchitis as well as in animal models of experimental bowel necrosis.
In this study PAF generation was found to be increased both in epithelial cells and in lamina propria mononuclear cells of ulcerative colitis patients, thus confirming and expanding our previous finding of enhanced PAF generation by mucosal biopsy specimens of ulcerative colitis patients.
PAF generation by examination of colonic biopsy specimens of patients with Crohn's colitis has not been previously evaluated.
In this study of Crohn's disease colitis, however, PAF activity was not found to be significantly increased in epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells above the values of control cells.
These results show again the differences in the possible pathogenesis of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
Other differences have been previously described with respect to the generation of other inflammatory mediators.
Whereas colonic generation of prostaglandin E 2 , protaglandin I 2 , and thromboxane B 2 were all found to be enhanced in ulcerative colitis, in Crohn's disease colitis only the generation of PGE2 and TxB2 were increased.
We have also reported differences in the generation of eicosanoids by peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
In these cells enhanced generation of PGE2 and TxB2 was detected in Crohn's disease but not in ulcerative colitis.
Additional distinctions between these two forms of inflammatory bowel disease exist with regard to the generation of interleukin 2 induced lymphokine activated killer cells and profuction of intestinal soluble interleukin 2 receptor.
The difference between the response of epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells to CaI in both diseases is further highlighted in this study.
In both diseases, PAF generation by lamina propria mononuclear cells was significantly enhanced by CaI but only epithelial cells from ulcerative colitis significantly increased their PAF generation following stimulation.
Taken together, these studies clearly show how a detailed evaluation of different cell types and mediators of inflammation and immonoregulation can separate Crohn's disease from ulcerative colitis.
Despite some similarities, it seems increasingly likely that the pathogenic mechanisms of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are distinct.
The most interesting finding in this study is the contribution of epithelial cells to the generation of PAF in the gut.
In control subjects, as well as in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, basal PAF generation by epithelial cells is similar to that of lamina propria mononuclear cells.
Evidence is accumulating to show that gut epithelial cells interact closely with adjacent mononuclear cells.
Epithelial cells can present antigens and stimulate immune cells, and these, in turn, can modulate epithelial cells through the release of soluble mediators.1 The contribution of epithelial cells to the formation of the inflammatory mediators is probably selective.
We have shown that both in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease their contribution to the enhanced mucosal generation of eicosanoids is negligible by comparison with that of lamina propria mononuclear cells.
In contrast, the enhanced generation of interleukin 1 by inflamed colonic mucosa in patients with inflammatory bowel disease is exclusively because of the production by lamina propria mononuclear cells as epithelial cells do not synthesise this cytokine.
It seems that under both normal and abnormal conditions tightly regulated mechanisms modulate the interaction and mutual mediator exchange between epithelial and immune mucosal cells.
In summary, the results of this study suggest that while PAF contributes to the pathogenesis of the inflammatory response in ulcerative colitis, it has less implications for Chron's disease.
Epithelial cells are an important component in the enhanced mucosal generation of PAF in ulcerative colitis, suggesting that, in addition to cells of the local immune system, epithelial cells play an important role in intestinal inflammation.
Bile salt inhibition of motility in the isolated perfused rabbit terminal ileum
Abstract
The effects of bile on small bowel motility were studied in isolated, perfused rabbit terminal ileum.
It was proposed that bile delivery into the distal ileum would inhibit ileal motor activity, by peptide YY (PYY) release and therefore the effect of luminal bile on motor activity was examined and PYY release measured.
Luminal bile and taurocheodeoxycholic acid (10 mmol) inhibited ileal motor activity.
Arterial infusion of venous effluencts from a bile inhibited ileum suppressed motor activity in a second isolated ileum.
This shows the presence of a humoral inhibitor of ileal motor activity.
Luminal bile increased venous PYY concentrations (42.5 (8.5) to 502 (46.2) pmol/l; p<0.01) and increased bile salt values (1.7 (0.36) to 88.6 (5.6) 10 µmol/l/l; p<0.005).
Arterial infusion of taurocheodeoxycholic acid at concentrations found in the venous effluent (100µmol/l/l) suppressed motility (p<0.001) but infusion of PYY at concentrations in the venous effluent (500.0 pmol/l) failed to inhibit motility.
Furthermore, PYY antagonist, PYX 1, failed to reverse the bile induced inhibition of motility.
Luminal bile salts inhibit terminal ileal motility and this is independent of PYY release.
By slowing motility, bile salts may participate in their own absorption by the ‘ileal pump’ and in the ‘ileal brake’mechanism.
Bile and bile salts inhibit motility and it has been proposed that they take part in the putative ‘ileal brake’ mechanism.
It has been reported that gastric infusion of bile salts in rats delays gastric emptying and inhibits small bowel transit time.
Similarly, infusion of bile salts into the jejunum or ileum of healthy volunteers slows small intestinal transit and inhibits intestinal myoelectrical activity.
An analogous phenomenon has been noted in some diarrhoeal syndromes such as tropical sprue, coeliac disease, and short gut syndrome, where intestinal transit is reflexly inhibited.
It has been proposed that the effector mechanism for this inhibition is located in the terminal ileum and is therefore often referred to as the ‘ileal brake’.
The ileal brake was initially defined by showing that the infusion of fat into the terminal ileum in man slowed both gastric emptying and intestinal transit.
These studies provide circumstantial evidence that the ‘ileal brake’ reflex may be mediated by the release of peptide YY (PYY) from the terminal ileal mucosa.
PYY is found in high concentrations in the terminal ileum and is released after meals.
In addition, infusion of PYY inhibits gastric emptying and prolongs the mouth to caecal transit time in man.
This effect of PYY seems to be mediated by inhibition of cholinergic neurotransmission through a pertussis toxin sensitive mechanism.
Little direct evidence exists, however, to support the initial proposal that PYY itself is the mediator of the ‘ileal brake’ reflex.
PYY and its close homologue, neurotransmitter neuropeptide Y (NPY) share sequence homology in the C terminal fragments, which are responsible for receptor binding and biological activity of the peptides.
Both peptides have essentially identical biological activities.
Study of the actions of PYY and NPY have been helped by the recent description of synthetic decapeptide amide antagonists, PYX 1 and PYX 2.
PYX 1 is physiologically active in vitro at concentrations of 1.0–10 µmol/l/l and PYX 2 at 0.1–10. µmol/l/l.
The specificity of these antagonists has been shown in vitro and they provide a valuable research tool with potential widespread clinical application.
We used a model of isolated, perfused rabbit terminal ileum to characterise the effects of luminal bile salts on intestinal motility.
In addition, the role of gut peptides in mediating the actions of bile on ileal motility are investigated, and the relation of these mechanisms to the ‘ileal brake’ reflex are explored.
Methods
PREPARATION OF ISOLATED ILEUM
New Zealand white rabbits (2 kg) were anaesthetised using ketamine HCl (50 mg/kg) and xyalazine (20 mg/kg).
Intravenous fluid (Ringer's lactate) was given through a lateral ear vein at a rate which maintained stable vital signs.
Heparin (2000 IU) was given intravenously at the beginning of the procedure.
Through a midline laparotomy, the ileocolic artery and vein were cannulated using standard intravenous catheters (20G Cathlon, Critikon, Tampa, Fl, USA).
The ileocolic artery was perfused immediately at 3 ml/min using warmed (37°C), oxygenated (95% O s , 5% CO 2 ) Krebs-Ringer's bicarbonate solution (NaCl 118.4 mmol, KCl 4.7 mmol, dextrose 5.6 mmol, bovine serum albumin 30 µmol).
A 10 cm length of terminal ileum based on the ileocolic artery was isolated and peripheral vascular branches were ligated and divided to avoid loss of perfusate.
At the end of the operation, the animal was killed with additional ketamine (200 mg/kg iv) followed by a saturated KCl solution (5 ml iv).
The isolated ileum was transferred to a humidified organ plate and maintained at 37°C.
Arterial perfusate was infused by roller pump from a warmed fluid oxygenator.
The venous effluent was collected from the cannulated ileocolic vein with a fraction collector.
The perfusate passed in a single cycle through the organ and was not recirculated.
To ensure viability of the organs, pH, PO 2 , and PCO 2 of both the arterial infusate and venous effluent were measured every hour throughout the experiments.
MEASUREMENT OF ILEAL MOTILITY
Motility of the ileal segment was measured by inserting a multilumen manometry catheter into the proximal end of the ileal segment.
The manometer ports were spaced every 2.5 cm and perfused at a constant pressure of 15 cm h 2 o with distilled water (a total volume 0.3 ml/min).
Depending on the length of ileum used, three or four manometer channels were used to record motility.
The manometer catheter was linked to pressure transducers which were interfaced to a polygraph.
The analogue signal was stored in digitised form on a computer hard drive.
The cholinergic agonist carbachol was infused intra-arterially at a final concentration of 0.1 µmol/l to maintain consistent motor activity.
This was continued throughout the experiment.
Ileal motility was measured by integrating the area under the pressure-time curve, during 1 minute periods, using computer software.
The mean activity in all channels was used to quantitate motility and was expressed in units of mm Hg/min.
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) concentrations were measured by radioimmunoassay.
Antisera to pure porcine VIP were produced in rabbits by multiple subcutaneous injections of VIP (100 nmol/rabbit), conjugated to 50 nmol/l bovine serum albumin (BSA) by carbodiimide condensation, emulsified in complete Freud's adjuvant 23.
Incorporation of 0.7–1.1 nmol/l i ims 30 (approximately 2 mci/mol) into 6 nmol/l pure porcine VIP in 50 mmol/l acetate buffer at ph 5.0 was achieved by incubating with 22 pmol/l lactoperoxidase and 1.8 nmol/l H 2 O 2 at room temperature for 15 minutes in a total volume of 130 µl.
The iodinated VIP was purified using high resolution, reverse phase, high pressure liquid chromatography.
Concentrations of PYY were measured using a well characterised radioimmunoassay which we have described in detail elsewhere.
The antibody (Y 21) was raised in a rabbit immunised with unconjugated pure PYY.
Synthetic PYY was iodinated by conventional chloramine t oxidation and labelled PYY purified using high resolution, reverse phase, high pressure liquid chromatography.
This assay detects changes between adjacent tubes of 0.4/l (equivalent to 4 pmol/l perfusate) with 95% confidence.
The dose of PYY required to reduce binding of 1 fmol/l labelled PYY by 50% was 9/tube.
The antiserum is directed to the n terminal.
There is no significant cross reaction of this assay with the related peptides neuropeptide y (NPY) or pancreatic polypeptide (PP).
Enteroglucagon was measured by an assay system.
Enteroglucoagon was measured utilising an antibody (Gl77) that fully recognises pancreatic glucagon and enteroglucagon, the antibody being directed to the n terminal.
Because there were no potential sources of pancreatic glucagon in isolated perfused segments of terminal ileum, enteroglucagon concentrations were measured directly with antibody Gl77 in this preparation.
Subtraction techniques which are required when measuring enteroglucagon in plasma were not needed.
The assay shows no significant cross reaction with related peptides (secretin, VIP, PHI, GRF, and GIP) and detects changes of 0.2/tube with 95% confidence (equivalent to 3 pmol/l enteroglucagon/l perfusate)(Gl77).
In both human and porcine ileal extracts, the antibody (Gl77) recognises a peak in the gel permeation chromatograms which elutes in the position of oxyntomodulin.
Neither GLP 1 nor GLP 2 are detected.
Total bile salts in the venous effluent were measured using direct spectofluorometry.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Baseline ileal motility was measured after equilibration and during carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) infusion.
Examination of the effects of bile and bile salts were performed in five stages.
Experiment 1: effect of intraluminal bile and taurodeoxycholic acid on ileal motility
Bile (0.5 ml) was taken from the gall bladder at laparotomy and infused into the proximal ileum over a two minute period.
Motility was measured in response to luminal bile and after washout of the lumen.
These experiments were repeated using taurodeoxycholic acid (0.1–10 mmol/l).
Experiment 2: intra-arterial infusion of venous effluents
During carbachol infusion and bile stimulation (Experiment 1), the venous effluents were collected and reinfused into an isolated segment from a second rabbit at 0.3 ml/min, at a rate of one tenth the total perfusion rate to prevent hypoxia.
Infusion time for the effluents was two minutes.
Motility was recorded during infusion of each set of effluents.
This allowed the identification of a humoral mediator which might be responsible for the motility changes.
Experiment 3: bile stimulated release of PYY, VIP, and total bile salts in venous effluent
During each of the stages described above, 15 ml of effluent from the venous catheter was collected for five minutes after the start of infusion.
This was frozen at -20°C for subsequent determination of PYY, VIP, and bile salt concentrations.
Experiment 4: motor activity in response to intra-arterial infusion of PYY and taurodeoxycholic acid (TDCA)
To find out if PYY or bile salts were responsible for the inhibition of motility, each was separately infused intra-arterially over a two minute period, at the concentrations found in the venous efflu nts.
Motility was again recorded.
PYY values were measured in the venous effluents collected before and during arterial infusion of TDCA.
Experiment 5: effect of intra-arterial infusion of PYX 1 on bile inhibition of ileal motility
Bile infusion in experiment 3 caused a release of PYY.
Since PYY inhibits ileal motility, we tested the effect of PYX 1 which is a specific antagonist of NPY and PYY.
In each study, continuous infusion of intra-arterial PYX (0.1–1.0 µmol/l) was started five minutes after the start of the carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) infusion and stopped five minutes before the end of the carbachol infusion.
Intraluminal infusion of bile (0.5 ml) was started five minutes after initiation of the PYX 1 infusion.
Each study lasted a total of 25 minutes.
STATISTICS
Motility was quentified by integrating area under the pressure tracings curve in four manometer channels.
For each experiment, the mean of all four channels was derived and expressed in units of mm Hg/min.
Bile salt and peptides were measured in molar concentrations.
Levels of significance were derived from independent t test.
Results
ORGAN VIABILITY
The table summarises the pH, PO 2 , and HCO 3 of the arterial perfusate during the course of the experiments.
Satisfactory oxygenation was obtained in all experiments and the PO 2 in the venous effluents remained >90 mm Hg.
Experiment 1: effect of intraluminal bile (n=5) and TDCA (n=5) on ileal motility
After a 30 minute recovery period following harvest of the ileal segment, basal motor activity was 96 (59) mm Hg/min (Fig 1).
Carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) infusion produced a significant (p<0.01) threefold increase in motor activity; 306 (74) mm Hg/min.
Bile obtained by aspiration from the gall bladders of anesthetised rabbits contained bile acids in a concentration of 8.8 (2.3) mmol/l.
Figure 1 illustrates the effect of infusion of rabbit bile into the ileal lumen on carbachol stimulated motor activity.
The amplitude of the pressure waves declined after a latency period of about 2 to 3 minutes.
The frequency of the pressure waves remained unchanged.
Motor activity decreased to baseline values; 78 (45) mm Hg/min.
After washout of the bile, the amplitude of the pressure waves increased to previous values; 327 (86) mm Hg/ min.
Figure 1 summarises motor activity at all stages of the experiments.
Infusion of TDCA at 10 mmol/l but not at 1 mmol/l into the ileal lumen produced a significant (p<0.01) inhibition of motor activity (Fig 2).
The frequency remained unchanged.
Thus, luminal infusion of rabbit bile and TDCA inhibited motor activity in isolated segments of rabbit terminal ileum.
Experiment 2: intra-arterial infusion of venous effluents (n=4)
Arterial infusion of venous effluents collected before bile stimulation did not change motor activity.
Venous effluents collected during infusion of bile, however, did significantly (p<0.01) inhibit ileal motility after a very short latency (Fig 3).
This inhibition was reversible and motility returned to previous levels after the infusion was stopped.
Figure 3 summarises motor activity before, during, and after infusion of venous effluents.
These studies showed that a humoral agent present in the venous effluent during luminal administration of bile, inhibited motor activity in isolated segments of terminal ileum.
Experiment 3: bile stimulated release of PYY, enteroglucagon, VIP, and total bile acids in venous effluenct (n=5)
Figure 4 shows the basal levels of PYY, enteroglucagon, and VIP.
Intra-arterial infusion of carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) caused a small but significant (p<0.05) increase in PYY concentrations in the venous effluent from 29.8 (8.7) pmol/l to 125 (20) pmol/l.
PYY values significantly (p<0.01) increased to 428 (69) pmol/l during intraluminal infusion of bile.
Neither intra-arterial infusion of carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) nor intraluminal infusion of bile significantly changed venous effluent concentrations of enteroglucagon or VIP.
Therefore, luminal infusion of bile significantly increased the release of PYY but not of enteroglucagon or VIP.
Figure 5 shows total bile acid levels in the venous effluent during basal (unstimulated) periods, intra-arterial infusion of carbachol (0.1 µmol/l), and intraluminal infusion of bile.
The total bile acid concentration in the venous effluent significantly (p<0.01) increased from mean (SD) basal values of 1.7 (0.36) µmol/l to 88.6 (5.6) µmol/l during luminal infusion of bile.
Thus, luminal infusion of bile caused a 50 fold increase in venous effluent concentrations of bile acids.
Experiment 4: changes in motor activity in response to intra-aretrial infusion of PYY (n=7) and TDCA (n=4)
Intra-arterial infusion of PYY (0.1 µmol/l) significantly (p<0.01) inhibited carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) stimulated motor activity (Fig 6).
Lower concentrations of PYY (10 pmol/l-10 nmol/l) did not significantly (p>0.05) inhibit carbachol stimulated motor activity (Fig 6 Top).
Intra-arterial infusion of TCDA (1–100 µmol/l) inhibited motility in a concentration dependant manner (Fig 7) and this inhibition was reversible, after stopping the infusion.
Although arterial infusion of TDCA (100 µmol/l) significantly inhibited motor activity, it failed to stimulate the release of PYY (67 (10) pmol/l v 93 (22) pmol/l; p>0.05, n=5).
Thus TDCA, but not PYY, at concentrations similar to those seen in the venous effluent of experiment 3 inhibited motor activity in isolated segments of terminal ileum.
Experiment 5: effect of intra-arterial infusion of PYX on bile inhibition of ileal motility (n=3)
Intra-arterial infusion of PYX (0.1–1.0 µmol/l) did not significantly (p>0.05) change carbachol stimulated ileal motor activity.
Similarly, infusion of PYX did not prevent bile inhibition of ileal motor activity.
Discussion
This study showed that luminal infusion of bile and the bile acid TDCA inhibited carbachol stimulated motor activity in isolated segments of rabbit terminal ileum.
This inhibition was reproduced in a second isolated segment of terminal ileum by arterial infusion of the venous effluent collected from terminal ileums that had been luminally perfused with bile.
This suggested that bile inhibition of ileal motor activity was mediated by a humoral agent from the terminal ileum present in the venous effluent.
Indeed, PYY and bile salt concentrations in the venous effluents increased during luminal bile infusion, though enteroglucagon and VIP concentrations did not.
When PYY was arterially infused at the concentrations seen in the venous effluents, no inhibition of motility occurred.
In contrast, infusion of taurodeoxycholic acid at these concentrations inhibited ileal motor activity.
Thus, the bile itself seemed to be the inhibitory agent in the venous effluent.
Furthermore, perfusion of the PYY receptor antagonist PYX 1 beforehand did not block the effect of bile infusion on ileal motility.
These results indicated that bile and TDCA inhibited terminal ileal motor activity by a mechanism that was not mediated by PYY, enteroglucagon, or VIP.
These findings suggested that bile and taurodeoxycholic acid directly inhibited ileal motor activity.
Studies in rats have shown that bile salts inhibit gastric emptying and prolongs intestinal transit time.
In man, infusion of bile salts into the jejunum at physiological concentrations prolongs small bowel transit time and inhibits intestinal motor activity.
Fasting concentrations of bile salts in the upper small bowel have been measured at 3–4 mmol/l; the major component of the bile salts being conjugated to taurine or glycine.
Postprandial concentrations reach 5 mmol/l in the jejunum and 10 mmol/l in the ileum.
In this model, we infused bile salts into the ileal lumen at a concentration of 10 mmol/l, a level which both approximated these postprandial luminal values and significantly inhibited ileal motor activity.
These findings suggest that postprandial increases in bile salt concentrations in the terminal ileum may play a role in the inhibition of ileal motility.
This mechanism might facilitate bile salt absorption into the enterohepatic circulation by slowing intestinal transit time.
Bile salts are absorbed passively, to some extent, throughout the small intestine.
Active reabsorption, however, is limited to the ileum (the ‘ileal pump’) and is accomplished by a specific active biological pump.
In man portal venous bile salt concentrations increase from 22.2 µmol/l during fasting to 170 µmol/l after meals.
In this study, a similar change in portal venous concentration of bile acids was seen; from basal values of 1.7 (0.36) to 88.6 (5.6) µmol/l during luminal infusion of bile (Fig 1).
Infusion of venous effluents at a 1:10 dilution (bile salt content 8.8 µmol/l) inhibited motor activity.
This is consistent with the presence of a humoral mediator.
Moreover, taurodeoxycholic acid (10.0 µmol/l) produced a similar inhibition.
It is therefore not unreasonable to propose that bile salts might be the inhibitory component in the venous effluent.
As bile salts release PYY and PYY has been reported to slow intestinal transit time, it seemed possible that this peptide plays a role in the regulation of ileal motility.
We therefore suggested that PYY might mediate the bile inhibition of ileal motility.
Indeed, luminal bile did release PYY from the ileal mucosa.
Reinfusion of PYY at concentrations seen in the venous effluent, however, failed to inhibit motility.
Furthermore, preinfusion of PYX, a specific competitive antagonist of PYY, did not reduce bile inhibition of ileal motor activity.
Thus, PYY does not seem to mediate the inhibition of ileal motility by bile.
Nevertheless, infusion of PYY at much higher concentrations (two orders of magnitude higher) did produce inhibition of motility.
Consequently, these results do not exclude a role for PYY in the mediation of the ileal brake mechanism.
Indeed, previous in vivo studies have shown that intravenous administration of PYY in man at plasma concentrations seem postprandially inhibits gastric emptying and intestinal transit.
It is therefore possible that PYY's ability to inhibit motility in whole animal and human models is a result of its action at a more proximal level in the gut or at a central location.
If this is the case, such a reflex would not be reproducible in the present isolated model.
Alternatively, PYY may cause the release of other inhibitory agents which are responsible for inhibiting motility.
This is unlikely since the specific antagonist PYX 1 failed to reverse bile mediated inhibition.
Our studies suggest that the arrival of bile salts in the ileum may be one of the factors that stimulate the postprandial release of PYY, although the peptide does not seem to inhibit motility locally.
Other regulatory peptides in the terminal ileum may mediate bile inhibition of ileal motility.
VIP is localised to neurones in the lamina propria, submucousal, and myenteric plexuses of the gut and mediates the descending inhibitory reflex.
VIP is released in dogs in response to such stimuli as gastric juice, vagal stimulation, and ileal bile.
In our study, however, no release of VIP was seen in response to luminal infusion of bile.
This inconsistency may reflect species differences.
The absence of any detectable increase in VIP concentrations in our study suggested that this peptide did not play a significant part in the mediation of bile inhibition of ileal motility.
The manometry tracings of spontaneous ileal motility seen in this study closely resembled the in vivo patterns of small bowel motility described by other authors.
After 20–30 minutes of perfusion with oxygenated Krebs Ringer's bicarbonate solution, however, the amplitude of the pressure waves progressively declined.
Intermittent periods of activity were seen thereafter but the timing, amplitude, and duration of this activity was unpredictable.
Because acetylcholine is the endogenous agonist in mammalian small bowel in vivo, its cholinesterase resistant equivalent, carbachol, was used to mimic in vivo conditions.
The motility patterns produced during intra-arterial infusion of carbachol (0.1 µmol/l) were indistinguishable from those initially seen after harvest of the organ and those described in other mammals including man.
The requirement for exogenous administration of cholinergic agents to stimulate motility in isolated models of mammalian small bowel, has been described previously.
This study has shown that luminal bile directly inhibited terminal ileal motility.
It is possible that this effect on ileal motor activity may facilitate absorption of bile salts in the ileum by the ‘ileal pump’ mechanism by slowing intestinal transit time.
These findings therefore suggest that bile salts may play a role in the mediation of the ‘ileal brake’ mechanism and that the ‘ileal brake’may be mediated by several factors which may include bile salts and regulatory peptides such as PYY.
Pepsinogen C gene polymorphisms associated with gastric body ulcer
Abstract
This study was aimed to investigate the association of restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP's) for pepsinogen genes with peptic ulcer disease.
Eighty unrelated controls, 61 patients with gastric ulcer, and 57 patients with duodenal ulcer were studied.
No genetic polymorphisms for pepsinogen A were detected by EcoRI digestion in Japanese subjects but a 100 base pairs insertion-deletion RFLP for the pepsinogen C gene was observed.
The allele frequencies of the large (3.6 kilobase EcoRI fragment) and the small fragment (3.5 kilobase EcoRI fragment) were 80.6% and 19.4% respectively in controls, 55.4% and 44.6% in patients with gastric body ulcer, 79.4% and 20.6% in patients with gastro angular ulcer, 71.4% and 28.6% in patients with gastric antral ulcer, and 75.4% and 24.6% in patients with duodenal ulcer.
The allele frequency of the small fragment was significantly higher in patients with gastric body ulcer than in controls and in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer.
The genotypes which possessed the small fragment was significantly more frequent in patients with gastric body ulcer (78.4%) than in controls (33.8%) and in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer (37.5%).
These results suggest that there is a significant association between the genetic polymorphism at the pepsinogen A gene locus and gastric body ulcer, and that the pepsinogen C RFLP is a useful marker of the genetic predisposition to this disorder.
These results also indicate genetic heterogeneity of gastric ulcer disease, and suggest that the pepsinogen C RFLP may be a useful subclinical marker to explain the differences in geneticaetiologies of gastric body ulcer and gastric angular or antral ulcer.
The basis for supposing that there are hereditary factors in the aetiology of peptic ulcer disease is provided by studies showing aggregation of peptic ulcers in the families of affected individuals to a greater extent than that found in the general population.
More important information about the influence of hereditary factors in ulcer disease has been derived from studies of twins.
It has been reported that the concordance rate for peptic ulcer in monozygotic twins is greater than in dizygotic twins.
Since the concordance was less than 100%, the values could also be interpreted as indicating interactions between genetic predisposition and environmental factors.
A number of inherited characteristics, such as blood groups and HLA antigens, have been studied to determine the degree of association with peptic ulceration.
In this connection, it is assumed that a sufficiently positive association between peptic ulceration and the allele of a defined genetic locus indicates that the genetic trait plays a part in the pathogenesis of the ulceration.
Efforts to understand the gentics of common chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hypercholesterolaemia have focussed on the identification of DNA markers.
Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) can be very powerful tools in these studies.
RFLPs can act as markers of differences between individuals at the gene level.
Analysing RFLPs may identify alleles at a particular genetic locus that are associated with a clinical phenotype.
Human pepsinogen, the inactive precursor of pepsin, comprises two biochemically and immunologically distinct groups of isozymogens: namely, pepsinogen A (PGA)(previous nomenclature: PGI) and pepsinogen C (PGC)(previous nomenclature: PGII).
PGA is the precursor of pepsin A. PGC, also known as progastricsin, is the precursor of pepsin C or gastricsin.
These two types of zymogens differ in their topological distribution within the stomach.
PGA is localised mainly in the fundus, whereas PGC is distributed throughout the stomach and proximal duodenum.
PGA consists of five electrophoretic isozymogens (Pg 1–5) and is remarkably heterogeneous, as evidenced by an extensive protein electrophoretic polymorphism resulting from multiple haplotypes containing different combinations of the individual PGA genes and one or more post-translational modifications of the primary gene products.
Two principal forms of the PGA polymorphisms are recognised: phenotype A, which possesses all five PGA isoxymogens; and phenotype B, which lacks Pg 5.
In contrast, PGC consists of two electrophoretic isozymogens (Pg 6 and Pg 7).
No genetic variation has been described at the protein level but at the DNA level an insertion-deletion RFLP is observed with several restriction enzymes.
It has been reported that there is an association between duodenal ulcer and PGA phenotype A. In addition, two families with a prominent history of duodenal ulcer have been described in whom a high level of serum PGA (hyperpepsinogenaemia I) is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a high risk of developing duodenal ulcer.
From these findings, it can be suggested that pepsinogen genes are involved in the pathogenesis of peptic ulcer.
The aim of the present study was to analyse RFLPs for PGA and PGC, and to examine an association between peptic ulcer and the RFLPs.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
One hundred and eighteen patients were studied — 61 with gastric ulcer (41 men and 20 women, age range 19–82 years, mean 56.5 years) and 57 with duodenal ulcer (35 men and 22 women, age range 18–85 years, mean 45.8 years).
Most of the patients were referred for investigation to the Department of Gastroenterology of Kyoto Second Red Cross Hospital, and the remainder were seen at the Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.
Peptic ulcer was diagnosed endoscopically.
No patient had a history of taking ulcerogenic drugs, such as aspirin, indomethacin, and steroids.
All patients had a history of ulcer recurrence confirmed by endoscopy.
Patients with combined duodenal and prepyloric ulcer were excluded.
The 80 unrelated control subjects with no evidence of peptic ulcer disease (40 men and 40 women, age range 30–81 years, mean 53.3 years) were taken from subjects who visited multphasic health testing services held by Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.
The services included endoscopic screening for gastric cancer, which is a leading cause of cancer deaths in Japan.
No control subject individuals had evidence of peptic ulcer by endoscopy.
All patients and controls were living in Kyoto Prefecture and were Japanese in origin.
The study protocols were approved by each institutions human subjects' protection committee.
SOUTHERN ANALYSIS
Genomic DNA was purified from whole blood, digested with EcoRI (Toyobo, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufacture's instructions, and subjected to electrophoretic separation in agarose gels.
Genomic DNA was denatired and transferred to nitrocellulose, and prehybridised at 42°C for 3 hours in 50% formamide, 25 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.5), 500 µg/ml sonicated salmon testes DNA, and 5×Denhart's.
Filters were hybridised overnight in a solution containing 50% formamide, 10% dextran sulphate, 20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.5), 250 µg/ml sonicated salmon testes DNA, 2×Denhardt's, and PGA or PGC cDNA probes (1×10 cpm/ml) labelled with [P]-dCTP by the random primer method as described previously.
The PGA cDNA probe (pPGA101) is a full length cDNA including exons 1–9 of the predicted human PGA coding sequence and portion of the 5' and 3' untranslated region.
The PGC cDNA probe (PGC301) is a partial cDNA including exons 2–9 of the predicted human PGC coding sequence and portion of the 3' untranslated region.
Filters were rinsed several times at room temperature in a solution containing 0.1×SSC and 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) to remove excess hybridisation solution and then washed at 55°C for 15 minutes in the same solution for detection of the PGA or PGC sequences.
SERUM PGA AND PGC VALUES
Serum was obtained after an overnight fast, and was stored at -20°C until analysed.
Serum PGA and PGC values were determined by PGA and PGC RIABEAD kits (Dainabot Co, Tokyo, Japan).
The limits of the detection were 0.1 ng/ ml for PGA and 0.63 ng/ml for PGC.
The intra-assay coefficients of variation were 5.0% (n=5) for PGA and 3.5% (n=5) for PGC.
The inter-assay coefficients of variation were 8.0% (n=5) for PGA and 6.5% (n=5) for PGC.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The significance of the association between peptic ulcer and pepsinogen RFLPs was tested using the χ 2 test, with significance assigned values better than p<0.05.
The logit estimate of the common odds ratio was calculated using the method of Woolf.
The significance of the differences in serum PGA and PGC values and the ratio of PGA to PGC was determined by the Student's t test for unpaired samples, with significance assigned values better than p<0.05.
Results
RFLP FOR PGA
Four EcoRI restriction fragments (17.8, 17.2, 13.5, and 3.9 kilobase (kb)) were observed by Southern analysis for PGA.
We did not detect any RFLPs for PGA in Japanese populations (Fig. 1).
RFLP FOR PGC
Four EcoRI restriction fragments (20, 5.7, 3.6, and 3.5 kb) were observed among the genotypes, of which two were polymorphic (3.6 and 3.5 kb) by Southern analysis for PGC (Fig 2).
The polymorphic pattern was identical to that reported in white populations.
Of the 80 unrelated control subjects, 53 were homozygous for the 3.6 kb fragment (3.6/3.6), 23 were heterozygous — that is, they possessed both the 3.6 kb and the 3.5 kb fragment; 3.6/3.5 kb)— and four were homozygous for the 3.5 kb fragment (3.5/3.5)(Table I).
Hence, the estimated allele frequencies for the large and the small fragments were 80.6% and 19.4%, respectively, and were not significantly different from those in white populations (82.5% and 17.5% respectively).
PGC RFLP IN PATIENTS WITH GASTRIC ULCER
Of 61 patients with gastric ulcer, 23 were homozygous for the large fragment (3.6/3.6), 32 were heterozygous for the RFLP (3.6/3.5), and six were homozygous for the small fragment (3.5/ 3.5).
The allele frequencies of the large and the small fragments were 63.9% and 36.1%, respectively (Table I).
The increased frequency of the small fragment in the patients with gastric ulcer (36.1%) compared with controls (19.4%), was statistically significant (χ 2 , 23.83; p<0.005), and it yielded an odds ratio of 2.35 (95% confidence limits, 1.37 to 4.02)(Table I).
PGC RFLP IN PATIENTS WITH DUODENAL ULCER
Of 57 patients with duodenal ulcer, 30 were 3.6/ 3.6, 26 were 3.6/3.5, and one was 3.5/3.5 (Table I).
The allele frequencies of the large and the small fragments were 75.4% and 24.6% respectively in patients with duodenal ulcer, and were not significantly different from those in controls.
PGC RFLP ANALYSIS ACCORDING TO SEX
In no group were there significant differences between men and women in respect of allele frequencies.
In both sexes, the increased frequency of the small fragment in patients with gastric ulcer (35.4% in men, 37.5% in women) compared with controls (18.8% in men, 20.0% in women), was statistically significant (Table I).
PGC RFLP ANALYSIS ACCORDING TO THE LOCATION OF GASTRIC ULCER
The allele frequency of the small fragment in patients with gastric ulcer was analysed according to the location of the gastric ulcer.
The frequency of the small fragment was 44.6% in patients with gastric body ulcer, 20.6% in patients with gastric angular ulcer, and 28.6% in patients with a gastric antral ulcer.
The increased frequency of the small fragment in patients with gastric body ulcer (44.6%), compared with controls (19.4%) was statistically significant (χ 2 = 16.20; p<0.005), and it yielded an odds ratio of 3.34 (95% confidence limits, 1.83 to 6.12)(Table II).
In order to gain a better appreciation of the genotypic risk, the relative risk of gastric body ulcer associated with the genotypes was estimated.
The relative risk of gastric body ulcer associated with the presence of the small fragment (3.6/3.5 and 3.5/3.5) compared with 3.6/ 3.6 was 7.12 (95% confidence limits, 2.87 to 17.67) and was statistically significant (χ 2 =20.2; p<0.005).
The relative risk associated with 3.5/ 3.5 compared with 3.6/3.6 was 6.63 (95% confidence limits, 1.37 to 31.93) and was statistically significant (χ 2 =6.7; p<0.01).
The relative risk associated with 3.6/3.5 compared with 3.6/3.6 was 7.20 (95% confidence limits, 2.83 to 18.33) and was statistically significant (χ 2 =19.32; p<0.005).
SERUM PGA AND PGC VALUES AND THE RATIO OF PGA TO PGC
Serum PGA values were significantly higher in patients with duodenal ulcer than in controls and in patients with gastric ulcer.
Serum PGC values were significantly higher in patients with gastric ulcer and in patients with duodenal ulcer than in controls.
The PGA/PGC ratio was significantly lower in patients with gastric ulcer than in controls and in patients with duodenal ulcer (Table III).
Serum PGA and PGC values and the PGA/ PGC ratio were analysed according to the location of the gastric ulcer; body ulcer and angular or antral ulcer.
Serum PGA values were significantly higher in patients with angular or antral ulcer than in controls.
Serum PGC levels were significantly higher in patients with body ulcer and in patients with angular or antral ulcer than in controls.
The PGA/PGC ratio was significantly lower in patients with body ulcer than in controls and in patients with angular or antral ulcer.
Discussion
A major difficulty in genetic studies of peptic ulcer disease has been the lack of subclinical markers.
It has been reported that blood group O and non-secretor status are associated with duodenal ulcer, however, the magnitude of the association was very weak.
The relative risks of developing a duodenal ulcer for persons with blood group O and non-secretor status was 1.35 and 1.5 respectively.
Studies of the prevalence of HLA antigens in patients with duodenal ulcer have shown significant increases in the frequency of the antigens HLA-B5, HLA-B12, and HLA-BW35.
However, the contribution of these HLA antigens to ulcer prevalence is small because of their low prevalences in populations, even if the magnitude of the associations is relatively high.
Our data indicate an association between the genetic polymorphism at the PGC gene locus and gastric body ulcer.
The allele frequency of the small fragment of the PGC RFLP in patients with gastric body ulcer (44.6%) was significantly hgiher than that in controls (19.4%).
The odds ratio of gastric body ulcer associated with the presence of the lower fragment of the PGC RFLP was 3.44, and was statistically significant.
The genotypes containing the small fragment (3.6/3.5 and 3.5/3.5) were significantly more frequent in patients with gastric body ulcer (78.4%) than in controls (33.8) and in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer (37.5%).
The relative risk of gastric body ulcer associated with the presence of the small fragment as compared with the homozygosity for the large fragment was 7.12.
This value was greater than those of the associations between duodenal ulcer and blood group O (1.35), non-secretor status (1.5), and HLA B5 (2.9).
These results suggest that the PGC RFLP is a useful subclinical marker of the genetic predisposition to gastric body ulcer.
In addition, our data indicate genetic heterogeneity of gastric ulcer disease.
The allele frequency of the small fragment of the PGC RFLP was significantly higher in patients with gastric body ulcer than in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer.
The concept of genetic heterogeneity implies that a particular clinical disorder is a group of distinct diseases with different aetiologies, both genetic and non-genetic.
Some degree of heterogeneity has already been shown in peptic ulcer disease.
Doll and Kellock showed the independent segregation of gastric and duodenal ulcers.
They also concluded that genetic factors alone, without environmental interactions, could account for this segregation.
Other subgroups have been defined by identifying pathophysiological disturbances, such as gastric hypersecretion, increased rate of gastric emptying, or increased gastrin release, and combining these abnormalities with genetic markers.
These findings speculate that there are the differences in the genetic aetiology between gastric body ulcer and gastric angular or antral ulcer, and suggest that the PGC RFLP may be a useful subclinical marker to separate the genetic differences.
The meaning of the association is not clear in this study, however, several hypotheses can be proposed.
One is that the PGC gene itself is one of the genes responsible for gastric body ulcer.
Previous studies of the PGC genomic clone suggested that the RFLP involves a 100 bp insertion or deletion of intron sequence located between exons 7 and 8.
It might be possible that this rearrangement of the gene reflects differences in gastric mucosal structure and function between patients with gastric body ulcer and patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer and patients with duodenal ulcer.
To analyse the meaning of the association, serum PGA and PGC values and the PGA/PGC ratio were examined in the present study.
There were no significant differences in serum PGA and PGC values and in the PGA/PGC ratio among the genotypes of the PGC RFLP but serum PGA and PGC values were significantly higher in patients with duodenal ulcer and in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer than in controls.
Incontrast, serum PGC values were significantly higher and the PGA/PGC ratio was significantly lower in patients with gastric body ulcer than in controls, in patients with duodenal ulcer, and in patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer.
These results agree with previous reports.
Samloff et al reported that a raised pepsinogen I (PGA) concentration is a major risk factor for duodenal ulcer, whereas a high serum pepsinogen II (PGC) concentration and a low PGA/PGC ratio are major risk factors for gastric ulcer.
These differences in serum PGA and PGC values and in the PGA/PGC ratio seem to reflect differences in gastric mucosal structure and function between patients with gastric body ulcer and patients with duodenal ulcer and patients with gastric angular or antral ulcer.
One difference is that the fundic gland mucosa is often normal in patients with duodenal ulcer, but is affected by atrophic gastritis in those with gastric ulcer, especially high lying gastric ulcer.
It has been reported that the combination of a high PGC value and a low PGA/PGC ratio is a subclinical marker of atrophic gastritis.
Tatsuta and Okuda examined the influence of fundal gastritis on the location of gastric ulcers by the endoscopic Congo red test.
Their results indicated that ulcers were more proximal when atrophic gastritis was more severe.
These findings suggest that the rearrangement of the PGC gene may reflect the atrophic change of gastric mucosa.
Atrophic gastritis is thought to be the precursor lesion of the intestinal type of gastric carcinoma which is the most common cancer in Japan.
Studies are now underwat to examine the association between gastric cancer and the PGC-RFLP.
Helicobacter pylori has recently been implicated as an important aetiological factor of gastritis and gastroduodenal ulceration.
Further analysis of the relationship between the PGC RFLP and the H pylori status and precise histological changes are clearly needed in the future studies.
Another possible explanagion of the association between the PGC RFLP and gastric ulcer disease is that the PGC gene is not itself responsible for the predisposition but one of the responsible genes is closely linked to it.
It is interesting to note that the PGC gene was localised to human chromosome 6p21.1-pter by analysis of mouse x human somatic cell hybrids.
Our recent linkage analysis showed that the PGC gene is closely linked to the HLA cluster which has been investigated to determine the association with peptic ulcer disease.
Further molecular biological studies using RFLP markers in this chromosome region will clarify the hypotheses.
At last, one could have to propose the presence of reduced penetrance, other modifier genes, or an interaction with the environment.
Human PGA has been known to be a complicated protein polymorphism.
Recent molecular studies with cDNA probes have provided evidence that PGA haplotypes containing different combinations of genes are the major contributing factor in the observed protein heterogeneity.
The PGA gene complex located at 11q13 includes several different haplotypes that contain variable numbers of PGA genes each of which encodes an electrophoretically distinguishable isozymogen; Pg5 (PGA5), Pg4 (PGA4), and Pg3 (PGA3).
As a result of the multiple gene variation, more than 50% of white people are heterozygous.
Five EcoRI restriction fragments are detected among phenotypes (22, 17.8, 17.2, 13.5, and 3.0 kb).
The 13.5 kb fragment is present in all phenotypes that contain the A haplotype and is absent in the B haplotype.
In contrast, four EcoRI restriction fragments (17.8, 17.2, 13.5, and 3.9 kb) were observed in the present study, and we did not detect any RFLPs for PGA in Japanese populations by EcoRI digestion.
These findings indicate that all Japanese are homozygous for the A haplotype for PGA.
Samloff et al also reported that all persons of Far Eastern ancestry were phenotype A of PGA by the analysis of the protein heterogeneity.
Several genetic and environmental influences have been proposed to explain the racial and the geographic variability in the incidence of peptic ulcer disease.
It is probable that many factors are involved in the incidence, and that these vary among populations.
It has been reported that PGA phenotype A is associated with duodenal ulcer in white people.
The relative risk of the association with PGA phenotype A was 1.74.
If the PGA genes are on the average linked (in disequilibrium) to one of responsible genes for duodenal ulcer, the association is expected to vary among populations.
RFLP for PGC has been identified both in white people and in Japanese.
The frequencies of the RFLP alleles were near identical between the two groups.
The racial difference of the association between genetic polymorphisms of PGC and gastric body ulcer remains unclear in this study.
The incidence of gastric ulcer is higher than that of duodenal ulcer in Japan.
In our previous study, the ratio of gastric to duodenal ulcers was 1.69 in Kinki district where Kyoto Prefecture is located.
In contrast, duodenal ulcer is more common than gastric ulcer in most western countries.
Bonnevie reported that the incidence rate of duodenal ulcer was four times higher than that of gastric ulcer in Copenhagen County.
Kurata et al reported that duodenal ulcers were diagnosed 2.5 times more frequently than gastric ulcers in Los Angeles, California.
The similar distribution of the RFLP alleles in Japanese and whites could not explain the difference of the ratio of gastric to duodenal ulcers in these populations.
Studies are now underway to confirm our results in a larger number of patients and in different populations.
Peptic ulcer disease is a multifactorial inheritant disease.
There are interactions between genetic predisposition and environmental factors.
In addition, peptic ulcer disease represents a heterogeneous group of disorders attributable to a variety of genetic and environmental causes.
With the larger numbers to be attained, attempts will be made to correlate our findings with various clinical features and environmental factors, to analyse the meaning of the association we described the present study.
Towards safer endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
In the 22 years since its introduction, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) has become firmly established in the management of biliary and pancreatic disease.
It is usually as effective as surgery in treating bile duct stones and involves a shorter hospital stay.
But is it safer?
The answer seems to be a qualified yes.
The difficulties in comparing the two modes of treatment have been understood for some time.
In particular, patients coming to ERCP tend to be older and in poorer general health than those undergoing surgery.
With a complication rate of around 7% and a procedure related mortality of 0.6–0.7%, however, therapeutic ERCP compares favourably with the morbidity and mortality of surgery for choledocholithiasis.
When patients with malignant obstructive jaundice have been randomised to either surgery or insertion of a large diameter biliary stent, the 30 day mortality in the endoscopic group was significantly lower or showed a trend in that direction.
Thus, while the risks of ERCP are relatively fewer, this is not grounds for complacency.
Many recent developments provide an opportunity for safer ERCP and endoscopists offering this service should consider incorporating these advances into their practice.
Haemorrhage
Haemorrhage after endoscopic sphincterotomy occurs in 2.5–4% of cases.
In many of these patients the bleeding stops spontaneously — only 0.4% undergo surgery and 0.2% die.
Haemorrhage is usually immediate but it can occasionally be a late complication.
It is customary to check patients' blood coagulation before ERCp and correct any detected abnormality.
Compatible blood should be available for transfusion before performing a sphincterotomy.
Most patients who bleed after this procedure have normal blood clotting, however, indicating that other risk factors are more important than minor coagulation abnormalities.
The most important of these factors is the size of the sphincterotomy.
Large sphincterotomies are usualy done in the hope of extracting big stones.
Those stones with a diameter of less than 1 cm can almost always be removed, whereas those more than 1.5 cm diameter often cause difficulties.
The shape of the calculus is also a determinant of successful extraction.
‘Square’ stones are more difficult to remove than more rounded ones.
Improved mechanical lithotripters that are often effective and reasonably cheap are now available and may reduce the temptation to cut too far when attempting removal of large stones.
In one centre, the use of mechanical lithotripsy increased the endoscopic clearance rate of duct stones from 86% to 94%.
Nevertheless, failure to grasp very large ‘square’ calculi still occurs.
In patients with this problem who are elderly and in poor general health, other methods of stone fragmentation such as extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy or biliary stenting without stone removal may be safer alternatives than either surgery or enlargement of a sphincterotomy that is already a reasonable size.
Unless lithotripsy is planned, inserting a stent is preferable to inserting a nasobiliary drain.
The latter provides only a temporary solution to the problem, particularly as confused elderly patients often try to remove the tube at night.
In contrast, stents provide reasonable long term palliation in most cases.
It would, however, be preferable to have a bile duct free of stones, and Johnson et al recently reported that in such patients initially treated with an endoprosthesis, eight of 10 who had been given ursodeoxycholic acid had cleared their stones within six months compared with only one of 10 not given this bile acid.
Sphincterotomy is sometimes performed to facilitate biliary stenting, and consequent haemorrhage may occasionally be a cause of death.
With modern equipment, however, a single, large diameter stent can often be inserted without a sphincterotomy and is usually sufficient to provide adequate drainage, even when both lobes of the liver are obstructed by carinoma.
Good sphincterotomy technique is well described in standard texts and is crucial to the safety of the procedure.
One of the commonest mistakes is attempting to cut with too much wire inside the papilla, partly for fear of displacing the wire.
Sphincterotomes that can be used while a guide wire remains in the common bile duct are now available.
The use of this equipment should obviate this problem and also helps to ensure that the sphincterotomy continues in the correct direction.
Even with a well performed sphincterotomy of judivious size, unpredictable harmorrhage still occurs in a few cases.
The possibility of using endoscopic Doppler ultrasound to detect any large blood vessels lurking in the path of the proposed sphincterotomy has not yet been well evaluated.
When bleeding is a steady ooze, it can often be stopped by injections of dilute adrenaline (1 in 10000), and this also facilitates completion of the procedure and thereby drainage of the duct.
When blood is spurting this technique is less successful, partly because the endoscopic view is obscured.
Injections should be placed into the apex of the sphincterotomy, avoiding the area around the pancreatic duct.
Because uncontrolled spurting haemorrhage is unlikely to stop spontaneously and carries a high mortality, patients with this problem (whatever their age and state of health) should be considered for urgent surgical intervention.
Infection
Cholangitis and septicaemia are, in some cases, potentially avoidable complications of ERCP.
The most common causes of infection are either the use of endoscopic equipment contaminated with nosocomial pathogens or spread of host derived bacteria after instrumentation of an obstructed biliary tree.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most frequent contaminant of endoscopes.
Septic complications after the introduction of P aeruginosa at ERCP are well described and may occur even in patients who do not have biliary or pancreatic disease.
Duodenoscopes are more difficult to clean thoroughly than gastroscopes because of the bridging elevator channel and, as they are often used less frequently, their incomplete disinfection or drying allows a greater time for organisms to proliferate.
In addition to rigorous mechanical cleansing and effective disinfection of the endoscope, prevention of Pseudomonas infections requires thorough drying before the endoscope is stored and repeat disinfection immediately before its subsequent use to remove any organisms that may have grown.
It must also be remembered that the cleaning equipment itself, including washing machines, is a potential source of contamination.
Any water in these cleaning accessories should be changed frequently.
All the equipment should be subject to regular microbiological surveillance.
Cannulation and contrast injection of an occluded, and often already infected, bile duct may precipitate overt cholangitis or septicaemia.
Prophylactic antibiotics are therefore advisable in those patients found to have biliary obstruction and mandatory in those in whom the duct has not been cleared.
Piperacillin or mezlocillin have been recommended, but many patients now harbour bacteria resistant to these antibiotics.
Ciprofloxacin or cefotaxime, together with metronidazole to cover anaerobic organisms are current alternatives.
In patients at risk of infectious endocarditis, ampicillin usually provides satisfactory prophylaxis.
Antibiotics penetrate very poorly into obstructed bile and drainage of the duct is of paramount importance in both relieving and preventing infective complications.
It is, therefore, undesirable to undertake ERCP solely as a diagnostic test in jaundiced patients when the endoscopist lacks either the experience or the equipment to relieve the obstructing lesion.
Guide wire exchange and needle-knofe papillotomy
New procedures and equipment can facilitate therapeutic ERCP.
The guide wire exchange technique can be useful in maintaining access to the common bile duct when the diagnostic cannulation has proved difficult, thereby aiding a successful sphincterotomy or stent insertion.
Guide wire technology is continually improving.
Newer models have the advantages of increased flexibility and torque control.
They may also be easier to negotiate through strictures because of a hydrophilic coating which becomes slippery when wet.
In experienced hands, needle-knife papillotomy can be effective in gaining access to an occluded biliary tree.
If, despite this procedure, cannulation subsequently fails, a repeat attempt at cannulation will often be successful a few days later when the oedema has subsided.
Needle-knife papillotomy is probably a safer option than pre-cutting with a sphincterotome where the wire emerges from the end, as the direction of the cut is easier to control with the needle-knife and there is less danger of damage to the pancreatic duct.
Similarly, needle-knife papillotomy may be less hazardous than the alternative method of achieving biliary access using the combined percutaneous-endoscopic procedure.
Biliary stenting
Most patients with malignant biliary obstruction in whom a large diameter (10 or 11.5 FG) plastic stent is inserted, die from their tumour while their first stent is still patient.
In the remainder, the stents eventually block with a sludge derived from protein, food fibres, bilirubin, and bacteria.
Cholangitis then commonly follows.
While larger diameter stents remain patient longer than smaller diameter ones, many are blocked five to six months after insertion.
Attempts to delay stent clogging by prescribing long term antibiotics or by the mucolytic action of aspirin have met with little success, though recent studies suggest that silver impregnation of the stent and omitting side holes may be helpful.
Failure to exchange an occluded stent leaves the patient at risk of infection and often requires the replacement of the stent by the combined radiological-endoscopic procedure with its additional hazards.
This can sometimes be avoided by the use of a newly developed stent exchanger.
Employing a short biliary balloon to remove the old stent while leaving a guide wire in place is an alternative technique.
The new metal stents (Wallstent) have been proposed as a possible answer to stent clogging.
As they expand to a much greater diameter (24 FG) than plastic stents, they are not subject to occlusion by debris and bacteria, though some become blocked by tumour ingrowth between the stent mesh.
Nevertheless, a preliminary report suggests that they remain patent longer than plastic stents, produce a more rapid decrease in the patients' jaundice, and are associated with a lower incidence of early cholangitis.
Metal stents, however, are expensive, non-removable, and have a short effective length of 6.5 cm.
Acute pancreatitis
Increased serum pancreatic enzyme activities are common after ERCP, but clinically significant pancreatitis occurs in about 2% of procedures only.
It is well known that filling of the gland with acinar should be avoided.
This may still happen, however, as an inexperienced endoscopist, having achieved a pancreatogram, struggles with the usually more difficult task of obtaining a cholangiogram, making further injections into the pancreatic duct during his attempts.
The newer, non-ionic contrast materials may be less likely to excite pancreatic inflammation than ionic media.
But even when no contrast has been injected into the gland, pancreatitis may occasionally occur, perhaps as a consequence of manipulation of the ampulla.
Perforation
Perforation, which is usually retroperitoneal, complicates approximately 1% of endoscopic sphincterotomies.
An incidence as high as 10% has been reported after combined procedures.
Perforation is more likely when cutting non-dilated bile ducts, if the sphincterotomy is large or strays from the line of the duct.
A recent study describes 11 patients who had retroperitoneal perforation during ERCP and who were all successfully treated by conservative means.
However, this plan of management is advisable only if biliary drainage has been established.
Basket impaction
If basket impaction is to be avoided, it is essential to assess the size of the sphincterotomy and the lower common bile duct with a balloon catheter, and to compare the size of the balloon with the stone(s) to be removed.
The basket should not be closed too tightly as many duct stones are soft and the basket wires may become embedded in the stone so that it cannot be released.
More effective forms of lithotripsy offer the prospect of a reduction in the present rate of basket impaction of 0.2%, and can also be useful in resolving the problem when it arises.
Sometimes an impacted basket can be delivered the next day, when the ampullary oedema subsides.
Whatever plan of management is adopted, however, it is important that some form of biliary drainage is instituted urgently to lessen the risk of cholangitis.
Hypoxia
The recent British Society of Gastroenterology report on endoscopic safety and monitoring contains much that is germane to the practice of ERCP.
Hypoxia is more likely in patients undergoing ERCP than gastroscopy as they are often elderly and given heavier sedation.
In addition, the procedure usually takes longer and an endoscope of a greater diameter is used when biliary stenting is performed.
In most ERCP patients, hypoxia can be avoided by intranasal oxygen given at a rate of 4–5 litres per minute.
Nevertheless, Griffin et al found in 10% of their patients that oxygen saturation dropped below 90% for longer than a minute even when supplementary oxygen was used and only modest doses of sedative had been given.
As careful clinical monitoring is more difficult in the darkened environment in which ERCP is usually performed, this finding illustrates the value of additional patient monitoring by pulse oximetry.
Patient selection
Despite attempts to improve the safety of ERCP, some risk will inevitably remain.
It is therefore important to select appropriately those patients who need this investigation, and to balance carefully the risks and expected benefits of any therapeutic procedure.
These considerations are especially pertinent with the advent of laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
The bile ducts are not often visualised or explored during this operation and it is uncertain how those patients with both duct and gall bladder stones can be identified, either beforehand or perioperatively.
Choledocholithiasis is highly unlikely when a technically satisfactory ultrasound indicates a non-dilated duct system that is free of stones, particularly when the patient's liver function tests are also normal.
If pre-operative ERCP is planned, it can reasonably be reserved for those patients who do not fulfil these criteria.
Rectal epithelial cell proliferation patterns as predictors of adenomatous colorectal polyp recurrence
Abstract
To determine whether proliferative patterns in flat rectal mucosal samples can predict the recurrence of adenomatous colorectal polyps, after polypectomy, rectal mucosal specimens removed from the lesions obtained at endoscopy from 55 patients diagnosed for the first time as having adenomatous colorectal polyps.
Epithelial cell proliferation was assessed in biopsy specimens through H-thymidine autoradiography.
After polypectomy, patients were followed for 24 months and underwent complete colonoscopy every 6 months to detect and remove any metachronous lesions.
In 40 patients second biopsy specimens were taken during one of the follow up colonoscopies to evaluate the stability of proliferative indices over time.
The ratio of labelled (S phase) to total cells (labelling index) for the entire crypt, as well as ratios for each of the five equal compartments into which the crypt had been divided longitudinally, was calculated for each patient.
Mean labelling indices for upper crypt compartments 3 and 45 in the 22 patients in whom polyps recurred were significantly higher (respectively p<0.05 and p<0.01) than those of the 33 without recurrence suggesting that an upward shift of the crypt's replicative compartment is associated with polyp recurrence.
Labelling indices remained essentially unchanged in those patient who underwent biopsy twice.
Reproducible kinetic parameters such as these might be useful in planning follow up of patients with adenomatous polyps after polypectomy.
It is generally accepted that most colorectal carcinomas arise from adenomatous tissue, which usually but not always assumes the form of polyps.
Polyp removal is therefore recommended as a way of interrupting the adenoma-carcinoma sequence.
Polyps recur, however, in 30–50% of all polypectomy patients, and they must therefore be followed with regular colonoscopic examinations.
The precise level of risk associated with new adenomas that occur after polypectomy has not been fully defined, however, and there is still some debate over the length of adequate surveillance.
Numerous clinical, pathological, and biological features of index or baseline (as opposed to recurrent) polyps have been evaluated as potential ‘markers’ for predicting recurrence but examination of histologically normal mucosal samples may also provide information on the likelihood of recidivism.
Proliferative abnormalities in normal looking colorectal mucosa are believed to represent an early phase of colorectal carcinogenesis and have been found in a number of conditions associated with a high risk for these malignancies.
These changes may also precede the development of adenomatous polyps.
Using H-thymidine autoradiography, Deschner, Lipkin,et al have shown that in high-risk subjects, proliferating cells are not confined to the lower two thirds of the colonic crypts, as they are in normal subjects, but are scattered throughout the entire length of the gland.
For this reason, most investigators agree that several longitudinal compartments should be defined along each crypt column ot provide more precise descriptions of the distribution of labelled or replicating cells.
Potten et al have recently described a software package which generates frequency plots of labelling indices against the exact cell position within the crypt.
Since the proliferative abnormalities generally affect the entire colonic mucosa in high risk subjects, reflecting the model of ‘field cancerisation’ first described by Slaughter et al , most investigators use the proliferative pattern of the more accessible rectal mucosa as an index of the proliferative activity of the colon as a whole.
The purposes of this 2 year prospective study were:(1) to determine whether rectal epithelial cell proliferation evaluated at index polypectomy can be used to predict the risk for adenoma recurrence and (2) to assess the stability of this marker over time.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Fifty five patients (29 men and 26 women aged 23 to 77 years)(mean (SD) 56.2 (12.5) years) with sporadic adenomatous polyps of the large bowel took part in this study.
None had ever been diagnosed as having colorectal polyps before our examination.
Patients with hyperplastic polyps only were not accepted for enrollment.
At the beginning of the study, each polyp patient underwent total colonoscopy and a ‘clearing’ polypectomy to ensure a polyp free colon.
Pancolonoscopy was performed between 0800 am and 1200 pm after standard preparation with a polyethylene glycol solution taken the evening before.
During this examination, three to four samples of flat rectal mucosa were taken from an area 10–15 cm from the anal verge and used for the proliferative studies described below.
Repeat colonoscopies were performed every 6 months for the entire 2 year follow up period, and any metachronous adenomas that had occurred were removed.
On the basis of these findings, two subgroups were distinguished — a relapsing group, in which recurrence was noted during one or more of the follow up examinations, and a non-relapsing group, in which no recurrences were observed during the entire 24 month study period.
In 40 of the 55 patients, biopsy of the flat mucosa was repeated during one of these subsequent surveillance examinations and the proliferative patterns found in these samples were compared with those of the baseline biopsy samples.
The mean interval between baseline and repeat biopsies was 15.0 months (6 months in six cases, 12 months in 10, 18 months in 22, and 24 months in two patients).
None of the 55 patients was given any type of medical treatment during the study period and all were instructed to continue their normal dietary habits.
A second group fo 28 subjects (16 men and 12 women, aged 25 to 80 years (mean (SD) 61.5 (14.2) years) were used as controls.
These subjects had all undergone colonoscopy for diagnostic purposes.
With the exception of an occasional haemorrhoid, findings were negative for all types of colorectal pathology, and none of the control patients or their families had histories of either colorectal malignancy or inflammatory bowel disease.
Index biopsy specimens were taken during this colonoscopic examination as described above for the polyp group.
There was no colonoscopic follow up of control patients.
EVALUATION FO RECTAL EPITHELIAL CELL PROLIFERATIVE PATTERNS
Within 15 minutes of removal, biopsy specimens of flat rectal mucosa were washed in saline solution and cut into 1 mm thick fragments.
According to a slightly modified method described by Deschner and Lipkin, the mucosal fragments were then transferred to sterile septum fitted vials containing 2 ml of Eagle's basic salt solution supplemented with 10% calf serum (GIBCO, Paisley, Scotland) and 5 µCi H-thymidine/ml (specific activity, 25 Ci/mmol)(Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK).
A mixture of 95% O 2 /5% CO 2 was injected through the vial's septum until an internal pressure of 3–4 atm was reached, and the vials were incubated at 37°C for 1 hour in a shaking bath.
After incubation, the specimens were washed with four changes of saline solution at 4°C, fixed in Bouin solution for 1 hour, transferred to ethanol solutions, and embedded in paraffin.
The paraffin block was cut into 3 µm thick sections which were placed on slides.
Pooled slides from several patients were dipped in Ilford K5 (Ilford Ltd, Mobberley, Cheshire, England) emulsion and placed inside a light-tight box where they were kept at 4°C for 10 days.
After exposure, the slides were developed in Ilford Phenprint at 18°C, fixed in Ilford Hypam fixative, and counterstained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Analysis was confined to those crypts whose entire lengths could be completely visualised and which contained a single layer of cells only.
Identification and counts of ‘labelled’ cells — that is, those in S-phase during the incubation period — was carried out at ×1000 magnification.
The dose of tritiated thymidine used here, which is somewhat higher than that used by many other investigators, produces clear cut labelling of S-phase muclei with numerous black grains against a negligible background.
When weaker labelling made grain counts necessary, a cut off of 6 grains or more was used to define labelling.
The total number of cells, as well as the number and the position of labelled cells, was recorded for each crypt column — that is, each side of the length of a crypt.
A total labelling index was calculated as the ratio of labelled cell to total cell numbers for each column.
In addition, each column was divided into five equal compartments from the base (compartment 1) to the mouth of the gland (compartment 5), and the ratio of labelled to total cells was calculated for each compartment.
Since the number of labelled cells in the upper crypts was often quite low, a single labelling index was calculated for compartment 4+5 (labelling index 4+5) as suggested by other investigators.
This high crypt region generally represents 40% of the crypt length.
In those patients from whom two biopsy specimens had been taken, slides were read by the same examiner.
A minimum of 25 different and well oriented columns were considered sufficient to evaluate the proliferative pattern of the epithelial cells; cases with fewer than 25 columns were excluded from the analysis.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
χ 2 test was used to compare the pathological features of the idex polyps in relapsing patients with those of patients in whom recurrence was not observed.
Group and subgroup means (SEM) were calculated for all of the proliferative data.
Since the distribution of H-thymidine labelling indices was normal, Student's t test for unpaired data was used to compare index values among the groups of subjects studied.
Threshold labelling indices above which polyp recurrence was most likely to occur were identified through linear discriminant analysis.
Multivariate analysis was also performed to determine which of these proliferative parameters was independently associated with relapse.
Student's t test was used to compare mean difference (D) between the first and the second biopsy labelling indices in relapsing and non-relapsing patients.
p Values of <0.05 were considered significant.
Results
During the 24 month follow up period, 22 (40%) of the 55 polyp patients developed metachronous polyps.
Table I compares the clinical and pathological characteristics of these patients with those of the other 33 (60%) in whom there were no recurrences after the initial polypectomy.
Recurrent polyps were noted at the 6 month follow up examination in three patients, at the 12 month examination in eight, at the 18 month visit in nine, and at the final (24 month) examination in two.
None of these patients experienced more than one recurrence during the study period.
No significant differences (χ 2 test) were found between the two subgroups as far as index polyp number, size, histotype, or degree of dysplasia were concerned.
Table II contains the proliferative parameters (group means (SEM) of all patients enrolled in this study — healthy controls and patients with polyps — the latter divided into the two subgroups mentioned above.
There was virtually no correlation between these parameters and any of the clinical and histological features of index polyps referred to in Table I (data not shown).
Comparison of the polyp group as a whole and the control group showed no significant differences as far as total labelling indices or those for compartments 1, 2, or 3 (the lower 60% of the crypt) were concerned, although the mean values for the polyp group were consistently higher.
The mean labelling index for the upper compartment (4+5) in the polyp group was, however, significantly (p<0.05) higher than that of the controls.
Within the polyp group, there were significantly higher numbers of labelled cells in compartment 3 (p<0.05) and compartment 4+5 (p<0.01) in those patients in whom adenomas recurred compared with those without recurrences.
The proliferative pattern of this latter subgroup was quite similar to that of controls, whereas the total labelling index (p<0.05), as well as the indices for compartments 3 (p<0.01) and 4+5 (p<0.01), in the relapsing subgroup were all significantly higher than those of controls.
The Figure shows the individual labelling indices for compartment 3 and 4+5 for the-two subgroups of polyp patients.
Linear discriminant analysis showed that polyp recurrence within 2 years of index polypectomy was most likely to occur when index labelling indices were greater than 15.5 for compartment 3 or greater than 3.5 for compartment 4+5.
Multivariate analysis showed that the latter index was clearly an independent predictor of relapse while the p value for the compartment 3 labelling index was borderline (p=0.057).
Table III presents the mucosal proliferation parameters in the 40 polyp patients in whom biopsies for proliferation studies were repeated during one of the follow up colonoscopies.
Eighteen of these patients were members of the relapsing subgroup and 22, of the non-relapsing group.
Data from both baseline and follow up specimens are shown separately for the two subgroups.
The mean labelling indices did not change significantly over time regardless of whether or not there were recurrences.
Discussion
The main findings of this study can be summarised as follows:(1) patients with adenomatous colorectal polyps generally showed a significant increase in the cytoproliferative activity of the most superficial portions of the rectal crypts compared with controls;(b) this difference was primarily the result of an appreciable upward shift of replicating cells in patients destined to suffer from recurrent polyps; the proliferative pattern of patients whose polyps did not recur after initial polypectomies were essentially similar to those of controls;(c) the proliferative pattern of flat rectal mucosa did not change appreciably during the follow up period regardless of whether polyps recurred or not.
Previous studies have shown that expansion of the proliferative compartment toward the surface of the colonic gland is a common feature in subjects at high risk for colorectal cancer.
The presence of replicative epithelial cells in the upper crypt has classically been shown with H-thymidine labelling, and more recently by an in vivo bromodeoxyuridine labelling technique.
It is thought to reflect defective cell proliferation control and delayed onset of normal differentiation.
These replicative cells are extremely sensitive to the effects of intraluminal carcinogens, and their exposure to these substances is greater when they are located in the upper crypt.
For this reason, the pattern of the proliferative cells in this area of the colorectal crypt is considered to be the most discriminatory index of a subject's level of risk for colorectal cancer.
Most investigators use the proliferative pattern of the rectal mucosa as a reliable index of the cytoproliferative activity of the entire colonic mucosa.
Several studies have shown that mucosal cell proliferation is uniform throughout the various segments of the colon in normal subjects, in those with adenomatous polyps or colon cancer, and in those with hereditary risk factors for colon malignancy.
However, Potten et al have recently reported that in vivo bromodeoxyuridine labelling indices for the rectal mucosa were lower than those for the rest of the colon, which were fairly homogeneous.
The mean rectal labelling index reported by these investigators was, in fact, lower than that found in any of the groups of our study.
Potten et al are the first to point out that their findings are based entirely on the study of patients with colorectal cancer and, although the specimens used were taken at least 5 cm from the primary carcinoma and did not show any unusual histological features, there may be differences with respect to the colonic mucosa of patients without carcinoma.
In their most recent study they compared these distant from the tumour with those from histologically normal samples taken within a 1 cm radius of the tumour and founr that regardless of the colonic segment being considered, the proliferative activity in tumour adjacent tissues was generally dampened with respect to that of the more distant specimens.
If, as these authors postulate, the tumour exerts some type of inhibitory effect on the proliferation of the cells surrounding it, it is possible that the lower labelling index reported for the rectal segment is at least party related to a wider — that is, extending beyond a 5 cm radius — zone of inhibition produced by rectal tumours with respect to those arising in other colonic segments.
It is, however, quite possible that the proliferative activity of the rectum is, indeed, lower than that of the rest of the colon.
Other investigators, using a microdissection technique on biopsy specimens, have reported less proliferative activity in the rectum of patients without colon cancer.
With regard to the validity of rectal cell proliferation as an index of that of the colon as a whole, the in vitro results of Terpstra et al are significant.
While these authors also noted a slight decrease in the proliferative activity of the distal colon, they found that this difference remained constant regardless of the risk status of the subject (normal controls, small or large adenomas, colon cancer).
Our data confirm an upward shift of the proliferative zone in the patients with adenomatous colorectal polyps (which are themselves associated with an increased tendency to develop colon cancer).
This shift was not observed in the normal controls with no identifiable risk factors for these malignancies.
Within the polyp group, labelling pattern differences also emerged between the subgroup of patients in whom polyps recurred and those in whom the colon remained polyp free during the follow up period.
The former subgroup showed the same upward shift observed for the polyp group as a whole, but the differences, with respect to normal controls were even more noticeable, involving significant increases not only in the labelling indices of compartments 3 and 4+5, but also in the total labelling index.
In contrast, the subgroup in whom no recurrences were observed showed mean labelling indeces that were not significantly different from those of controls.
Linear discriminant analysis showed that polyp recurrence could be predicted with 71% accuracy when the compartment 4+5 labelling index exceeded 3.5.
The prognostic value of this parameter might have been higher if the follow up of our patients had been longer, since some of the patients with high upper crypt labelling indeces who did not relapse might have experienced later recurrences.
But regardless of the precise predictive value of this threshold, our findings show clearly that patients destined to suffer recurrence presented a persistent upward shift in the proliferative pattern which could be detected before the relapse occurred.
Similar differences between relapsing and non-relapsing polyp patients ahve already emerged from previous studies, although other investigators have found no significant differences whatsoever.
Future advances in technology may disclose other, more sensitive markers of cell proliferation whose predictive accuracy is greater.
The heterogeneity of proliferative patterns found within the high risk population used for this study is not surprising.
Diversity has also been reported within groups with other high risk conditions for colorectal cancer.
The difference noted within our polyp group may be explained in a number of ways.
Firstly, patients with sporadic adenomatous colorectal polyps are known to have a higher risk of developing colorectal cancer, but the possible modulation of this risk by hereditary or environmental factors will naturally vary from subject to subject.
An inherited susceptibility has recently been reported in a subgroup of patients with common — that is, apparently sporadic — adenomatous polyps.
Modulation of proliferative anomalies by environmental factors — for example the intensity or length of exposure to protective substances in the diet, or both, has also been shown by a number of studies.
One example is our recent observation of changes in the proliferative patterns of the rectal mucosa induced by omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in patients with adenomatous polyps.
On the other hand, this heterogeneity between risk groups might reflect the existence of constitutionally distinct subgroups within a population that has different forms of susceptibility to adenoma development: one with generalised and noticeable proliferative anomalies throughout the entire colonic epithelium that produce an increase tendency toward recidivism, and a second, less recidivant subgroup in whom polyp development is not preceded by the generalised pattern of hyperproliferation seen in the first group but by other types of alterations as yet unidentified.
One hypothesis, which was first advanced by Deschner in 1975 and has recently been reproposed by Rozen, is that the same type of proliferative anomalies are also present in the second subgroup but in a localised rather than diffuse form.
If the latter were true, random sampling of the normal mucosa would be less reliable as a means of ascertaining risk.
However, the uniformity of mucosal cell proliferative patterns in the various colonic segments that was discussed earlier would shed some degree of doubt on this possibility.
Finally, our data donfirm the longitudinal stability of the kinetic markers (both total labelling index and compartmental distribution of labelled cells) over time.
This finding is in agreement with those of Lynch et al .
Furthermore, in dietary trials aimed at reducing the risk of colon cancer in which these parameters were repeatedly evaluated, the same stability has been noted in control patients.
If more extensive studies confirm our belieft that markers of proliferative activity are reliable predictors of polyp recurrence, the initial kinetic pattern can be used to individualise follow up protocols for polypectomy patients, eliminating unnecessary colonoscopy for those who are unlikely to suffer recurrence and increasing surveillance in those with recidivant tendencies.
Polymeric enteral diets as primary treatment of active Crohn's disease: a prospective steroid controlled trial
Abstract
Thirty two patients with active Crohn's disease were included in a controlled randomised trial to determine the efficacy and safety of polymeric enteral nutrition compared with steroids, to achieve and maintain clinical remission.
The polymeric diet was administered through a fine bore nasogastric tube by continuous, pump assisted infusion (2800 (SD 120) kcal/day).
The steroid group received 1 mg/kg/day of prednisone.
Both treatments were effective in inducing clinical remission: 15 of the 17 patients given steroids and 12 of the 15 patients assigned to the polymeric diet went into clinical remission (defined by a Van Hees index < within four weeks of treatment.
The percentage reduction of the Van Hees index was 34.8 (SEM 4.9) % for steroids and 32.3 (5) % for enteral nutrition (mean difference 2.5%; 95% CI 11.8% to 16.8%).
Mean time elapsed to achieve remission was similar in both groups (2.0 (1)v 2.4 (1.2) weeks).
Tolerance of the enteral diet was excellent.
Four patients in the steroid group had mild complications attributable to this treatment.
Ten patients (66.6%) in the steroid group and five (41.6%) in the enteral nutrition group relapsed within a year of discharge, but no differences were found in the cumulative probability of relapse during the follow up period.
These results suggest that polymeric enteral nutrition is as safe and effective as steroids in inducing short term remission in active Crohn's disease.
Elemental (aminoacid based) diets were initially introduced as primary treatment of active Crohn's disease because of their hypoallergenicity, because it was considered that whole protein may act as a dietary antigens and increase the immune stimuli to the gut.
Another argument for these diets was their possible role in favouring bowel rest.
Six prospective randomised trials have evaluated the efficacy of elemental diets in Crohn's disease.
In four of them, the elemental diet was as effective as steroid treatment in achieving short term remission.
In one trial, elemental feeding was as effective as bowel rest plus total parenteral nutrition, but these results could not be reproduced in patients with colonic Crohn's disease.
Recent studies suggest that the effectiveness of elemental formulas is sustained by factors other than the socalled bowel rest.
Also, polymeric (whole protein based) diets, when used as adjuncts to steroids, are well tolerated in active Crohn's disease.
Elemental diets have the inconvenience, however, of being unpalatable, hyperosmolar, and expensive.
Therefore, other types of formula diets without such drawbacks have been assessed.
In one study, hydrolysed (peptide based) diets were no better than steroid plus sulfasalazine treatment.
In another trial this type of diet was as effective as an elemental diet in inducing remission in active Crohn's disease.
Four prospective randomised trials have investigated the role of polymeric formulas in Crohn's disease.
In three of them, this diet was as effective as an elemental diet in achieving remission.
By contrast, opposite results were obtained in a recent study, with a very poor response to the polymeric diet.
Thus the question of which type of enteral formula diet is better in the treatment of Crohn's disease remains open, and a study comparing polymeric diets with steroid treatment has, to our knowledge, never been performed.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of polymeric enteral nutrition, as compared with steroid treatment, in achieving and maintaining clinical remission in patients with active Crohn's disease.
Patients and methods
From November 1988 until November 1991, all adult patients admitted because of clinically symptomatic Crohn's disease were prospectively evaluated.
The diagnosis of the disease was based on previously reported clinical, morphological, and histopathological data.
Patients were considered for the trial on the basis of:(1) symptoms consistent with activity of the disease (abdominal pain, diarrhoea, weight loss, anorexia, fever);(2) two or more abnormal laboratory indices indicative of active disease (erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) >30 mm/h, haemoglobin concentration (Hb) <12 g/dl for men and <11.5 g/dl for women, C-reactive protein (CRP) >3 mg/l, platelet count >350000 cells/mm); and (3) Van Hees activity index (VHAI) greater than 120.
Patients were excluded from the study if they were already taking steroids, had evidence of intestinal perforation, significant intestinal obstruction, toxic megacolon, massive gastrointestinal haemorrhage, or mid-jejunal fistulas that precluded the use of enteral nutrition.
Forty four patients with Crohn's disease were examined for eligibility during the trial period.
Twelve were excluded because of VHAI <120 (five patients), steroid treatment (four patients), refusal to participate in the study (two patients), and mental retardation (one patient).
Thus 32 patients (17 men, 15 women) were assigned by means of a random number table to one of two treatment groups: 17 patients were treated with steroids and 15 patients received a polymeric diet.
To obtain comparable groups a stratified randomisation was performed according to two variables: the VHAI (<170 v 170), and the location of the disease (small bowel (with or without colon involvement)v exclusive colonic disease).
The study was performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Informed consent was obtained from all the patients and the study was approved by the research and ethics committees of both participating hospitals.
Table I gives the composition of the polymeric formula diet.
Polymeric enteral nutrition (PEN) was administered through a fine bore Silk type nasogastric tube (Corpak, Chicago, IL) by continuous, pump assisted infusion over 20–22 hours/day.
No oral food or fluids were allowed during the trial.
Daily total caloric requirements were calculated from Long's equation modified for ideal body weight.
A starter regimen was used, with infusion of 60% of the calculated total caloric requirements on the first day; this was progressively increased to 100% by the third day.
Patients randomised for steroid treatment received oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day).
If improvement was achieved, prednisone was gradually reduced by 10 mg weekly decrements down to 30 mg.
Afterwards, prednisone was reduced in steps of 5 mg/week until completely withdrawn.
While in hospital, patients taking steroids were encouraged to eat the whole hospital lactose free diet.
(mean daily caloric intake 2200 (230) kcal/day).
In both groups, treatment with sulfasalazine, azathioprine, cyclosporine A, or parenteral nutrition was not allowed.
Two patients, one in each group, received oral metronidazole (20 mg/ kg/day) for severe perianal disease.
EVALUATION OF RESPONSE
Improvement was defined as showing three or less stools a day, absence or mild abdominal pain, no fever, pulse rate ≤90 beats/min, and a 10% reduction in the VHAI in each weekly evaluation of the patient.
Clinical remission was considered when a patient fulfilled the criteria of improvement and had a VHAI <120.
Patients not fulfilling the criteria of improvement, and those in whom the VHAI increased compared with that of the previous weekly evaluation, were considered as treatment failure and treatment was stopped.
Also, treatment was considered unsuccessful when clinical remission was not achieved after four weeks.
Laboratory evaluation, including complete haematological and biochemical analysis (SMA-21 plus autoanalyser), was obtained weekly.
Nutritional assessment was performed weekly by recording body weight, percentage of ideal body weight (% IBW), mid-arm muscle circumference (MAMC, % standard), triceps skinfold thickness (TSF, % standard), and serum albumin concentration.
FOLLOW UP
After remission was achieved, a western type lactose free oral diet was reintroduced in the PEN group within a period no longer than two days.
In both groups, treatment with oral 5-ASA (500 mg mesalazine thrice daily) was started before discharge and maintained during follow up.
Patients treated with steroids continued the decreasing steroid regime on an ambulatory basis and also had a western type lactose free oral diet.
Milk derivatives were slowly reintroduced after one month of follow up in both groups.
Follow up included monthly visits during the first three months, and every three months afterwards.
Relapse was defined as:(1) appearance of symptoms of flare up (abdominal pain or diarrhoea) or development of complications of the disease (intestinal occlusion, abdominal mass, fistulas etc);(2) two or more of body temperature >37.5°C, ESR >30 mm/h, CRP >3 mg/l, platelet count >350000 cells/mm.
STATISTICAL CALCULATIONS
A sample size of 15 patients for each group was calculated based on an α error of 0.05 and a β error of 0.10 (two tailed).
This number of patients should allow us to detect a minimal relevant difference in the mean percentage reduction of the VHAI between both treatments of 20% (35 points); the estimated standard deviation of the VHAI is 30 points, a value obtained from a previous study on patients with similar clinical characteristics.
The results are expressed as mean (SEM).
The 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) for percentages and for the difference between means were computed when appropriate.
Significant differences between both groups were determined by the χ 2 test of independence or Fisher's exact test and by the unpaired Student 7 test for qualitative and quantitative data respectively.
The effect of treatment on laboratory and anthropometric measurements was assessed by the paired Student t test.
Evolution of ordered categorical data in each group was assessed by the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
Probability of relapse curves were computed by the Kaplan-Meier method, and were compared between groups by the long rank test.
All the statistical analyses were performed with the statistical package BMDP (Statistical Software Inc, Los Angeles, CA, 1989).
Results
Table II shows the main features in both treatment groups.
At entry, both groups were clinically and nutritionally comparable.
The number of patients with abnormal biological and nutritional indices before and after the trial were similar in both treatment groups (Table III).
Twenty seven patients achieved clinical remission: 15 out of 17 (88.2%; 95% CI 63.5–98.5) in the steroid group, and 12 out of 15 (80%; 95% CI 51.9–95.7) in the PEN group (p=0.43).
Mean time to achieve remission was similar in both groups (steroids: 2.0 (1.0) weeks v PEN: 2.4 (1.2) weeks; p=0.47).
Nine cases achieved a response within the first week (five prednisone, four PEN), eight cases by the second week (six prednisone, two PEN), five by the third week (two prednisone, three PEN), and five by the fourth week (two prednisone, three PEN).
A decrease in activity of disease was shown in both groups by reduction in the VHAI (PEN: 172.5 (7.7) to 113.8 (6.9), p=0.0001; steroids: 184.3 (9.5) to 118.1 (10.6), p=0.0003).
The percent reduction of the VHAI was 34.8 (4.9) % for the steroid group and 32.28 (5.0) % for the PEN group.
The 95% CI for the difference of 2.5% ranged from -11.8% to 16.8% and included zero.
Tables IV and V show that the changes in the VHAI in both groups were due to the improvement in most items included in the index.
Also, CRP concentration significantly decreased in both treatment groups.
Treatment failure occurred in two patients of the steroid group, both within the first week.
One of them had an intestinal perforation and required surgery.
The second patient was treated with enteral diet and achieved remission.
In the PEN group, there were three treatment failures.
One of these patients improved when steroids were administered.
The remaining two patients did not achieve remission after four weeks of treatment.
They also failed to respond to steroids and were treated surgically.
No preferential disease location was noted in treatment failures.
Protein-energy nutritional status was maintained in both groups during the trial period.
Nutritional support induced a significant increase in TSF, whereas normal hospital diet plus steroids did not.
Similar significant increases in serum albumin concentration were found in both groups (Table V).
Tolerance of the diet in the PEN group was excellent.
One patient complained of heartburn and required the administration of H 2 antagonists to relieve it.
It is remarkable that no patient had diarrhoea attributable to diet intolerance, and the number of bowel movements decreased significantly in the PEN group (Table IV).
Four of the 17 (23.5%) patients in the steroid group had complications attributable to the treatment (two moon faces, one acne, and one hypokalaemia), but, no difference in treatment related complication rate was found between groups (p=0.21).
Fifteen patients relapsed during the follow up, 10 from the steroid group (66.6%) and five from the PEN group (41.6%).
No differences were found in the cumulative relapse probability during follow up(p=0.21)(figure).
Follow up in non-relapsing patients ranged from two to 41.7 months (median 9.1 months) in the PEN group, and from 3.2 to 30.1 months (median 7.8 months) in the steroid group.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first controlled trial to compare a polymeric formula enteral diet v steroids in the treatment of active Crohn's disease.
The results suggest that polymeric diets are as safe and effective as steroids in inducing short term remission.
The mean difference of reduction in the VHAI between treatments was small.
Also, there is only a probability of 0.025 that the true difference between treatment groups in the population was greater than 16.8% (upper limit of 95% CI).
So it is unlikely that clinically important differences have been overlooked.
Changes in the VHAI were used as an end point in this study.
This index, as it largely depends on laboratory measurements, is more objective than other indices including overall clinical assessment, such as the Crohn's disease activity index (CDAI).
Also, the increase in the number of liquid or soft stools, an important item of CDAI, may be caused either because of worsening of the intestinal disease or as a side effect of enteral nutrition.
This may induce misjudgment.
Moreover, the use of the reduction of the VHAI instead of CDAI as the end point to calculate the sample size allowed us to study a smaller sample of patients than in previous work, for the same α and β errors.
This is due to the smaller variability of VHAI compared with CDAI.
In a unique trial comparing a non-elemental tube fed diet with steroids, Lochs et al suggested that a peptide based diet was less effective than a combination of methylprednisolone and sulfasalazine in treating active Crohn's disease.
The different results obtained with the peptide diet used in our study are unlikely to be a consequence of the different protein composition.
Peptides, less antigenic substrates than whole protein, are effective in inducing remission in Crohn's disease.
Thus difference should be attributed to other factors.
As previously mentioned, the use of CDAI as the criteria to assess clinical efficacy in the study of Locjs et al may be controversial due to the importance of the number of bowel movements on the CDAI score.
The osmolality of the diet used was high (400 mmol/kg) because, as well as peptides, it contained medium chain triglycerides (60% of the fat content).
Thus this formula diet might increase stool frequency and cause misleading changes in the CDAI.
Our present study supports the view that whole protein based diets are clinically effective, as suggested in three previous trials that compared this type of diet with elemental formulas, although in one of them the sample is small and the conclusions are only indicative.
Only in one study, by Giaffer et al , was a poorer response formed with a polymeric diet compared with an elemental diet.
In this trial the polymeric diet was discontinued for ethical reasons when no improvement was found by the 10th day of treatment.
The results of this trial can be questioned for several reasons.
Firstly, the groups studied were not homogeneous for the location of the disease.
This could have been avoided by stratified randomisation of the patients.
Secondly, if the objective of the study of Giaffer et al was to ascertain whether a particular form of nitrogen source (amino acid v whole protein) had a primary beneficial effect, both formula diets should have been equivalent in carbohydrate and fat composition, and in fact the amount of fat administered was 15 times higher in the polymeric than in the elemental diet.
Nutritional improvement itself does not seem to have had a role in the effect of PEN in our study.
Although mean TSF increased significantly in the PEN group, this improvement is likely to be clinically irrelevant as no differences were found in the number of patients with abnormal TSF values before and after the trial.
The increase in serum albumin was similar in both groups.
Therefore, the effect of PEN seems to be mediated by changes in the inflammatory activity.
In fact, biological indices of inflammation (CRP, ESR) improved similarly in both groups.
One fact seldom taken into account when comparing diets in the treatment of Crohn's disease is the possible differences in their fat composition.
Experimental work has been reported in which the administration of low fat diets or diets with low essential fatty acid content have an immunomodulatory effect in animal models.
Also, essential fatty acid deficiency diminishes acute inflammation and improves experimental colitis in rats.
Recent studies in vitro and in humans emphasise the possible role of fatty acids and their derivatives in mediating inflammation.
In this context, an altered plasma pattern of polyunsaturated fatty acids has been described in inflammatory bowel disease.
A careful examination of the reports of elemental diets having a favourable effect on Crohn's disease, indicates that all of them had very low fat content (0.6 to 1.3% of total calories).
When intermediate or high fat diets are used, the favourable or unfavourable clinical outcome might depend on the type of predominant fatty acids.
In the present study, the polymeric diet used had both high fat (33% of the total calories) and high monounsaturated fatty acid (oleic acid) content.
By contrast, the polymeric diet used in the study of Giaffer et al was high fat (36% of total calories) but also high in linoleic acid.
This fatty acid is the precursor of arachidonic acid, which, in turn is the substrate for eiconsanoid (LTD 4 , TxA 2 , PGE 2 ) synthesis.
Thus quantitative or qualitative differences in the lipid composition of the administered fat, saturated or monounsaturated v polyunsaturated oils, may modify the synthesis of eicosanoids and impair some immunomodulatory mechanisms that may influence the outcome when treating active Crohn's disease.
Studies taking into account the lipid composition of the diets may help to further define the mechanism for the primary effect of enteral diets in active Crohn's disease.
In our present study, differences in relapse during follow up between both groups were not found, but relapse rate tended to be lower in the PEN group.
This suggests that the remissions achieved with PEN were real, whatever the mechanism.
This trend has to be confirmed with more patients and a longer follow up.
In conclusion, the results of our present study suggest that polymeric diets are a safe and effective treatment for active Crohn's disease.
They are a well tolerated and a cheaper alternative to elemental diets, which merit serious consideration as treatment of active Crohn's disease, specially in malnourished patients or when steroid treatment is contraindicated.
Further studies in a larger series are needed to ascertain which subgroups of patients with Crohn's disease are more prone to respond to diet treatment and to maintain long term remission.
Progress in determining the nature of bile duct strictures
It is surprising that in 1992 patients can still be treated with radical radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or surgery, including liver transplantation, without establishing a definitive diagnosis.
This happens, however, in patients with obstructive jaundice caused by bile duct stricture where there is difficulty in obtaining a tissue diagnosis.
The age and frailty of this patient group are often used as justifications for limiting investigations and employing palliative methods of treatment such as endoscopic balloon dilatation or stenting.
Although this may sometimes be appropriate, the lack of a tissue diagnosis undoubtedly results in some patients being inappropriately treated for malignant disease when a benign stricture is present and vice versa.
It also hampers any objective assessment of the value of treatment in these patients.
The adage of ‘a diagnosis is not required because it does not affect management’ is now outdated when many treatment options are available.
Malignant bile duct strictures are mainly the result of cancer of the ampulla of Vater, pancreas, or bile duct and account for about 75% of patients presenting with extrahepatic bile duct obstruction.
In the remainder stricutres are caused by benign conditions such as gall stones, surgical trauma, chronic pancreatitis, or rarer disorders such as sclerosing cholangitis or Caroli's disease.
How are we to separate benign from malignant strictures?
Unfortunately, the patient's history and presentation, usually of clinical jaundice, pruritus, vague abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight loss are of limited value in determining the underlying aetiology.
Baron et al compared the value of ultrasound and computed tomography in patients with suspected biliary obstruction.
Both imaging modalities were effective for determining the presence of obstruction, computed tomography alone accurately determines the level of the obstruction, but neither can reliably predict the cause.
Since imaging cannot accurately predict the aetiology of a biliary stricture it is illogical to base treatment on external imaging alone and most patients then undergo either endoscopic or percutaneous cholangiography.
Does cholangiography establish the nature of a biliary stricture?
Cholangiography accurately locates the site of a stricture in the biliary tree and radiological features may suggest the presence of malignant disease.
External imaging (ultrasound or computed tomography) and cholangiography cannot, however, differentiate benign from malignant biliary strictures.
For example, it is not possible to differentiate between a hilar stricture caused by focal sclerosing cholangitis from one resulting from a cholangiocarcinoma, or a distal stricture due to cancer of the pancreas from a stricture caused by chronic pancreatitis.
A tissue diagnosis is clearly required to provide a rational basis for treatment.
Diagnosing malignancy by percutaneous sampling
In patients with obstructive jaundice secondary to extrahepatic bile duct obstruction, about one third have a focal lesion detected on initial ultrasound and about two thirds on computed tomography.
Whether this lesion should be biopsied percutaneously at the time of initial imaging remains controversial.
The morbidity and mortality associated with percutaneous biopsy is very low, and with the use of a fine needle for aspiration cytology is negligible (about 0.16% and 0.006% respectively).
The major objection to the percutaneous approach is the possibility of tumour dissemination in the track.
The reported incidence after fine, needle aspiration is very low (about 1 in 20000).
A recent report has suggested, however, that malignant cells are frequently disseminated in the peritoneal cavity after percutaneous fine needle aspiration.
Their viability and importance have yet to be established but may be a contributary factory to peritoneal recurrence.
Despite this theoretical risk, the possibility of safely establishing a tissue diagnosis in about two thirds of patients with a focal lesion on imaging justifies percutaneous aspiration cytology as a first line investigation.
Percutaneous fine needle aspiration cytology is, however, highly operator dependent.
Alternative methods
Before percutaneous fine needle aspiration cytology was attempted many groups had shown that a tissue diagnosis could be achieved in some patients with obstructive jaundice caused by malignancy by detecting neoplastic cells in duodenal aspiration.
In 1949 Lemon and Byrne reported a large series of patients undergoing duodenal aspiration cytology with a test sensitivity of over 70%.
Despite these encouraging results this technique was not widely adopted because it proved time consuming, generally insensitive, did not localise the neoplastic lesion, and was associated with false positive results.
The ability to collect samples directly from the biliary tree at the time of either percutaneous or endoscopic cholangiography has superseded the use of duodenal aspirates and provides a better sample for cytological examination.
The possible dissemination of tumour by percutaneous fine needle aspiration cytology may result in these becoming the diagnostic techniques of choice.
Bile exfoliative cytology
Bile sampling at the time of endoscopic or percutaneous cholangiography, with subsequent cytological examination, has been carried out for over 20 years.
Surprisingly the sensitivity reported for this technique is frequently less than that for duodenal aspiration cytology, although this may be related to differences in the stage of disease being investigated.
Unlike duodenal aspiration cytology, bile exfoliative cytology is generally 100% specific (no false positive results).
However, it allows only about one third of patients to be diagnosed and therefore a negative result has little value.
This low sensitivity rate has encouraged the use of instruments to enhance cell exfoliation.
Biliary brush cytology
Endobiliary brushes were introduced in the mid-1980s but their use has only recently been publicised.
The results are generally better than with exfoliative bile cytology alone, with a sensitivity over 60%.
Although brush sampling produces more cellular samples than exfoliative bile cytology, radiologists and gastroenterologists have been reluctant to perform brush cytology because of the time involved in carrying out the procedure.
This problem was largely overcome in 1989 by Foutch et al , who demonstrated a technique that allowed brush cytology of the biliary tree to be performed without removing the guide wire inserted across the biliary stricture.
This technique should result in its more widespread application.
Further improvement in the diagnostic accuracy may be obtained by repeated sampling.
Although this becomes a time consuming procedure, several negative brushings effectively excludes a diagnosis of biliary neoplasm.
In certain patient groups, such as those with sclerosing cholangitis who are being considered for liver transplantation, repeated brushings to exclude the development of a cholangiocarcinoma seem justified or essential.
Endobiliary biopsy and fine needle aspiration cytology
Despite the application of exfoliative bile and brush cytology, some 20–30% of patients with malignant biliary strictures will remain undiagnosed either because of a lack of cell exfoliation from the tumour or because the tumour is producing extrinsic compression on the biliary tree and has not affected the biliary epithelium.
In these patients two novel cytology methods, endobiliary biopsy and endobiliary fine needle aspiration, may be suitable.
Endobiliary biopsy has only recently been introduced after the manufacture of biopsy forceps that are small enough to enter the biliary tree without a sphincterotomy.
The tissue obtained may be too small for histological examination but satisfactory for cytology.
Reports on the clinical use of endobiliary biopsy forceps are limited and their place in the investigation of biliary strictures remains to be established.
Initial studies, however, suggest the technique is safe and effective.
Endobiliary fine needle aspiration cytology, in which a fine needle is introduced into the biliary tree either percutaneously or endoscopically, has the potential advantage over other methods of diagnosing biliary strictures in that the needle may be inserted through the strictured area and thereby obtain tissue from outwith the wall of the bile duct.
This might therefore be useful in diagnosing strictures caused by extrinsic compression on the bile ducts.
The results of this technique are also preliminary but encouraging.
Both endobiliary biopsy and endobiliary fine needle aspiration cytology are likely to establish a role in the investigation of patients in whom a tissue diagnosis is elusive by standard methods.
A wide variety of safe and effective methods is now available for obtaining a cytological diagnosis in patients with biliary strictures.
Some are still awaiting adequate clinical evaluation but even with currently available techniques it should be possible to obtain a tissue diagnosis in most patients.
Until this is achieved it is impossible to carry out a useful evaluation of the many alternative treatments available for patients with the complex problem of extrahepatic bile duct stricture.
Insulin like growth factor-I, insulin like growth factor binding protein-1, and insulin in childhood Crohn's disease
Abstract
Twenty nine children with Crohn's disease were studied before and after treatment with steroids or an elemental diet to assess the effect of disease activity and treatment on serum insulin like growth factor I (IGF-I), insulin like growth factor binding protein (IGFBP-1), and insulin concentrations.
The median serum IGF-I concentration was lower in patients with active disease than in matched controls, and lower in stunted than well grown patients, but insulin and IGFBP-1 concentrations were not significantly different between any group.
After four weeks of either treatment there was an increase in the median serum IGF-I concentration; this was greater in the steroid group than the elemental diet group.
The median serum insulin concentration increased and median serum IGFBP-1 concentration decreased in the steroid treated group but not in the elemental diet group.
These changes were accompanied by a greater and more sustained increase in energy intake in the steroid group.
Despite this the median height velocity SD score was greater in the elemental diet group than in the steroid group.
Growth failure is a major problem affecting up to 50% of children with Crohn's disease.
Chronic dietary insufficiency is thought to be the single main cause but the mechanism is unclear.
There are conflicting reports of spontaneous and stimulated growth hormone secretion in childhood Crohn's disease.
McCaffery et al showed a blunted serum growth hormone response to insulin induced hypoglycaemia in 11 of 13 children with Crohn's disease and growth retardation and suggested that there might be a secondary pituitary abnormality.
There was a normal serum growth hormone response in 10 children with Crohn's disease and normal growth but no obvious improvement in growth in three patients with growth failure treated with growth hormone.
The authors suggested that this might represent end organ resistance to growth hormone.
Gothin et al , studying six adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease and growth failure (three with Crohn's disease and three with ulcerative colitis), showed a normal sleep related serum growth hormone response in all six but a blunted response to arginine in one patient and to insulin in three patients.
Tenore et al also showed a significant serum growth hormone response during sleep and to propranolol/ glaucagon but a poor response to insulin induced hypoglycaemia.
Farthing et al have shown a low spontaneous nocturnal serum growth hormone concentration in three of five children with Crohn's disease and severe growth retardation, with a significant correlation between serum growth hormone concentration and the disease activity score.
Kelts et al showed normal serum growth hormone (sleep and glucagon stimulation) and insulin like growth factor I (IGF-I) concentrations in seven children with Crohn's disease.
Kirschner et al , on the other hand, showed low serum IGF-I concentrations in children with Crohn's disease.
The serum concentration of IGF-I and growth velocity both improved with increased calorie intake.
The insulin like growth factors are thought to mediate some of the effects of growth hormone on tissues.
Infants with marasmus and kwashiorkor have low serum IGF-I concentrations despite high concentrations of growth hormone.
The concentrations of both return to normal with refeeding.
There is accumulating evidence that the action of IGF-I in target tissues is modulated by insulin like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBP) but there is a lack of published data in children with Crohn's disease.
One of these binding proteins, IGFBP-1, is of particular interest because of its known relationship to metabolism.
This study aimed to assess:
(1)
The inter-relationships of serum IGF-I, IGFBP-1, and insulin in children with active Crohn's disease.
(2)
The relationship of these parameters with nutritional status and treatment with steroids or an elemental diet.
Patients and methods
Twenty nine children with active Crohn's disease were studied.
The mean age was 13.2 years (range 3.6–17.5) andthe mean time from onset of disease was 2.7 years (range 0.1–7.9).
The diagnosis was confirmed by clinical, hostological, and radiological appearances.
Six patients had ileal involvement with or without caecal involvement (in two the proximal small bowel was also affected).
One patient had disease that seemed to be confirmed to the proximal small bowel.
Eleven patients had ileocolic disease and 11 had disease confined to the colon or anorectal region, or both.
Disease activity was indicated by the following: increased stool frequency, abdominal pain, weight loss, growth failure, raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), raised serum orosomucoid, and reduced serum albumin concentration.
Activity was graded according to the Lloyd-Still activity index.
Dietary intake was assessed by means of five day weighed surveys (Soelne digital scales) and analysed using McCance and Widdowson's: The Composition of Foods and a computer dietary analysis program (Microdiet, Salford University).
The children entered a randomised controlled trial and were allocated to one of two groups as follows:
Group A received a normal diet, sulphasalazine 25 mg/kd/day, and prednisolone 2 mg/kd/ day (maximum 60 mg/day).
After two weeks the dosage of prednisolone was gradually reduced.
Group B received an elemental diet orally (Elemental 028, Scientific Hospital Supplies, Liverpool).
Energy intake was adjusted to the estimated average requirement for healthy children of the same age — that is the recommended daily allowance (RDA).
No other food or drink was allowed for four weeks, then normal foods were gradually reintroduced.
Patients in whom there was a subsequent increase in disease activity were allocated to the alternative treatment group.
Height and weight were measured by the same observer (AT) in all patients at the time of study.
Using the criteria of Waterlow. eight children (ages 11.5, 12.7, 14.5, 11.6, 12.7, 12.8, 14.8, 16.2 years) were defined as stunted (less than 90% of expected height for age).
Height velocity was measured for six months from the start of treatment and SD scores were calculated.
The pubertal stage was rated as 1–5, in the girls according to breast development and in the boys according to genital development following the criteria of Tanner.
Numbers of boys and girls within each pubertal group were as follows: stage 1, six boys:four girls; stage 2, three boys:one girl; stage 3, three boys:one girl; stage 4, no boys:two girls, stage 5, seven boys:two girls.
Venous blood samples were collected after an overnight fast and the serum was immediately separated and stored at -20°C until analysed.
The serum IGF-I concentration was measured as previously described by radioimmunoassay (RIA) after acid ethanol extraction using a rabbit antiserum developed by L U Underwood and J J Van Wyk and distributed by the Hormone Distribution Program of NIDDK through the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
The assay was standardised against a pool of normal adult human serum defined as containing 1.0 U IGF-I/ml (equivalent to 159 ng/ml of a highly purified preparation of IGF-I).
Serum IGFBP-1 and insulin concentrations were measured by RIA as previously described.
Serum IGF-I, IGFBP-1, and insulin concentrations were compared with those obtained from 29 age and sex matched controls selected from a large study of normal adolescents previously reported.
Parametric data are expressed in terms of the mean and 95% confidence interval (CI) and comparison between groups was by the Student's t test.
Non-parametric data are expressed in terms of the median and lowest possible CI above 95% as calculated by the binomial based method, with comparison between groups by the Mann-Whitney U test.
Results
IN RELAPSE
Serum IGF-I concentrations in patients and matched controls are shown in the Figure.
The median (95% CI) serum IGF-I concentrations were 0.54 (0.29–0.90) U/ml in patients compared with 1.58 (1.11–2.00) U/ml in controls (p<0.001).
Twenty two patients had serum concentrations <1.0 U/ml and 10 were <0.4 U/ml.
The median (95% CI) serum insulin concentrations were 9.3 (5.3–13.0) mU/l in patients and 12.0 (11.0–14.0) mU/l in controls (NS), and median (95% CI) serum IGFBP-1 concentrations were 55.0 (41.0–89.4) µg/l in patients and 57.0 (42.0–80.0) µg/l in controls (NS).
Two patients had very high insulin concentrations before starting treatment (161 and 213 mU/l), suggesting that they were not adequately fasted.
These data were not included in the analyses.
EFFECT OF STUNTING (TABLE I)
The median serum IGF-I concentration was significantly lower in stunted than well grown patients.
Seven of the patients in the well grown group were sexually mature (Tanner stage 5), and excluding them had no significant effect on the median serum IGF-I concentration (reduced from 0.67 to 0.66 U/ml).
There were no significant differences between the median serum IGFBP-1 and insulin concentrations in well grown compared with stunted patients.
CONTROLLED TRIAL (TABLE II)
Median serum concentrations of IGF-I increased by 0.38 U/ml after four weeks' treatment (0.54–0.92 U/ml; p<0.001).
The median increase in the steroid treated group (0.41 U/ml) was significantly greater (p<0.05) than in the elemental diet group (0.1 U/ml).
In the steroid treated group, median fasting serum concentrations of insulin increased by 3.0 mU/l (p<0.05) and median serum concentrations of IGFBP-1 fell by 27.3 µg/l (p<0.01).
Similar changes did not occur in the elemental diet group.
GROWTH VELOCITY
Increased disease activity occurred in six patients from the steroid group and in three from the elemental diet group before six months had elapsed.
As they were allocated to the alternative treatment group their height velocities were not included in the analyses.
The median height velocity SD scores in the remaining patients were significantly greater in the elemental diet group (+0.32) than the steroid group (-3.1; p<0.05).
DIETARY INTAKE
Mean energy intake (Table III) was not significantly different in the two groups before treatment, increased in both groups after four weeks' treatment, and was maintained in the steroid treated group but not in the group treated with the elemental diet after 13 weeks.
Discussion
One of the most distressing aspects for children with Crohn's disease is the effect on growth.
In the current study, 28% of the children had growth failure (<90% expected height for age).
Several treatments have been shown to improve growth in children with Crohn's disease but it is crucial that catch up growth is achieved before the pubertal growth spurt is completed.
Sanderson et al showed that an elemental diet was as effective as steroids in acute childhood Crohn's disease and also resulted in improved growth.
Energy intake, however, was not measured.
The current study confirms the improvement in linear growth velocity with an elemental diet despite a more sustained increase in energy intake with steroids.
This study also confirms the presence of low serum IGF-I concentrations in children with Crohn's disease, which may reflect depressed energy intake.
Pubertal stage can have a major effect but the lower IGF-I concentrations in the children with growth failure could not be attributed solely to the greater proportion of sexually mature children in the well grown group.
This finding supports previous reports of low serum IGF-I concentrations in growth retarded children with Crohn's disease, chronic renal failure, and anorexia.
Serum concentrations of IGFBP-1 were not significantly different from controls and were similar in patients with growth failure and those with normal growth.
The physiological role of IGFBP-1 is not clearly understood, and indeed it may have different functions in different circumstances or different tissues.
Evidence from cell culture work suggests that IGFBP-1 may be an important modulator of the cellular activity of the insulin like growth factors, and in diabetics increased inhibitory activity is associated with an increased concentration of IGFBP-1.
It is also recognised that IGFBP-1 is just one of at least six distinct binding proteins but the functions and inter-relationships of these are also uncertain.
Surprisingly, the median serum IGF-I concentration increased more in the steroid treated group despite better growth in the group treated with the elemental diet.
Furthermore, the reduction in IGFBP-1 values after steroid treatment might have been expected to increase the availability of IGF-I for growth.
It seems that the recognised growth suppressant effects of steroids over-ride any benefits from increased energy intake, increased IGF-I concentration, and reduced IGFBP-1 concentration.
The increase in the serum insulin concentration after steroid treatment may reflect increased energy intake or induction of insulin resistance.
The close inverse relationship between insulin and IGFBP-1 is well recognised in normal and diabetic children.
In most situations this seems to be a direct effect of insulin on the hepatic production of IGFBP-1.
Further work is required to understand the complex relationship between energy intake, disease activity, the insulin-like growth factors, their binding proteins, and growth in children with Crohn's disease.
Screening for gastric carcinoma in coal miners
Abstract
This study aimed to determine the prevalence of dyspeptic symptoms and premalignant gastric lesions in coal miners and sex matched population control subjects.
Retired coal miners and men from the general population in North Nottinghamshire were sent a dyspepsia questionnaire to fill in, and those with upper gastrointestinal symptoms were invited for gastroscopy and biopsy.
A total of 1272 men from the general population and 2099 retired coal miners aged 50–75 years took part in the study.
Some 977 of 1272 (76.8%) control subjects and 1715 of 2099 (81.7%) miners replied to the questionnaire.
A total of 308 of 977 (31.5%) controls and 620 of 1715 (36.2%) miners were positive for at least one symptom.
There was a highly significant difference between the numbers of surface mine and underground workers who reported dyspeptic symptoms (66 of 300 (22%)v 425 of 1083 (32.2%) of p<0.0001).
Histology showed that significantly more miners than controls had acute on chronic gastritis (22 v 11%; p=0.01) and intestinal metaplasia (23 v 8%; p=<0.0001).
Coal miners may be a suitable group for gastric premalignancy screening using an upper gastrointestinal symptom questionnaire and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
It has been suggested that gastric cancer which occurs in some manual workers is occupation related.
Evidence for such an association has been publshed in the Register General's Decimal Supplements on Occupational Mortality since 1937, but these data have not been highlighted.
The occupational mortality data pertaining to the 1949–53 quinquennium were analysed by Stodes who showed that there were six conditions which caused a 15% or greater excess mortality among coal miners (Table I).
The average excess mortality for gastric cancer among coal miners was 126 per million, with a range of 65–226 per million.
This excess was greatest in South Wales, intermediate in the north of England, and least in the south of England.
Stocks hypothesised that these findings could be related to the nature of the coal mined in these different areas.
The excess mortality is not limited to underground workers, since workers above ground have a raised standardised mortality ratio (SMR) for gastric cancer (143), which is similar to that for underground workers other than those at the coal face (SMR 144).
It is of note that workers at the coal face (cutters, hewers, and getters) have only a slightly raised SMR for gastric cancer (113) which is not as great as that for the remainder of the mineworkers.
This is probably because the youngest and fittest miners are involved in the more strenuous tasks at the coal face, while the older and less fit do other underground work or gain surface employment.
It is likely, however, that the surface workers with the higher SMR for gastric cancer worked underground when they were younger and graduated to a less strenuous and dangerous job with age.
Screening for gastric cancer in Japan has increased the proportion of early gastrc cancers diagnosed to approximately 45% in the screened population.
Many studies have shown that these tumours are surgically curable.
Mortality from gastric cancer has fallen in areas of Japan where screening has been most widely accepted.
In the United Kingdom, however, only 10% of tumours are early gastric cancers, so potential exists for changing the natural history of the disease if populations suitable for screening can be identified.
If dyspepsia is to be used to identify a particularly high risk group (such as coal miners), then we must know the rate of dyspepsia in the group we are studying and the extent to which it differs from that in the general population.
We have therefore compared a group of coal miners and an age and sex matched group of subjects selected from the members of a general population screening study.
Groups received questionnaire screening to see if there are any differences in the rates of dyspepsia between the two with a view to screening the high risk group of miners for gastric cancer.
In addition to, the dyspeptic members of bth groups underwent gastroscopy to determine if there was any evidence of an increased incidence of benign, premalignant, and malignant gastric lesions.
Patients and methods
A group of 2037 retired coal miners aged 50–75 years was identified from the records of the North Nottinghamshire Miners' Pension Fund (with the cooperation of the Pension Fund Board and the Union of Democratic Mineworkers).
A group of 1199 men who were not coal miners was identified from general practitioner records in three Nottinghamshire general practices.
Included in the questionnaire were inquiries about tobacco habits (including tobacco chewing in the questionnaire to miners).
When the completed questionnaire had been received, the general practitioner was written to before any further contact with the patient took place.
The questionnaire was sent to the subjects in each of the groups with a reply paid envelope.
A reminder letter and questionnaire were sent 6 weeks later to subjects who had not replied by this time.
The signatory of the letter in the case of the miners was Mr Roy Lynk, President of the Union of Democratic Mineworkers but in the case of the general population this was the patient's general practitioner.
The letter and questionnaire were as simple as possible to maximise the response.
Subjects with one or more positive replies on the questionnaire, or those who used H 2 antagonists or antacids, were invited to attend a dyspepsia clinic where it was decided whether endoscopy was appropriate and the procedure was explained.
Those in whom gastroscopy was appropriate were invited to attend the endoscopy unit at a later date (within 1 month).
Also included in the questionnaire was a brief occupation history (underground or surface work), and the data were analysed to take account of previous occupation.
The clinic and endoscopy were initially held in Nottingham, but because of relatively poor attendance at the clinic and since a large proportion of the retired miners in the North Nottinghamshire Pension Scheme live in and around Mansfield, a session was held in the endoscopy unit at King's Mill Hospital, Mansfield.
A small number of patients were not contacted further on the advice of their general practitioner, usually because of concurrent malignant disease.
Patients were excluded from further examination after their dyspepsia clinic visit if they had severe concurrent cardiovascular or respiratory disease.
Patients with other malignant disorders were also excluded from further study, since the early diagnosis of a second malignancy might not be expected to improve their prognosis.
Patients who denied any symptoms, or who gave a history of a single episode of self-limiting dyspeptic symptoms were also excluded from gastrscopic examination, but all other patients were offered gastroscopy as outpatients.
STATISTICS
The relative proportions of each of the parameters in the miners' and the general population groups were compared for statistical signficance using the χ 2 test.
Results
COMPLIANCE
A total of 977 of 1272 (76.8%) men in the general population and 1715 of 2099 (81.7%) miners replied to the questionnaire (χ 2 =1.33, NS).
Of those who replied, 620 of 1715 (36.2%) miners were positive for at least one symptom as were 308 of 977 (31.5%) men in the general population group (χ 2 =2.90, NS).
The attendance of the coal miners at the Nottingham dyspepsia clinic was poor compared with that of the general population: 338 of 620 (54%) compared with 254 of 308 (82.5%) respectively (χ 2 =14.6, p<0.0001).
There was a significant improvement in the attendance of miners at the Mansfield clinic, however, since this was much closer to their homes.
The attendance of miners at Mansfield was 73 of 95 (76.8%) compared with 54.5% at Nottingham (χ 2 =4.1, p<0.05).
Once they had attended the clinic and been invited for gastroscopy, a similar proportion of miners and general population attended for gastroscopy (229 of 338 (67.8%) and 192 of 254 (77.6%) respectively (χ 2 =0.7, NS)).
The reasons for not endoscoping some subjets are given in Table II.
SYMPTOMS
Comparing each of the symptoms (see Table III), significantly more miners than control subjects complained of anorexia, weight loss, dysphagia, epigastric pain, and vomiting, while similar numbers from both groups complained of heartburn.
Significantly more miners had had previous gastric surgery for benign disease, and significantly more miners smoked than did men from the general population.
In addition, chewing tobacco is a common habit among coal miners.
Altogether 643 (30.5%) of the miners took tobacco in this form either solely or in conjunction with smoking (see Table IV).
Surface v underground workers 
There was a highly significant difference between the number of mine surface workers who reported dyspeptic symptoms (66 of 300, 22%) on the questionnaire and underground workers (425 of 1083, 39.2%), χ 2 =30.5, p<0.0001.
There were no signficant differences between the surface and underground workers for attendance at the dyspepsia clinic or the endoscopy unit.
Age
There were no statistically signficant differences between the age groups analysed for the number of questionnaires returned or the dyspepsia rate (which was highest in the 61–65 year age group, although the numbers in this group were small).
There was a trend towards a decline in attendance at both the dyspepsia clinic and the endoscopy unit with increasing age, but this was not statistically significant.
The age composition of the mining group was significantly older than that of the general population group, since the source of the coal miners was a group of retired men.
Medical treatment
Compared with the general population, significantly more miners had visited their general practitioner because of dyspepsia either recently or at some time in the past (80% v 55.1%, p<0.001).
There was no significant differences between the groups for consumption of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (miners 12.9%, population 16.6%), H 2 antagonists (miners 6.7%, population 11.4%), or simple antacids (miners 42.1% population 54.2%).
Endoscopy
The endoscopic findings in each group are summarised by site in Tables V and VI.
It is notable that oesophageal and gastric inflammatory pathology was common in these symptomatic patients.
There was a slight preponderance of hiatus hernia in the control group and of Barrett's oesophagus in the miners' group, but these were not statistically significant.
Histology
Gastritis was also common.
There was a significant excess of subjects with acute on chronic gastritis in the miners' group, and in addition, nearly three times as many miners had intestinal metaplasia in their gastric biopsy specimens.
We were unable to subclassify the type of intestinal metaplasia in this study.
Discussion
Most of the data in the published reports to date (including those of the Registrar General for England and Wales) support the conclusion that coal miners have an average excess mortality for gastric cancer of approximately 30–50%, rising to five fold in some regions, although some studies have failed to show this excess.
A number of hypotheses to account for an excess mortality have been proposed, including an effect of socioeconomic statis.
Socioeconomic status has been considered important because miners were of social class V earlier this century and this class has a 50% excess for gastric cancer compared with the higher social classes.
In two Utah mining countries (Carbon and Emery), the age and sex adjusted death rate for gastric cancer was 3.4 times higher than that for the rest of the state overall, and eight times higher in miners than in non-mining Utah men.
The excess mortality was attributed to coal mining and the extensive use of soft coal in the mining areas.
A larger study of 23 mining countries in the USA showed a similar excess mortality of approximately 30%.
Excesses were also seen for the tumours associated with low socioeconomic class (lung and cervical cancer), while deficiencies were noted for breast and colon cancer that are usually associated with higher socioeconomic class.
The authors thus concluded that the excess mortality noted for gastric cancer was probably related to socioeconomic class rather than coal mining.
In a study of 23232 miners, excess mortality was noted for benign respiratory conditions, accidents, and gastric cancer.
The excess for gastric cancer was noted only for men over 70 years of age.
Coal dust exposure is an occupational hazard for coal miners.
The dust contains a variety of minerals such as quartz, pyrite, dolomite, siderite, magnetite, and a variety of solicates.
There are also metals including aluminium, iron, magnesium, potassium, and sodium.
Organic compounds including a number of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are also present in coal dust.
When coal dust is inhaled, particles are cleared by the cilia of the respiratory mucosa into the pharynx, where they are swallowed thereby exposing the upper gastrointestinal mucosa to these compounds contained in the dust.
Mutagenesis experiments with coal dust using the Ames salmonella assay have found extracts of American coal dust to be mutagenic (and mutagenicity has a broad correlation with carcinogencity).
This mutagenicity is enhanced by nitrosation in acid conditions.
This is one hypothesis by which coal miners may have an increased risk of developing gastric cancer, although it has ben noted recently that not all carcinogens are mutagens.
The quantification of dust exposure is often difficult but there is some evidence that there is a relationship between exposure to dust and the degree of increased risk of developing gastric cancer.
Ames showed in a case-control study that prolonged dust exposure was not an independent risk factor, but an increased risk was seen in association with dust exposure and cigarette smoking.
Other hypotheses relate to the potentially carcinogenic effects of coal dust alone, or after conversion of aromatic coal derivatives to mutagenic nitroso-compounds in the stomach.
Another study has shown a positive association between gastric cancer and exposure to coal dust in those miners who smoked.
Polynuclear aromatic compounds have been shown to be effective as carcinogens, especially when in particulate form, while statistical associations have been noted in men between atmospheric pollution and coal mining.
Another possible factor resulting in an increased gastric cancer risk is the more common use of tobacco by coal miners.
The carcinogenic effects of smoking on the respiratory tract are well known, but the effect of smoking on the stomach is less well known, although there is much circumstantial evidence that smokers are at a higher risk of developing gastric carcinoma.
There have also been studies to suggest that unburned tobacco in the form of snuff or chewing tobacco has a carcinogenic effect on gastric mucosa.
It is thus of note that 27% of coal miners in our survey have a history of chewing tobacco.
Other studies have shown that smoking is an aetiological factor for gastric cancer either by itself, or more potently when in combination with another factor such as coal dust exposure or the consumption of alcohol.
In our study, significantly more miners complained of anorexia and weight loss than the general population, as shown in an earlier published report.
This may be related to the destabilisation of the gastric mucosa engendered by a lifetime of exposure to the environmental conditions in coal mines, although clearly these symptoms could also be related to the asthenia of chronic respiratory disease which is so common in coal miners.
We did not quantitate respiratory disease or dust exposure in our study, and hence we are unable to assess the effect of this variable.
Also relevant in the context of increased risk of gastric cancer is the finding that significantly more miners have had surgery for benign peptic ulcer disease (7.7% v 4%, p=<0.001).
A recent review confirmed the increase in risk of developing a gastric carcinoma after gastric resection.
The miners had significantly more acute-on-chronic gastritis in their endoscopic biopsy speci ens.
The cause for this is not clear but one factor could be the higher proportion of miners who had had gastric surgery.
Another possibility is that there could be a relationship between this inflammation and infection with Helicobacter pylori , although we are unable to confirm this from our study, since the organism was not specifically looked for in every case.
There are no studies in the literature to date linking miners with an increased risk of developing gastric H pylori infection.
It is also of note that there was a higher proportion of gastric and duodenal ulcers in the group of miners, and there was a significantly higher number of miners with the premalignant histological lesions of dysplasia and intestinal metaplasia compared with the general population.
Miners are thus a high risk group for the development of gastric cancer and gastroscopic screening could give a significant yield of early gastric cancers.
It is evident that there is a variety of occupations in which an excess mortality has been described for gastric cancer.
but the largest occupational group with such an excess in the United Kingdom is the coal miners.
In South Wales the gastric cancer registration rates in miners are higher than in England, and it has been suggested that coal miners in urban areas should be considered as a high risk group suitable to be screened for the disease by the instigation of dyspepsia clinics.
The group of coal miners in this study complained more frequently of anorexia and weight loss, had a higher prevalence of previous gastric surgery, and included a higher proportion of smokers than an age and sex matched group of men from the general population.
Endoscopy showed that the miners had a higher incidence of gastritis than the men from the general population.
Histology showed that there were more premalignant lesions (intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia) in the miners than in the control group.
These findings could help to explain the higher incidence of gastric cancer among coal miners and we suggest that this would be a suitable group to screen for premalignant gastric pathology using an upper gastrointestinal symptom questionnaire.
Protein kinase C inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate generation by histamine and truncated glucagon like peptide 1 in the human gastric cancer cell line HGT-1
Abstract
The HGT-1 gastric cancer cell line was used to determine the actions of protein kinase C on the stimulation of adenylate cyclase by the human histamine H 2 receptor, and the receptors for gastric inhibitory polypeptide and truncated glucagon like peptide 1 (TGLP-1).
Suspensions of HGT-1 cells were preincubated with the activator of protein kinase C, 12- O -tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA, 100 nmol/l), for 10 minutes.
The subsequent cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) response to 0.5 mmol/l histamine or 100 nmol/l TGLP-1 was reduced by comparison with control sells preincubated in the absence of TPA.
The cyclic AMP response to 100 nmol/l gastric inhibitory polypeptide was enhanced by preincubation with TPA, while the responses to cholera toxin and forskolin were unaffected.
Preincubation with pertussis toxin prevented the enhancement of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide response by TPA, suggesting an involvement of an inhibitory guanine nucleotide regulatory subunit of the Gi class, but did not change the inhibition of histamine stimulation.
In conclusion, activation of protein kinase C produces a speific inhibition of the effects of histamine and TGLP-1 on adenylate cyclase activity in a human gastric cancer cell line by acting at a site close to their receptors.
Protein kinase C is the name given to a group of kinases, which when activated by diacylglycerol in the presence of phospholipids such as phosphatidylserine, phosphorylate proteins on serine or threonine.
Some forms of protein kinase C require Ca 2 + for activation.
Pghorbol esters such as 12- O -tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) can substitute for diacylglycerol and have been used extensively as tools to investigate actions of protein kinase C.
Acid secretion can be induced in parietal cells by activation of adenylate cyclase by histamine, acting on an H 2 receptor and by Β adrenergic agonists.
Muscarinic cholinergic agonists and gastrin stimulate acid secretion by activation of polyphosphoinositide breakdown (see for a review of regulation of acid secretion).
Recently, truncated glycagon like peptide 1 (TGLP-1) has been shown to stimulate secretory activity in parietal cells by increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP).
Incubation of parietal cells from rats, rabbits, and guinea pigs with TPA inhibited the stimulation by histamine of aminopyrine accumulation (an index of acid secretion), but no such effect was found with dog parietal cells.
The site, or sites, at which protein kinase C exerts these inhibitory effects is unresolved.
Hatt and Hanson found that preincubation with TPA inhibited the stimulation by histamine of the cyclic AMP content of rat perietal cells, but this finding was not replicated by Ostrowski and Bomsztyk.
In this work the human gastric cancer cell line HGT-1 has been used to investigate whether protein kinase C modulates signalling by the human histamine H 2 receptor.
The HGT-1 cell line was isolated from a human gastric adenocarcinoma, and cannot be considered a complete model for the parietal cell as it does not secrete hydrochloric acid.
It does, however, express histamine H 2 receptors, which are pharmacologically indistinguishable from those on human gastric glands.
It is therefore a useful system to investigate one particular aspect of the control of acid secretion, namely the regulation of histamine H 2 receptor stimulated adenylate cyclase.
HGT-1 cells also express receptors for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, gastric inhibitory polypeptide and for TGLP-1.
All of these receptors are coupled to adenylate cyclase in HGT-1 cells.
To enable the identification of the sites of action of protein kinase C, the actions of TPA on the cyclic AMP response to histamine, gastric inhibitory polypeptide, TGLP-1, cholera toxin, and forskolin have been compared.
Methods
REAGENTS
The 1 2 5 I radioimmunoassay kit for cyclic AMP was from NEN,(Stevenage, UK).
TGLP-1 (glucagon like peptide 1 (7–36) amide), gastric inhibitory polypeptide, TPA, and pertussis and cholera toxins were obtained from Sigma (Poole, UK).
The 4α-phorbol derivative, 4α-TPA, was from Scientific Marketing Associates,(London N1, UK).
CULTURE AND INCUBATION OF CELLS
HGT-1 cells were cultured as described previously.
Cells were detached from flasks by first washing three times with Ca 2 + -and Mg 2 + -free phosphate buffered saline and then incubating for three minutes at 37°C with the same phosphate buffered saline to which 0.02% (w/v) EDTA had been added.
Cells were washed twice in Eagle's minimum essential medium containing 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin and 20 mmol/l hidsoxyethylpiperazine-ethanesulphonic acid (HEPES) and then finally resuspended at a concentration of 1.5×10 cells/ml in the same medium to which 0.1 mmol/l 3-isobutyl-1-methyl xanthine (IBMX) had been added.
The airspace above the cells was gassed with 95% O 2 /5%CO 2 and the cells were incubated at either 37°C or 20°C.
After preincubation for 10 minutes, TPA, or the solvent dimethylsulphoxide (final concentration, 0.2% v/v), was added to the suspensions.
Preincubation was usually continued for a further 10 minutes, and then agonists were added to the suspensions and the change in cyclic AMP content recorded at intervals over the following 30 minutes.
Stimulation with cholera toxin involved addition of 15 µl of toxin dissolved in 5 mmol/l Tris HCl, 174 mmol/l NaCl, 0.3 mmol/l NaN 3 , and 0.1 mmol/l EDTA to each 1.5 ml of suspension to give a final concentration of 500 ng/ml.
The cyclic AMP content of the suspensions was measured at one, two, and three hours.
Fifteen µl of vehicle were added to 1.5 ml of control suspensions.
Treatment with pertussis toxin was performed on attached cells in culture flasks for two hours before detachment.
Vehicle, which was 50% glycerol, 50% 0.05 mol/l phosphate buffer containing 0.5 mol/l NaCl, was present at a dilution of 1:400 in both experimental and control flasks.
ADENYLATE CYCLASE ACTIVITY
Cells were homogenised in a buffer (pH 7.5) containing 10 mmol/l Tris HCl, 1 mmol/l EDTA, 30 mmol/l NcCl, 1 mmol/l dithiothreitol, and 5 µmol/l phenylmethylsulphonylfluoride using a teflon-glass homogenizer.
Homogenates were centrigued at 40000 g for 90 minutes at 4°C, and the pellet was resuspended in homogenisation buffer.
Adenylate cyclase in thepellet was determined by adding 15 µl of homogenate (10 µg protein) to 235 µl of incubation buffer to give the following final concentrations in the assay mixture (pH 7.5): 25 mmol/l Tris HCl, 1 mmol/l EGTA, 0.06 mmol/l EDTA 0.06 mmol/l dithiothreitol, 1.8 mmol/l NaCl, 5 mmol/l MgCl 2 , 1 mmol/l ATP, 20 mmol/l creatine phosphate, 0.1 mg/ml creatine kinase, 0.2 mmol/l IBMX, 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin, 200 µg/ml bacitracin, and 200 µmol/l GTP.
Phosphatidylserine (20 µg/ml) and Ca + (free concentration, 10 -mol/l) were also present in the assay system.
Incubation was for 10 minutes at 30°C.
ASSAY OF CYCLIC AMP
Samples of cell suspension, or of the adenylate cyclase assay system, were added to an equal volume of ice cold ethanol, immediately frozen, and were stored at -20°C.
Samples were thawed, vortexed, and then centrigudes at 10000 g for one minute.
Portions of the supernatants were evaporated in a vacuum oven at 40°C, dissolved in 0.05 mol/l sodium acetate buffer (pH 6.2), and were analysed for cyclic AMP by using an acetylated [1 2 5 I]radioimmunoassay procedure (New England Nuclear kit).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Where possible data were subjected to analysis of variance to enable the effects of preincubation with TPA to be evaluated after the removal from consideration of the slight variation in the responsiveness of each cell batch to agonists.
Otherwise an appropriate t test was used.
Data are presented as means (SEM).
Results
EFFECT OF TPA ON STIMULATION OF CYCLIC AMP CONTENT AND ADENYLATE CYCLASE BY HISTAMINE
Stimulation of suspensions of HGT-1 cells with histamine at 37°C produced a rapid, 4.5 fold increase in cyclic AMP content above basal at one minute, which was subsequently attenuated between five and 30 minutes, although remaining above basal (Fig 1A).
Preincubation of HGT-1 cells with 100 nmol/l TPA for 10 minutes significantly reduced the initial response to histamine (p<0.01), this effect being most apparent five minutes after the addition of histamine.
The effect of preincubation with various concentrations of TPA on the cyclic AMP content five minutes after the addition of 0.5 mmol/l histamine was investigated (Fig 1B).
The concentration of TPA which produced half maximal inhibition was 0.15 nmol/l, estimated by using the program FIT.
At 20°C, the cyclic AMP response to histamine was much more sustained, with little variation in the cyclic AMP content between one and 15 minutes after the addition of 0.5 mmol/l histamine (Fig 2A).
Significant effects of preincubation with 100 nmol/l TPA were also evident at this temperature, and the half maximally effective concentration of TPA was estimated to be 4.1 nmol/l.
No significant effects of TPA were evident on basal cyclic AMP content after the 10 minutes preincubation period, or at the end of the 30 minute incubation (Figs 1 and 2).
The inhibitory effect of TPA was the same whether it was added 30 or 10 minutes before challenge with histamine at 20°C, but TPA was ineffective if added at the same time as histamine (Fig 3).
The diacylglycerol analogue, 1-oleoyl-2-acetyl-glycerol, at a concentration at which it inhibited histamine stimulated aminopyrine accumulation in parietal cells, had a similar inhibitory effect to 100 nM TPA (Fig 3).
Basal adenylate cyclase activities in a membrane fraction in the absence and presence of 100 nmol/l TPA were 4.2 (0.8) and 4.2 (0.6) pmol/10 minutes per 10 cells respectively.
In the presence of histamine (0.5 mmol/l), adenylate cyclase activity was significantly (p<0.01) reduced from a control value of 28 (1.9) to 21 (1.5) by the presence of TPA (100 nmol/l).
Data are means (SEM) from four separate experiments.
EFFECT OF STAUROSPORINE AND 4α-TPA ON RESPONSE TO HISTAMINE
Staurosporine is a potent inhibitor of protein kinase C. When added 10 minutes before TPA, 200 nmol/l staurosporine completely abolished the subsequent effects of TPA (Fig 2B).
Preincubation with staurosporine alone enhanced the cyclic AMP responses in HGT-1 cells incubated with 0.5 mmol/l histamine for five minutes at 20°C by 36 (7) % (Table I).
The presence of 200 nmol/l staurosporine did not alter the time course of the desensitisation that was seen when HGT-1 cells were exposed to histamine at 37°C (data not shown.
The TPA analogue, 4-αTPA, does not activate protein kinase C. The cyclic AMP response to incubation with 0.5 mmol/l histamine for five minutes at 20°C, after preincubation with 4α-TPA for 10 minutes, was 102 (12) % of control cells preincubated with vehicle (mean (SEM) of three separate experiments).
EFFECTS OF TPA ON THE CYCLIC AMP RESPONSE TO TGLP-1, GASTRIC INHIBITORY POLYPEPTIDE, FORSKOLIN, AND CHOLERA TOXIN
At maximally effective concentrations of peptides (100 nmol/l), preincubation with 100 nmol/l TPA reduced the cyclic AMP response to TGLP-1 and enhanced the response to gastric inhibitory polypeptide.
There was no effect on the response to 5 µmol/l forskolin (Figs 4A, B and 5A).
At 37°C, 100 nmol/l TPA did not alter the effect of cholera toxin on cyclic AMP content (Fig 5B).
These experiments had to be performed at 37°C because at 20°C cholera toxin did not stimulate cyclic AMP content.
Preincubation with staurosporine abolished the stimulatory effect of 100 nmol/l TPA on the response to 100 nmol/l gastric inhibitory polypeptide and the inhibitory effect of TPA on the response to TGLP-1 (Table I).
In the absence of TPA, staurosporine enhanced the response to gastric inhibitory polypeptide by 49 (14) % (Table I).
EFFECT ON PREINCUBATION WITH PERTUSSIS TOXIN
Preincubation of layers of attached HGT-1 cells in culture flasks in the presence of 500 ng/ml of pertussis toxin for two hours before detachment prevented the effects of TPA on the resposne to gastric inhibitory polypeptide.
No such effect of pertussis toxin on the inhibitory action of TPA was observed when histamine was used to stimulate the cyclic AMP content of HGT-1 cells (Table II).
The basal contents of cyclic AMP in the cell suspensions were 3.9 (0.4) and 3.8 (0.7) pmol/million cells after pretreatment with vehicle or pertussis toxin respectively (means (SEM) from three separate experiments).
Discussion
The main finding of this work is that the effects of the human histamine H 2 receptor on adenylate cyclase are inhibited by protein kinase C and that the site of action of protein kinase C is close to the receptor.
New information is also provided on the modulation of the activity of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide and TGLP-1 receptors in HGT-1 cells.
The cyclic AMP content of the cell suspension rose to a peak one minute after the addition of histamine at 37°C and then fell.
The fall in cyclic AMP means that a cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase must have been active despite the presence of IBMX (0.1 mM).
Indeed not all cyclic AMP phosphodiesterases are inhibited by this compound.
This decline in cyclic AMP content has been found previously in HGT-1 cells stimulated with histamine at 37°C, and can be explained by a decrease in adenylate cyclase activity associated with desensitisation of the histamine receptor.
Such desensitisation is inhibited at 20°C, and this temperature was preferred for most experiments since it enabled effects of activation of protein kinase C to be assessed against a relatively stable control value.
It is necessary to establish that the effects of TPA on the cyclic AMP content of HGT-1 cells were mediated through activation of protein kinase C. The half maximally effective concentrations of TPA were in the low nanomolar region or below, which indicates specificity, as does the lack of effect of the inactive isomer 4α-TPA.
Furthermore, the inhibitor of protein kinase C, staurosporine, completely prevented the effects of TPA on stimulation of the cyclic AMP content by histamine, TGLP-1, and gastric inhibitory polypeptide.
Staurosporine stimulated the response to both histamine and gastric inhibitory polypeptide in the absence of TPA.
This action cannot be interpreted as an inhibition by stauro sporine of negative modulation of the histamine H 2 receptor by a basal activity of protein kinase C because similar effects were found with gastric inhibitory polypeptide, the action of which was not inhibited by activation of protein kinase C. Finally 1-oleoyl-2-acetyl-glycerol, a diacylglycerol analogue which activates protein kinase C in intact cells, inhibited histamine stimulation of cyclic AMP content in HGT-1 cells at a concentration at which it inhibited histamine stimulated aminopyrine accumulation in partietal cells.
The cyclic AMP content of cells can potentially be regulated at many sites.
A stimulation of the breakdown of cyclic AMP by the activation of a cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase is unlikely to be responsible for the effects seen here.
Such an action would have been expected to lower the cyclic AMP content irrespective of the agonist used to stimulate the cells.
The effects of TPA on intact HGT-1 cells are therefore likely to be mediated by effects on the activity of the adenylate cyclase system, and this is supported by the direct effect of TPA on histamine stimulated adenylate cyclase activity in the isolated membrane fraction.
Protein kinase C immunoreactivity has been detected in this fraction by protein blotting (J M Williams and P J Hanson, unpublished data).
Forskolin produces a direct activation of the catalytic subunit of adenylate cyclase, while cholera toxin causes a permanent activation of the guanine nucleotide regulatory subunit, Gs.
The lack of effect of preincubation with TPA on the responses to forskolin and cholera toxin suggests that the actions of TPA on the responses to histamine, TGLP-1, and gastric inhibitory polypeptide are not mediated at the catalytic subunit or at the level of the interaction between Gs and the catalytic subunit.
The prevention by pertussis toxin of the stimulatory effect of TPA on the action of gastric inhibitory polypeptide suggests an involvement of a guanine nucleotide binding protein of the class designated Gi in this action of TPA.
Protein kinase C phosphorylates Gi and prevents its inhibitory action on the catalytic subunit.
Pertussis toxin pretreatment also inactivates Gi and therefore a reduced or negligible effect of activation of protein kinase C is seen under these circumstances.
The actions of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor on adenylate cyclase seems to be under the control of an activated form of Gi in HGT-1 cells.
A generalised effect of TPA on receptor-Gs coupling mediated by a phosphorylation of Gs seems an unlikely explanation of the effects of protein kinase C on the actions of histamine and TGLP-1.
The heterotrimeric Gs protein does not seem to be a substrate for protein kinase C, and treatment of cells with pertussis toxin to remove the influence of Gi did not unmask an inhibitory effect of protein kinase C on the response to gastric inhibitory polypeptide.
The sites of action for protein kinase C are likely to be close to the receptors for histamine and TGLP-1.
Since pretreatment with TPA did not completely destroy histamine stimulated adenylate cyclase activity, it seems possible that the effect of phosphorylation by protein kinase C is to reduce the efficiency of coupling between the receptor and Gs rather than to abolish it completely.
The C-terminal cytosolic portion of the human histamine H 2 receptor exhibits several sites at which serines are flanked by basic residues and could therefore be a substrate for protein kinase C. It has also bee suggested that protein kinase C uncouples a receptor for glucagon-29 from Gs by phosphorylating the receptor.
The receptor for TGLP-1 in the rat gastric mucosa seems to be different from that for glucagon-29, but they may be part of a closely related family.
The present new finding of an inhibitory effect of protein kinase C on the stimulation of adenylate cyclase by TGLP-1 is thus reasonable.
Activation of protein kinase C may have a role in the short term regulation of acid secretion, as in the inhibitory action of high concentrations of carbachol on histamine stimulated secretory activity in guinea pig parietal cells.
Alternatively, protein kinase C could regulate the turnover or insertion of the histamine H 2 receptor into the membrane and be involved with the effects of long term exposure to gastrin on the response to histamine.
Investigation of this ‘crosstalk’ between receptors may prove difficult in HGT-1 cells because muscarinic cholinergic and gastric recetor have not been detected (McKenna et al , unpublished data), although it may be possible to induce cholinergic receptors by culturing the cells with butyrate (J P Bali, personal communication).
In conclusion, this work shows negative modulation by protein kinase C of the stimulation of adenylate cyclase by the human histamine H 2 receptor.
This finding could have implications for the regulation of gastric acid secretion in normal and pathological states in man.
Ambulatory motility patterns of the transposed short segment colon
Abstract
Ambulatory manometry and pH-metry were performed on 10 asymptomatic patients who had undergone lower oesophageal replacement with the left hemicolon between two and 20 years previously.
Recording of the ambient pH in the intrathoracic colon was carried out simultaneously.
In every patient the recording, which lasted approximately eight hours, included upright, supine, prandial, and postprandial periods.
The results were analysed both visually and by computer.
The emerging motility patterns showed three basic types of wave, based on amplitudes — low amplitude contractions (LAC) measuring <60 mm Hg, medium amplitude contractions (MAC) of 60–100 mm Hg, and high amplitude contractions (HAC) of 100–200 mm Hg.
Additional subtypes were identified in the LACs and MACs.
Using software primarily designed for oesophageal motility, the proportion of propulsive (6%–55%) waves could be distinguished from simultaneous or mixed waves, or both.
A proportion of propulsive waves was noted in patients who had undergone surgery 10 or more years previously.
It is concluded that the transposed colon retains its normal motility pattern but some adaptation to its new location may occur in the long term.
Replacement of the undilatably strictured lower oesophagus by a short segment of left hemicolon has been practised for several decades.
The motility of the left hemicolon in its normal position has been studied only in recent years.
Some patterns of normal colonic motility have begun to emerge, but specific abnormalities are yet to be defined.
The motility patterns of transposed colonic segments have until now been studied by static manometry.
There is no information on the ambulatory motility patterns of transposed segments of colon in their new location between the oesophagus and stomach, functioning as a neo-oesophagus.
Patients and methods
Ten asymptomatic patients who had had short segment colonic interposition of the oesophagus two to 20 years previously for undilatable peptic stricture, underwent ambulatory manometric recordings in their short colonic segments.
Their mean age at operation was 48 years, with a range of 21 to 67.
The operative technique entailed resection of a benign peptic oesophageal stricture and the transposition of an 18 to 24 cm segment of left hemicolon pedicled on the upper left colic arterial branch, between the oesophagus and stomach, with a proximal subaortic oesophagocolic anastomosis and a distal subdiaphragmatic cologastric anastomosis.
A minimum length of 12 to 18 cm of colon was maintained below the diaphragm.
Ambulatory manometry lasting approximately eight hours was performed with a Gaeltec (Dunvegan, Isle of Skye IV55 8GU) Manometric catheter with three miniaturised solid state transducers placed 5 cm apart in its distal 10 cm, connected proximally to a Synectics (215 Willow Road, Enfield, Middlesex) multichannel microdigitrapper.
The terminal tip of the probe was positioned immediately above the diaphragm at approximately 38 cm from the nostril.
In this way it was possible to ensure that all three transducers were located in the supradiaphragmatic part of the transposed colon.
The data were analysed both visually and with the help of the Synectics Gastrosoft Multigram software (version 5), which was originally designed for oesophageal manometry.
Any waves with amplitudes greater or equal to 20 mm Hg were included in the analysis.
The amplitude, wave duration, motility index (contractions/minute× mean amplitude of contraction×mean duration of contration), wave frequency, and wave velocity were analysed in the upright and supine positions and during prandial and postprandial periods.
An analysis was also made of the proportion of propulsive waves.
Results
The general pattern of activity consisted of periods of quiescence alternating with periods of activity.
Based on the amplitude of contraction, we were able to recognise three types of waves as follows:
(1)
Low amplitude contractions (LACs) measuring <60 mm Hg (Fig 1);
(2)
Medium amplitude contractions (MACs) measuring 60–100 mm Hg;
(3)
High amplitude contractions (HACs) measuring >100 mm Hg (Fig 2).
Further subtypes were also identified as follows:
(1)
The LACs showed sporadic (amplitude 40 mm Hg and duration seven seconds),repetitive (same amplitude and duration but lasting approximately five minutes), and bursting (amplitude 25 mm Hg, duration five seconds, and bursts lasting five to 20 minutes) waves (Figs 1 and 3).
(2)
The MACs showed two subtypes (Figs 4 and 5), a peaked variety (duration eight seconds) and a bell shaped one (duration 13 seconds).
In addition to these, HACs with durations of up to 15 seconds were seen in three patients and these tended to occur mostly between 10 and 11 am.
In two patients a plateau wave with an amplitude of 20 mm Hg that lasted 20–30 seconds was noted postprandially (2–3 pm).
The mean wave frequency was 2.36 c/min (range 0.1–12.4) with the higher values occurring during the prandial periods (Table I), although this did not reach statistical significance.
The mean wave velocity was 1.2 cm/s.
The mean percentage of propulsive waves was 26.6.
The average hourly motility index for all periods is shown in Tavle II.
The difference in motility indices for the total period and the postprandial period did not reach statistical significance.
None of the eight recordings incorporated a sleep period of any duration.
There was, however, no correlation between the motility patterns and the short postprandial periods of sleep (after lunch).
It was also not possible to correlate the motility of the exercise periods durng the recording as patients were not subjected to any strenuous form of exercise during the recordings.
Discussion
The normal colonic motility patterns described by Narducci et al consist of periods of motor quiescence irregularly alternating with periods of activity.
Sleep promotes quiescence, while walking promotes motor activity.
Two types of LACs have been described, sporadic waves and those that occur in bursts.
To this we have added a third variety — repretitive contraction.
The LACs usually have a propulsive rate of 10% and a frequency of 3–8/min.
They occur more often in the postprandial period.
In dogs, LAC type activity has been recorded originating from the interstitial cells of Cajal located at the submucosa-circular muscle interface of the colonic wall, where pacemaking takes place.
It is also thought that a proper coupling of electrical and metabolic activity is a prerequisite for the generation of pacemaker activity.
The extent to which sporadic, bursting, or repetitive waves occur may well be an index of the proper coupling of electrical and metabolic activity.
The same factor may also account for the variation in amplitudes and frequencies noted by us and by Sunshine .
HACs have an amplitude of 100–200 mm Hg.
They are isoperistaltic but occur very infrequently, at 4.4 waves/24 h.
They are seen predominantly in the early hours of the morning, or in the late postprandial period, and are usually followed by a second or third wave within a short period.
They are promoted by colonic distension and are associated with the urge to defaecate.
They may well have a reflex aetiology with an afferent arc situated in the colonic wall as well as in the gastric wall — not unlike the gastrocolic reflex.
In this respect it is interesting to note that the new location of the interposed colon has not in any way altered the inherent motility characteristics of that segment.
The three main types of contractions and five subtypes that we have noted have both similarities and dissimilarities to those described by Narducci et al in the left hemicolon in its normal location.
The main difference is that we describe a MAC with an amplitude of60–100 mm Hg in addition to the LAC and HAC described by them.
Our MAC does not conform to the amplitude criteria of the LAC and HAC respectively.
We postulate that the supradiaphragmatic segment of transposed colon has evolved a MAC type activity in an attempt to overcome the ‘obstructive’ effect of the diaphragmatic hiatus.
This factor may also account for the repetitive waves in the transposed colon.
There is controversy over the point of entry of the pelvic parasympathetic nerves into the colonic wall.
Two modes of entry have been suggested, one that they pierce the muscular layer of the upper rectum and travel upwards in the wall of the colon, and the other that they follow the course of the inferior mesenteric artery and its branches.
Should the first theory be correct, the similarities that exist between the motility of the colon in the normal location and in the transposed location would not exist, as the nerves would have been interrupted during transection and mobilisation of the segment of colon.
Our findings support the view that the nerves follow the course of the artery and its branches which anatomically penetrate the colonic wall at various levels along the length of the bowel.
During mobilisation, the marginal artery and its branches are preserved, and form the pedicle for the vascular supply of the colon in its new location.
The highest wave frequency and motility index were noted in the postprandial period.
Despite the lack of statistical significance it seems that contact with food provided the most potent stimulus to inducing motor activity.
The percentage propulsive rate (26.6%) in the interposed colon is significantly lower than that seen in the normal oesophagus (80%), and more than double that seen in the left hemicolon in its normal location (10%).
Our findings differ from those reported by Paris et al who performed instant and not ambulatory manometry.
They obtained propulsive rates of 87% and 93% when swallowing liquids and solids respectively.
As Paris et al performed their measurements by instant manometry using the solid or liquid bolus, the difference between their results and ours is entirely attributable to the positive effect of the arrival of the liquid or solid bolus in the segment of colon in their studies, while in our patients the propulsive waves were in response to the contents of the colonic segment at the time.
We did, however, note that patients in whom the interposition had been performed 10 or more years previously, showed a higher propulsive rate.
We conclude that the transposed left hemicolon retains its normal motility patterns albeit with some minor modifications, in keeping with its new location and function as a neo-oesophagus.
There is, however, a need for further studies in this field in order that the picture could be elucidated further.
Crohn's disease: the genetic contribution
It is clear that the liability to develop Chrohn's disease is influenced by a wide range of genetic and environmental factors.
Few of these have been specifically identified and it is not known whether any single factor is essential for the development of Crohn's disease.
Role of autoimmunity
Crohn's disease patients and their relatives are more likely to suffer from disorders with a known or suspected autoimmune origin than members of the general population.
These disorders include ankylosing spondylitis, Behet's disease, psoriasis, iritis, thrombocytopenic purpura and synstemic lupus erythematosus, and multiple sclerosis.
Aberrant HLA-DR expression in the intestinal mucosa of Crohn's disease patients is consistent with an autoimmune aetiology.
Serum from Crohn's disease probands and their healthy first degree relatives may contain antibodies to gut epithelial cells, and peripheral blood lymphocytes from Crohn's disease patients may be cytotoxic to these cells.
The sharing of antigenic determinants by germ free rat colon and a lipopolysaccharide extract of Escherichia coli suggests that the anticolon antibodies and associated cell mediated cytotoxicity may result from stimulation of the gut associated lymphoid tissue by cross reacting enterobacterial antigens.
This hypothesis is unlikely to provide a mechanism for substantial inherited variation in liability, however, since, unlike ankylosing spondylitis alone where HLA-B27 positive subjects run a risk of disease approaching 100 times that of HLA-B27 negative subjects and where cross reaction and amino acid sequence homology between the host antigen and Klebsiella pneumoniae have been shown, the anticolon antibodies of Crohn's disease are effective against allogeneic colonic epithelial cells.
Lymphocytotoxic antibodies have also been shown in Crohn's disease probands and their healthy relatives but, as these antibodies react with lymphocytes from normal subjects with a wide range of HLA specificities, they are similarly unlikely to account for inherited differences of liability.
Chromosomal and monogenic disorders
Crohn's disease occurs at an unusual high frequency among patients with Turner's syndrome, known for its association with autoimmunity.
A disorder like Crohn's disease has also been reported in the autosomal recessive Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, a form of albinism with haemorrhagic diathesis and pigmented reticuloendothelial cells, and glycogen storage disease type Ib, in which there is neutropenia and abnormal neutrophil function.
Comparable bowel involvement has been described in patients with other inherited neutrophil defects, while Crohn's disease activity has been negatively correlated with neurophil superoxide production among patients in whom the disease has no obvious monogenic basis.
Neutrophil function in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome seems normal.
It has been suggested that susceptibility to autoimmune disease in general, including Crohn's disease, is under the control of a single dominant gene, the specific clinical effects of which are determined by other genes, hormonal influences, and environment triggers.
Complex segregation analysis has indicated that about 30% of all Crohn's disease patients could be homozygous for a major recessive gene with incomplete penetrance, with no residual causes of family resemblance and a relatively high frequency of homozygosity among younger onset cases.
Nevertheless, the differences in fit from what would be expected of multifactorial inheritance are small and the pattern of familial aggregation indicative of a recessive influence (with affected sibling pairs predominating over parent-offspring pairs) could have occurred for other reasons, as discussed below.
Twins and resemblance between ther relatives
The results of most family studies of Crohn's disease have been expressed in terms of the proportion of probands with either affected first degree relatives or with a positive family history over all relatives investigated.
These data are of limited value in making a genetic analysis.
It has been argued that a better measure of familial aggregation is the ratio of prevalence among relatives to that in the general population, but this ratio alone is also of limited value since, for a given heritability, it varies inversely with population prevalence.
Rational genetic interpretation of familial aggregation requires both the absolute value of the population prevalence and the numbers of affected and unaffected relatives of probands.
Several reports have quoted numbers of affected and unaffected relatives of Crohn's disease patients, including twins.
The studies differ in respect of diagnostic criteria, the age structure and method of ascertainment of the sample of probands, and the number of years between diagnosis in probands and ascertainment of affected relatives.
Strict comparability is not therefore possible but pooling of results (Table) provides a summary of the overall position.
Population prevalences, where given, ranged from 13 to 74 per 100000 but were generally in the region of 50 per 100000.
The significantly higher prevalence in siblings than among either parents (χ 2 1 2 =5.5, p=0.019) or children (χ 2 1 2 =10.7, p= 0.001) could be interpreted as evidence for an environmental or recessive genetic contribution to Crohn's disease.
It seems likely, however, that the low prevalence among children is largely a consequence of inability to ascertain pre-onset cases, while among parents it could stem from the effect of Crohn's disease on marital relationships with reduced fertility, either through complications of the disease in women or reversible azoospermia during sulphasalazine treatment in men.
The results of a collaborative European study indicate that affected women do indeed have fewer children than normal control subjects.
The classical multifactorial model is useful for considering these observations, even though its requirements may not be fully met.
The model assumes that many genes and environmental influences contribute to an individual's position on an underlying continuous scale of liability but that disease is present only in those who fall above a critical threshold value.
The model allows estimation of heritability, the proportion of the population variance in liability attributable to additive genetic variation, from proband concordance rates in twins and from the prevalence of disease among other relatives of probands.
Heritability estimates for Crohn's disease are given alongside the prevalence data in the Table.
The estimates from twins are very high, but since the standard errors are large they make a limited contribution to the overall picture.
Reduced fitness and inability to ascertain pre-onset cases are likely to have resulted in serious underestimates of heritability in parents and children.
On the other hand, the estimates from siblings may be inflated because of within generation environmental effects or the influence of recessive genes.
The low estimates for second degree relatives, admittedly with large standard errors, also suggest that common environment or recessive genes, or both, may have contributed to the relatively high prevalence among siblings.
It may be, however, that low prevalence among more distant relatives results in part from lower levels of ascertainment.
Among third degree relatives, the single affected individual gave a prevalence similar to that in the general population.
Taking into account all the data for the prevalence of Crohn's disease among relatives of probands, and assuming a population prevalence of around 50 per 100000, a heritability in the region of 50–60% seems likely.
In other words, perhaps a little more than half of the variation in liability to develop Crohn's disease is a consequence of inherited differences between individuals.
Two other features of the family studies are noteworthy.
Firstly, Crohn's disease is rarely found among spouses of Crohn's disease probands, suggesting that family environment after marriage does not contribute substantially to the disease.
Secondly, familial cases have sometimes shown a lower age at onset than sporadic cases, which is consistent with aetiological heterogeneity.
Association of Crohn's disease with genetic markers
There is little evidence of any association with HLA-A or -B antigens in individual studies, although pooling of results from a number of centres showed a significant positive association with HLA-A2 (relative risk 1.25) and a significant negative association with HLA-A11 (relative risk 0.62).
Various associations with HLA-DR specificities have been reported but no consistent pattern has emerged, except for the positive association with DR4 in three Japanese studies.
These findings support the contention that host antigenic variation, through an autoimmune aetiology, is unlikely to make a substantial contribution to differences in liability to develop Crohn's disease.
Nevertheless, different HLA types have been associated with granuloma positive and granuloma negative Crohn's disease and with other differences in manifestation of the disorder in Japan and in Italy, while the F and FS phenotypes of complement component C3 have been over-represented in Crohn's disease patients whose small bowel is affected.
Thus, there is some suggestion of variation in the immune response within Crohn's disease.
Within families, evidence for an HLA haplotype association is not convincing and therefore provides little indication of linkage of an important Crohn's disease susceptibility gene with the major histocompatibility complex at 6p21.3.
Studies of association with several blood group and serum protein markers have also proved inconclusive, while no association has been found at the population level with DNA restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) at the T cell antigen receptor alphas and beta loci.
A high negative correlation between the prevalence of lactose intolerance and the incidence of Crohn's disease among different populations in several countries led to the hypothesis that lactose malabsorption results in the formation of volatile fatty acids that may inhibit multiplication of potentially pathogenic intestinal orgamisms.
In Jewish subpopulations from different parts of the world, however, the incidence of Crohn's disease varies while the prevalence of lactose intolerance is remarkably constant.
Further attempts to relate the incidence of Crohn's disease to known genetic variation between populations are unlikely to be productive since differences of incidence between ethnic groups are narrowing with time and migration.
Subclinical findings
Three sets of findings have highlighted possible areas where subclinical investigation of Crohn's disease patients and their relatives may be fruitful.
Two of these, serum anticolon antibodies and abnormal neutrophil function, have already been considered.
The third is evidence to suggest that intestinal permeability to polyethylene glycol is increased in patients with Crohn's disease and their clinical normal relatives.
Increased intestinal permeability to other substances has also been reported in Crohn's disease patients but not in their unaffected relatives.
raising the possibility that at least part of the permeability defect is not an inherited abnormality but secondary to the disease process.
Future possibilities
The most pressing need in investigating the genetic contribution to Crohn's disease is the collection of multiply affected families for RFLP linkage studies, to identify individual loci that contribute to liability.
The chromosomal locations of markers that have shown no association at the population level should not be ignored since the lack of this association does not rule out linkage.
There are, however, at least two complicating factors.
First is the possibility of inheriting a major gene for liability, but not developing the disease.
A prerequisite for linkage studies would thus be a thorough search for subclinical manifestations of inherited liability.
Second is the extent of genetic heterogeneity within Crohn's disease and of the genetic correlation between Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
The loci controlled the mucosal immune system are likely candidates for investigation, in particular, those that may have the ability to suppress the generation of an effective immune response to the multiple antigens normally present in the intestinal lumen.
Animal models could also be useful.
Transgenic rats that express human HLA-B27 and Beta-2-microglobulin have developed spontaneous inflammatory disease in the gastrointestinal tract.
Genetic dissection of the immune system in this way, or through the use of mutants with different specific defects of immune function, could prove valuable in studying the influence of individual genes in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
Finally, detailed studies of the chromosomal and monogenic disorders accompanied by Crohn's disease like lesions should also provide insight into the inherited basis for this disease.
Initial response and subsequent course of Crohn's disease treated with elemental diet or prednisolone
Abstract
Elemental diet is as effective as corticosteroids in the treatment of previously untreated Crohn's disease.
It is unclear whether a poor nutritional state is a prerequisite for efficacy of elemental diet, whether previously treated patients respond as well, or how duration of remission using elemental diet compares with corticosteroid induced remission.
Forty two patients with active Crohn's disease were stratified for nutritional state and randomised to receive Vivonex TEN 2.1 l/day for four weeks, or 0.75 mg prednisolone/kg/day for two weeks and subsequent reducing doses.
Nine of 22 (41%) patients assigned to nutritional treatment were intolerant of the diet.
Thirty patients completed four weeks treatment.
Disease activity decreased on elemental diet from mean (SEM) 4.8 (0.9) to 1.7 (0.6), p<0.05, and on prednisolone from 5.3 (0.5) to 1.9 (0.6), p<0.05.
For each treatment, nourished and malnourished patients responded similarly.
Patients with longstanding disease responded as well as newly diagnosed patients.
The probability of maintaining remission at six months was 0.67 after prednisolone, 0.28 after elemental diet, and at one year was 0.35 after prednisolone and 0.09 after elemental diet, p<0.05.
When tolerated, elemental diet is as effective in the short term as prednisolone in newly and previously diagnosed Crohn's disease, and its benefit is independent of nutritional state.
The subsequent relapse rate after elemental diet induced remission, however, is greater than after treatment with prednisolone.
Crohn's disease is commonly associated with undernutrition, which is often most evident when the disease is active.
Nutritional treatment may have a primary therapeutic role in active Crohn's disease in addition to its proved value as a supportive measure in the overall management of the disease.
Chemically defined ‘elemental’ diets containing nutrients in simple, easily assimilable form with nitrogen provided as free amino acids, carbohydrate as simple sugars or glucose polymers, and fat present in very small amounts, were initially used as nutritional support in patients with Crohn's disease.
Subsequently, they have been reported to be as effective as corticosteroids in treating patients with active Crohn's disease, and one controlled, but non-randomised trial suggested that elemental diet was actually superior to corticosteroid treatment.
In childhood Crohn's disease, attainment of remission using dietary means is particularly attractive, as the growth retarding effects of steroids can be avoided.
Elemental diet has been shown to be as beneficial as corticosteroid treatment in children with Crohn's disease.
It is not clear, however, from these published studies whether elemental diet is as efficacious as steroids in previously treated adults with active Crohn's disease.
The only prospective trial directly comparing elemental diet with steroids, which included adult patients who had received treatment for Crohn's disease in the past, also entailed administration of antibiotics during the 10 day treatment with elemental diet.
In addition it is not known whether the influence of nutritional treatment on the disease process is as beneficial in nourished as in undernourished patients.
Similarly, the longterm outcome of adult patients treated with elemental diet has not been compared with the outcome after steroid treatment in a prospective fashion.
If this treatment changes the fundamental disease process, a prolonged period of remission might be expected in these patients.
We have undertaken a randomised trial of elemental diet v prednisolone, to consider these points, in patients with newly diagnosed or recurrent attacks of Crohn's disease, and followed up the patients for one year after treatment or until relapse.
Methods
Patients with active Crohn's disease requiring hospital admission were considered for entry into the study.
Patients were recruited from three centres, St Bartholomew's and Central Middlesex Hospitals in London, and Western General Hospital in Edinburgh.
The diagnosis of Crohn's disease was made by colonoscopy with biopsy or characteristic radiological appearances on barium studies.
Active Crohn's disease was defined as at least one of the following: abdominal pain causing severe limitation of activity, diarrhoea (at least 3 loose stools/day), weight loss of more than 2 kg in the past month, or at least two of the following laboratory abnormalities: haemoglobin <12.5 g/dl in men (<10.5 g/dl in women), erythrocyte sedimentation rate >20 mm/h, serum albumin <35 g/l.
Patients were excluded if they had evidence of intestinal obstruction, previous gastric surgery, a contraindication to steroid treatment, or had been receiving more than 7.5 mg prednisolone/ day at the time of relapse.
Patients fulfilling the entry criteria were stratified before randomisation according to whether they were malnourished or not.
Patients were considered malnourished if they (a) had lost more than 10% usual body weight or had a serum albumin of <30 g/l; and (b) also had a triceps skinfold thickness (TSF) of <90% adult reference range or a mid arm muscle circumference (MAMC) <90% reference range.
Informed consent was obtained from all patients and the study protocol approved by the Research Ethical Committees of the participating centres.
Patients were randomised to receive either prednisolone 0.75 mg/kg body weight daily for two weeks followed by subsequent reducing doses, or elemental diet (Vivonex TEN, Norwich Eaton) as sole treatment for four weeks.
The nitrogen source in Vivonex TEN is amino acids comprising 15.3% of its energy value, carbohydrate as glucose polymers (maltodextrin), which makes up 82.2% of its energy value, and safflower oil, which contributes just 2.5% of the total energy as fat.
Patients receiving elemental diet consumed a minimum of 2.1 litres of standard dilution Vivonex daily, providing 2100 kcal and 12 g nitrogen.
This minimum daily intake was reached by day 3, and ‘starter regimens’ using less than full strength of the feed were not used.
Those who could not take this minimum daily requirement orally were fed by fine bore nasogastric tube.
All other food except water and tea or coffee without milk was prohibited.
Patients receiving elemental diet remained in hospital for at least 10 days to ensure compliance.
After discharge they were reviewed at weekly intervals and the volume of feed consumed was recorded daily throughout the four week period.
After four weeks treatment with elemental diet, normal diet was reintroduced.
Patients assigned to receive steroids consumed an unrestricted diet and were asked to record their food intake during the first four weeks.
After the first two weeks of prednisolone, the daily dosage was steadily reduced to zero over the ensuing weeks.
Patients taking sulphasalazine at the time of onset of relapse continued on this drug.
Before treatment was started (week 0), clinical disease severity was assessed using a simple disease activity index (DAI).
Anthropometric measurements of mid arm circumference (MAC), TSF, MAMC, weight and height were made and expressed as percentage standard MAC, MAMC, TSF, and percentage ideal body weight (%IBW).
Laboratory measurements of haemoglobin, white cell count, lymphocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, albumin, urea, and C-reactive protein (CRP) were recorded.
These assessments of DAI, anthropometric and laboratory measurements were repeated at week 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 12, 16, 28, 40, and 52, or sooner if a relapse occurred.
A relapse was defined as a clinical deterioration with an increase in DAI requiring (i) high dose steroids, or a return to high dose steroids in the case of patients still on tapering prednisolone doses, or (ii) surgery.
χ 2 and Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare the characteristics of the two treatment groups at randomisation.
The response to treatment was assessed by Wilcoxon signed rank test.
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
After treatment, the time to relapse within each treatment group was assessed by lifetable analysis, and the two survival curves obtained were compared using the log rank test.
Results
Forty two patients (19 men) were entered into the study.
Twenty two patients were randomised to receive elemental diet and 20 to receive prednisolone.
Twenty two patients were newly diagnosed and 20 were patients with known Crohn's disease in relapse.
Patients within each treatment group were well matched in terms of age, site, and duration of disease, nutritional state, initial DAI, laboratory, and anthropometric data (Table I).
INITIAL FOUR WEEKS TREATMENT
Of the 22 patients assigned to dietary treatment, nine (41%) could not tolerate elemental diet whether given orally or nasogastrically.
The reasons for non-compliance with the diet were its unpalatability and intolerance of a nasogastric tube.
These patients were withdrawn from the trial and treated with corticosteroids.
Three patients (two on elemental diet, one one prednisolone) deteriorated and required urgent colonic surgery within four weeks of entry.
The mean daily intake of Vivonex in those completing four weeks treatment was 2070 ml (2070 kcal).
Dietary records of the patients treated with prednisolene were inadequate to make a valid assessment of nutritional intake.
For the 30 patients completing four weeks treatment (19 treated with prednisolone, 11 with elemental diet), there were significant improvements in DAI and laboratory indicators of activity.
The degree of improvement in both treatment groups was similar (Fig 1).
Of the 19 patients completing four weeks prednisolone, 12 had been nourished and seven malnourished at randomisation.
Of the 11 patients completing four weeks elemental diet, six were nourished and five malnourished at randomisation.
Despite the overall improvement in both groups, one patient on elemental diet and two on prednisolone achieved only a partial remission at four weeks.
In considering these patients, and those requiring early surgery, a failure to achieve complete remission at four weeks was seen in three of 20 (15%) prednisolone treated patients and three of 13 (23%) patients tolerating elemental diet.
Patients within each treatment arm who were considered malnourished at randomisation responded as well as nourished patients.
In the group completing four weeks of elemental diet, there were similar significant (p<0.05) reductions in DAI from 4.6 (0.9) to 2.2 (1.0) in malnourished patients, and from 5.0 (1.6) to 1.3 (0.6) in nourished patients.
In those receiving prednisolone, improvements (p<0.05) in DAI, from 4.4 (0.7) to 1.9 (0.6) in malnourished patients, and from 5.8 (0.9) to 1.9 (0.9) in nourished patients, were similar.
Patients with a long duration of Crohn's disease and who had received specific treatment (steroids or surgery) in the past, showed a similar significant (p<0.05) response to elemental diet, DAI decreasing from 6.3 (1.4) to 2.2 (0.8), as newly diagnosed patients, 3.0 (0.6) to 1.2 (0.7).
On prednisolone, the DAI improvements (p<0.05) from 5.1 (0.9) to 1.7 (0.6) in previously treated patients, and from 5.6 (0.6) to 2.1 (1.1) in newly diagnosed patients, were also similar.
Serial anthropometric measurements did not improve in those completing four weeks treatment with elemental diet.
Within the prednisolone treated group, there was a significant increase in %IBW and percentage standard MAC at four weeks (Table II).
FOLLOW UP OF REMISSION
During the 12 months prospective follow up of the 30 patients completing four weeks treatment, one patient (prednisolone treated) was lost to follow up at week 16.
After the initial four weeks, patients treated with prednisolone were withdrawn from this drug over a further period of 6.5 (2.4) weeks.
During this period, the average daily dosage of prednisolone was 12 (3) mg.
Patients who had relapsed all had a DAI of at least four at the time of relapse.
Those patients who had achieved remission on elemental diet relapsed earlier than those who had attained remission on prednisolone (Fig 2).
The cumulative probability of maintaining remission at six months was 0.67 after treatment with prednisolone compared with 0.28 after treatment with elemental diet, and at one year the probability of maintaining remission was 0.35 in the prednisolone group and 0.09 in the elemental diet treated group (p<0.05; log rank test).
At one year, remission was maintained in only one of the 11 elemental diet treated patients compared with six of the 19 prednisolone treated patients.
Within the elemental diet treated group, five patients with only small intestinal Crohn's disease tended to relapse later (mean remission period 29 weeks) than six patients who had colonic involvement (mean remission time 13 weeks), but this difference did not reach statistical significance.
Discussion
This trial has shown that elemental diet, when tolerated, is as effective as prednisolone in treating acute Crohn's disease in the short term, and confirms the result from the original study of O'Morain et al .
In addition, we have shown that elemental diet is as beneficial in patients with longstanding disease as it is in newly diagnosed patients.
Unlike previous studies comparing elemental diet with corticosteroids, in this trial we have stratified patients according to nutritional state before randomisation.
Our results show that relatively well nourished patients respond equally well to elemental diet as those with a poor nutritional state.
A large number of patients would be necessary, however, to ensure that a small difference in response to elemental diet between nourished and malnourished patients was not being overlooked.
Despire the improvements in DAIR and laboratory tests, there was no improvement in body weight and anthropometrics in the elemental diet treated patients, whereas the prednisolone treated patients showed increases in %IBW and percentage standard MAC.
Although elemental diet is known to decrease gastrointestinal protein loss, faecal leucocyte excretion, and improve intestinal permedability in acute Crohn's disease, its underlying mode of action remains unclear.
Elemental diet does not exert its beneficial affect by improving nutrition alone, and in this study remission with an elemental diet was achieved as readily in nourished as in malnourished patients.
Polymeric diets containing whole protein are as effective as elemental diets in improving nutrition and are more palatable, but it is unclear whether isocaloric polymeric diets are as successful as elemental diets in inducing remission in acute Crohn's disease.
Furthermore, nutritional treatment with enteral feeds in which nitrogen is provided as a hydrolysate of whole protein has been shown to be inferior to drug treatment in two large studies involving adults, although a small study in children showed equal efficacy to corticosteroids.
Preliminary results from the only trial directly comparing polymeric diet with corticosteroids do, however, suggest equal efficacy in inducing remission.
It is widely believed that elemental diet is effective in Crohn's disease by achieving bowel rest.
Its absorption is virtually complete in the proximal small intestine and there is minimal residue, so that the distal small intestine and colon are ‘medically by passed’.
By virtue of its free amino acid content, however, elemental diet provides a powerful stimulus to pancreatobiliary secretions to which inflamed ulcerated gut is then exposed.
Moreover, following a study that failed to show superiority of intravenous nutrition over polymeric feeding or oral food with parenteral supplementation, it is now apparent that complete bowel rest is not essential for achieving remission in acute Crohn's disease with nutritional treatment.
It has been suggested that in active Crohn's disease, dietary protein might gain access to the gut wall by ulcerated mucosa and cause secondary immune mediated tissue damage.
A unique property of elemental diet, which might account for its effectiveness in acute Crohn's disease is its hypoallergenic nature.
The absence of whole protein or peptides in elemental diet effectively removes dietary antigenic stimuli, which might otherwise provoke immune mediated damage on exposure to ulcerated gut mucosa.
This may explain why two trials by the European Cooperative Crohn's Disease group, both using a protein hydrolysate diet containing oligopeptides rather than solely free amino acids, have shown that enteral feeding is inferior to drug treatment with corticosteroids and sulphasalazine.
Another difference in the enteral feeds used in these trials concerns the higher fat content of about 10% total energy, whereas the present and other trials, have used strictly elemental diets containing a very small amount (2.5% of energy) of fat.
Induction of remission using elemental diet avoids the side effects of repeated courses of steroids.
In children with Crohn's disease, elemental diet also improves or reverses growth retardation.
Nevertheless, the unpalatability of orally given feed or the inconvenience of nasogastrically given feed, together with the total avoidance of other food requires considerable determination by the patient.
Consequently 41% of our patients assigned to dietary treatment, despite hospitalisation, could not tolerate the elemental diet regimen and we could not reproduce the high compliance rates reported by others.
If these non-compliant patients who failed to tolerate four weeks of elemental feeding are taken into account, then just 45% (10 of 22) patients originally randomised to receive four weeks of elemental diet achieved complete remission on diet alone.
When compared with 85% (17 of 20) patients achieving remission with prednisolone, elemental diet is inferior (p<0.05) on an intention to treat basis.
This trial is the first to prospectively follow elemental diet or prednisolone induced remission in adult patients over a period of a year.
Some of the patients assigned to prednisolone did receive this drug for more than four weeks.
The DAI and laboratory data, however, showed significant improvements at four weeks and continued prednisolone treatment does not protect patients in remission from further relapse.
The rate of relapse in elemental diet treated patients was higher than in those who had gained remission with prednisolone.
Earlier relapse after elemental diet treatment has also been noted in paediatric patients.
We also found that patients with Crohn's disease affecting the colon were likely to relapse more rapidly, a finding that has been noted by others.
In conclusion, this study confirms that four weeks treatment with elemental diet, when tolerated, is as effective as prednisolone.
The number of patients intolerant of the diet is disappointingly high and together with inability to sustain a prolonged remission, elemental diet treatment does have its disadvantages.
Nevertheless it does have a primary role in managing acute Crohn's disease, and is an attractive alternative to corticosteroids when avoidance of the side effects of corticosteroids is essential.
Postprandial gall bladder motility and hormone release during intermittent and continuous subcutaneous octreotide treatment in acromegaly
Abstract
Repeated daily injections of the somatostatin analogue, octreotide (SMS201–995, Sandostatin) are an effective treatment for acromegaly, but lead to gall stone formation in about 50% of cases during long term treatment.
This is probably because of impaired gall bladder contraction.
This study examined whether the timing of intermittent injections in relation to meals, or alternatively, continuous 24 hour subcutaneous octreotide infusion (CSOI) might avert adverse effects on gall bladder contraction.
In six patients with active acromegaly, gall bladder volume, plasma cholecystokinin (CCK), and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) were measured in the fasting state and after consumption of a fatty meal.
Measurements were made on five separate days:(a) without treatment,(b) 45 minutes after 100µ g octreotide given subcutaneously,(c) four hours after 100 µg octreotide given subcutaneously,(d) eight hours after 100 µg octreotide given subcutaneously, and (e) during CSOI of 300µ g/24 h for two weeks.
Without treatment, postprandial gall bladder contraction was 86.2 (2.1%).
Fasting gall bladder volume increased after octreotide injection and was almost doubled during CSOI.
Octreotide injections impaired postprandial gall bladder contraction as well as CCK and PP release for at least four hours.
Eight hours after injection and during CSOI, postprandia gall bladder contraction was partly restored (43.4% and 50.8% respectively).
Postprandial CCK release was normal at eight hours after injection but very low during CSOI.
PP release was suppressed by each mode of octreotide treatment.
This study indicates that octreotide injections impair postprandial gall bladder contraction for at least four hours.
Eight hours after injection and during CSOI, gall bladder contraction is partly restored.
Intermittent subcutaneous treatment with a longacting somatostatin analogue, octreotide (SMS201–995, Sandostatin) is an effective treatment for patients with acromegaly.
Octreotide is usually given by intermittent subcutaneous injection of 100–500 µg twice daily or three times daily.
Continuous subcutaneous octreotide infusion (CSOI) of 300–1500 µg/24 h is probably more effective in suppressing growth hormone secretion.
An important side effect of longterm octreotide treatment with intermittent injections is a high incidence, up to 50%, of gall stone formation during one year of treatment.
The rate of gall stone formation during CSOI has yet to be discovered, but is probably lower.
A high occurrence of gall stones is also found in patients with somatostatinoma, the natural equivalent of longterm somatostatin treatment.
Like natural somatostatin, octreotide inhibits postprandial gall bladder contraction, release of cholecystokinin (CCK), and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) when given just before a meal Impaired postprandial gall bladder contraction is a risk factor for gall stone formation.
We examined the effect of varying the intervals between octreotide injection and meal ingestion on fasting and postprandial gall gladder motility and on plasma CCK and PP concentrations in patients with acromegaly.
These findings were used to see whether appropriate timing of octreotide injections with respect to meal ingestion might avert impaired gall bladder contraction.
In addition, we examined the effect of CSOI on fasting and postprandial gall bladder motility and hormone release in these patients.
Patients and methods
SUBJECTS
Six patients with active acromegaly, requiring octreotide treatment, were enrolled in the study.
All patients had typical clinical features of the acromegaly syndrome, high circulating growth hormone concentrations which were not suppressed below 2 µg/l after an oral glucose load, and insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) or somatomedin-C plasma concentrations above the mean 2 (SD) for age.
Table I shows patient characteristics.
Ultrasound examination of the gall bladder, bile ducts, and liver was performed before the study and showed no stones, sludge, or other abnormalities.
None of the patients had had abdominal surgery previously.
None of the patients were pregnant at the time of the study or had taken any drug which could potentially interfere with gall bladder motility.
Body weight was stable during the three months preceding the study.
All patients gave written informed consent.
The study protocol was approved by the ethical committee of our hospital.
PROTOCOL
Postprandial gall bladder contraction as well as plasma CCK and PP concentrations were assessed on five separate days with at least one day in between to allow for degradation of octreotide (T=80–100 minutes).
The first measurement was made after two weeks without any treatment.
The second, third, and fourth measurement (on separate days) started at 45 minutes, four hours, and eight hours respectively after a single subcutaneous injection of 100 µg octreotide (Sandostatin, Sandoz AG, Basel, Switzerland).
The fifth measurement was made after two weeks of continuous subcutaneous treatment with 300 µg octreotide/24 h with an ambulatory pump (CADD-1 Ambulatory Infusion Pump, Pharmacia Deltec Inc, St Paul, USA).
This measurement was taken while the pump was giving octreotide.
Measurements
After an overnight fast, gall bladder volume was measured by real time ultrasonography (SDR 1500, Philips Ultrasound Inc, California, USA: 5.0 MHz transducer).
Sagittal and transverse scans of the gall bladder at its largest dimensions were obtained.
Subsequently, after consumption of a test meal, gall bladder images were made every 15 minutes for 2 hours.
These images were stored on video tape and processed by a MS-DOS computer, using a video grabber, and processing software (IBAS, Kontron GmbH, Munich, Germany).
Gall bladder volume was calculated with the sum of cylinders method.
The test meal consisted of 1 slice of white bread, 5 g margarine, 50 g cheese, 1 boiled egg, 200 ml yoghurt, and 50 g glucose.
This is equivalent to 30 g fat, 30 g protein, and 70 g carbohydrate and gives a physiologic stimulation of gall bladder contraction and cholecystokinin release.
Fasting volume (mean of measurements at 15 and 0 minutes before test meal; V in ml) and residual postprandial volume were measured as characteristic of gall bladder motility.
Residual gall bladder volume (V r e s in ml) was defined as the resulting volume after maximum response to a test teal.
In gall bladder filling after a test meal, V r e s reflects maximum gall bladder volume.
As indices of postprandial gall bladder contraction, maximum decrement of gall bladder volume in ml and percentage () and integrated gall bladder contraction (expressed as ml/120 min) were calculated.
Blood samples were taken in the fasting state, at -15 and 0 minutes and, after consumption of the test meal, every 15 minutes for 2 hours.
Blood was collected in ice chilled tubes.
Plasma was stored at -20°C until analysis.
CCK and PP plasma concentrations were measured by sensitive and specific radioimmunoassays, as described previously.
Indices of CCK and PP release were basal concentration (mean of concentrations at -15 and 0 minutes), maximum increase (), and integrated CCK and PP release (expressed as pmol/l -1 /120 min).
Plasma octreotide concentrations (pg/ml) were assessed by radioimmunoassay (Sandoz, Basle, Switzerland), immediately before consumption of the test meal (at 0 minutes) for measurements at 45 minutes, 4 hours, and 8 hours after subcutaneous octreotide injection.
Plasma octreotide concentrations during CSOI were measured in the fasting state and, after consumption of the test meal, every 30 minutes for two hours.
Statistical analysis
Results are shown as mean (SEM).
Differences between the effects of the five experimental conditions on gall bladder volume, hormone release, and octreotide values were assessed by two way repeated measures of analysis of variance.
When a statistically significant difference was detected, results were further analysed by Fishers's LSD test.
Statistical significance was defined as a two tailed probability of less than 0.05.
Results
GALL BLADDER CONTRACTION
Table II shows indices of gall bladder contraction and Figure 1 shows gall bladder contraction curves.
Without treatment, postprandial gall bladder contraction was 86.2 (2.1) % or 36.2 (5.7) ml.
Forty five minutes and four hours after subcutaneous octreotide injection (measured on separate days), postprantial gall bladder contraction was stopped.
Eight hours after octreotide injection, postprandial gall bladder contraction was partially restored.
Fasting gall bladder volume increased after injections, compared with the volume before treatment.
After two weeks of CSOI of 300 µg/24 h, fasting gall bladder volume had increased almost twofold to 81.5 (9.2) ml whereas postprandial gall bladder contraction was 50.8 (8.5) % or 39.7 (6.3) ml.
Eight hours after injection of octreotide and after two weeks of CSOI, V m a x ml (as index for the amount of bile expelled to the duodenum during a meal) was not significantly different compared with that of gall bladder contraction without treatment (Fig 2).
CHOLECYSTOKININ AND PP RELEASE
Table III shows indices of plasma CCK and PP release.
Basal CCK concentrations did not change during octreotide treatment.
Postprandial CCK release was suppressed for at least four hours after injection (Fig 3).
Eight hours after injection, integrated postprandial CCK release was not significantly different compared with the first measurement, without treatment (Fig 4).
During CSOI, postprandial CCK release was suppressed.
Integrated CCK release was only 46.0 (22.5) pmol CCK/l -1 /120 min compared with 256.8 (30.1) pmol CCK/l -1 /120 min without treatment.
Basal PP concentrations and postprandial PP release were suppressed by intermittent injections as well as by CSOI (Fig 5).
PLASMA OCTREOTIDE CONCENTRATION
Table III shows plasma octreotide concentrations.
As expected, plasma octreotide concentrations were lowest eight hours after injection.
During CSOI, octreotide concentrations were comparable with values at four hours after injection.
Octreotide concentrations dueing CSOI did not change for two hours after meal consumption (results not shown).
Discussion
This study showed that fasting gall bladder volume increased after treatment with octreotide.
Fasting gall bladder volume had virtually doubled from 42.1 ml in octreotide free conditions to 81.5 ml after two weeks of CSOI.
Increased fasting gall bladder volume during octreotide might be a result of decreased gall bladder muscle tone or because of the absence of interdigestive gall bladder contraction, which takes place in the fasting state, in close association with the intestinal migrating motor complex.
Decreased sphincter of oddi function might also account for increased fasting volume.
In comparison with a control group of 20 normal subjects, studied in our laboratory, patients with acromegaly had large fasting volumes, even without treatment (18.9 (1.6 ml)v 42.1 (6.3 ml); p<0.002).
Similarly, increased fasting gall bladder volumes have been reported in obese, tall, and muscular subjects.
Therefore, increased fasting volumes in patients with acromegaly might be explained by their large body size.
We found that patients with acromegaly not receiving treatment, were able to contract their gall bladder almost completely after a meal.
This is in agreement with other studies.
It would seem that acromegaly as such does not directly impair gall bladder contraction.
Our study also showed that postprandial gall bladder contraction was suppressed for at least four hours after octreotide injection.
Delayed gastric emptying is not responsible for this finding since octreotide, in contrast with somatostatin, slightly accelerates gastric emptying of a mixed meal.
Like others, we saw postprandial gall bladder filling rather than contraction at 45 minutes and four hours after injection.
At eight hours after injection, postprandial gall bladder contraction (ml) was not significantly different compared with contraction without treatment or with contraction after two weeks of CSOI.
This could be because of the small number of patients studied, but it is in agreement with the results of Hopman et al , who measured postprandial gall bladder contraction in patients on long term (six months) intermittent injection treatment.
At eight hours after the last injection they found 17.0 ml emptying, which was not significantly different from postprandial gall bladder contraction without treatment.
Low plasma octreotide concentration and increased fasting volume may explain improved gall bladder contraction.
Gall bladder contraction during long term treatment was still greatly suppressed (19%) at 45 minutes after injection.
This study suggests that CSOI (50.8% contraction) or adequate timing of injections with respect to meals might, at least partially, preserve gall bladder contraction and thereby might reduce the risk of gall stone formation.
After each mode of octreotide treatment, postprandial residual gall bladder volume increased.
In pregnancy and obesity, increased fasting and postprandial residual gall bladder volumes are associated with increased risk of gall stone formation.
In tall and muscular subjects, fasting and residual gall bladder volumes are also increased but, as far as known, without increased risk of gall stone formation.
Therefore, the role of increased fasting and residual gall bladder volume — as described in this study of patients with acromegaly receiving octreotide treatment — in the formation of gall stones remains uncertain.
The effect of octreotide on gall bladder motility may not be crucial in the formation of gall stones.
Somatostatin and octreotide also have an effect on bile composition.
In experiments with animals, bile salt independent canalicular flow is reduced and biliary lipid concentration is enhanced.
This increases biliary cholesterol content and favours nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate crystals.
Potential differences in this respect between intermittent octreotide injection and CSOI have yet to be studied.
Gall bladder contraction is regulated by an interaction of the myenteric plexus with intestinal hormones.
CCK is important for mediating postprandial gall bladder contraction and act in physiological doses by the cholinergic neurons of the plexus, as shown in guinea pigs.
In the same species, in vitro, somatostatin does not inhibit gall bladder contraction induced by CCK octapeptide or acetylcholine but it inhibits electrically induced gall bladder contraction, probably by a reduction of acetylcholine release.
The same finding was made in dogs.
This indicates that somatostatin — and probably also octreotide — has no direct effect on the gall bladder but exerts its inhibitory action by the myenteric plexus.
Moreover, octreotide inhibits the release of CCK from the duodenum.
PP is produced in the pancreas and its release in under cholinergic control and can be evoked by a meal.
PP inhibits gall bladder contraction by an inhibiting action on cholinergic pathways.
Postprandial PP release was at a maximum in the untreated state.
After each injection of octreotide, fasting PP concentrations and postprandial PP release were suppressed, even below basal values.
Therefore, it is concluded that increased fasting gall bladder volumes and inhibition of postprandial gall bladder contraction during octreotide treatment are not mediated by PP.
Plasma octreotide and PP concentrations confirmed patient compliance to the study protocol.
Acromegaly patients generally use three octreotide injections daily, usually given before breakfast in the morning (8:00), afternoon (16:00), and late in the evening (24:00).
This study suggests that if the early morning injection is taken after breakfast, the gall bladder can empty partially (43.4%).
Gall bladder concentration during lunch and dinner (within 4 to 6 hours of the early morning and afternoon injection), however, remains suppressed.
Good gall bladder contraction after breakfast is important because gall bladder bile has the highest cholesterol saturation index and concentration at that time and cholesterol crystals might precipitate easily.
In the subgroup of patients who are treated with two injections daily, adequate gall bladder concentration might also be achieved after dinner.
At eight hours after injection, about 70% of maximum gall bladder contraction was achieved at 45 minutes after the test meal.
This might suggest that octreotide injections should be given at least 45 minutes after a meal.
During CSOI, postprandial gall bladder contraction is partially preserved during all meals.
In conclusion, this study shows that postprandial gall bladder contraction and CCK and PP release are greatly impaired for at least four hours after injection of octreotide.
Eight hours after octreotide injection, gall bladder contraction is partially restored and CCK release is completely restored.
Also during CSOI, postprandial gall bladder contraction is partially resotred while CCK release remains low.
Prospective studies should show whether appropriate timing of octreotide injections with respect to meal ingestion, or alternative treatment schedules, like CSOI, might lessen the risk of gall stone formation during long term octreotide treatment.
Pancreatitis in Finland between 1970 and 1989
Abstract
The incidence and mortality from pancreatitis in Finland between 1970 and 1989 were studied and compared with the alcohol consumption in the country and with the incidence of liver cirrhosis and gall stone disease.
Hospital discharge data were obtained from the Finnish National Agency for Welfare and Health, the causes of deaths from the Finnish State Statistics, and annual alcohol consumption from the Finnish State Alcohol Company.
There were 56353 hospital treatment periods because of pancreatitis.
The incidence of pancreatitis discharges increased from 46.6 to 73.4/100000/year.
In men it increased from 59.1 to 113.4, but in women it remained unchanged (mean 35.0).
The incidence of pancreatitis discharges correlated with the alcohol consumption in Finland (r=0.78, p=0.0001).
The incidence of pancreatitis discharges correlated in men, but not in women, with the incidence of liver cirrhosis (r=0.81, p=0.0001).
In women, but not in men, the incidence of pancreatitis discharges correlated with the incidence of gall stone disease discharges (r=0.77, p=0.0001).
The incidence of discharges due to haemorrhagic pancreatitis and pancreatic abscess doubled in men and remained unchanged in women.
Pancreatitis death rate decreased from 5.9% (men 4.8%, women 7.0%) to 2.6% (men 2.4%, women 2.7%).
Despite numerous studies published on the incidence and mortality of pancreatitis in various hospitals, only a few epidemiological studies on large populations have been carried out.
The recent and, according to our knowledge, the only previous nationwide survey from Scotland showed an appreciable increase in the incidence of pancreatitis between 1961 and 1985.
Gall stone disease is the most common cause of pancreatitis in Scotland.
In comparison, alcohol is the most common cause of pancreatitis in patients in Finland.
In Finland alcohol consumption has shown an increase up to the 1990s, which is in contrast with other European countries.
This study was carried out to examine the two decade trends in the incidence and death from pancreatitis, and to evaluate the relations between the occurrence of pancreatitis and alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis, and gall stone disease in Finland.
Furthermore, as the amount of alcohol consumed before pancreatitis correlates with the severity markers of the disease in patients with the first acute alcoholic pancreatitis episode, the correlation between the alcohol consumption in Finland and the occurrence of severe pancreatitis in the country was also studied.
Methods
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
In Finland the selling of all alcoholicbeverages is organised and controlled by a single institution, The Finnish State Alcohol Company (Alko Ltd).
Annual sales statistics provided by Alko Ltd were used for evaluating the consumption of various alcoholic beverages in Finland between 1960–89.
The consumption was expressed as litres of ethanol per inhabitant.
About 40% of alcoholic beverages sold through retail outlets was spirits and 45% was beer in 1989.
POPULATION
The population of Finland is registered on the census list based statistics that are updated annually.
According to the official statistics the population in Finland increased from 4598300 in 1970 to 4974400 in 1989, the average annual increase being 0.4%.
The mean age of the population increased from 32 to 35 years in men and from 35 to 39 years in women during this period.
Approximately 60% of the population live in urban areas.
EPISODES OF PANCREATITIS
Annual discharges with the diagnosis of pancreatitis (ICD Code 577) during 1970–89 were obtained from the statistics of the Finnish National Agency for Welfare and Health.
These statistics account for all discharges from all the Finnish hospitals after a stay in hospital for more than one day.
From 1977 the diagnoses of acute and chronic pancreatitis could be obtained separately.
Also discharges because of acute hemorrhagic necrotising pancreatitis and pancreatic abscess could be identified separately from 1977 onwards.
These diagnoses were considered to represent severe acute pancreatitis.
Incidences were calculated as the number of annual discharges in a population of 100000 in each age and sex groups.
For comparison, the number of discharges because of liver cirrhosis (ICD code 571) and gall stone disease (ICD code 574) were also obtained, and the incidences were calculated as expressed above.
MORTALITY
The number of deaths from pancreatitis was obtained from the annual statistics of causes of death in Finland.
Death rates were calculated as the annual number of deaths in a population of 100000 in each age and sex groups.
Death rates were also calculated as the number of deaths per recorded discharge (case mortality or fatal spell ratio).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Correlations between alcohol consumption and incidences were evaluated by linear regression analysis.
Results
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
Alcohol consumption per inhabitant increased from 1.9 to 7.6 litres (fourfold increase) during 1960–89 (Fig 1).
A sharp rise in consumption occurred in 1969, when the sale of strong beer (3.8% alcohol content) was allowed in general stores.
Between 1970–89 alcohol consumption increased during 1970–74 and 1984–89, but was relatively stable during 1975–83 (Fig 1).
INCIDENCE OF PANCREATITIS
There were 56353 discharges after a stay in hospital because of pancreatitis in Finland between 1970–89.
The incidence of pancreatitis discharges in the whole population increased from 46.6 to 73.4/100000/year (by 58%) during the two decade study period (Fig 1).
The incidence increased remarkably during 1970–74 and 1987–89, but remained comparatively unchanged from 1975 to 1986.
The increase took place only in men, whereas in women the incidence slightly decreased (Fig 2).
In men 60–70% of discharges were seen among adults between 25–64 years of age (Fig 3A).
The increase in the overall incidence of pancreatitis discharges was seen predominantly in this age group (Fig 3A).
In women about half of the discharges were seen among the patients over 64 years of age (Fig 3B).
The decrease in the incidence of pancreatitis discharges in women also occurred predominantly in this age group (Fig 3B).
INCIDENCE OF CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Between 1977–89 it was possible to differentiate between discharges as a result of acute and chronic pancreatitis.
The distribution of discharges between these two diagnoses was relatively unchanged during this period (Fig 4).
The incidence of chronic pancreatitis discharges increased from 10.4 to 13.4 (increase 26%) between 1977–89).
Approximately 80% of chronic pancreatitis discharges were men.
INCIDENCE OF SEVERE ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Between 1977–89 discharges due to hemorrhagic necrotising pancreatitis and pancreatic abscess (together considered to represent severe pancreatitis) could be differentiated from mild pancreatitis.
The overall incidence of severe pancreatitis was 5.3/100000/year and accounted for 12.3% of all pancreatitis discharges.
In men the incidence of severe pancreatitis discharges was 6.6/100000/year in 1977 and 11.3/100000/ year in 1989.
The proportion of severe episodes from all pancreatitis discharges in men increased from 8.1% in 1977 to 13–4% in 1981 and remained at an average of 14.0% during the 1980s (Fig 4).
In women the incidence of severe pancreatitis discharges was 3.6/100000/year in 1977 and 3.4/100000/year in 1989, the proportion of severe episodes from all pancreatitis discharges remaining fairly stable, an average of 11.1% (Fig 4).
MORTALITY FROM PANCREATITIS
The annual number of deaths from pancreatitis decreased from 132 to 52 from 1970 to 1989, respectively (decrease 61%).
During this period the death rate from pancreatitis in the population decreased by 67% (Table).
The mortality decreased continuously in women, the decrease in the mortality in men being less prominent since 1974 (Table).
CORRELATION WITH ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION, LIVER CIRRHOSIS AND GALL STONE DISEASE
There was a strong positive correlation between the incidence of pancreatitis discharges and the alcohol consumption in Finland (r=0.78, p= 0.0001).
Alcohol consumption in Finland also correlated significantly with the incidence of chronic pancreatitis discharges (r=0.74, p= 0.004).
The incidence of discharges because of liver cirrhosis in Finland increased from 26.4 to 49.4/ 100000/year (increase 87%) from 1970 to 1989 (Fig 5).
Approximately 65% of discharges were men, and the incidence was highest amongst men aged 45–64 years (Fig 5).
The most noticeable increase in discharges as a result of liver cirrhosis occurred between 1986–89.
The alcohol consumption in Finland correlated significantly with the incidence of liver cirrhosis discharges (r=0.65, p=0.002).
The incidence of liver cirrhosis discharges correlated significantly with the incidence of pancreatitis discharges in men (r=0.81, p=0.0001), but not in women.
The incidence of discharges because of gall stone disease decreased from 368.4 to 247.4/ 100000 (decrease 33%) from 1970 to 1989 (Fig 6).
By comparison with other age and sex groups, 65 years or older men showed an increased incidence of discharges because of gall stone disease beginning from the late 1970s (Fig 6).
There was a significant positive correlation between the incidence of gall stone disease discharges and the incidence of pancreatitis discharges in women (r=0.77, p=0.0001), but not in men.
Discussion
Although acute and chronic pancreatitis are considered common diseases in many Western areas, surprisingly few epidemiological studies on large populations have been reported.
The official statistics in Finland have some major advantages for performing a nationwide epidemiological study.
Firstly, exact data on the overall population can be obtained from the annually updated census list based statistics.
Secondly, the hospital discharges with various diagnoses from all the Finnish hospitals are recorded annually.
These discharge statistics can also be obtained separately in men and women in various age groups.
Also the number of deaths with various diagnoses can be obtained from the annually updated national statistics on the causes of death.
Furthermore, as there is only one institution for controlling and selling of all alcoholic beverages in Finland, the alcohol consumption in the country can be evaluated fairly reliably.
There are still some pitfalls, however, in this kind of epidemiological study.
There may be errors in medical records or in transferring information from medical records to discharge register files.
According to a previous study from Finland, however, the accuracy of the discharge data is good, being about 90% for pancreatitis.
Because the recording system has remained unchanged throughout the study period, any changes in the data are probably not a result of errors in registration.
Furthermore, the basic diagnostic test for pancreatitis has been a measurement of serum or uring amylase activity throughout the study period.
Unfortunately, acute and chronic pancreatitis could not be separated in the discharge statistics before 1977.
Also, by comparison with Scotland, regional differences could not be studied from the Finnish discharge data.
According to this survey pancreatitis has been a comparatively common disease in Finland, the mean annual incidence of acute pancreatitis discharges being about 50/100000, and in men in 1989 even 90/100000.
This is noticeably more than in the previous European series from Nottingham (14/100000/year), Bristol (7/ 100000/year), Göttingen (21/100000/year), Glasgow (15/100000/year), Copenhagen (28/ 100000/year), and even more than in the previous survey from Western Australia (60/ 100000/year).
Comparison of the incidence of chronic pancreatitis between the various countries is not possible, because such incidences of the disease have been seldom reported.
According to international multicentre surveys by the Sarles' group, chronic pancreatitis has been found predominantly in two types of countries.
In the first type the diet is high in alcohol, protein, and lipids.
France, Italy, Portugal, Switzerland, United States, and Brazil belong to this type.
In the second type pancreatitis has been mostly related to malnutrition.
The tropical zone of Asia and Africa belong to this type.
The incidence of chronic pancreatitis in western France was estimated to average 1/100000 of population in 1970.
More recent population based studies from the Copenhagen area in the early and late 1970s showed 7–10/100000 incidence of chronic pancreatitis.
According to this study the incidence of discharges because of chronic pancreatitis range between 10–15/100000 during 1977–89 in Finland.
The incidence of pancreatitis discharges in Finland greatly increased between 1970–89, especially in men.
This increase may be caused by the increased alcohol consumption in the country because most pancreatitis episodes are caused by alcohol in Finnish studies.
It could also be because there was also a noticeable increase in the incidence of liver cirrhosis discharges during this period and the most liver cirrhosis cases are also caused by alcohol abuse in Finland.
The discharges due to these two diseases correlated with each other.
This is in agreement with the previous findings that the increase in the alcohol consumption in Finland has been particularly attributed to the increase in the number of heavy drinkers, and that the heavy drinkers are the group that may be more vulnerable to pancreatitis.
Both acute and chronic pancreatitis seemed to cause less need for a stay in hospital in Finnish women than in Finnish men.
Furthermore, in comparison with men the incidence of pancreatitis discharges in women did not increase between 1970 and 1989.
As most pancreatitis episodes in men are caused by alcohol abuse, and as the increase in the incidence of pancreatitis discharges took place particularly in men between 25–64 years of age, and this group consumes most of the alcohol in the country, it is suggested that the increased alcohol consumption and the increased incidence of pancreatitis discharges may have a causal relation.
A positive correlation between the alcohol consumption in the study area and the incidence of chronic pancreatitis has previously been seen in the Copenhagen area.
Gall stone disease is the most common cause of pancreatitis in Finnish women.
The diagnostic methods for gall stone disease have changed appreciably during the study period.
Until the late 1970s gall bladder disease has generally been diagnosed by oral cholecystography or intravenous biligraphy, but during the 1980s ultra sonography has become the preferred treatment.
Moreover, endoscopic and percutaneous cholangiography have become during the 1980s widely used methods to diagnose bile duct abnormality, including common duct stones.
These improvements in diagnosis may also have an effect on the incidence of gall stone disease discharges, and thus could cause a false impression of increase in gall stone disease discharges (Fig 5).
But, in fact, the incidence of gall stone disease discharges significantly decreased between 1970–89, except for men 65 years or older.
Thus, this decrease in the gall stone disease discharges may be real.
This may be because of a decreased gall stone disease rate, which could explain the decrease in pancreatitis discharges in women.
More efficient treatment of the gall stone disease and less need for hospital treatment, which results in fewer episodes of recurrent gall stone pancreatitis, may offer a more likely explanation.
It is not understood why the incidence of gall stone disease discharges increased in elderly men.
In elderly men the incidence of pancreatitis discharges decreased, suggesting that the cause of pancreatitis was most probably because of alcohol or a non-gall stone disease.
The hospital discharge data are based on disease episodes, not on separate patients.
Thus, the increased incidence of pancreatitis discharges may be a result of an increased number of recurrent episodes of pancreatitis, and not caused by an increased number of individual patients.
In fact, it could easily be thought that increased alcohol consumption could result just in the increased incidence of recurrent pancreatitis.
Fewer episodes in recurrent pancreatitis are as severe as in episodes of the first occurrence of pancreatitis.
Therefore one would have expected the proportion of severe pancreatitis to decrease.
The proportion of severe pancreatitis from all pancreatitis discharges, however, did not decrease, but increased between 1977–89.
This would also indirectly suggest that the number of individual patients had increased.
The incidence of severe pancreatitis discharges among adult men also correlated significantly with the alcohol consumption in the country.
Adult men consume most of the alcohol in the country.
Thus is seems that the amount of alcohol consumed may also have an effect on the severity of alcoholic pancreatitis in the total population, as well as in individual subjects.
The incidence of severe pancreattis discharges doubled in men and remained unchanged in women.
The pancreatitis related death rate, however, fell significantly in both sexes during the study period, the decrease being more noticeable in women.
This may suggest that the treatment of pancreatitis has improved.
The higher death rate in women than in men is probably because of the higher proportion of elderly patients among them.
The decrease in pancreatitis related mortality seen in this study has also taken place in Scotland and Göttingen, but not in Bristol.
In conclusion, the incidence of pancreatitis has increased, especially in men, in Finland between 1970 and 1989.
This increase is presumably related to the increased alcohol consumption in the country.
Mortality from pancreatitis has simultaneously decreased, probably because of improved treatment.
Immunocytochemical localisation of parietal cells and G cells in the developing human stomach
Abstract
Previous studies on the distribution of parietal cells and G cells in normal adult stomachs have shown that in about 20% of specimens parietal cells extended to the pylorus.
This study aimed to examine the distribution of parietal cells and G cells in the body and antrum of the developing human stomach in relation to anatomical landmarks, using histological and immunocytochemical methods.
In all 15 fetal stomachs examined parietal cells extended to the pylorus and expressed intrinsic factor and hydrogen-potassium-ATPase activity from week 13 of gestation.
By contrast, in only one of the five infant stomachs did parietal cells extend to the pylorus: this is identical to the distribution in the adult.
G cells developed in the antrum from 18 weeks' gestation and their distribution did not differ between the fetal and infant stomachs.
These findings indicate that parietal cells disappear from the antrum of the stomach in the third trimester of pregnancy, but this process fails to occur in approximately 20% of the population.
The specialised cells of the stomach, including the parietal cell (responsible for gastric acid and intrinsic factor secretion) and the G cell (gastrin producing), have been the subject of considerable study in both normal subjects and in those with peptic ulcer disease.
In adults there seem to be two anatomically distinct types of stomach.
In the first type, parietal cells are found within the corpus and G cells within the antrum, with a transitional zone on the antrum-corpus boundary containing both cell types (80% of the population).
In the second, parietal cells extend to the pylorus, but G cells are also present in the antrum (20% of the population).
This type of stomach has been referred to as having an ‘acid antrum’.
Both types of stomach are seen in patients with duodenal ulcer diseas and this is relevant to the surgical treatment of the condition since patients with acid antra may be inadequately treated by highly selective vagotomy.
Surprisingly, the origin of these two distinct types of stomach is unknown.
In this study we have mapped the location of parietal cells and G cells in the developing human stomach, using specific immunocytochemistry, in order to determine whether there are two distinct populations in the fetus or whether a change in distribution of parietal cells and G cells occurs during fetal and postnatal life.
Methods
Fifteen fetal and five infant stomachs were obtained from the University Department of Pathology and Obstetrics and Gynaecology, St James's University Hospital, Leeds.
The specimens resulted from therapeutic abortions, miscarriages, and cot deaths.
The ages of the fetuses and babies are listed in Table I. The maturity of fetuses is given in weeks of gestation since the last menstrual period and was confirmed by antenatal ultrasound assessment and fetal foot length measurements.
Infants who were studied after unexplained sudden infant death were all born at term and their ages are given as weeks of postnatal life.
The specimens were immersed in buffered formalin for a minimum of four days.
The distal pylorus and the anatomical antrum-corpus boundary (indicated by the point where the nerve of Latarjet crossed the lesser curvature) were marked with indian ink on both sides of the specimens.
Two adjacent strips containing mucosa from the corpus, antrum, and pylorus were then cut from the anterior and posterior aspects, resulting in four strips from each specimen.
Sections, 8 µ thick, were stained using haematoxylin and eosin and the peroxidase antiperoxidase technique of Sternberger.
Intrinsic factor and hydrogen-potassium ATPase activity were mapped using murine monoclonal antibodies (Dr Smolka, University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA) and gastrin activity was mapped using a rabbit antiserum to human gastrin (Dako, High Wycombe).
The second antibodies were raised in goat and swine respectively (Sigma, Poole) and complemented with rabbit and mouse peroxidase antiperoxidase complexes (Sigma).
The sections were stained with 3,3 diamino benzidine and counterstained with methyl green.
A negative control, in which the primary antibody was omitted, was performed for all sections.
The sections stained for intrinsic factor and gastrin also had negative controls in which their antisera were incubated with their respective antigens (Sigma).
All sections were viewed under a Leitz Dialux 20 EB microscope using ×50 and ×100 objectives.
The sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin and those stained for gastrin had the point at which the parietal cells stopped distally and the point at which the G cells stopped proximally marked on the surface of the slides.
As the stomachs varied greatly in size, data were normalised.
This was done by using the pylorus and the anatomical antrum-corpus boundary as reference points.
Histological findings were related to these anatomical landmarks.
The density of both cell types within the antrum of each specimen was determined by calculating the number of each cell type per high power field.
Ten measurements were made independently by two observers on each specimen and the mean was calculated.
Statistical analysis of the data was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test for non-parametric data and Spearman's rank order correlation.
Results
PARIETAL CELLS
Parietal cells were detected in all stomachs on slides stained with haematoxylin and eosin, from 13 weeks of gestation to 21 postnatal weeks.
There was a difference in the distribution of parietal cells between the fetus and infant specimens.
In all of the fetal specimens parietal cells were noted to extend from the body, through the antrum, to the pyloric region of the stomach.
In five infant stomachs studied, however, extension of parietal cells into the antrum was much more limited.
In one case parietal cells were found to extend to the pylorus, in two they extended through 20 and 22% of the antrum respectively, and in the remaining two infant specimens no parietal cells were found in the antrum.
There was great diversity in the density of parietal cells between specimens of different maturities (Fig 1).
Intrinsic factor and hydrogen-potassium ATPase activity were found in all specimens, including those of 13 and 15 weeks' gestation.
The location of this activity corresponded precisely with the location of parietal cells as determined by haematoxylin and eosin staining (Fig 2).
G CELLS
G cells could not be detected in the fetuses of 13 and 15 weeks' gestation.
By contrast, specimens from 18 gestational weeks showed gastrin activity (Fig 3), although at this stage cells were sparse.
The number of G cells then increased appreciably until 24 weeks of gestation (Fig 1).
G cells of all maturities were limited, to the anatomical antrum, and their distribution within the antrum did not differ between the fetal and infant specimens (p=0.42).
Regression analysis of the density of G cells and parietal cells sowed that there was a significant negative correlation between G cells and parietal cells, rho=-0.52(p=0.04).
None of the negative controls in which the primary antibody was omitted showed any staining after the application of 3,3 diamino benzadine.
This was also true when gastrin and intrinsic factor were incubated together with their respective antibodies.
Discussion
This study shows that parietal cells, with their specialised functions of acid and intrinsic factor secretion, are present from 13 weeks of gestation, and at this stage these cells occupy the whole stomach.
Our results, therefore, agree with those of previous investigators who have noted that parietal cells are present in fetal stomachs from 11 gestational weeks as differentiated epithelial cells which represent adult parietal cells in both structure and histochemical staining.
By contrast, the G cells are not detectable until 18 weeks of gestation and develop entirely within the anatomical antrum.
Interestingly, this is the period in which parietal cells disappear from the same anatomical site in most subjects.
Previous studies in the adult have shown that where the parietal cells retain their ‘embryological’ distribution, the G cells are relatively sparse.
It is interesting to speculate that in the fetus the G cells may, by a means yet to be identified, lead to the disappearance of parietal cells in their immediate vicinity.
This is supported by our observation that the G cell and parietal cell densities were negatively correlated.
Hydrogen-potassium ATPase, necessary for the secretion of hydrogen ions, is present from the 13th gestational week in a functional form.
The timing of active hydrogen ion secretion, however, remains unknown.
Gastric acid has been shown during the first hour of life in both term and preterm infants of more than 32 weeks gestation.
No data are available on acid secretion by more immature infants.
In 1971, using a radioimmunoassay technique on homogenised tissue, Schwarz and Weber suggested that intrinsic factor may be present in fetal stomachs from at least 13 weeks of gestation.
We have shown, using immunohistochemistry, that intrinsic factor is present in parietal cells from 13 weeks of gestation.
This does not merely indicate that the framework for intrinsic factor production is in place but that it is being produced actively by the parietal cell from the end of the first trimester.
G cells have been found inthe duodenum from 10 gestational weeks and in much lower numbers in the antrum from 19 gestational weeks.
This agrees with our localisation of gastrin producing cells from 18 gestational weeks.
The role of peptide hormones produced by endocrine cells in fetal development is incompletely understood at present in both experimental animals and humans.
It seems probable, however, that since factors such as gastrin are being produced by the developing stomach from about 18 gestational weeks, they may have a role in the development of the gastrointestinal tract.
This is consistent with observations of Schulles et al on fetal sheep in which gastrin has been detected in the gastric juices at a time when the intragastric acidity is low.
The authors argue that ‘gastrin in fetal juice could have a unique role in the in utero development of the gastrointestinal tract’.
Indeed, if the developing human fetus provides some of its own nutrition, digestive enzymes may need to be synthesised and secreted during interuterine life.
From the small number of neonatal stomachs examined it seems that the distribution of parietal cells remains constant after birth, and so it appears reasonable to assume that a definite change in distribution of parietal cells must occur during the third trimester.
This period coincides with the development of G cells within the antrum.
Circulating gastrin is trophic to parietal vells, but its paracrine effects are unknown.
It may be that the high local concentrations of gastrin, or another factor produced by the G cell, is responsible for the loss of parietal cells.
Alternatively, the development of G cells and the oss of parietal cells may be the result of other, as yet unidentified, factors.
Why the process fails in 20% of the population is unclear but it has been noted that in patients with acid antra, G cells are qualitatively sparse.
Further understanding of the processes and growth factors involved in gastric epithelial development in the fetus may allow the exact mechanisms to be elucidated.
Influence of Helicobacter pylori , sex, and age on serum gastrin and pepsinogen concentrations in subjects without symptoms and patients with duodenal ulcers
Abstract
The relation between Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) infecton and fasting gastrin and pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations was evaluated in 278 volunteers without symptoms and the results were compared with the values obtained in 35 patients with duodenal ulcers.
H pylori infection was determined with the C-urea breath test in subjects without symptoms and with endoscopy, biopsy (histology and culture), and quick urease test (CLO-test) in patients with duodenal ulcers.
Gastrin and pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations were assayed with specific radioimmunoassay systems.
The results clearly indicate that fasting gastrin and pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations were significantly higher in H pylori positive compated with H pylori negative subjects.
Neither age nor sex affected basal gastrin and pepsinogen concentrations in H pylori negative subjects.
Fasting gastrin, pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations in serum samples were similar in H pylori positive persons with no symptoms and those with duodenal ulcers suggesting that similar mechanisms are involved in increasing plasma concentrations of these variables in both populations.
Hypergastrinaemia and hyperpepsinogenaemia are therefore probably secondary to active H pylori infection.
Colonisation of the gastric mucosa by Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) is associated with chronic gastritis and peptic ulcer disease, but the role of H pylori in the pathogenesis of peptic ulcer disease is still unclear.
Thus although eradication of H pylori has been shown to dramatically reduce ulcer relapse rates, we still do not know how H pylori causes ulcers.
Besides H pylori , aggressive factors (acid, pepsin) are necessary for peptic ulcer pathogenesis.
Measurement of serum gastrin and pepsinogen concentrations is considered a diagnostic tool to indirectly assess these factors.
Information on the interrelations between H pylori , chronic gastritis, and circulating gastrin or pepsinogen concentrations seems, however, confusing and in particular, there is no consensus on how the mechanisms interact.
Recently, it has been suggested that in humans gastric acid and serum pepsinogen secretion rates increase with age as does the prevalence of H pylori infection.
Although H pylori infection was associated with decreased acid secretion rates in the few subjects studied, serum gastrin concentrations surprsingly did not differ between H pylori positive and H pylori negative sugjects.
The aim of this study was therefore to further explore the potential relation between serum gastrin and pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations and H pylori infection in a large number of H pylori positive and H pylori negative, subjects without symptoms and to compare the results with those in patients with duodenal ulcers.
We also aimed to re-evaluate the effects of age and sex on these variables.
Methods
The study was approved by the human research and review committees of the participating centres and subjects gave written informed consent.
SUBJECTS WITHOUT SYMPTOMS
Caucasian subjects without symptoms and without a history of dyspepsia, peptic ulcer disease, or other upper gastrointestinal symptoms or abdominal surgery (with the exception of appendectomy) were carefully recruited by word of mouth among cowirkers, relatives, and friends of the investigators, and fellow workers.
Some elderly subjects were recruited from senior citizens' homes or choirs.
No one had taken any antacids, bismuth preparations, or other drugs to treat dyspepsia within the past year and nobody was taking antibiotics during the three months before the study.
The 278 vonunteers thus recruited comprised 155 men aged 21 to 91 years (median 42 years) and 123 women aged 18 to 83 years (median 43 years).
After an overnight fast, a C-ura breath test (UBT) was performed according to published methods and a plasma sample was obtained for gastrin, pepsinogen-I, and pepsinogen-II determinations.
The plasma was stored at -20°C until analysis.
PATIENTS WITH DUODENAL ULCERS
Patients referred for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy because of suspected duodenal ulcers were invited to participate in the study.
The patients gave written informed consent.
Exclusion criteria included previous gastric surgery, known bleeding diathesis, oral anticoagulation, or recent (during the three months before the study) treatment with bismuth compounds, antisecretory agents (H 2 antagonists, omeprazole), or antibiotics.
Thirty five patients with duodenal ulcer at endoscopy were finally included (30 men aged 20 to 60 years, median 36 years; five women aged 26 to 50 years, median 36 years).
During endoscopy, performed in the morning after an overnight fast, five biopsies were taken from the antrum for the detection of H pylori : one for a quick urease test (CLO-test), two for culture with standard methods, and two for histology.
The endoscopes were sterilised after each examination according to local standards; the biopsy forceps were sterilised by autoclaving.
Based on these tests, all 35 subjects could be unequivocally classified as H pylori positive.
A plasma sample was taken for gastrin, pepsinogen-I, and pepsinogen-II determinations and stored at -20°C until analysis.
GASTRIN RADIOIMMUNOASSAY
Radioimmunoassay of coded serum samples was performed as described recently.
PEPSINOGEN-I AND -II RADIOIMMUNOASSAY
Radioimmunoassay for serum pepsinogen-I and -II of coded seum samples was performed with commercial kits (Pepsik-I and -II, SORIN Biomedica, Saluggia, Italy).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For each variable examined, the difference between men and women was tested for significance by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test.
Differences in each variable among H pylori positive subjects (men or women) and H pylori negative subjects (men or women) were tested by analysis of variance.
If this step showed a significant difference for the variable examined, then pairs of subgroups were examined by the Newman-Keuls post hoc test.
Differences in proportions in H pylori positive and H pylori negative subjects were evaluated by χ 2 test.
Correlation coefficients were calculated by Pearson's method.
A p value <0.05 was considered significant.
Results
SUBJECTS WITHOUT SYMPTOMS
H pylori
H pylori infection was present in 62 of 278 subjects — that is, in 22% of the population studied (fig 1).
The frequency fo H pylori infection in men and women was similar and increased with age as previously reported.
Gastrin
Basal serum gastrin concentrations were significantly higher in H pylori positive than in H pylori negative subjects (p<0.001).
Age and sex did not significantly affect basal gastrin concentrations (table, fig 2), irrespective of H pylori state.
Pepsinogen concentrations
Basal serum pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations were significantly higher in H pylori positive than in H pylori negative subjects (table, fig 3).
There was a significant decrease in the ratio of pepsinogen-I to pepsinogen-II in H pylori positive compared with H pylori negative subjects (p<0.001), because in H pylori positive subjects the increase in pepsinogen-II was more pronounced than the increase in pepsinogen-I.
As with serum gastrin, neither age not sex influenced serum pepsinogen concentrations.
PATIENTS WITH DUODENAL ULCERS
H pylori
All 35 patients with duodenal ulcers were clearly identified as H pylori positive (35 positive by culture, 35 positive by histology, 34 positive in the CLO-test).
Gastrin
As there were only five women with duodenal ulcer disease and as there were no differences apparent, the results shown in the table are pooled for male and female patients.
Basal serum gastrin concentrations were similar in patients with duodenal ulcers compared with H pylori positive subjects without symptoms, but were significantly (p<0.001) higher than in H pylori negative subjects without symptoms (table).
There was no effect of age on basal serum gastrin concentrations (data not shown).
Pepsinogen concentrations
Pepsinogen-I and pepsinogen-II concentrations in patients with duodenal ulcers were again similar to the values found in H pylori positive, subjects without symptoms, but significantly higher than those in H pylori negative subjects.
Again, no age dependence was detectable (data not shown).
Discussion
The effect of age and sex on basal serum gastrin and pepsinogen secretion in healthy people as well as in patients with duodenal ulcers has been investigated previously by different groups.
Most of them did not control for a possible confounding effect of H pylori infection.
Moreover, in a recent study it was suggested that aging is associated with increasing gastrin and pepsinogen secretion in humans, particularly in men.
Although infection with H pylori was associated with lower acid secretion rates, no differences in basal gastrin concentrations were found between H pylori positive and H pylori negative subjects.
Only 11 subjects with H pylori infection were examined in the study, however.
Here we have examined a large group of subjects without symptoms covering a broad age range and in whom the H pylori state was known.
Our findings can be summarised as:(1) basal gastrin and pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations were significantly influenced by H pylori infection, being higher in H pylori positive compared with H pylori negative subjects;(2) in a large group of H pylori negative subjects, neither age nor sex affected basal serum gastrin or pepsinogen concentrations.
In the present study, 62 of 278 Swiss subjects with no symptoms were H pylori positive (22%).
This figure is comparable with data from other industrialised countries such as Great Britain, the United States, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand with an apparent overall prevalence of 15–25%.
Similarly, age was associated with an increase in H pylori prevalence, but the peak of H pylori positive subjects was found in the group aged between 50 and 60 years, whereas the rate tended to be lower in older subjects.
This phenomenon as been noted previously by other groups and could be associated with progression of the chronic H pylori gastritis to atrophic gastritis in elderly people, because severe gastric atrophy seems to make the stomach inhospitable to H pylori .
Alternatively, as teeth and gums have been proposed to act as a reservoir of H pylori infection, people becoming more edentulous with increasing age may lose their H pylori reservoir.
The present study has also confirmed that H pylori affects circulating gastrin concentrations.
Gastrin is a gut hormone produced by G cells located in the gastric antrum.
The factors that regulate gastrin secretion are complex.
Here we add to the complex as we have clearly shown that basal gastrin concentrations are neither affected by age nor by sex, but are influenced by H pylori .
As basal gastrin levels can be returned to normal with eradication of H pylori , the data indicate that the increase in gastrin is induced by the infection.
These findings have physiological and clinical implications.
Firstly,H pylori infection apparently interfers with the physiological mechanisms regulating gastrin release.
Future studies evaluating mechanisms of gastrin release have to take into account the H pylori state.
Secondly, high gastrin concentrations may induce increased parietal cell mass and acid secretion, which in turn could contribute to the pathogenesis of duodenal ulceration.
It has, however, not been shown up to now that eradication of H pylori modifies parietal cell mass or acid secretion rates.
Recent work has focused on the gastrin acid secretion feedback loop and identified a number of potential pathogenetic pathways.
The finding of enhanced fasting gastrin concentrations in H pylori positive subjects and in duodenal ulcer disease cannot easily be explained.
Firstly,H pylori could increase gastrin release by production of ammonia through its enzyme urease.
This would raise the pH within the antrum mucus layer, which in turn would prevent inhibition of gastrin release through a feedback mediated mechanism by low intragastric acidity.
Secondly, gastrin concentrations could be increased through local inflammation as gastrin concentrations are also increased in patients with non- H pylori induced gastritis.
Beardshall and coworkers have shown that suppression of H pylori with tripotassium dicitratobismuthate and metronidazole decreased the response of gastrin to gastrin releasing peptide stimulation.
These findings support the hypothesis that H pylori colonisation is directly involved in the hypergastrinaemia.
Bismuth has, however, effects on the gastric mucosa apart from that on H pylori .
It is therefore possible that the changes found in the study of Beardshall et al are not related to suppression of H pylori although this remains the most likely explanation.
Further studies are still necessary to determine the mechanism by which H pylori increases fasting plasma gastrin concentrations in H pylori positive subjects and in patients with duodenal ulcer disease.
In the present study we also analysed the relation between active H pylori infection and serum pepsinogen-I and pepsinogen-II concentrations.
Both pepsinogens are present in the chief cells of the oxyntic glands of the gastric corpus mucosa, but only pepsinogen-II is present in the gastric antrum.
We found that the serum concentrations of both pepsinogens were increased in persons without symptoms but with active H pylori infection compared with those without H pylori .
Interestingly, the effect was more pronounced with pepsinogen-II, indicating the diffuse antral gastritis leads either to increased pepsinogen-II secretion or to increased leakage of pepsinogen-II into the circulation.
Althugh the mechanism by which H pylori infection produces hyperpepsinogenaemia remains unknown, it has been shown before that patients with gastritis have increased serum pepsinogen concentrations.
In fact, measurement of pepsinogen concentrations had been proposed as a method for screening of gastritis.
We have shown that the serum pepsinogen-I: -II ratio is significantly lower in H pylori positive subjects than in uninfected persons.
Again, neither age nor sex affected pepsinogen-I or pepsinogen-II concentrations.
The distribution and severity of chronic gastritis induced by H pylori in patients with duodenal ulcer disease seems to be different from those in H pylori positive subjects without symptoms.
It might be anticipated, therefore, that the pattern of gastrin and pepsinogen would differ in H pylori positive subjects without symptoms and in patients with duodenal ulcers.
We have shown, however, that basal gastrin pepsinogen-I and -II concentrations are similar in these groups, suggesting that similar mechanisms are involved in increasing plasma concentrations of gastrin and pepsinogen in both populations.
Similar results have recently been published for basal gastrin concentrations in a small group of subjects matched for sex and age.
In summary,H pylori infection is associated with increases in basal gastrin and pepsinogen-I, and pepsinogen-II concentrations.
Basal gastrin and pepsinogen-I, and pepsinogen-II concentrations were not influenced by sex or age and were similar in patients with duodenal ulcers and in H pylori infected volunteers without symptoms, suggesting that hypergastrinaemia and hyperpepsinogaenemia are secondary to active H pylori infection.
Transjugular intrahepatic portasystemic stent shunting for control of acute and recurrent upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage related to portal hypertension
Abstract
The insertion of a transjugular intrahepatic portasystemic stent shunt (TIPSS) was evaluated in 22 patients with recurrent upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage related to portal hypertension (bleeding from oesophageal varices 10, gastric varices six, portal hypertensive gastropathy six).
TIPSS was successfully performed electively in 15 patients and as an emergency in three patients.
Twelve patients have had no further admissions with bleeding after TIPSS.
Single episodes of bleeding were noted in six patients after TIPSS associated with shunt thrombosis (two), intimal hyperplasia within the shunt (two), and shunt migration (one).
Another patient presented with reaccumulated ascites suggesting poor shunt function but died from massive variceal haemorrhage before further assessment could be performed.
There was one death related to the procedure.
Two patients developed encephalopathy after TIPSS, in one patient this was controlled by the insertion of a smaller diameter stent within the existing TIPSS.
Several complications arose in earlier patients that have not recurred after modification of the initial technique.
TIPSS can be life saving and is effective in controlling variceal haemorrhage and rebleeding from oesophageal or gastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy.
Larger and longer term studies are required, however, to define the role of TIPSS in the overall management of such patients.
Many treatments have evolved over the last 30 years for controlling upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
Bleeding varices may be controlled initially by pharmacological measures, balloon tamponade, endoscopic sclerotherapy, oesophageal transection, or emergency portasystemic shunt surgery.
The problem of rebleeding remains, however, except in patients treated with shunt surgery.
Long term oral propranolol treatment or repeated endoscopic injection sclerotherapy are similarly effective in reducing rebleeding that still occurs in up to 60% of patients and neither have been shown consistently to improve survival.
Non-emergency portasystemic shunt surgery is effective in preventing rebleeding but is still associated with high perioperative mortality in Child's grade C patients and postoperative encephalopathy occurs in up to 40% of patients.
A percutaneous transjugular technique for placement of an intrahepatic portasystemic shunt was first described in animals in 1969.
Subsequent modifications in the technique resulted in long term maintenance of shunt patency and infrequent migration of the internal stents.
Early experience with the technique in patients was disappointing.
Balloon catheters were used to dilate the intrahepatic parenchymal fistulous tracts but metallic stents were not available and long term patency was not maintained.
A transjugaulr intrahepatic portasystemic stent shunt (TIPSS), inserting metallic expandable stents, was first described in 1989 in a patient with Child's C alcoholic cirrhosis and recurrent bleeding from oesophageal varices.
After successful TIPSS, the portal pressure gradient fell from 38 to 18 mm Hg and no further haemorrhage occurred.
Unfortunately, the patent died from septicaemia 11 days after TIPSS but postmortem examination of the stent showed internal epithelialisation and continued patency.
Subsequent reports have shown TIPSS to be a safe and effective method for treating recurrent variceal haemorrhage and cases of encephalopathy after TIPSS are rare.
We report here our early experience of TIPSS in 22 patients with recurrent upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage related to portal hypertension.
Patients and methods
Table I shws details of patients.
The indications for TIPSS were bleeding from gastric varices (six patients) or recurrent bleeding from oesophageal varices that had not responded to repeated injection sclerotherapy (10 patients, number of bleeds two to more than 10 before TIPSS).
TIPSS was performed in six patients with bleeding from portal hypertensive gastropathy that required recurrent transfusions, in whom propranolol was contraindicated or ineffective.
In four patients TIPSS was attempted as an emergency procedure; the remaining procedures were performed electively.
The basic TIPSS technique used incorporated modifications similar to those described by Zemel et al and Rössle et al , based on the original method of Richter and are described in detail in our previous report.
Intravenous midazolam and pethidine were used to provide sedation and analgesia throughout the procedure.
During the procedure the patients received oxygen (2 litres/minute), via nasal cannulae and heart rate and oxygen saturation were monitored continuously.
After cleaning and draping the right side of the neck in a sterile fashion, local anaesthetic (1% lignocaine) was instilled and a 10 French 35 cm long sheath (William Cook, Europe) was inserted into the right internal jugular vein.
The right or middle hepatic vein was then catheterised under fluoroscopic screening and thetip of the sheath advanced into the hepatic veing.
A 16 gauge 56 cm reversed bevel curved transjugular liver biopsy needle (William Cook, Europe) was introduced through the sheath into the hepatic vein, directed anteriorly, and advanced through the liver parenchyma to puncture a large portal vein branch.
Successful cannulation of the portal vein was preceded by a characteristic ‘give’.
A stiff guidewire was then passed through the transjugular biopsy needle into the superior mesenteric vein (Fig 1), the needle removed, and a catheter introduced over the wire into the portal vein.
Correct placement of the catheter was confirmed by portography (Fig 2) and direct portal venous pressure measurement was recorded.
In the first five patients and patient 12 a percutaneous transhepatic catheter was placed into the portal vein to act as a target for the transjugular needle.
In the other patients a portagram alone, visualised by mesenteric angiography on the previous day, was used for guidance.
The transhepatic parenchymal tract was subsequently dilated wth an 8 mm angioplasty balloon; on initial inflation a characteristic sharp waste related to the dense periportal fibrosis was seen (Fig 3).
After adequate dilatation of the tract, patency was maintained by the insertion of one or more Palmaz stents (Johnson and Johnson Interventional Systems, Edinburgh, UK) to cover the tract from portal to hepatic veing (Fig 4).
After dilatation of the stents to 8 mm, repeat measurements of portal pressure were made and the stents progressively dilated until the portal pressure gradient (direct portal pressure minus free hepatic venous pressure) fell below 15 mm Hg.
The procedure took between two and six hours, less in the later cases.
The most time consuming part was related to transjugular cannulation of the portal vein.
After the procedure the patients were monitored for evidence of bleeding and prophylactic antibiotic (cefotaxime) was administered for 48 hours.
Results
Table II shows the procedures undertaken and results of attempted TIPSS.
In four patients the TIPSS was attempted as an emergency procedure and was successful in three cases.
A successful TIPSS procedure was performed electively in 15 of 18 patients.
for anatomical reasons it proved impossible to cannulate the portal vein in four patients, two were referred for surgical intervention, and one patient has required further admission for transfusion because of bleeding from portal gastropathy.
One death related to the procedure occurred in patient 9 who had a small shrunken liver, gross ascites, and a coagulopathy not completely reversed by vitamin K and fresh frozen plasma.
Six hours after the attempted TIPSS the patient developed fatal intraperitoneal haemorrhage from the liver parenchyma.
A number of complications prompted modification of ouroriginal technique.
In patient 2 the tip of a fine 0.018 inch gauge guidewire was amputated in the liver parenchyma.
Although this resulted in no clinical sequelae and did not migrate, we have subsequently abandoned the use of fine guidewires.
In the same patient haemoperitoneum and haemothorax occurred and in a further patient a large subcutaneous haematoma was seen.
These were treated conservatively and no transfusions were required.
These complications were related to the percutaneous transhepatic insertion of a catheter into the portal vein to act as a target for the transjugular biopsy needle.
Use of the portagram alone for guidance eliminated these complications.
Before routine use of prophylactic antibiotics we noted two infective complications, namely Straphylococcal septicaemia and cellulitis at the jugular vein puncture site; both responded promptly to appropriate antibiotic treatment.
Haemobilia after puncture of the biliary tree was seen in patient 6 and settled with conservative management.
In the same patient mild clinical encephalopathy developed three days after TIPSS.
This resolved with protein restriction and oral lactulose but recurred one month later and required readmission to hospital.
The shunt size was reduced by placing an 8 mm stent within the 10 mm stent with clinical improvement (Fig 5) allowing the patient to be discharged.
One month after TIPSS, patient presented with mild clinical encephalpathy, this did not require hospital admission and was controlled by protein restriction and lactulose.
In 12 patients no further bleeding has been found during follow up(range 1–15 months).
In patients with ascites there was resolution with a reduction in weight and a reduced requirement for diuretics.
No deterioration in hepatic synthetic function occurred following successful TIPSS (Table III).
Patient 1 was admitted with reaccumulated ascites suggested poor shunt function.
Although transabdominal ultrasound showed flow through the shunt, the patient died from massive variceal haemorrhage before further assessment could be undertaken.
Post morten examination showed the shunt to be patient.
Patient 2 was readmitted two months after TIPSS with a further bleed from oesophageal varices.
Portography showed that the two stents inserted did not completely cover the parenchymal tract between the portal and hepatic veins and occlusion had occurred.
A third stent was deployed more proximally and the stents further dilated from 8 to 10 mm resulting in a satisfactory pressure gradient of 14 mm Hg.
During the past 10 months of follow up this patient, who had bled on 11 occasions over the previous six months, has not required further admission with recurrent haemorrhage.
Single episodes of haemorrhage have been noted in four other patients related to shunt thrombosis (two), internal hyperplasia within the shunt (one), and shunt migration (one).
In the patient with intimal hyperplasia, angioplasty dilatation of the shunt reduced portal pressure and there was no further bleeding.
In the patient with migration of the TIPSS deployment of a further stent has resulted in no further bleeding.
One patient with shunt thrombosis has had a CVA and no attempt has been made to recannulise the shunt.
The other patient has had successful recannulisation of his shunt and no further bleeding.
Follow up assessment of shunt patency has been undertaken using transabdominal ultrasound.
In those in whom this failed to identify flow within the stent, transoesophageal duplex ultrasound was performed and has been particularly useful in obese patients.
One patient had reaccumulated ascites but ultrasound showed good shunt flow.
Portography was undertaken that showed hepatic vein stenosis.
This was successfully treated by the insertion of a Palmaz stent within the hepatic vein.
Discussion
This paper details our experience with the TIPSS procedure.
We have successfully carried out this procedure in 18 patients.
In four patients cannulation of the portal vein was impossible for anatomical reasons.
The indications for insertion of TIPSS in our series were recurrent bleeding from oesophageal varices despite injection sclerotherapy, bleeding gastric varices, and portal gastropathy.
Bleeding from gastric varices responds poorly to injection sclerotherapy and often requires surgical intervention.
Similarly, bleeding from oesophageal varices that have not responded to repeated sessions of injection sclerotherapy is a further indication for surgical intervention.
Despite the short duration of follow up, we have been impressed with the effectiveness of TIPSS in controlling recurrent haemorrhage from oesophageal or gastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy.
We have experienced one death related to the procedure in a patient with coagulopathy, massive ascites, and a shrunken right lobe of liver.
Complications have also occurred that caused us to modify our original technique; namely to abandon ultrafine guidewires, to use a reverse bevelled transjugular biopsy needle, and to avoid the percutaneous transhepatic placement of portal catheters for guidance.
Two of our patients developed infective omplications and we now use prophylactic antibiotics during and for 48 hours after the procedure.
In previously reported series encephalopathy after successful TIPSS is rare.
This may be related to the maintenance of hepatopetal portal blood flow as well as the small diameter of the shunt.
We have noticed this complication in two elderly patients.
Reduction of the diameter of the shunt by inserting an 8 mm stent within the original 10 mm stent resulted in improvement in encephalopathy in the more severe case.
Clearly this important complication requires careful study with electrocephalography and psychometric testing before and after the procedure and longer term follow up.
The use of TIPSS would seem to be a valid alternative to surgery and has several advantages over either esophageal transection or surgical shunts.
Firstly, TIPSS avoids a general anaesthetic, laparotomy, and disruption of the hepatic portal venous system that may adversely affect subsequent hepatic transplantation.
TIPSS have been performed on patients without interfering with successful transplantation.
Secondly, dilatation of the stents allows a graduated and controlled reduction in portal pressure.
Aiming for a portal pressure gradient of 12–15 mm Hg might allow control of haemorrhage without inducing a high incidence of encephalopathy.
Should this particular complication occur after creation of a successful shunt, it can be improved as described for patient 6.
As experience with TIPSS increases, so the indications for this procedure may expand.
Improvement of ascites was found after TIPSS associated with a diuresis and it may, therefore, be useful in patients with intractable ascites.
TIPSS could be undertaken in the acute situation or soon after haemostatic injection sclerotherapy for the index bleed in patients with a high risk of rebleeding but this requires evaluation in controlled trials.
TIPSS may also become the treatment of choice for bleeding from portal hypertensive gastropathy in patients intolerant of propranolol and in the uncommon cases of patients bleeding from varices at ectopic sites.
Other workers have undertaken TIPSS before closure of a surgical portasystemic shunt in a patient with chronic encephalopathy.
In summary, we have successfully carried out TIPSS in 18 patients with control of bleeding from gastric or esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy.
Ascites improved when it was present.
The complications found have prompted alterations in technique to minimise the procedure related morbidity.
We believe TIPSS to be a valuable treatment in the management of selected patients with gastrointestinal bleeding associated with portal hypertension but fuller evaluation of its indications, safety, and efficacy is required before it is adopted into general clinical practice.
Non-deglutitive motor activity of the oesopagus
Non-deglutitive motor activity of the oesophagus is usually considered a sign of disordered motility.
The absence of spontaneous contractions in the normal gullet is related to the nature of the oesophageal smooth muscle cells, which have a stable membrane potential and do not show the characteristic slow wave activity found elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract.
In pathological conditions such as achalasia and, to a lesser degree diffuse oesophageal spasm, non-deglutitive motor activity occurs particularly when there is stasis of food in the oesophagus.
When treatment results in disappearance of food stasis, the non-deglutitive simultaneos contractions disappear as well.
Recent findings show that, in addition to these well known tertiary contractions, several other types of non-deglutitive motor activity exist, even in healthy subjects.
In 1986 Clouse and Ferney described a manometric abnormality they termed rhythmic spontaneous contractions.
This pattern consisted of a sequence of reptitive contractions that originated immediately below the region of the upper oesophageal sphincter.
Some rhythmic sequences were initiated by swallows, but others were not related to deglutition.
Some rhythmic contraction waves propagated a short distance into the proximal oesophagus.
Other rhythmic sequences consisted of repetitive simultaneous contractions in the uppermost portion of the gullet.
The rhythms varied from eight to 16 per minute.
These contraction sequences were associated with long periods of increased baseline pressure in the distal oesophagus.
The technique did not determine whether this was due to failed propulsion of a swallowed bolus or to a common cavity phenomenon due to transient relaxation of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
In 1987 Kahrilas et al reported a patient who was unable to belch.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux of gas resulted in a peculiar manometric pattern consisting of repetitive peristaltic pressure waves that were not related to swallowing.
This could be precipitated by instillation of 210 ml of air into the stomach.
Combined fluoroscopic and manometric findings showed that transient relaxations of the lower oesophageal sphincter resulted in gastro-oesophageal reflux of gas with distension of the oesophageal lumen as was evident by the 10–15 mm Hg oesophageal common cavity pressure.
These oesophageal distensions did not cause relaxations of the upper oesophageal sphincter but elicited secondary oesophageal persitaltic contractions, which in turn resulted in clearance of gas from the oesophageal body.
This sequence was repeated several times at a rhythm of nine per minute.
In 1989 Nixon and Koch described a manometric pattern they termed recurrent autonomous oesophageal peristalsis.
The pattern was seen in five patients; four of them had reflux oesophagitis, one had symptoms suggestive of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The pattern consisted of repetitive peristaltic contractions in the body of the oesophagus not related to swallowing and occurring at a rhythm of four to eight contractions per minute and lasting for periods of two to eight minutes.
In four of the five patients an increase in baseline pressure of 5–10 mm Hg preceded the peristaltic contractions.
These repetitive non-deglutitive peristaltic contractions were probably induced by gastro-oesophageal reflux of acid or gas in at least four of the five patients.
In 1989 Shay et al found a manometric pattern they termed cycling in patients with documented gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
Peristaltic or simultaneous oesophageal contractions occurred in clusters of four or more repetitive waves and lasted for several minutes.
The contraction peaks were preceded by a pressure plateau of 5–10 mm Hg.
These clustered contractions nearly always developed at a time when the lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was below 5 mm Hg.
Scintigraphic findings during simultaneously manometry and pH monitoring indicated that cycling resulted from repeated reflux events and their oesophageal clearance.
The clearing contractions were either induced by swallows or elicited by oesophageal distension due to refluxed acid or gas.
When repeated reflux episodes resulted in repetitive simultaneous oesophageal contractions that followed each other at short intervals, the pattern resembled that seen in primary oesophageal motility disorders.
Cycling was noted in 18 to 52 patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease; 17 of them had oesophagitis.
Moreover, cycling occurred in nine of 10 patients with Barrett's oesophagus.
The manometric patterns described in the four papers have some features in common.
In all four clustered contractions were reported, which may or may not be related to swallowing, which may be peristaltic in nature, or which develop simultaneously at different levels of the oesophagus.
In most patients there is evidence that the pattern is elicited by gastro-oesophageal reflux of acid or gas.
The repeated reflux of gas was clearly shown in the patient with dysfunction of the belch reflex.
Cycling was also definitely related to gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The contractions occurring during episodes of recurrent autonomous oesophageal peristalsis were preceded by a small pressure plateau in four of the five patients.
This, together with the fact that all four patients had evidence of reflux oesophagitis, suggests that the contractions were induced by gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The rhythmic spontaneous contractions in the upper oesophagus may also have been related to acid gastro-oesophageal reflux, because sometimes the contraction sequences were preceded by increased oesophageal baseline pressure (due to a common cavity phenomenon or inadequate clearance of the swallowed bolus); moreover half of the patients had signs of reflux oesophagitis.
When the repetitive contractions are peristaltic and are preceded by a small pressure plateau suggestive of a common cavity phenomenon, the relation to gastro-oesophageal reflex is clear.
In some cases, however, the clustered contractions appear as a series of tertiary contractions of the type often found in primary oesophageal motility disorders.
Simultaneous pH measurements or monitoring of lower oesophageal sphincter pressure may then be required to identify the true nature of the phenomenon.
The phenomenon reported in the paper by Janssens et al in this issueis of a different nature.
All subjects included in the study were healthy young persons without any symptoms related to the oesophagus.
The contractions were not related to swallowing and usually consisted of several bursts of contractions, each burst composed of two to five simultaneous contractions of rather low amplitude (20 mm Hg).
This pattern was limited to the distal, smooth muscle portion of the oesophagus.
It usually coincided with the end of phase 2 or with phase 3 of the migrating motor complex in lower oesophageal sphincter and stomach.
Such a pattern of non-deglutitive, simultaneous repetitive contractions could easily be misinterpreted as a sign of primary or secondary oesophageal motility disorder.
The mechanism of this phenomenon remains unknown.
There was no manometric evidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux in these subjects preceding the onset of the contraction bursts.
Whether motilin is involved remains to be determined.
It seems, therefore, that a pattern of clustered simultaneous contractions, not induced by deglutition, may be seen not only in disorders of primary oesophageal motility but also in patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux of acid or gas.
In both instances the stimulus eliciting this non-deglutitive motor activity is continuous or repeated distention of the oesophagus by swallowed or refluxed material.
A third type of non-deglutitive motor activity in the smooth muscle portion of the oesophagus is probably the oesophageal component of phase 2 and phase 3 of the migrating motor complex.
Now that ambulatory manometry has become available, it is necessary to identify these patterns if perfectly normal oesophageal migrating motor complex activity is not to be interpreted as a sign of oesophageal motility disorders or as a cause of oesophageal chest pain.
In this context attention is drawn to the fact that 24 hour ambulatory pressure monitoring indicates that non-sequential (simultaneous) pressure peaks are often found in normal subjects.
Before redefining the upper limit of normal for the incidence of non-peristaltic deglutitive pressure waves, it seems appropriate to point out some fundamental shortcomings in the technique of prolonged recording that may lead to erroneous conclusions.
The most important limitation of presently available systems is the lack of a reliable deglutitive signal.
Consequently, available prolonged oesophageal manometric recordings cannot differentiate between deglutitive and non-deglutitive motor activity and they are unable to distinguish multiple pressure peaks induced by a single deglutition from a pressure complex induced by repetitive swallowing, or to separate dry swallows from wet or solid swallows.
Although simultaneous contractions are rare after wet or solid swallows (≤10% of swallows), they occur much more often after dry swallows.
Moreover, simultaneous oesophageal pressure peaks may occur as a normal phenomenon when swallows are taken in rapid succession, due to the phenomenon of deglutitive inhibition.
In conclusion, it is recommended that redefinition of the upper limit of normal incidence of non-peristaltic and non-deglutitive pressure waves should be considered but should be based on recording techniques that reliably signal all deglutitions.
Failure of colonoscopic surveillance in ulcerative colitis
Abstract
A prospective surveillance programme for patients with longstanding( >=8; years) or extensive( >=splenic; flexure) ulcerative colitis was undertaken between 1978 and 1990.
It comprised annual colonoscopy with pancolonic biopsy.
One hundred and sixty patients were entered into the programme and had 739 colonoscopies (4.6 colonoscopies per patient; 709 patient years follow up).
Eighty eight per cent of examinations reached the right colon.
There was no procedure related death.
One Dukes's A cancer was detected.
Forty one patients (25%) defaulted.
Of these 25 remain well; 13 ar unaccounted for, and one died from colonic cancer.
One patient had colectomy for medical reasons, and another died of carcinoma of the pancreas.
Retrospectively an additional 16 eligible patients were identified who had not been recruited.
Of these, 14 remain well, two are unaccounted for.
None developed colonic cancer.
Four patients refused colonoscopy.
All remain well.
Over the same period seven other cases of colonic cancer were found in association with ulcerative colitis, two in patients who had erroneously been diagnosed as having only proctitis and were therefore not entered into the programme, but were found at operation to have total colitis, one in a patient with colitis of seven years duration, and four patients who had previously attended the clinic but had been lost to follow up before 1978 and then had re-presented with new symptoms during the surveillance period.
This, of the nine colitis related cancers diagnosed in this centre during the study period only one was detected by the surveillance programme.
The results of this large study, and a review of published works, cast doubts on the effectiveness of colonoscopic surveillance programmes in detecting colorectal cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Colorectal carcinoma was recognised as a complication of ulcerative colitis over 65 years ago.
The risk of developing cancer is increased in those individuals who have had extensive colitis for more than 10 years after the first attack, the cumulative cancer rate being 7% at 20 years and 17% at 30 years disease duration.
Such was the perceived risk of a patient developing cancer that prophylactic colectomy has been recommended.
The strong association between colorectal dysplasia and cancer in ulcerative colitis was described in 1967.
The development of flexible endoscopy, which allows pancolonic biopsy, has supported this finding and has led to a change in practice such that in many centres at risk patients are examined at intervals, with colonoscopy and biopsy, to detect premalignant dysplasia or early cancer.
These cancer surveillance programmes are now widely implemented despite not having been subjected to clinical trial.
A number of reports have supported the use of colonoscopic surveillance in ulcerative colitis, but doubts have also been expressed about its efficacy.
Surveillance programmes are expensive, time consuming, and unpleasant for patients and should be shown to be effective before implementation.
Colonoscopic surveillance in colitis should reduce cancer related death compared with routine clinical care, by detecting early curable cancer.
It might be deemed unethical, however, to perform a controlled trial.
Gastroenterologists, therefore, have a responsibility to review their results to show whether or not this form of surveillance is effective.
In 1978 a prospective surveillance programme was started whereby all patients with longstanding extensive ulcerative colitis were invited to have annual colonoscopy with biopsy.
In this paper the results of this large programme and other reported series are reviewed to discover if colonoscopic surveillance works.
Methods
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME
From 1978 to December 31 1990 all patients with longstanding( >=8; years) and extensive (disease extending to or beyond the splenic feature) ulcerative colitis were advised to have annual colonoscopy with pancolonic biopsy.
Patients were seen at routine clinic follow up and the reasons for surveillance explained.
If the patient failed to attend for their clinic/colonoscopy then a repeat appointment was made.
If a second reminder was unsuccessful no further action was taken.
If patients were known to be moving away a letter detailing their surveillance history was sent to their doctor or next supervising consultant.
The duration of disease was taken from the date of diagnosis except where obvious symptoms of colitis came before the diagnosis by a matter of years.
Disease extent was verified by barium enema or colonoscopy, or both.
Patients older than 75 years were not entered and those reaching 75 during surveillance were withdrawn.
Colonoscopy was carried out under light sedation after standard laxative and bowel enema preparation.
Biopsy specimens were taken with forceps from flat mucosa at about 10 cm intervals along the colorectum and from any identifiable ‘mass lesions’.
These correspond to the following descriptive sites: caecum; proximal ascending colon; distal ascending colon; proximal transverse colon; distal transverse colon; proximal descending colon; distal descending colon; sigmoid colon; rectum.
Biopsy specimens were mounted on filter paper or placed in cassettes before fixation in formalin and after routine processing were sectioned at three levels and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
If dysplasia was present it was classified as low grade, high grade, or carcinoma.
If high grade dysplasia was found, repeat biopsies were performed within six months.
Surgery was performed in cases of persistent high grade dysplasia, or carcinoma.
DETERMINING OUTCOME OF SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME
Our review of the surveillance programme had three distinct goals:(a) to obtain full follow up of all patients who had participated at any time in the surveillance programme;(b) to identify any other patients, who attended the department over this time and who should have been recruited into the surveillance programme; and (c) to identify all cases of colonic carcinoma occurring in association with ulcerative colitis presenting to the department over this period.
These goals were achieved as follows:(a) the outcome of patients entered into the surveillance programme was obtained from departmental records, patient case notes, histopathology reports, doctor supervising consultant or patient by clinic, letter or telephone;(b) eligible patients with ulcerative colitis were identified from index cards used to document all colitis clinic patients, and review of notes of all patients attending the clinic for a 12 month period.
Using this information notes were obtained from the records departments.
Information extracted included date of birth, relevant medical and surgical history, date of onset of symptoms, date of diagnosis (histological/radiological), disease extent (barium enema/colonoscopy), surveillance colonoscopy date and findings, biopsy site and histological findings, and present status if known;(c) cases of cancer in association with colitis were identified from histopathology department records that document all colitis patients who developed dysplasia, cancer, or had colonic surgery since 1978.
Results
One hundred and eighty patients fulfilled the criteria for entry into the surveillance programme.
RECRUITMENT FAILURES
Sixteen patients were erroneously not entered into the programme by the supervising physician because they were unaware that the patient was eligible for surveillance.
Fourteen of these patients are well, a mean of 9.4 years (range 3–12) after what should have been their programme entry date.
Two are unaccounted for after a mean of three years.
SURVEILLANCE REFUSALS
Four patients refused colonoscopic surveillance, but continue with regular clinical supervision.
All are well, a mean of 9.75 years (range 6–12) after programme entry date.
PATIENTS STARTING SURVEILLANCE
One hundred and sixty patients entered the surveillance programme and had 739 colonoscopies (4.6 colonoscopy/patient; 709 years follow up).
The mean length of duration of colitis was 14.1 years (range 8–46).
Eighty eight per cent examinations reached the right colon.
There was no procedure related death.
Biopsy speimens (5695) were taken giving a mean of 7.8 per colonoscopy (range 1–9).
SURVEILLANCE DEFAULTERS
Forty one patients who started surveillance defaulted.
Twenty five remain well, a mean of 2.5 years (range 2–10) after default.
Thirteen patients are unaccounted for, mean 6.5 years (range 2–12) later.
One patient died of disseminated colonic cancer after three years (see Table I, patient E), the three previous complete annual colonoscopies had been negative for dysplasia.
One patient had colectomy for medical reasons six years later.
No cancer was found.
One patient died of pancreatic cancer seven years later.
LOW GRADE DYSPLASIA
Forty patients were found to have low grade dysplasia in at least one biopsy.
The mean age at first diagnosis of low grade dysplasia was 45.2 years (SD 13.64) and mean duration of colitis to diagnosis of low grade dysplasia 17.7 years (SD 7.33).
These 40 patients had a further 201 colonoscopies (223 patient years follow up).
Twenty (50%) had no further dysplasia (mean 4.0 colonoscopies per patient over 4.7 years).
Nineteen continued to exhibit low grade dysplasia in at least one subsequent biopsy (mean 6.3 follow up colonoscopies per patient over 6.9 years).
One of these developed an adenoma six years later, which was removed at colonoscopy and has remained free of dysplasia since (6 years).
One patient (patient C) who had low grade dysplasia in the distal descending and sigmoid colon was found to have high grade dysplasia in the sigmoid colon at the next colonoscopy 14 months later.
At colectomy two Dukes's A cancers were found; one in the sigmoid and one in the transverse colon.
This patient was the only case of cancer detected by the surveillance programme.
Thus, follow up of patients with low grade dysplasia found one cancer in 223 patient years.
The Figure shows that 25% of patients with ulcerative colitis exhibited low grade dysplasia on at least occasion by 17 years after diagnosis of ulcerative colitis, 50% by 25 years, and 75% by 38 years.
NON-CANCER SURGERY
Fifteen patients had colectomy for failed medical treatment after a mean of 15.6 years (range 9–32) disease duration.
Nine had subtotal colectomy, six had panproctocolectomy.
Four of the patients who had low grade dysplasia previously were negative for dysplasia at colectomy.
Two patients who had been negative for dysplasia were found to have low grade dysplasia in their colectomy specimens.
CANCER COMPLICATING ULCERATIVE COLITIS OUTSIDE THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME
During the 12 year period there have been seven other cases of colonic cancer in association with ulcerative colitis at this centre.
Two patients (patient B and patient H) were believed to have had proctitis but were subsequently found to have total colitis at colonoscopy with biopsy or histological examination of the colectomy specimen (one Dukes's B, one Dukes's C)(Table I).
One patient (patient A) had several colonic polyps removed endoscopically two years earlier.
A barium enema performed at seven years disease duration showed recurrent polyps.
Colonoscopy was performed to remove the colonic polyps and determine disease extent.
Total colectomy was performed because of incomplete removal of a large tubular adenoma with intra-epithelial malignant change.
At colectomy a Dukes's A cancer was found on a background of total colitis.
There were no other areas of dysplasia (Table I).
Four patients (D, F, G, and I) had been seen in the Leeds colitis clinic before the policy of surveillance had been started and were lost to follow up.
They re-presented during the surveillance period with new symptoms.
CANCER SURGERY
Thus, altogether, there were nine cases of colinic cancer in association with ulcerative colitis at this centre over this time period (Table I); mean age 46.4 years (range 33–62), mean disease duration 18.2 years (range 7–26), six men.
Six patients developed cancer under the age of fifty.
Seven patients had total colectomy (three Dukes's A, one Dukes's B, three Dukes's C).
One patient (patient F) who had been lost to follow up, had an anterior resection for a rectal carcinoma (one Dukes's C).
Because of the high risk of developing a further cancer the patient was entered into the surveillance programme.
Three subsequent colonoscopies have been negative for dysplasia.
Therefore, of 180 patients eligible for colonic cancer surveillance in ulcerative colitis 160 were entered into the programme.
During the 12 year period 1978–1990 nine colonic cancers were found in association with ulcerative colitis, but only one was detected by the surveillance programme.
Discussion
Many gastroenterologists consider that patients with ulcerative colitis with ongstanding, extensive disease should have annual colonoscopy and biopsy to detect dysplasia or early cancer.
If high grade dysplasia or arcinoma is detected the patient can be treated at an early stage.
It is important to define what is ‘success’ and what is ‘failure’in a surveillance programme to allow critical analysis of the outcome.
An early cancer — that is, Dukes's A or B found as a result of the programme represents a success.
A Dukes's C cancer or worse should be regarded a failure or surveillance because of the uncertain outlook.
It is also important to consider the method of cancer detection when reviewing the results of a surveillance policy.
The generally accepted surveillance policy in most centres today is regular colonoscopy for patients with longstanding extensive colitis.
If this definition is applied when reviewing surveillance studies the result is that cancers found earlier than eight years from onset or found in left sided colitis or a cancer found at colonoscopy performed for any reason other than surveillance (such as rectal bleeding), cannot be regarded as a success.
Colorectal cancer presenting as an abdominal mass or perforation, cancers found on sigmoidoscopy and barium enema, or colonoscopy performed because of an abnormal barium enema are outside protocols that use regular colonoscopic examination as the surveillance technique.
Similarly, if a cancer is found at a screening colonoscopy in a patient presenting to a unit years after the programme entry date for example, colitis of 17 years duration or when referred from another centre it cannot be counted a success becaue these cancers represent a selected group detected outside the regular surveillance protocol.
Cancers found at surgery performed for reasons other than high grade dysplasia or early carcinoma, such as debility or failed medical treatment, or low grade dysplasia,(not a generally recognised indication for surgery) cannot be counted as successes of the surveillance policy either.
Appying these criteria to our results, one of nine colonic cancers that arose in association with ulcerative colitis during the surveillance period was detected by the surveillance programme.
Analysis of 12 published studies of colonoscopic surveillance programmes (Table II and III) shows that 93 cases of colonic cancer were found.
Twelve (13%) of these represent successes for the colonoscopic surveillance programmes — that is, Dukes's A/B cancers detected by regular colonoscopic surveillance.
It could be argued that these criteria are too rigid.
Some surveillance programmes entail routine clinical follow up, regular sigmoidoscopy, and barium enema examination as well as regular colonoscopy and biopsy.
These methods of cancer detection are equally valid if they are laid down as part of a surveillance protocol.
Also, cancers found at the screening (first) colonoscopy may be regarded as a success when the examination is performed according to the protocol.
Adopting this approach the number of successes in the 12 published studies is 24 (26%).
A workable surveillance programme requires defined entry criteria and a cheap simple test, which is acceptable to the patient and which has a sound discriminatory basis.
Current surveillance colonoscopy programmes in ulcerative colitis fall short in a number of ways.
There are no universally accepted entry criteria for cancr surveillance.
There is a general feeling in published studies that colitis extending beyond the splenic flexure can be regarded as extensive in terms of cancer risk.
Assessment of extent, however, may be by barium enema, colonoscopy or both.
Barium studies seem to be insensitive to microscopic involvement and may detect only more severe cases.
In our study two patients were originally diagnosed as having proctitis.
If colonoscopy had been done the extensive nature of the disease might have been recognised and the patient would have entered the programme.
Colitis for at least eight years is considered to be long standing.
In this series, however, one patient developed cancer after seven years disease duration so perhaps the criteria for entry should be widened.
Colonscopic surveillance programmes cause a heavy clinical workload as well as a substantial capital outlay — that is, the test is not simple or cheap.
Patient recruitment is a recognised problem; 12% were not recruited into our programme.
Some were lost to follow up from clinic before fulfilling the entry criteria for longstanding disease; others despite being eligible, were not entered.
Once recruited, patients had a regular, uncomfortable examination that requires a day off work.
In our study four patients refused colonoscopy, and 41 (27%) patients defaulted from the programme — strong evidence that annual colonoscopy is unacceptable to many.
There are problems with the discriminatory power of colonoscopy and biopsy.
Colonic epithelial dysplasia is patchy.
Multiple biopsies sample much less than 1% of the surface area of the colon.
The evidence for the association of dysplasia and cancer is conflicting.
Twenty to fifty per cent of cancers are thought to arise de novo.
Fozard et al found a weak association between colon cancer and distant dysplasia.
By contrast two other studies conclude that the association is invariable.
The histological interpretation of biopsy specimens and diagnosis of dysplasia is fraught with the problems of inter and intraobserver variation — that is, the diagnostic test does not have a sound discriminatory basis.
The histological recognition of dysplasia is the very cornerstone of surveillance yet it would seem that the process of tissue collection to final diagnosis is susceptible to a number of pitfalls.
It can be argued that the finding of high grade dysplasia without cancer should be considered to be a success of surveillance.
This argument is not straightforward.
The diagnosis of dysplasia is beset with problems, as discussed above, furthermore the significance and outcome of high grade dysplasia is unpredictable.
Colon cancer was found in 25% of patients with high grade dysplasia but another 25% had a negative colectomy specimen or colonoscopy on follow up.
In another study while 33% of patients with high grade dysplasia developed cancer within six years 33% were not operated on and were alive and well five years later so not all authors have advised operation even when high grade dysplasia has been diagnosed.
Low grade dysplasia was a common finding in ulcerative colitis surveillance in our study and in others and has little prognostic significance.
All but one of the colorectal cancers in this series occurred in patients outside the surveillance programme.
This experience is not unique.
This cannot be construed as a criticism of the surveillance protocol itself.
Only one of these patients had been recruited and had then defaulted.
We are not aware of any extensive cancer arising in patients who had regular surveillance colonoscopy.
It is apparent, however, that a number of patients who needed surveillance did not receive it.
It is probable that these individuals were well and asymptomatic or had minimal symptoms.
This might explain why they did not attend for clinical review.
A review of the notes of our cancer patients suggests that virtually none of the cancer patients were taking disease suppressant drugs, such as salazopyrin, regularly or at all.
It may be that unsuppressed inflammation, while causing few or no symptoms, places these patients at increased risk of developing colonic cancer.
The main criticism that can be levelled at our study (and those in published works) is that the finding of one patient with high grade dysplasia (and carcinoma) does not justify the great expense and the effort for staff and patients involved in 739 colonscopies and 709 years of follow up.
In 10 of 12 surveillance studies it is possible to calculate the number of colonoscopies performed and the number of early cancers detected by them.
Including this study eight early cancers were found by colonoscopic surveillance and 3807 colonoscopies were performed: one cancer per 476 examinations.
There are 38 deaths per 100000 from colorectal cancer annually in the United Kingdom.
As nearly all of these occur in the 40–80 age group (and not everyone with colorectal cancer dies of it) the annual incidence in this group is greater than 38 per 50000.
If, therefore, the normal population in this age group was screened at five year intervals, and assuming that the polyp/carcinoma sequence takes longer than five years, 190 cases of cancer or premalignant polyp would be found per 50000 examinations — that is, 1 in 263: a higher detection rate in the normal population than that achieved by annual colonoscopic surveillance of extensive longstanding ulcerative ulcerative colitis.
In a recent study colonoscopy was performed on 210 asymptomatic subjects aged 50–75 years with negative faecal occult bloods.
Two Dukes's A cancers were detected giving a yield of one cancer per 105 colonoscopies.
We conclude that in our experience annual colonoscopic surveillance for cancer has been unsuccessful; eight of nine colonic cancers occurred in ulcerative colitis patients not having surveillance.
Our results and a review of published works cast doubts on the value of annual colonoscopic surveillance in this condition when considering its cost effectiveness and the definition of a workable programme.
Lashner et al monitored groups of 90 patients with longstanding, extensive ulcerative colitis, one with regular colonoscopy, the other with regular clinical follow up.
There was no difference in the cancer detection rate.
Though the numbers affected are small colonoscopic biopsy and histological examination for dysplasia seems to hold no advantage over routine clinical management.
How then should we manage these patients who are known to be at an increased rick of developing cancer?
The published data show that most cancers are detected as a result of clinical follow up, where new symptoms are investigated at an early stage.
Many cancers were found in patients who had defaulted the clinic before they were eligible for surveillance returning with new symptoms years later.
‘Screening’ colonoscopy (as opposed to‘surveillance’colonoscopy) detected a number of cancers.
All patients with ulcerative colitis should be screened at eight years.
This will allow them to be assessed microscopically as ‘total’, ‘extensive’, or ‘left sided’ providing important information about their cancer risk.
All patients with colitis should be followed up indefinitely.
It is difficult to justify regular colonoscopy thereafter.
Clinicians faced with a patient with longstanding colitis, at increased risk of developing colonic cancer, feel compelled to do, or be seen to do, something.
There is also an obligation, however, to use effective methods.
The argument for colonoscopic surveillance is not convincing.
While it has been deemed unethical to perform a controlled clinical trial, it could be argued that the use of limited resources on surveillance programmes of unproved value is also unethical.
The funds released by ending surveillance are considerable.
They could be channelled into a more cost effective cancer prevention scheme.
It is time to review cancer surveillance in ulcerative colitis.
Effect of Helicobacter pylori colonisation on gastric mucosal eicosanoid synthesis in patients taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Abstract
Colonisation with Helicobacter pylori may influence susceptibility to gastroduodenal injury and ulceration in patients taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
The aim of this study was to determine if Helicobacter pylori colonisation altered eicosanoid synthesis by gastric musoca in these patients.
Sixty five patients with longstanding NSAID intake and 23 control subjects underwent endoscopy.
In vitro gastric antral biopsies were stimulated by vortex mixing and eicosanoid measurements determined by radioimmunoassay.
Helicobacter pylori colonisation was determined by a CLO test (a gel based rapid urease test) and histological assessment.
Median prostaglandin E 2 synthesis by gastric mucosa was 61.0 (interquartile range: 19.2–73.1) pg/mg in control subjects colonised with Helicobacter pylori compared with 46.5 (23.3–65.5) pg/mg in Helicobacter pylori negative subjects.
This was not significantly different.
Treated with NSAIDs was associated with a significant difference (p<0.001) in prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) synthesis between those colonised with Helicobacter pylori (37.5 (22.0–77.3) pg/mg) compared with patients not infected (12.6 (7.0–19.3) pg/mg).
Values in patients taking NSAIDs who were colonised were not different from control subjects.
Synthesis of PGE 2 was strongly associated with type B (chronic active), but not type C (chemical) gastritis.
Dyspeptic symptoms were more common in subjects colonised with Helicobacter pylori (p<0.002) and were associated with higher PGE 2 synthesis.
In patients taking NSAIDs Helicobacter pylori colonisation removes rather then enhances depression of PGE 2 synthesis associated with NSAIDs and may promote dyspepsia associated with ulcers and prevent superficial mucosal injury.
Both Helicobacter pylori and non-steroidal non-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are well established risk factors for gastric and duodenal ulceration but interactions between them are poorly described.
It has been reported that patients taking NSAIDs experience more dyspepsia and have more chronic ulcers if they are colonised by Helicobacter pylori than if they are not.
By contrast there seems to be no increase, or even a decrease, in less serious gastric mucosal injury.
Prostaglandins are well recognised as protecting the gastric mucosa and enhancing the perception of pain.
Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by NSAIDs is the major established mechanism by which NSAIDs render the gastric mucosa vulnerable to mucosal injury.
Equally depression of prostaglandin synthesis, by diminishing pain perception, could at least in part account for the high proportion of NSAID associated ulcers that are silent.
In theory the increased risk of peptic ulceration in patients taking NSAIDs who are infected by Helicobacter pylori could be explained if Helicobacter pylori acted to exaggerate the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by NSAIDs.
Conversely, the increased dyspepsia and the decrease in superficial mucosal injury (if real) imply an opposite action with Helicobacter pylori restoring the mucosal prostaglandins to concentrations capable of mediating pain and of protecting the mucosa against injury.
Previous data on the influence of Helicobacter pylori on synthesis of eicosanoids have been inconclusive.
Two studies have found increased (but not significant) gastric prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) synthesis in the presence of Helicobacter pylori colonisation; the rise in PGE 2 synthesis was strongly associated with the intensity of inflammatory cell infiltrate.
By contrast a third smaller study claimed depressed PGE 2 synthesis, but surprisingly found no relation between production of PGE 2 and polymorphonuclear cell infiltrate.
The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the relation between Helicobacter pylori colonisation, symptoms, mucosal damage, and synthesis of eicosanoid by gastric mucosa, as detected by PGE 2 and thromboxane B 2 (TXB 2 ) concentrations, in patients taking NSAIDs compared with control subjects.
Patients and methods
Sixty five patients with rheumatoid arthritis (n= 57) or osteoarthritis (n=7) and taking NSAIDs for a period of greater than three months (mean 4.5 (SD 3.1) years) were recruted from a rheumatology clinic to undergo a screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy before entry into a therapeutic trial that had been approved by the hospital ethics committee.
Patients who had undergone previous gastric surgery, or were taking cytotoxic drugs or prednisolone at a dose greater than 5 mg each day were excluded.
Patients taking second line antiarthritic treatment were included in the study.
Patients taking H 2 antagonists stopped the medication at least one week before endoscopy.
No patients had taken antibiotics for at least one month before endoscopy.
Informed consent was obtained and patients were questioned as to whether they had experienced any upper abdominal pain or heartburn in the two weeks before endoscopy.
At endoscopy a visual assessment of injury was made.
Nine gastric antral biopsies were taken 3 to 4 cm from the pyloric ring.
One sample was placed in a CLO test (a gel based rapid urease test) for assessment of Helicobacter pylori state (a positive result denoted by a colour change at four hours).
Two samples were placed in formalin and subsequently stained for histological assessment.
Paraffin sections were cut and stained with both haematoxylin and eosin and giemsa for evidence of gastritis and Helicobacter pylori organisms.
Gastritis was defined according to the system proposed by Wyatt and Dixon.
Histopathology assessments were made without knowledge of the endoscopic and biochemical findings.
The remaining biopsies were divided into pairs and washed in 1 ml of Tris saline buffer.
Each pair was then vortex mixed for six seconds and centrifuged for 10 seconds.
The supernatant was stored and the procedure repeated.
A further 300 µl of Tris saline was added.
Eicosanoid synthesis was stimulated by vortex mixing for a further minute.
After centrifuging for 10 seconds the supernatant was removed and stored at -70°C until assayed.
Concentrations of PGE 2 and TXB 2 were measured by radioimmunoassay and the results expressed as pg/mg/wet weight of gastric biopsy.
Chemicals for radioimmunoassay were obtained from Amersham International except PGE 2 antisera, which was from Sigma Chemicals Limited and TXB 2 which was donated by Dr Lawrence Levine.
Sensitivities and cross reactivities of all three assays have been previously described.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The influence of age, sex, smoking category, use of prednisolone or second line treatment,Helicobacter pylori colonisation of use of NSAIDs on each of the dependent variables was analysed by stepwise multivariate regression analysis with the SPSS (statistical package for social sciences) programme.
The Mann-Whitney U test was then used for pairwise comparisons.
The χ 2 test was used to determine significant differences in gastroduodenal injury and symptoms between Helicobacter pylori positive and negative subjects.
Results are expressed as medians (interquartile ranges).
Results
PATIENTS
Of the 65 patients taking NSAIDs, 25 (38%) were colonised with Helicobacter pylori .
Twelve (52%) of the 23 control subjects were colonised with the organism.
In the users of NSAIDs gastroduodenal ulceration occurred in six (24%) of those colonised compared with three (8%) of those who were Helicobacter pylori negative whereas erosions occurred in eight (32%) who were Helicobacter pylori positive and in nine (23%) of those Helicobacter pylori negative.
The number of erosive lesions, as classified by ulceration or non-haemorrhagic erosions, was higher in the patients colonised with Helicobacter pylori (p<0.1).
Haemorrhagic lesions also occurred more frequently in subjects infected with the organism (36% v 13%; p<0.01)(table I).
Symptoms
Twenty four (37%) of the patients taking NSAIDs had symptoms attributable to the upper gastrointestinal tract in the two weeks before endoscopy.
Of these, 45% had complained of upper abdominal pain and heartburn, 36% of upper abdominal pain only, 18% of heartburn only.
There was a significant difference in symptoms according to whether the subject was colonised with Helicobacter pylori or not.
Sixteen (66%) of the symptomatic patients taking NSAIDs were colonised with Helicobacter pylori compared with nine (22%) of the patients with no symptoms (p<0.002).
Gastritis
Twenty (31%) patients taking NSAIDs had a histologically normal gastric antral mucosa.
Twenty (31%) patients had a type C (chemical) gastritis and the remaining 25 (38%) had a type B (chronic active) gastritis.
Helicobacter pylori organisms were identified in all but two patients with type B gastritis and in two patients with type C gastritis.
In the 12 control subjects with type B (chronic active) gastritis all were Helicobacter pylori positive whereas the antral mucosa of those not infected was histologically normal.
The table gives other patient characteristics.
PROSTAGLANDIN E
2 The use of NSAIDs and colonisation by Helicobacter pylori were the only independent variables that influenced PGE 2 concentrations.
Synthesis of PGE 2 in control subjects colonised with Helicobacter pylori was 61.0 (19.2–73.1) pg/ mg (n=12), not significantly different from 46.5 (23.3–65.5) pg/mg (n=11) in subjects not colonised.
In patients taking NSAIDs who were not colonised with Helicobacter pylori median synthesis of PGE 2 by gastric mucosa was 12.6 (7.0–19.3) pg/mg (n=40)(p<0.001 v controls).
In patients taking NSAIDs who were colonised with Helicobacter pylori synthesis of PGE 2 was 37.5 (22.0–77.3) pg/mg (n=25), significantly higher than in patients taking NSAIDs who were not colonised (p<0.001) but not significantly different from values seen in comparable controls (p=0.52)(figure).
Gastritis
Synthesis of PGE 2 was aso determined in subjects according to the histological state of the antral biopsies.
All control subjects with type B (chronic active) gastritis were Helicobacter pylori positive with median PGE 2 61.0 (19.2–73.1) pg/ mg.
The antral mucosa of those not infected was histologically normal with median 46.5 (23.3–65.5) pg/mg.
In patients taking NSAIDs those with type B (chronic active) gastritis synthesised 43.4 (15.680.3) pg/mg of PGE 2 .
This was significantly higher than the median 11.4 (7.8–15.4) pg/mg in patients with normal mucosa (p<0.001) and the median 13.1 (5.9–25.0) pg/ mg in patients with type C (chemical) gastritis (p=0.012) and not significantly different from the value from patients not taking NSAIDs who had gastritis.
Mucosal injury
Median synthesis of PGE 2 in patients taking NSAIDs with erosive lesions was 15.4 (6.4–40.3) pg/mg compared with 16.2 (7.5–38.4) pg/mg in patients with haemorrhagic lesions or endoscopically normal mucosa.
In patients who were colonised with Helicobacter pylori mucosal PGE 2 concentrations were lower in subjects with erosive lesions compared with those with haemorrhagic lesions (30.8 (6.2–63.8) pg/mg v 45.8 (22.5–80.1) pg/mg).
Symptoms
In patients taking NSAIDs with symptoms attributable to the upper gastrointestinal tract PGE 2 synthesis was 26.6 (8.5–68.8) pg/mg.
Although this was higher than 13.8 (7.7–30.3) pg/mg in subjects without symptoms, this did reach statistical significant (p=0.11).
Smoking
Although PGE 2 synthesis was lower in patients taking NSAIDs who smoked compared with non-smokers this did not reach significance (8.5 (2.4–24.9)v 18.1 (9.8–46.5) pg/mg (p=0.076)).
THROMBOXANE B
2 Median gastric mucosal TBX 2 synthesis was 27.7 (13.0–53.7) pg/mg in patients taking NSAIDs compared with 39.8 (10.2–54.2) pg/mg in control subjects.
This difference was not significant.
Colonisation with Helicobacter pylori did not significantly affect TXB 2 synthesis in NSAID users.
Those colonised with the organism produced 48.9 (15.4–59.0) pg/mg compared wth 18.3 (12.2–33.2) pg/mg in those not colonised (p=0.08).
In control subjects not taking NSAIDs synthesis of TXB 2 was not influenced by Helicobacter pylori (42.2 (13.5–61.5) pg/mg v 30.9 (6.9–45.6) pg/mg respectively).
Discussion
The results of this study suggest that Helicobacter pylori removes rather than enhances the decrease in gastric mucosal PGE associated with NSAIDs.
Age, sex, and use of prednisolone or second line treatment did not seem to influence PGE 2 synthesis.
Smoking has previously been reported to inhibit synthesis of PGE 2 by gastric mucosa.
We also found lower concentrations in smokers although this did not reach significance.
The increase in PGE 2 associated with Helicobacter pylori seems likely to be a consequence of the associated inflammatory cell infiltrate as it was seen in patients with type B (chronic active) but not with type C (chemical) gastritis, which is characterised by a paucity of inflammatory cells.
Helicobacter pylori also tended to increase thromboxane B 2 synthesis although this was not statistically significant.
There is conflicting evidence concerning PGE 2 concentrations in both peptic ulcer disease and mucosal inflammation.
Some authors have suggested that PGE 2 synthesis is increased in patients with gastric ulcers, and others have found no differences or depressed synthesis, although the last may reflect occult aspirin or NSAID consumption.
Similarly, PGE 2 synthesis has been reported to be both reduced and increased in patients with superficial gastritis.
Acute mucosal injury does not seem to be associated with stimulation of PGE 2 synthesis.
In vitro experiments suggest that Helicobacter pylori may even intensify the inhibition of PGE 2 synthesis associated with administration of indomethacin.
Our data support the trends, however, reported in smaller studies by Taha et al and Avunduk et al that Helicobacter pylori seems to increase PGE 2 concentrations in the presence of NSAIDs.
Jones et al found that, in NSAID users, colonisation by Helicobacter pylori determined serologically was associated with significantly more dyspeptic symptoms and NSAID intolerance.
Similarly our study found a strong association between dyspepsia and colonisation by Helicobacter pylori in patients taking NSAIDs.
The enhanced synthesis of PGE 2 seen in patients taking NSAIDs and infected with Helicobacter pylori might mediate the increased dyspapsia that characterises these patients.
In support of this we also found that PGE 2 synthesis was increased in patients with dyspepsia compared with patients without symptoms although this did not reach statistical significance.
Epidemiological evidence suggests that complications associated with NSAIDs are characterised by a paucity of premonitory symptoms.
As many as 70% of patients presenting with ulceration may have no symptoms.
It is possible that patients colonised with the organism selectively stop their NSAID treatment because of dyspeptic symptoms.
Recent evidence suggests that Helicobacter pylori and ingestion of NSAIDs may interact to influence and enhance the susceptibility to gastroduodenal ulceration.
Martin et al found that among Helicobacter pylori positive patients ingestion of NSAIDs significantly increased the risk of gastric ulceration.
Others have suggested a similar interaction.
Our data suggest that it is unlikely that the mechanism of this apparent synergy is enhanced depression of prostaglandin synthesis.
It seems more likely that prostaglandin independent actions such as increased gastrin or acid production, or local production of toxins against epithelial cells account for this amplified impairment in mucosal defence.
Endoscopically ingestion of NSAIDs is associated with a high prevalence of superficial mucosal injury.
Graham et al have reported that in patients taking NSAIDs the associated mucosal injury of erosions and intramucosal haemorrhages is more frequent in those patients not colonised with Helicobacter pylori .
In theory the increased prostaglandin synthesis seen with Helicobacter pylori might explain such a reduction in minor mucosal injury.
A reduction in haemorrhagic lesions and increased prostaglandin synthesis in association with Helicobacter pylori and gastritis would be compatible with data showing that prostaglandins can exert protective properties at a vascular level.
In our study, however, although there was a trend to higher prostaglandin concentrations in Helicobacter pylori positive patients with lower levels of mucosal injury this was weak.
Moreover, we failed to find that Helicobacter pylori is associated with reduced acute mucosal injury and the relevance of haemorrhagic lesions in patients taking NSAIDs to the development of important clinical lesions has recently been questioned.
In conclusion, we investigated the influence of Helicobacter pylori colonisation on gastric mucosal eicosanoid synthesis in patients taking NSAIDs.
We found no evidence that Helicobacter pylori potentiated the detrimental effects of NSAIDs on mucosal defence mediated by eicosanoids.
In fact,Helicobacter pylori seemed to stimulate synthesis of PGE 2 by promoting mucosal inflammatory cell infiltration.
The effect on prostaglandin production might account for the increase in dyspepsia associated with NSAIDs in patients colonised with Helicobacter pylori and could also protect the mucosa from superficial injury induced by NSAIDs.
Pioneer in the gluten free diet: Willem-Karel Dicke 1905–1962, over 50 years of gluten free diet
The purpose of this article is to commemorate the death of Willem-Karel Dicke 31 years ago and his first publication on gluten free diet in 1941 (Fig 1).
Dicke, born 1905 in Dordrecht, The Netherlands, became the medical director of the Juliana Children's Hospital in The Hague at the age of 31.
J W Stoop, one of his disciples, wrote about him ‘Dicke was an outstanding clinician, scientist and manager with exceptional personal qualities.
His intuition, subtle approach, analytical capacities and broad clinical knowledge made him a brilliant clinician’.
We will provide evidence that these qualities and critical observations led him to the conclusion that wheat products contained the factor responsible for the severe clinical symptoms of coeliac disease, at that time also called Gee-Herter's disease, long before this thesis in 1950.
In the late '20s and early '30s it was generally agreed that the two main treatment principles in coeliac disease were rest and diet.
The most important study in this period was published in 1924 when Sidney Haas described his treatment of coeliac disease.
He reported 10 cases, of whom he claimed that the eight treated by a banana diet were clinically cured whereas the two untreated had died.
From that time there is hardly any form of diet that has not been recommended, such as carbohydrate diet (fruit, purée of potatoes or tomatoes), beef steak cure, milk diet (2–2.5 l/day).
Even as early as 1887, however, in the former Dutch East Indies (at present Indonesia), VandeBurg advised a straight fruit diet.
These principles of dietary treatment were frequently discussed during the meetings of paediatricians at that time.
Visiting such a meeting in 1932 Dicke's attention was directed to a case report presented by Stheeman concerning relapses of diarrhoea after the consumption of bread and rusks; according to the testimony of one patient.
How do we know that Dicke was convinced of the beneficial effect of wheat free diet even before 1940?
From the testimony of Dicke's wife in 1991, we learned that already between 1934 and 1936 he had started his experiments with wheat free diets.
Also from Booth's conversation with Dicke it can be concluded that Dicke knew long before World War II that wheat products contained the offending agent; ‘It was a young mother's statement of her coeliac child's rash improving rapidly if she removed bread from the diet, that alerted his interest, when he was a paediatrician in The Hague in 1936.’
At the end of World War II, during the 1944/45 ‘Winter of starvation’, the delivery of normal food such as bread to his young patients in his hospital was endangered.
This period convinced him even more that merely eating less cereals and other more uncommon food products, such as tulip bulbs, improved the clinical condition of his patients.
Dicke's first report about the wheat free diet was published in Het Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde in 1941 (W K Dicke: A simple diet for Gee-Herter's Syndrome).
‘…In recent literature it is stated that the diet of Haas (Banana-diet) and Fanconi (fruit and begetables) gives the best results in the treatment of patients suffering from coeliac disease.
At present(World War II) these items are not available.
Therefore, I give a simple diet, which is helping these children at this time of rationing.
The diet should not contain any bread or rusks.
A hot meal twice a day is also well tolerated.
The third meal can be sweet or sour porridge (without any wheat flour).’
Dicke's other written reference is his thesis.
In this thesis he describes a meticulous dietary study over a period of several years at the Juliana Children's Hospital in a patient with coeliac disease, which started in 1936!
A strict regimen of wheat free diet in the hospital had a favourable and normalising effect on his clinical symptoms, weight, and growth.
Each time the boy went home and the wheat free diet could not be sustained he suffered a decline in his growth curve.
During four longterm admissions each time the trend towards normal growth could be restored (Fig 2).
In his other examples of the cases described, he has chosen on purpose older children with longstanding histories of suffering, thus removing any doubt about the correct diagnosis.
He excluded patients with cystic fibrosis by performing duodenal drainage tests for the measurements of pancreatic enzyme concentrations in the duodenal juice.
Faecal tests to exclude parasitic diseases and small intestinal roentgenograms were also performed.
In his thesis several growth curves of children treated with a wheat free diet are presented.
In longterm studies over several years he shows that with a wheat free diet these children are gaining weight and are reaching anormal growth pattern by comparison with age matched controls.
At the end of chapter 3 of his thesis he concludes that:
‘if certain types of meal, such as wheat and rye are replaced in the daily diet, the patient improves;
acute attacks of diarrhoea, do not occur, provided these types of meal are not given;
after a latent period which can vary in length, deterioration and acute attacks of diarrhoea re-occur, if the objectionable types of meal are added to the diet too soon….’
Considering Dicke's thesis as well as van de Kamer's publication in 1952 it is quite clear that when Dicke went to Utrecht to perform his classic dietary fat absorption experiments, he had already been convinced for years that wheat, rye, and oat meal products were the offending agents in the cause of coeliac disease.
It was fortunate that after World War II Dicke started a close co-operation with J H vandeKamer, a biochemist from the Netherlands Central Institute for Nutritional Research TNO in Utrecht, who was the first to develop an accurate and easily available method to measure faecal fat content in wet faeces.
Also in collaboration with H A Weyers, a paediatrician from the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht, a method was developed that permitted the analysis of faecal fat excretion in children with coeliac disease by analysing the correct coefficient of fat absorption.
These experiments are also described in chapter 4 of his thesis.
Dicke decided to take as the measure for fat digestion, the fat absorption coefficient, where the coefficient of fat absorption/24 hrs is:
The crucial experiments with standardised diets, each time excluding or adding wheat or rye flour over long periods in these children with coeliac disease, were performed on four children in the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht and in one child in the Juliana Children's Hospital in The Hague.
The children were challenged with different cereals under a strict dietary protocol with measurement of total faecal output, faecal fat content, and the fat absorption coefficient.
Figure 3 shows one example of such a study.
Based on these findings Dicke concluded in 1950 in his thesis that wheat flour but not well purified wheat starch (amylum) and also rye flour were the causes of the anorexia, the increased faecal output, and the streatorrhoea seen in these patients.
The development of the gluten free diet was based on these discoveries.
Together with van de Kamer and Weyers, he subsequently published that the alcohol soluble or the gliadin component of the water insoluble protein or gluten moiety of wheat, was responsible for the fat malabsorption in patients with coeliac disease.
Alghouth these findings were rapidly confirmed by investigators from Britain, Scandinavia, and Germany some doubt persisted, especially in American publications, concerning the efficacy of a gluten free diet.
After the establishment of the intestinal biopsy technique for the diagnosis of coeliac disease, it became apparent that a wheat free diet should be maintained for long periods before an adequate response occurred, as Dicke had predicted.
Although it is well known nowadays that, in addition to the noxious cereal grains, genetic factors may predispose susceptible subjects to an immune response that damages the small intestinal mucosa and the other environmental factors may triggerthis abnormal immune response, it was Dicke's astute observations some 50 years ago that first changed the prognosis and treatment of these patients dramatically.
It was to honour Dicke that the Dutch Society for Gastroenterology instituted the Dicke medal to reward pioneering work in hepatogastroenterology and, naturally, the first gold medal was awarded to Dicke himself.
In recognition of Dicke's outstanding clinical and scientific capacities he was appointed to the Chair of Professor of Pediatrics at the University of Utrecht and he became Medical Director of the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in 1957.
He sadly passed away prematurely in 1962 because of severe cerebrovascular disease.
Evidence of a dominant role for low osmolality in the efficacy of cereal based oral rehydration solutions: studies in a model of secretory diarrhoea
Abstract
Clinical trials suggest that including naturally occurring complex carbohydrate in oral rehydration solutions (ORS) in place of glucose increases water absorption and reduces stool volume during acute diarrhoea.
The mechanisms for this greater clinical efficacy has not been established.
This study examined the ability of two hypotonic rice based ORS, RS-ORS (137 mOsm/kg) and RP-ORS (143 mOsm/kg), and HYPO-ORS (240 mOsm/kg) a glucose equivalent ORS, to effect water absorption by in vivo perfusion of normal and secreting rat small intestine.
The results were compared with those for two widely used conventional hypertonic ORS, WHO-ORS (331 mOsm/kg) and UK-ORS (310 mOsm/kg).
In the normal intestine, water absorption was similar from WHO-ORS (87.4 (45.1–124.6) µl/min/g; median and interquartile range) and UK-ORS (57.6 (41.5–87)) but less than from the hypotonic solutions (p<0.02); water absorption from RS-ORS (181.8 (168.5–193.8)) and RP-ORS (195.7 (179.3–207.9)) was similar but less than from HYPO-ORS (241.3 (230.6–279.7); p<0.005).
In the secreting intestine, all ORS reversed net secretion of fluid to net absorption; the hypotonic solutions, HYPO-ORS (105.2 (95.2–111)), RS-ORS (127.7 (118.3–169.4)) and RP-ORS (133.7 (122.1–174.5)), produced more water absorption (p<0.005) than the hypertonic solutions WHO-ORS (47.1 (29–75.9)) and UK-ORS (24.9 (18.4–29.4)).
The rice based solutions promoted most water absorption in secreting intestine (p<0.007).
These data indicate that low osmolality is of primary importance in mediating the increased water absorption from cereal based ORS.
Acute infectious diarrhoea continues to be a major cause of morbidity throughout the world, particularly in preschool children, with an unacceptable mortality in this age group approaching 4 million each year.
Rehydration with oral rehydration solutions (ORS) containing monomeric glucose as substrate has been considered the most important therapeutic breakthrough of this century.
Although highly effective for rapid rehydration when given by mouth, standard glucose electrolyte ORS do not reduce the volume or duration of the diarrhoea and may actually increase stool volumes.
This can discourage the mother or other attendant who administers ORS and compromise the rehydration process.
Several clinical trials with cereal based ORS have shown dramatic improvements over conventional glucose electrolyte oral rehydration treatment with reduced duration and severity of diarrhoea and an associated reduction in the volume of ORS required for rehydration.
The reasons why cereal based ORS have been so successful has not been examined but a number of possible mechanisms have been proposed including increased substrate availability without increased osmolality, kinetic advantage of oligosaccharides over glucose monomers, and low osmolality.
To explore these possible mechanisms further we studied the ability of hypotonic cereal based ORS and a glucose equivalent monomeric ORS ro effect water and electroyte absorption in an animal model and compared these findings with two widely used conventional glucose-electrolyte ORS.
Materials and methods
ORAL REHYDRATION SOLUTIONS STUDIED
Table I shows the composition of the ORS perfused.
We used two conventional standard ORS — namely, the World Health Organisation ORS (WHO-ORS) and the ORS formulation recommended in the British Pharmacopoeia (UK-ORS), which until recently was the most widely used ORS in the United Kingdom.
A hypotonic ORS (HYPO-ORS) has been previously studied by our group and is now recommended by the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition as being the optimal formulation for European children.
Rice starch (Sigma Chemical Co) and rice powder (local supermarket) ORS were prepared with an identical electrolyte composition and glucose content (after complete hydrolysis) to HYPO-ORS.
Thus we were able to examine the effects of presenting the intestine with a similar glucose load but in monomeric or polymeric form with an obligatory reduction in osmolality accompanying the last.
Comparison was also possible with the standard United Kingdom and developing world ORS.
INTESTINAL PERFUSION OF NORMAL AND SECRETING RAT SMALL INTESTINE
Adult male Wistar rats (180–240 g) were fasted for 18 hours with free access to water.
Anaesthesia was induced by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbitone (60 mg/kg) and maintained as necessary by interval intramuscular injection (30 mg/kg) Body temperature was measured with rectal thermometer and maintained with an underlying heat pad.
After laparotomy cannulae were inserted proximally by duodenotomy and distally by terminal ileotomy as described previously.
Gentle lavage with warm isotonic saline (37°C) and air was used to clear the entire small intestine of residual contents before instilling 75 µg of cholera toxin in 5 ml of isotonic saline for two hours to induce a stable secretory state.
For experiments with normal intestine, 5 ml of plasma electrolyte solution (PES) were instilled in place of cholera toxin.
The small intestine was then perfused with either PES or an ORS at 0.5 ml/min for one hour to ensure steady state conditions, after which three successive 10 minute collections of effluent were made from the distal cannula.
At the end of the experiment the rats were killed by intracardiac injection of sodium pentobarbitone and exsanguination.
The perfused segment of entire small intestine was removed, rinsed, bottled, and dessicated at 100°C to obtain the dry weight.
Mean marker recovery for 66 perfusions, comprising three consecutive 10 minute collections each, was 102.1 (SEM 1.48) %.
The percentage variation around the mean for [C]-PEG concentrations was 2.6 (0.2) % confirming that steady state conditions were indeed obtained.
Each solution was perfused in eight to 10 rats with normal and with secreting intestine.
HYDROLYSIS OF RICE POWDER AND RICE STARCH
Acid hydrolysis was performed wherein samples of effluent were incubared with hydrochloric acid (1.0 mol/l) for two hours at 100°C.
At the end of the reaction sodium hydroxide (1.0 mol/l) was added to neutralise the sample before glucose analysis.
This methof was effective at producing complete carbohydrate hydrolysis within two hours and was validated in preliminary experiments against an enzymatic method.
PERFUSATE ANALYSIS
Sodium and potassium concentrations were analysed with flame photometry (Instrument Laboratories 943), chloride concentration by Chemlab CCMI chloride meter, bicarbonate concentration by Corning CO 2 and glucose concentration by Beckman Glucose Analyser 2.
Osmolality was analysed with the vapour pressure technique with a Wescor 5500 osmometer.
[C]-PEG concentrations were measured in triplicate by liquid scintillation spectroscopy in an LKB Wallac ultra-beta 1210 scintillation counter.
CALCULATIONS
Net solute and water movements were calculated by standard formulae from the measured solute concentration and [C]-PEG counts in perfusate and effluent.
The differences in transport data were analysed with the Wilcoxon rank test.
All results were expressed as median and interquartile range.
Two tailed tests were used throughout.
Results
WATER ABSORPTION
In normal intestine (Fig 1) water absorption was similar from WHO-ORS and UK-ORS but less than from HYPO-ORS and the rice based solutions (p<0.02).
Water absorption was similar from RS-ORS and RP-ORS but despite having the same total glucose content, HYPO-ORS produced more water absorption than the rice based solutions (p<0.005).
In secreting intestine (Fig 2) all the solutions reversed net secretion to net absorption but all three hypotonic ORS promoted more water absorption than WHO-ORS and UK-ORS (p<0.005).
RS-ORS and RP-ORS promoted more water absorption in secreting intestine than did the hypotonic glucose monomer solution, HYPO-ORS (p<0.007).
Water absorption from rice based solutions in the secretory state was about 70% of that in the normal state compared with about 50% for all other ORS.
GLUCOSE ABSORPTION
In normal intestine glucose absorption (Fig 3) was greatest from UK-ORS and HYPO-ORS there being no significant difference between these solutions.
Glucose absorption from RS-ORS was less than from HYPO-ORS and RP-ORS (p<0.002) and of these, HYPO-ORS led to more glucose absorption than RP-ORS (p= 0.002).
In the secretory state glucose absorption (Fig 4) from UK-ORS was not different from all the other ORS despite the very low water absorption.
Similar glucose absorption was obtained from WHO-ORS, UK-ORS, and RP-ORS.
Glucose adsorption from HYPO-ORS and RS-ORS was almost identical and was less from either than from WHO-ORS (p<0.004).
Glucose absorption from HYPO-ORS was less than from RP-ORS and WHO-ORS (p=0.03).
SODIUM ABSORPTION
In normal intestine sodium absorption occurred from all the solutions (Fig 5) except for the low sodium UK-ORS (p<0.002).
Sodium absorption from the rice-based solutions was similar but significantly less than sodium absorption from HYPO-ORS and WHO-ORS (p<0.01).
None of the ORS perfused were able to reverse the net secretory state for sodium induced by cholera toxinc (Fig 6); sodium secretion was greater with UK-ORS (p<0.002).
CHLORIDE ABSORPTION
Table II summarises the data for net chloride movement.
In normal intestine all ORS were associated with net chloride absorption but the highest chloride absorption was from HYPO-ORS (p<0.001).
UK-ORS, which had the lowest chloride concentration, was associated with least chloride absorption (p<0.02).
In secreting intestine UK-ORS led to chloride secretion (p<0.001) whereas the other ORS still led to net chloride absorption albeit much lower than in normal intestine.
RELATIONS BETWEEN WATER AND SOLUTE UPTAKE
Tables III and IV summarise the data for individual and total solute movement in relation to net water movement.
As expected there was direct correlation between total net solute absorption and net water absorption both in normal (r=0.76, p<0.001) and secreting intestine (r=0.77, p<0.001).
Discussion
All of the hypotonic ORS, whether they contained monometic or polymeric carbohydrate as substrate, promoted more water absorption than the widely used hypertonic ORS and this accords well with the findings of other workers, both in human jejunum and in animal models.
Both of the hypertonic ORS contained higher glucose concentrations and higher water obsorption might have been expected from these solutions because of a greater stimulatory effect on active glucose transport.
It is known, however, that a glucose concentration of 56 mmol/l can exert a maximal stimulatory effect on water absorption and concentrations as low as 30 mmol/l, at least in short segments of human jejunum, can promote sodium absorption.
Furthermore, restricting intraluminal sodium concentration in jejunal perfusion does not seem to limit glucose absorption.
It is extremely unlikely therefore that the profound differences in water absorption between the hypertonic and hypotonic ORS are related to differences in sodium or glucose concentration.
The ORS containing complex carbohydrate led to increased water absorption in secreting intestine compared with the hypotonic monomer solution HYPO-ORS.
It would seem therefore that low osmolality is the dominant factor rather than glucose transport when it comes to promoting net water absorption and this contention is supported by the higher water absorption from the WHO-ORS compared to UK-ORS in secreting intestine, despite their similar glucose absorption.
In human jejunum there is an inverse relation between water absorption and perfusate osmolality but below 250 mOsm/kg this inverse relation seems to disintegrate.
Although solute dependent sodium absorption via the cotransport mechanism is of major therapeutic importance during diarrhoeal states, sodium is mainly absorbed from the jejunum through other passive processes such as electroneutral sodium chloride absorption and solvent drag.
According to data from animal perfusion systems, net sodium movement even in glucose containing solutions is linearly related to sodium concentration of the perfusate and this pertains equally in secreting intestine, although the threshold at which sodium absorption occurs is higher in the secretory state (120 mmol/l v 60 mmol/l).
This linear relation has been confirmed with in vivo perfusion studies of human jejunum where net absorption of sodium from isotonic enteral feeds containing glucose polymer occurred only when the sodium concentration was above 80–90 mmol/l.
It is not surprising therefore, that UK-ORS with its relatively low sodium concentration of 35 mmol/l did not promote net sodium absorption even in normal intestine, or that none of the solutions were able to reverse net sodium secretion to absorption in secreting intestine.
In normal intestine the pattern of sodium absorption paralleled that for water absorption emphasising the importance of passive sodium absorption and solvent drag.
These mechanisms were not able to offset the net sodium secretion induced by CT, however, which occurred despite net water absorption.
In the whole gut of course, the reduction of this net sodium secretion by colonic salvage should be considered.
Glucose absorption from the hypotonic, monomeric, or polymeric ORS, paralleled water absorption whether the intestine was in a normal or secretory state.
Exactly how glucose is absorbed from the jejunum remains undecided.
Although saturation kinetics for glucose absorption from human jejunum have been shown suggesting that there is only active glucose transport, there is other evidence suggesting the participation of passibe glucose absorption as well.
Indeed recent work in a perfusion system with rat jejunum has added to the probability of there being substantial passive glucose absorption after changes in the intercellular junctions once active electrogenic sodium absorption is stimulated.
Glucose absorption was highest in normal intestine from UK-ORS but not in secreting intestine and this certainly suggests an important role for passive glucose absorption due to solvent drag.
Rice starch is not a pure carbohydrate and on ignition about 0.4% remains as residue.
Some of this will consist of protein.
Aminoacid stimulated sodium absorption occurs independently of hexose stimulated sodium absorption via a separate nutrient-sodium cotransporter.
There would therefore be an additive effect on the passive water absorption that occurs secondary to solute absorption.
In our deliberations we have discounted that as a significant factor because of the negligible fraction of rice starch and rice power that is not carbohydrate.
Of course in the rice solutions used in the published field trials the protein content may have been as hgh as 10% and may therefore have contributed more to secondary salt and water absorption.
The exact relation between net water uptake and osmolality is not entirely clear from our findings.
Similarly no strong relations can be drawn from these data between osmolality and the glucose and electrolyte uptakes.
There are some variables that confound adequate dissection of the potential interrelations.
Firstly, the sodium and other electrolyte concentrations were not uniform among the ORS.
Further studies with a defined glucose polymer where electrolyte composition is constant but osmolality and substrate concentration is varied with a range of monomer and polymer concentrations may lead to be a better understanding of these phenomena.
Although it is not absolutely certain whether these findings from our animal model will be relevant in human beings, the close parallelism in the handling of ORS in both rat and human perfusion models is very encouraging.
We believe that these findings suggest that osmolality is the key determinant of water absorption in both normal and secreting intestine and that it seems to be of particular importance in the secretory state.
The success of complex carbohydrate containing ORS in clinical studies may be more closely related therefore to their very low osmolality relative to standard hypertonic monomer ORS than to the kinetic advantage factor or the increased substrate availability for glucose/sodium cotransport.
Many field studies have used much higher loads of carbohydrate than we have because their main rationale was the ability to greatly increase available substrate without incurring a substantial osmotic penalty.
Their goal was not necessarily to keep the resulting ORS hypotonic.
Our solutions containing rice derived glucose polymer promoted the highest water obsorption in the secretory state but it is not known whether increasing the polymer concentration (but maintaining ORS hypotonicity) would enhance water absorption by further stimulating active glucose transport or whether water absorption would be jeopardised, even by a moderate increase in osmolality.
The optimum polymer concentration therefore that would yield the best compromise between total glucose availability and low osmolality remains to be determined.
The standard hypertonic UK-ORS has already been replaced by the hypotonic monomer solution HYPO-ORS in the British National Formulary but the World Health Organisation understandably remains cautious about modifying what has been a highly successful and very widely tested remedy.
Substantial changes recommending the widespread use of hypotonic ORS containing monomeric or polymeric glycose (defined glucose polymer or crude complex carbohydrate) would require more evidence of clinical benefit after rigorous controlled clinical trials.
Effects of serotonin on rat ileocolonic transit and fluid transfer in vivo: possible mechanisms of action
Abstract
The aim was to investigate the action of serotonin (5HT) on function of the ileocolonic junction (ICJ) in vivo.
In anesthetised rats, models were developed to study the effects of intra-aortic (ia) serotonin on ileocolonic and colonic transit, and the effects on transit of a number of 5HT receptor antagonists.
In the first series of experiments, a bolus of saline labelled with 9 9 m Tc DTPA was instilled 20 cm proximal to the ICJ and transit was assessed three hours later by the geometric centre of the spread of isotope.
In the second series, similar techniques were used on the postcecal colon and transit assessed two hours later.
In the third series of experiments, the effects of 5HT on ileal net flux was evaluated by standard perfusion experiments with 1 4 C polyethylene glycol (PEG) 4000 as a non-absorbable marker in rat plasma like electrolyte solution.
Compared with ia saline, 5HT accelerated ICJ transit significantly (p<0.05).
This acceleration was comparable with the effect of ia bethanechol.
The effects of 5HT on ICJ transit were inhibited by the intraperitoneal (ip) infusion of atropine, the 5HT receptor antagonists, methysergide, ketanserin, zacopride, and the 5HT 4 agonist, SC53116.
Methysergide, zacopride, and SC53116 given with ia 5HT slowed ICJ transit to rates below those of ia saline alone.
When thse same agents were given together with ia saline, the ICJ transit was not significantly altered.
Serotonin, at the dose that accelerated ICJ transit, did not significantly alter colonic transit or ileal fluid transport.
In conslusion, 5HT is a potent pharmacological stimulant of transit across the rat ICJ in vivo; the action of 5HT is mediated partly through muscarinic neurones and several 5HT receptor subtypes.
Serotonin (5 hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) is believed to be an important humoral mediator of carcinoid diarrhoea.
Agents that release 5HT exacerbate diarrhoea in the carcinoid syndrome; agents that block the synthesis or the peripheral effects of 5HT sometimes control diarrhoea in patients with carcinoid syndrome.
Serotonin stimulates contraction or myoelectric spike activity of small intestinal muscle in vivo, and gastrointestinal transit is altered in patients with the carcinoid syndrome.
Serotonin also stimulates gastric emptying in rats in vivo; however, the specific effects of 5HT on propulsion and transit in vivo are less clear.
In an in vitro study of an isolated segment of guinea pig ileum, Bülbring and Lin found that 5HT stimulated propulsive motility when applied intraluminally.
By contrast, serosal 5HT had no effect on transit; others have even reported inhibition of peristalsis by 5HT.
Serotonin stimulates nerve muscle preparations from the guinea pig small intestine and colon in vitro.
Thus there is evidence that 5HT can both inhibit and facilitate gastrointestinal motor function.
Intestinal smooth muscle cells and enteric nerves have 5HT 1 , 5HT 2 , and 5HT 3 receptors.
More recently, a new class of 5HT 4 receptors has been found in several tissues, including the guinea pig ileum and ascending colon, the cardiovascular system of the pig, and the human heat.
Acetylcholine is thought to play an important part in mediating 5HT induced contraction of intestinal smooth muscle in vitro and in vivo.
The relative roles of the different subtypes of 5HT receptors inducing propulsion through different levels of the alimentary tract are unclear.
Further understanding of serotonergic control of motility could lead to new ways to control diarrhoea in diseases such as the carcinoid syndrome.
The ileocolonic junction (ICJ) is an important area whereby gastrointestinal absorptive and motor functions are controlled, by virtue of its regulation of the passage of chyme from the small to the large bowel.
In carcinoid diarrhoea, transit through the small bowel and proximal colon is considerably accelerated, and this acceleration is associated with high urinary concentrations of 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid (5HIAA) and circulating 5HT.
In view of the rapid ICJ transit in patients with carcinoid diarrhoea, our aim was to develop a model in which the effects and mechanisms of hyperserotoninemia on transit and fluid transport in this region could be investigated.
Patients and methods
Experiments were performed on 100 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 300–400 mg; the study was approved by the institutional animal care and use committee and the radiation control committee of the Mayo Clinic.
Animals were housed in an animal care facility that is approved by the American Association for Accrediaton of Laboratory Animal Care and they were exposed to 12 hours of alternating light and dark cycles.
Their health was monitored by fully trained veterinary staff.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Preparation of experimental models
Rats were anesthetised with intraperitoneal (ip) chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg).
In all animals, a tracheostomy was performed to allow endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation by a rodent ventilator (cat no 7025, Stollting Co, Chicago, IL).
The respiratory minute volume was never higher than 0.12 l and the frequency of respiration was set at 60 a minute.
A PE10 cannula was placed into the thoracic aorta through a cutdown into the left carotid artery.
Rats also underwent laparotomy, at which time several models were established.
In the first (for ileocolonic transit), a Tygon cannula (external diameter: 1.22 mm; internal diameter: 0.76 mm) was placed into the distal ileum about 20 cm from the cecum, the cecum was opened, and the ileocaecal segment was rinsed of any residue with warm saline (37°C).
After closing the caecum with a purse string ligature, the loops of intestine were restored to the abdominal cavity.
In experiments on the colon (colonic transit), one cannula was positioned in the postcaecal portion of the colon; a second cannula was placed in the most distal part of the colon that was accessible at the time of laparotomy.
The average length of the colonic loop studied was 20 cm.
In a third series of experiments (fluid transport), the distal 20 to 25 cm of ileum was isolated for perfusion studies by two Tygon cannulae.
After one of these three experimental segments was set up, the intestines were returned to the abdominal cavity and the incision was closed.
Ileocolonic transit
One ml of 9 9 m Tc DTPA radio labelled saline was introduced into the ileum by slow infusion over five minutes; 0.3 ml saline was gently flushed through the cannula to ensure delivery of the entire volume of radiolabel into the ileum.
Preliminary studies showed that, with this method of delivery, the radiolabel did not disperse beyond the first 5 cm of the ileal segment.
Animals were kept under light anaesthesia thereafter with ip chloral hydrate.
Three hours after the ileal infusion, the abdomen was opened and the mesenteric vessels were tied.
The ileocolonic segment was identified, closed by ligatures at each end, and divided into five equal portions by separating 4 cm segments by means of silk ligatures.
The caecum and colon were identified down to the pelvis and ligatures tied.
The rats were then killed, and all these segments were counted in a Capintech radioisotope dose calibrator (CRC-5, Montvale, NJ).
Colonic transit
With the animals under light anesthaesia, 1 ml of 9 9 m Tc DTPA radiolabelled saline was introduced into the colon by slow infusion over five minutes; 0.3 ml of saline was gently flushed through the cannula.
Two hours after this infusion, the abdomen was opened, and the loop of colon was divided into four equal segments by means of silk ligatures.
The effluent from the distal Tygon cannula was collected separately during the experiment, and constituted the fifth segment.
Each segment of colon and the effluent were counted in a dose calibrator.
Ileal fluid transport
The ileum was perfused through the proximal cannula with an iso-osmolar electrolyte solution containing 1 4 C PEG 4000.
The electrolyte content (Na + , 151 mmol/l; K + , 5.6 mmol/l; Cl -, 128 mmol/l; Ca + + , 2.5 mmol/l; HCO 3 -, 23.1 mmol/l) was selected to mimic rat plasma (osmolarity: 324 mOsm/kg; pH: 7.4).
The ileal loop was perfused at a rate of 1.0 ml/minute by a peristaltic pump (Watson-Marlow, Inc, Marblehead, MA); experiments started with 30 minutes equilibration followed by three hours during which samples of ileal effluent were collected every 10 minutes.
During the first and third hours, saline was infused into the aorta; during the second hour, 5HT was infused.
Net fluid flux was assessed by changes in the concentration of the non-absorbable marker,1 4 C PEG 4000.
Choice of agonist and antagonist doses
The dose of 5HT (Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO) used in this study (7.74 mmol/kg) was based on previous in vivo dose resposne studies that showed that 5HT stimulated gastric emptying.
Antagonist doses were based on previous publications.
In the first series of experiments on motor function of the ileocolonic junction, we studied the effects of ia saline, 5HT, and bethanechol chloride, at a dose of 3.05 mmol/kg (Merck, Sharp, and Dohme, West Point, PA).
These agents were given in a total voluem of 1.5 ml, a 0.5 ml bolus injection, followed by a continuous infusion of 1 ml over a one hour period.
In experiments to study the mechanism of 5HT induced alterations of ileocolonic function, atropine and several 5HT receptor subtype antagonists were given intraperitoneally 60 minutes before the laparotomy; these were atropine suphate (0.14 mmol/kg, Elkins-Sinn, Cherry Hill, NJ); methylsergide (2.83 mmol/kg, a 5HT 1 and 5HT 2 antagonist donated by Sandoz Research Institute, East Hanover, NJ, USA); ketanserin (1.83 mmol/kg, a 5HT 2 antagonist donated by Janssen Pharmaceutica Inc, Beerse, Belgium); R-zacopride (2.5 mmol/kg, a selective 5HT 3 antagonist donated by Searle, IL, USA), and SC53116 (2.4 mmol/kg, a 5HT 4 agonist donated by Searle, IL, USA).
Experimental design
Five series of experiments were performed in rats in vivo to study:(1) the effects of ia saline, 5HT, and bethanechol on ileocolonic transit;(2) the effects of ip atropine, a 5HT 4 agonist, and several 5HT antagonists on ileocolonic transit induced by ia 5HT;(3) the effect of the same ip 5HT agonist and antagonists on ileocolonic transit;(4) the effect of ia saline, 5HT, and bethanechol on colonic transit; and (5) a comparison between the effects of ia saline and ia 5HT on ileal net fluid flux.
DATA AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The proportions of counts in the ileal or colonic segments at the end of the experiment were calculated.
ICJ transit was assessed by finding the geometric centre (weighted average) of counts over the five ileal segments, caecum, and colon with an adaptation of a previously published method used to measure intestinal transit in rats.
For studies of ICJ transit, with this method, a value of 1 indicated that all the isotope was in the first 4 cm of ileum; a value of 6 indicated that all isotope was in the caecum or colon.
Colonic transit was similarly assessed with the four colonic segments and effluent as the fifth segment.
Statistical analysis compared the effects on transit of 5HT and its agonist and antagonists by ANOVA followed by Dunnett's multigroup comparison, with the ia saline or the ia 5HT alone as the control groups.
Effects of ip agents during ia saline were also compared by ANOVA with Newman-Kuels multigroup comparison.
All results are expressed as mean (SEM).
Net fluid flux was summarised for the ia saline and 5HT hours and expressed as µl/cm loop/ hour in each rat.
Statistical analysis was by paired t test.
Results
ILEOCOLONIC JUNCTION TRANSIT: EFFECTS OF 5HT AND ITS ANTAGONISTS
Serotonin and bethanechol (Fig 1) significantly accelerated ICJ transit compared with saline.
The effects of 5HT and bethanechol were not statistically different.
Table 1 shows the geometric centres of isotope in the ileocolonic segment after the concomitant 5HT and the series of ip drugs were given.
Methysergide, R-zacopride, and SC53116 significantly inhibited the increased transit induced by 5HT; indeed, the geometric centres of isotope with ia 5HT and these agents given ip were less than the value observed with ia saline alone (Table I).
Atropine and the 5HT 2 antagonist, ketanserin, also significantly inhibited 5HT induced ICJ transit, but not to concentrations below that of ia saline.
EFFECT OF INTRAPERITONEAL SC53116 AND 5 HT ANTAGONISTS ON BASAL ILEOCOLONIC JUNCTION TRANSIT
None of the 5HT antagonists or the 5HT 4 agonist, SC53116, significantly altered ICJ transit when they were given ip during ia infusion of saline (Table II).
There were no significant differences relative to ip saline, but the difference between groups treated with SC53116 and R-zacopride was significant (Newman-Kuels test).
EFFECT OF 5 HT AND BETHANECHOL ON COLONIC TRANSIT
Intra-aortic bethanechol significantly accelerated colonic transit.
The effect of ia serotonin was variable; however, there was no overall acceleration of colonic transit (Fig 2).
EFFECT OF 5 HT ON ILEAL FLUID FLUX
Intra-aortal 5HT, given at the same dose and route as had induced acceleration of ICJ transit, failed to significantly alter baseline absorption found during the ia infusion of saline (Fig 3).
Discussion
The questions we considered required that an in vivo model be developed for measurement of transit across the ileocolonic junction and colon.
We elected to use a static rather than a dynamic method to evaluate transit because our previous studies with dynamic scintigraphy showed that emptying of the unprepared rat ileum into the caecum occurred very infrequently.
Infusion of the liquid bolus at a slow rate ensured that the isotope did not disperse beyond the first ileal segment; the present results confirmed the effect of a cholinergic agonist and antagonist on transit in the ICJ and colon, suggesting that the model is valid.
Serotonin accelerated transit of liquid across the ICJ, but not in the colon in vivo.
Previous reports have shown in vivo effects of 5HT on intraluminal pressure and myoelectric activity of the ICJ in the cat, but they did not assess the propulsive effects of 5HT in vivo or analyse which subtypes of 5HT receptors were responsible.
The effects of serotonin on gastrointestinal motor function are generally believed to be mediated through myenteric plexus neurons.
Although the mucosal application of 5HT activated the peristaltic reflex, suggesting a possible role for mucosal enterochromaffin cells,
Gershon and Tamir provided convincing data that an intraenteric barrier separates the myenteric plexus from the enterochromaffin cells in the epithelium.
It is possible, however, that mucosal application of 5HT might stimulate submucosal 5HT neurons, which may in turn activate interneurons connecting the submucosal and enteric plexuses.
Effects of 5HT on colonic motor function were previously studied in vivo by Jacoby et al .
Intracerebroventricular 5HT inhibited propulsive motility in the mouse colon; by contrast, ip 5HT stimulated propulsion of a glass bead through the colon.
In vitro, 5HT stimulated rabbit colonic circular muscle but inhibited neurons responsible for the off contraction.
Others have also shown in the rat that high doses (>10 -5 M) of 5HT released the caecum and internal anal sphincter.
Our data suggest that ia 5HT had no significant physiological effect on transit of liquid through the rat colon and are, therefore, consistent with these two studies.
The availability of novel, relatively specific antagonists of the 5HT receptor subtypes allowed us to evaluate the mechanism of 5HT induced acceleration of ICJ transit.
Generally, our results confirm some of the findings from in vitro studies.
We showed that the effects of 5HT on ICJ transit are partially mediated by cholinergic mechanisms and that they involve several 5HT receptor subtypes.
Thus 5HT stimulated an excitatory muscarinic cholinergic pathway that was inhibited by atropine.
This is consistent with the previously-described role of acetylcholine in 5HT induced contraction of intestinal smooth muscle in vitro and in vivo, which is mediated through neuronal 5HT 3 receptors.
Our findings of inhibition of the 5HT effect by subtypes 1 and 3 antagonists and by a 5HT 4 agonist suggests more complex interactions of 5HT receptors on enteric muscles or nerves.
5HT may be directly stimulating smooth muscle or antagonising an inhibitory interneuron in the myenteric plexus.
Several motor effects of 5HT agents have been reported.
For example, 5HT 1 like receptors occur on enteric smooth muscle, and their stimulation resulted in smooth muscle contraction.
Receptors for 5HT 2 may alter pyloric and cecal function.
Receptors for 5HT 4 have been identified in neurons of guinea pig ileum and ascending colon; the inhibitory effects of the 5HT 4 agonist, SC53116, on 5HT induced ICJ transit in the present study suggest that there may be a 5HT 4 mediated stimulation of the ileocaecal sphincter itself.
The precise sites of action of 5HT were not conssidered in our experiments, and further studies on isolated issues will be necessary.
Our findings help elucidate the in vivo effects of 5HT, such as in patients with carcinoid diarrhoea who have rapid small bowel and colonic transit and decreased capacitance of the proximal colon.
Thus correcton of these motor dysfunctions may help control carcinoid diarrhoea.
Previous studies in a few patients suggest that carcinoid diarrhoea is, at least temporarily, improved with methysergide, ICS205–930 (a 5HT 3 antagonist without 5HT 4 effects), and ketanserin.
Intra-aortic 5HT, given at the same dose that stimulated ICJ transit, had no significant effect on net fluid flux in the rat ileum.
These findings contrast with those of Beubler et al who used close intra-arterial injections of 5HT.
In the absence of dose-response studies, the only important point we can make is that transit was accelerated across the ICJ by a dose if ia 5HT that did not induce ileal secretion in vivo.
It is possible that secretory and motor mechanisms contribute to carcinoid diarrhoea, and the effects of 5HT and its antagonists on both processes deserve further study.
Liquid stool incontinence with severe urgency: anorectal function and effective biofeedback treatment
Abstract
The motor and sensory function of the anorectum is well characterised in patients with solid stool incontinence.
Fewer data are available in the case of liquid stool incontinence.
Anorectal sensorimotor function was studied in 16 patients with liquid stool incontinence and severe urgency (10 with diarrhoea) unresponsive to conventional medical treatment, and in 16 healthy volunteers.
The only significant difference found between incontinent patients and controls was a reduction in squeeze duration (p<0.0001).
Fourteen patients were selected to receive biofeedback treatment.
Treatment was associated with a substantial improvement in continence in 12 patients and with a significant decrease in urgency (p<0.05).
Bowel frequency was not significantly influenced.
Most patients showed a persistent improvement in anal motor function.
Functional parameters were not predictive of outcome of treatment; the poor responders showed major psychological problems.
In conclusion, an anal motor deficit is often present in disabling liquid stool incontinence.
Biofeedback may improve anal continence in 75% of patients.
Faecal incontinence is a disabling condition, which is reported to have a population prevalence in the range of 0.1% to 1.5%.
It is probably greatly under-reported by patients, because of the embarrassment it causes.
Most studies on anorectal function have focused so far on solid stool incontinence, which is probably the worse form.
Until a few years ago this was the uncontested domain of surgeons because of the poor results of pharmacological treatment.
More recently, biofeedback treatment has been suggested and reported to be effective in about two thirds of patients.
It is based on the rationale that patients can be trained to increase the anal sphincter contractile capability in response to rectal distension, if a residual rectal sensation is present.
Liquid stool incontinence has so far received little attention.
Its incidence in the general population is not clearly established, but it is unlikely to be negligible.
In a recent study as many as 5% of subjects in a group of students and hospital employees were reported as losing bowel control, at least occasionally.
Incontinence, however, was poorly defined (for solid or liquid stools), but we may reasonably suppose that in many cases it was for liquid stools only.
The same study suggested that faecal soiling may prompt people with bowel dysfunction to go and see the doctor.
A common clinical finding is occurrence of liquid stool incontinence together with severe urgency.
This combination of symptoms may be unresponsive to conventional medical treatment.
In addition, the role of biofeedback treatment in these conditions is still unclear, and the efficacy of retraining in liquid stool incontinence has been questioned in a recent study.
This study was designed to evaluate ano rectal sensorimotor function and the effectiveness of biofeedback treatment in a group of patients complaining of liquid stool incontinence and severe urgency resistant to conventional medicine treatments.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Twenty two patients referred for liquid stool incontinence were considered.
Each patient was provided with a diary card to record bowel frequency and episodes of incontinence and urgency over a one month period.
Criteria for inclusion were: liquid stool incontinence for at least 12 months, frequency of incontinence of at least once a week, frequent severe urgency, and inefficacy of conventional medical treatment (constipating agents, fibre supplementation, regular enemas) given for at least one month by the referring physician.
Severe urgency was defined as an urgent need to defecate which has to be relieved in less than one minute to avoid incontinence.
Only the patients meeting all the above mentioned criteria were included in the study.
They were 16 subjects (11 women and five men) aged from 24 to 75 years (mean 49).
The other patients were excluded for lower frequency of incontinence (three patients) or absence of severe urgency (three patients).
All the patients included signed an informed consent form.
Frequency of liquid stool incontinence ranged from three times day to once a week (mean 0.92 episodes/day).
Twelve patients also complained of diarrhoea defined either as frequent passage of small amounts of stools or as habitual passage of liquid or semiliquid stools.
Mean bowel frequency in the group was 3/day (SEM 0.7).
We did not attempt any better characterisation of this symptom because this may be difficult in patients with incontinence.
Nine patients with diarrhoea complained of incontinence in the presence of loose bowel movements only (Table I).
All patients had conventional examinations for anal incontinence or diatthoea, or both including flexible sigmoidoscopy, barium enema, barium meal and follow through, faecal fat estimation, xylose test, glucose breath test, and lactose tolerance test.
Table I shows clinical details of the incontinence study population.
Irritable bowel syndrome was diagnosed in patients with normal findings, but with abdominal pain relieved by defecation and at least two further symptoms featuring among the ‘Manning criteria’.
The incontinence was considered idiopathic in patients in whom no underlying condition could be detected.
Sixteen healthy volunteers without gastrointestinal or anorectal symptoms (13 women and three men, mean age 43, range 21–72 years) served as a control group.
ANORECTAL MANOMETRY
All subjects were studied without a bowel preparation and after conventional medical treatment had finished.
With the patient lying in the left lateral position, a three balloon apparatus was inserted into the rectum to permit rectal distension and pressure recordings from the rectum and upper and lower anal canal.
The rectal balloon, 5 cm in length, was positioned with its distal edge 5 cm from the anal verge.
The balloons located in the upper and lower anal canal reflect the activity of the internal and the external sphincter, respectively.
Each balloon was connected to an air filled pressure transducer.
The electrical signals from the pressure transducers were amplified and converted to digital form by an electronic interface unit (GR 800, Aspen Medical, Dingwall, Scotland).
Data were then transferred and displayed on a computer by means of specially designed software (Aspen Medical).
Pressure curves were analysed manually.
Rectal sensation was assessed by rapid air distension of the rectal balloon with volumes decreasing from 50 ml to 10 ml (in 10 ml decrements).
Placebo distensions were randomly performed throughout the procedure.
The rectoanal inhibitory reflex was measured using the threshold for internal sphincter relaxation (smallest volume of rectal distension producing a relaxation of at least 3 mm Hg).
External anal sphincter function was investigated by:(1) the threshold of external anal sphincter contraction (smallest volume of rectal distension causing a phasic sphincter contraction of at least 3 mm Hg),(2) maximum voluntary contraction (mean of three trials of maximum voluntary squeezing lasting for five seconds), and (3) squeeze duration (length of time during which each subject could voluntarily keep a pressure rise of 10 mm Hg in the lower anal canal balloon, mean of three trials).
Rectal compliance was evaluated by a cylindrical latex balloon (condom type), 10 cm in length, mounted on a stiff PVC tube measuring 0.3 mm in diameter.
This balloon was placed in the rectum at a distance of 8 cm from the anal verge and connected to an air filled transducer.
The balloon was inflated with air in 50 ml increments.
Inflations were separated by an adaptation interval of one minute.
An inflation volume of 100 ml was well tolerated by all subjects.
The pressure at 100 ml (corrected by subtracting the pressure within the balloon inflated in ambient air) and the maximum tolerable volume (the balloon volume causing abdominal discomfort or spontaneous expulsion) were taken as indices of rectal compliance.
BIOFEEDBACK TREATMENT
Biofeedback treatment was performed in all but two patients (patients 1 and 2, Table I), in whom all manometric results were within the normal range.
Both had prolapsing external haemorrhoids and were therefore referred to a surgeon for haemorrhoidectomy; both reported regression of symptoms after surgery.
Data from these two patients are included in the statistical analysis of the diagnostic anorectal manometry, as they were incontinent.
Other patients had external haemorrhoids, though less serious.
Patients received a full explanation of the relevance of the external sphincter in controlling anorectal functioning before starting biofeedback.
The conditioning session consisted of two treatment trials carried out within two days with the three balloon system.
Patients were trained in increasing strength and duration of external anal sphincter contractions in response to rectal distension.
Particular care was taken to get the patients to contract the sphincter for at least 20 seconds.
This was first accomplished with the manometric apparatus in position and with the visual help of the computer screen.
The same response was then produced withholding the visual display.
At home, each patient was instructed to practice contracting the sphincter several times a day (at least 20 times three times daily) for 20–30 seconds as directed in conditioning sessions.
Patients were interviewed monthly for the first five months and every three months thereafter.
Meanwhile, they continued the daily recording of bowel movements and frequency of incontinence and urgency.
Patients and referring physicians were instructed to avoid any change in the medical management of incontinence during the study.
The compliance to this advice was checked at each interview.
After one month, another training session was provided, if needed.
All treatment sessions were conducted by one of the authors (GC).
A good response to treatment was defined as restoration of continence or a decrease of at least 75% in frequency of incontinence.
Statistical analysis of the data was done using the Student's t test for paired data or the Wilcoxon rank sum test for paired data, as indicated.
Data are expressed as mean (SEM).
Results
ANORECTAL FUNCTION
Rectal sensation was within the range of our control group (20 ml) in all incontinent patients.
There was no significant difference in threshold of internal anal sphincter relaxation between controls and incontinent patients with only three patients showing values outside the control range (20 ml).
The threshold of external anal sphincter contraction was the same in incontinent patients and in controls (Table II) and only three patients showed a value above the upper limit of normal (20 ml of air).
Mean amplitude of maximum voluntary contraction was similar in incontinent patients and controls (38 v 41 mm Hg, Table II).
On the other hand, squeeze duration in incontinent subjects was significantly shorter than in healthy volunteers (22.4 (2.9)v 49.4 (1.4) sec, p<0.0001).
Squeeze duratiown was less than 35 seconds (lower normal limit) in all patients except the two with prolapsing haemorrhoids.
Figure I shows the most common pattern of prolonged contraction seen in patients with incontinence — that is, a strong initial sphincter contraction followed by rapid relaxation.
No statistical differences were found between incontinent patients and controls with regard to rectal compliance, whether as maximum tolerable volume or as intrarectal pressure at 100 ml of air (Table II).
BIOFEEDBACK TREATMENT
Bowel frequency and frequency of incontinence and urgency were assessed by reviewing the diary cards.
The first session of biofeedback conditioning was associated with an improvement in external anal sphincter function in all subjects.
The threshold of phasic sphincter contraction reverted to normal in the three patients with abnormal values.
After retraining, squeeze duration increased significantly from 19.6 (2.4) to 38.3 (3.2) seconds (p<0.0001) with all patients gaining a squeeze duration of at least 20 seconds (Fig 2).
At the first interview, 11 patients reported a substantial improvement in faecal continence (good responders according to our criteria).
Two other patients reported a slight improvement, and one reported no improvement at all.
After additional training, another subject was classified as a good responder, while two showed a persistently poor response.
The overall success rate was 85% of treated patients (75% of all incontinent subjects).
Restoration of continence was evident in nine patients, while three patients showed a reduction in frequency of incontinence ranging from 75% to 90%.
With a more in depth analysis of results, restoration of continence was seen only in patients achieving a squeeze duration over 30 seconds.
No patient reported a change of medical treatment during the study.
After the first interview 10 patients (seven good responders, three poor responders) had a second diagnostic anorectal manometry.
The good responders showed a persistent improvement in external anal sphincter function, while in the poor responders it had reverted to prebiofeedback values.
The two patients who did not respond to retaining refused to have a second training sessions and were lost to follow up, after three months.
These were irritable bowel syndrome patients (patients 13 and 15, Table I) with major psychological problems.
At diagnostic anorectal manometry, they showed an isolated alteration of squeeze duration without any impairment of internal anal sphincter function.
In the good responder group, the improvement in continence was maintained throughout our follow up period (mean 14.5 months, range 3–21).
After biofeedback, the frequency of episodes of severe urgency was significantly decreased compared with the month before treatment (1.9 (0.4)v 4.5 (0.7) episodes/day, p<0.05).
Bowel frequency was also decreased (2.4 (0.5)v 3.1 (0.7) bowel movements/day), but the difference did not reach statistical significance (p=0.06).
Six patients still complained of loose motions.
After three months of retraining, good responders were questioned about the social impact of the treatment.
They were pleased with the results and reported an increase in their social activities.
Discussion
A motor deficit of the external anal sphincter was seen in most of our patients with liquid stool incontinence and suvere urgency.
The relevance of impaired function of the external anal sphincter in liquid stool incontinence has been suggested in previous studies and is confirmed by our data.
The most common abnormality in our patients was isolated impairment of prolonged squeezing.
Prolonged contraction of the external anal sphincter is not often evaluated in faecal incontinence.
This may explain the finding of normal anal motor function in many incontinent patients.
Whitehead et al , using the same balloon probe as in our study, showed that the external anal sphincter fatigues in less than 30 seconds in geriatric patients with solid stool incontinence.
On the other hand, patients complaining of chronic diarrhoea and faecal incontinence had squeeze duration values similar to healthy volunteers, measured with perfused catheters.
Different techniques, reference values (5 mm Hg over anal basal pressure to define prolonged squeezing), and patient selection criteria may account for the discrepancy vis a vis our results.
An easily fatiguing sphincter may explain the severe urgency reported by our patients.
On presentation of faeces to the proximal anal canal, the duration of the squeezing effort may not be sufficient for rectal adaptation.
As a consequence, patients may feel a profound anorectal discomfort and have minor leaking.
The noted decrease in urgency after retraining may be consistent with this hypothesis.
The clinical significance of the motor abnormality is also confirmed by the fact that rectal sensation and the rectoanal inhibitory reflex were not significantly changed in our patients.
Both parameters have been found to be grossly impaired in subgroups of faecally incontinent patients.
We did not study anal basal pressure, which is commonly believed to play a significant part in preserving faecal continence for liquids.
Our balloon probe is not suitable for this, but anal basal pressure would not seem to influence the outcome of patients receiving biofeedback treatment.
Training was associated with normalisation of external anal sphincter phasic contraction and with an increase in squeeze duration in all patients.
The motor function of the sphincter seemed to be persistently improved in patients regaining continence, but not in poor responders (71% of patients tested after training).
Improved sphincter function was often achieved after only one retraining session and was associated with a significant, longlasting clinical benefit in 85% of patients treated.
The patients not only showed an improved continence mechanism, but also reported a significant decrease in urgency.
Bowel frequency, on the other hand, was only slightly modified.
Some patients may have recorded an episode of faecal incontinence as a bowel movement, before the beginning of retraining.
In any event, improved faecal continence was unlikely to be related to changes in bowel habits because many patients continued to report loose bowel movements.
It is unclear why some patients apparently lose the improvement in motor function gained during biofeedback sessions.
We were unable to predict the outcome of treatment on the basis of functional parameters, thus confirming the finding of previous studies.
The two poor responders in our group were both irritable bowel syndrome patients with major psychological problems.
They seemed to be particularly concerned about their incontinence, and this factor was thought to play an important part in their psychosocial dysfunction by the referring physician.
The reverse could also be true, and mental state was actually the only variable which differentiated these patients from irritable bowel syndrome patients who responded satisfactorily to treatment.
Our data confirm the impression gained from previous studies that psychological factors may affect the outcome of retraining treatment.
One might argue that spontaneous remission may have occurred in our patients.
Two recent controlled studies of biofeedback treatment v conventional medical treatment have cast doubts on the effectiveness of retraining, particularly in liquid stool incontinence in diarrhoea.
Spontaneous regression of faecal incontinence in our patients is unlikely because of the duration of symptoms before biofeedback and the close time relation between treatment and improvement.
We elected to study only patients with disabling liquid stool incontinence and urgency where conventional medical treatment had already failed.
Our study population may have been different from that examined in other studies in respect of different bowel habits (less consistent diarrhoea in our patients).
In addition, measurements of prolonged squeezing were not recorded in the two studies where biofeedback was reported to be as effective as conventional medical treatment.
Failure to maintain prolonged voluntary anal contraction seems to be critical in our patients.
As a matter of fact, a clinical benefit was seen even with an occasionally decreased amplitude in external sphincter contraction when improvement in squeeze duration was achieved (Fig 1).
Furthermore, the clinical outcome seemed also to be related to the length of prolonged voluntary anal contraction achieved by patients.
MacLeod reported effective biofeedback treatment with patients contracting the anal sphincter for 20–30 seconds.
Similarly, Miner, in a successful controlled biofeedback trial, encouraged patients to squeeze for at least 20 seconds.
A good response to training was associated with improved squeeze duration in our patients, but increased conidence in mastering anorectal function may also have been of some benefit.
In conclusion, a motor deficit of the anal sphincter is evident in most patients complaining of liquid stool incontinence associated with severe urgency and unresponsive to conventional medical treatment.
This consists more often than not in impairement of prolonged voluntary anal contraction.
This should be carefully looked for because it can be improved by biofeedback treatment.
In this group of patients, biofeedback treatment is effective in restoring socially acceptable faecal continence in 75% of cases, even in the presence of diarrhoeal stools.
In such patients, this type of treatment may be regarded as being quick, safe, comparatively simple, and inexpensive.
Inhibition of omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemia by SMS 201–995, a long acting somatostatin analogue in man
Abstract
Whether the long acting somatostatin analogue SMS 201–995 (octreotide, Sandostatin) could inhibit the basal and meal stimulated hypergastrinaemia and hyperpepsinogenaemia induced by omeprazole was investigated.
Eight healthy subjects were randomised to receive five day courses of SMS 201–995 (25µg subcutaneously three times daily), omeprazole (40 mg once a day), a combination of both drugs, or placebo.
Basal and meal stimulated serum gastrin and basal serum pepsinogen A and C values were measured the day before treatment, on day five treatment, and the day after each course of treatment.
Omeprazole caused significant increases in basal and meal stimulated peak and integrated serum gastrin values and pepsinogen A and C levels, which were still significantly raised the day after stopping omeprazole treatment.
Giving SMS 201–995 with omeprazole significantly reduced any omeprazole induced increases in basal and meal stimulated peak and integrated serum gastrin levels; serum pepsinogen A and C values were significantly inhibited too.
Serum gastrin values during combined therapy were not significantly different from those during placeo treatment, whereas pepsinogen A and C levels were still significantly raised.
On the day after stopping combined therapy, basal and meal stimulated peak and integrated serum gastrin and serum pepsinogen C (but not pepsinogen A) levels were not significantly different from values obtained on the day after stopping omeprazole alone.
SMS 201–995 without omeprazole significantly inhibited basal and meal stimulated peak and integrated serum gastrin levels.
Pepsinogen A was also significantly inhibited by SMS 210–995, but the reduction in pepsinogen C failed to reach statistical significance.
In conclusion, SMS 201–995 prevents basal and meal stimulated increases in serum gastrin during omeprazole therapy.
This finding may have clinical importance in the few patients who have pronounced hypergastrinaemia because of profound long acting acid inhibition.
Treatment of patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, peptic ulcer disease, and reflux oesophagitis with the H + /K + -ATPase antagonist, omeprazole, has resulted in considerably faster healing and higher healing rates than with H 2 receptor antagonists.
This improvement results from more profound inhibition of gastric acid secretion.
Profound acid inhibition, however, results in increases in serum gastrin because of interference in the feedback mechanism between intragastric acidity and antral gastrin release.
In rats, the hypergastrinaemia induced by long term omeprazole has resulted in enterochromaffin-like (EC-like) cell hyperplasia and, subsequently, gastric carcinoid formation.
Further studies have shown that these effects are not restricted to omeprazole treatment, but are also found during treatment with other H + /K + -ATPase inhibitors and high dose H 2 receptor antagonists, suggesting that the effects are secondary to profound, long term acid inhibition.
The finding that the effect of omeprazole on the EC-like cells is prevented by antrectomy points to a crucial role for hypergastrinaemia in EC-like cell hyperplasia and carcinoid formation.
Hypergastrinaemia in patients with type A atrophic gastritis and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is also accompanied by an increased incidence of gastric carcinoid tumours.
Although carcinoid tumours have not been observed during long term omeprazole treatment, the possibility thatlong term pronounced hypergastrinaemia may increase the risk of tumour formation cannot be excluded.
Since it has been shown in rats that decreased somatostatin concentrations in the antral mucosa may be involved in the development of hypergastrinaemia during potent acid inhibition, we have studied whether administration of the long-acting somatostatin analogue SMS 201–995 (Sandostatin, octreotide) can prevent omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemia in man.
Because serum pepsinogen A and C levels are considerably increased during omeprazole treatment, the effect of SMS 201–995 on serum pepsinogen A and C levels was also investigated.
Methods
Eight healthy volunteers (six men and two women; median age 33 years, range 27–43 years) were randomly treated with SMS 201–995 (25 µg subcutaneously three times a day), omeprazole (40 mg orally once a day), a combination of omeprazole 40 mg once daily and SMS 201–995 (25 µg three times daily), or placebo for five days.
Basal and postprandial serum gastrin concentrations and basal pepsinogen A and C values were measured the day before, the last day (day five), of treatment, and on the day after the various courses of treatment.
In studies on the last day of treatment, fasted subjects took their morning dose of study medication half an hour before eating the standard test meal, whereas on the day before and after the treatment courses placebo was given 30 minutes before eating the test meal.
There was an interval of at least one week between the treatment courses.
Serum gastrin was measured twice before with an interval of 15 minutes and at 15 minutes intervals for one hour after eating a standard test meal of one slice of white bread, one boiled egg, 150 ml of milk, 150 ml of yoghurt, 50 g of cheese, 20 g of sugar, and 25 g of butter.
Serum pepsinogen A and C concentrations were measured only in the basal samples, because it has been shown that feeding does not change these.
Serum gastrin was measured by a sensitive and specific radioimmunoassay, as previously described.
The upper limit of normal in this assay is 40 pM.
Serum pepsinogen A and C concentrations were also measured by sensitive and specific radioimmunoassays as previously described.
In 201 healthy blood donors, the mean (SEM) pepsinogen A concentration was 59 (28) µg/l, and pepsinogen C was 15 (12) µg/l.
All samples were measured in duplicate in the same assay.
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
The basal values reported are the means of the two basal values obtained with a 15 minute interval.
Integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin outputs were determined by calculating the area under the serum concentration time curve.
Statistical analysis was performed by Student's t test for paired results.
p Values of below 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.
The study was approved by the local ethical committee and informed consent was obtained from all volunteers.
Results
SERUM GASTRIN
During placebo treatment basal, postprandial peak, and integrated serum gastrin values were similar on the three study days and on the days before each drug course.
During the placebo experiments basal serum gastrin was 10 (1) pM, meal stimulated serum gastrin values peaked at 54 (4) pM, while integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin responses were calculated to be 157 (13) pM/hour (Figs 1–3).
When measured on day five of omeprazole medication, the basal serum gastrin concentration was significantly increased to 47 (14) pM (p<0.02), meal stimulated peak serum gastrin concentration to 89 (14) pM (p<0.02) and integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin responses to 300 (55) pm/hour (p<0.02)(Figs 1–3).
On the day after the last ingested omeprazole dose, basal serum gastrin (26 (6) pM), meal stimulated peak serum gastrin (78 (10) pM), and integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin concentrations (255 (40) pM/hour) were still significantly (p<0.02) higher than corresponding values during placebo treatment, but the values were not significantly different from the corresponding values on day five of omeprazole treatment (Figs 1–3).
SMS 201–995 significantly inhibited basal serum gastrin levels from 10 (1) pM to 5 (1) pM (p<0.05), peak serum gastrin levels after the meal from 54 (4) pM to 41 (5) pM (p<0.02), and integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin secretion from 157 (13) pM/hour to 115 (18) pM/hour (p<0.01).
On the day after the SMS 201–995 treatment, basal serum gastrin values (10 (1) pM), peak serum gastrin levels in response to the meal (53 (7) pM), and integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin responses (166 (24) pM/hour) were not significantly different from corresponding values during placebo treatment (Figs 1–3).
Omeprazole plus SMS 201–995 significantly reduced basal serum gastrin levels compared with those obtained during single omeprazole treatment from 47 (14) pM to 19 (7) pM (p<0.05), and these values were not significantly different from basal values during placebo.
Peak serum gastrin values in response to the meal and integrated meal stimulated serum gastrin responses on day five of omeprazole treatment (89 (14) pM and 300 (55) pM/hour, respectively) were also significantly (p<0.01) reduced by SMS 201–995 (56 (7) pM and 169 (23) pM/hour, respectively), but values were not significantly different from the placebo experiments (53 (4) pM and 157 (13) pM/hour, respectively).
One day after omeprazole plus SMS 201–995, basal (21 (3) pM)(p<0.05), peak (71 (8) pM)(p<0.02), and integrated (229 (31) pM/hour)(p<0.02) serum gastrin responses to the meal were significantly increased compared with corresponding values during placebo treatment, but the results did not differe from corresponding values on the day after omeprazole medication alone (Figs 1–3).
SERUM PEPSINOGEN A AND C
Fasting serum pepsinogen A and C levels before and after placebo and active treatment courses are shown in Figures 4 and 5.
Omeprazole treatment significantly increased the fasting serum pepsinogen A level from 44 (3) µg/l to 102 (21) µg/l (p<0.01), and the serum pepsinogen C value increased significantly from 13 (1) µg/l to 37 (9) µg/l (p<0.01).
One day after treatment the pepsinogen A (100 (23) µg/l) and pepsinogen C levels (34 (9) µg/l) were still significantly increased compared with the placebo values (p<0.01) SMS 201–995 treatment significantly decreased the pepsinogen A level from 43 (3) µg/l to 35 (3) µg/l (p<0.02), while the decrease in pepsinogen C values failed to reach statistical significance (from 13 (1) µg/l to 11 (2) µg/l).
On the day after stopping SMS 201–995 treatment, these levels were not significantly decreased when compared with placebo.
The combination of SMS 201–995 and omeprazole caused a significant fall in pepsinogen A from 102 (21) µg/l to 72 (9) µg/l (p<0.05) compared with single omeprazole treatment; one day after stopping treatment there was still a significant rise (p<0.05) in the pepsinogen A value (82 (24) µg/l).
The fall in serum pepsinogen C during combined therapy (20 (3) µg/l) was also significant (p<0.01), when compared with values during omeprazole alone (37 (9) µg/l), but the result on the day after stopping failed to reach statistical significance (26 (8)v 34 (9) µg/l).
The serum pepsinogen A and C levels on the day after stopping the combination therapy were significantly higher than placebo values (p<0.02 and p<0.05 respectively).
SIDE EFFECTS
Omeprazole was well tolerated.
Intestinal cramps, upper abdominal discomfort, and fatty stools were noticed by five of the subjects during SMS 201–995 treatment taken either alone or with omeprazole.
These complaints decreased towards the end of the treatment.
The side effects were, however, mild and did not lead to withdrawal from the study.
Discussion
This study shows that the long acting somatostatin analogue SMS 201–995 given subcutaneously in a dose of 25 µg three times daily can abolish hypergastrinaemia induced by five days' treatment with omeprazole (40 mg once daily in man.
The possibility that the inhibition of omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemia by SMS 201–995 is a result of interference with the antisecretory effect of omeprazole is unlikely.
Firstly, because SMS 201–995 is a potent inhibitor of gastric acid secretion and, secondly, because we have found in a separate pilot experiment that 24 hour intragastric pH profiles during single omeprazole treatment and treatment combined with SMS 201–995 did not differ in two subjects studied (data not shown).
The dose of 40 mg omeprazole once daily is higher than that recommended for peptic ulcer therapy, but is regularly used in reflux oesophagitis, while a duration of five days was chosen because it has been shown that the effect of omeprazole on gastric acid and serum gastrin stabilises after three days of treatment.
SMS 201–995 was administered three times daily at eight hour intervals, to obtain optimal efficacy over the 24 hour period.
The dose of 25 µg thrice daily is slightly lower than that usually given to patients with the dumping syndrome, or neuroendocrine tumours.
The relatively short duration of action of SMS 201–995 compared with omeprazole on serum gastrin was also observed in our study.
The day after five days' treatment with omeprazole plus SMS 201–995, serum gastrin levels were increased because of the prolonged effects of omeprazole on gastrin release.
Several factors motivated us to study the inhibitory effects of SMS 201–995 on omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemia.
Firstly, different studies have pointed to an important role for somatostatin, present in paracrine cells in the antral mucosa, in the regulation of gastrin release under physiological and pathophysiological conditions.
Secondly, gastric somatostatin concentrations have been found to be low after long term omeprazole treatment in rats, and thirdly, exogenous administration of somatostatin to hypergastrinaemia patients has been shown to inhibit significantly gastrin release.
Prevention of hypergastrinaemia through potent acid inhibition may also have clinical implications, since longlasting, pronounced hypergastrinaemia in rate has been shown to stimulate EC-like cell hyperplasia and, subsequently, gastric carcinoid formation.
Similarly, the increased incidence of carcinoid tumours found in patients wth type A atrophic gastritis and patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome has been associated with hypergastrinaemia.
It has been suggested that omeprazole treatment in patients with peptic ulcer disease will not be associated with clinically relevant EC-like cell proliferation since increases in serum gastrin in these patients are modest compared with those in patients with type A atrophic gastritis.
However, recent studies in patients on maintenance treatment with omeprazole for reflux oesophagitis have demonstrated that about 10% achieve serum gastrin values exceeding five times the upper limit of normal.
Therefore, agents capable of reducing hypergastrinaemia may be of potential value in preventing the trophic effects of hypergastrinaemia on the gastric mucosa.
In omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemic rats, SMS 201–995 prevents both the development of hypergastrinaemia and the increase in the gastrin mRNA levels, and antagonises the trophic effect of hypergastrinaemia on the fundic endocrine mucosa.
Giving SMS 201–995 subcutaneously, although regularly used in patients with hormone producing endocrine tumours and severe dumping syndrome, is an obvious drawback of this therapy.
Our observation that short term treatment with omeprazole increases serum pepsinogen A and C levels confirms previous studies.
Short term treatment with SMS 201–995 decreases both basal and omeprazole induced increases of serum pepsinogen A and C levels.
This inhibition may be secondary to the inhibitory effects of SMS 201–995 on serum gastrin levels, but direct or other indirect effects of SMS 201–995 on the pepsinogen producing cells cannot be excluded.
In vitro studies of cells showed that somatostatin inhibits pepsinogen secretion by decreasing cyclic AMP in chief cells.
Furthermore, treatment of rats with omeprazole leads to a decrease of somatostatin not only in the antrum but also in the fundic mucosa.
It is therefore possible that the increased serum pepsinogen concentrations during omeprazole treatment are secondary to the somatostatin deficiency of the fundic mucosa.
In conclusion, SMS 201–995 prevents basal and meal stimulated increases in serum gastrin caued by profound antisecretory therapy.
This finding may be of clinical importance in the few patients who have severe hypergastrinaemia as a result of long acting profound acid inhibition.
Growth and clinical course of children with Crohn's disease
Abstract
Growth impairment is a common complication of childhood Crohn's disease, but longitudinal data and follow up studies into adulthood are sparse.
This study reviewed the records of 100 Tanner stages 1 and 2 children (66 males, 34 females) consecutively diagnosed with Crohn's disease at this hospital between January 1980 and June 1988.
The influence of sex, anatomical location of disease, severity of symptoms, corticosteroids, and surgical intervention on growth were analysed by univariate and multivariate regression analysis.
At diagnosis mean standard deiation score (SDS) for height was 1.11 (1.28)(males 1.14 (1.26), females 1.05 (1.33)).
Twenty one children were below the third centile for height.
During years one and two height velocity (cm/y) was 4.4 (2.3) and 5.1 (2.7), but 40% of children in year one and 33% of children in year two grew less than expected (<4 cm).
Forty nine children grew <4 cm/y during two or more of the 4.9 (1.8) years of follow up.
severity of gastrointestinal symptoms was the major factor influencing linear growth velocity (p<0.01 for years one and two).
Despite the high prevalence of growth impairment, the subset of childen who had reached maturity by the time of the study (n=67) nevertheless maintained their height centile.
The SDS for height at ultimate follow up was 0.82 (1.1).
Compared with diagnosis, change in SDS was 0.35 (1.08).
Growth increments were comparable for surgically treated patients v patients only treated medically and among patients stratified by location of disease.
Females (n=25) achieved greater catch up growth than males (n=42).
Ultimate SDS for height for females was 0.48 (0.91)v 1.02 (1.19) for males.
Change in SDS for height was +0.66 (1.27) for females v 0.16 (0.90) for males (p=0.02).
These data confirm the frequency of growth impairment in childhood Crohn's Disease.
After diagnosis, however, the prognosis for ultimate linear growth is good.
Childhood Crohn's disease is often complicated by retardation of linear growth and pubertal development.
Few long term studies, however, specifically consider the epidemiology and natural history of impairment of growth in an at risj population.
Incomplete measurement of growth indices has often prevented or biased retrospective assessment of such data.
The data base for inflammatory bowel diseases established in our hospital has allowed us to review our experience.
We evaluated children with Crohn's disease presenting before or during early puberty and analysed the variation in their subsequent linear growth in relation to anatomical distribution of disease, severity of gastrointestinal symptoms, sex, and therapeutic interventions.
Methods
The records of 100 consecutive children diagnosed as having Crohn's disease at the Hospital for Sick Children between January 1980 and June 1988 were reviewed.
Only patients at Tanner stage 1 or 2 of pubertal development when initially assessed were included in this study.
In the Metropolitan Toronto area neither general pediatricians nor adult gastroenterologists independently manage such young patients and no pediatric gastroenterologist practises at another institution.
This restriction ensured that the study population was representative of the range of pediatric Crohn's disease rather than a select group requiring tertiaty care.
All patients were followed up for a minimum of two years through the inflammatory bowel diseases clinic.
Patients transferred after initial diagnosis elsewhere and patients referred for consultation only were excluded.
Gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal pain, diarrhoea, anorexia) as well as extraintestinal manifestations were registered on standardised forms.
Complete blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were regularly measured at clinic visits.
Heights were routinely measured on a wall mounted stadiometer.
Radiology of the small intestine and either double contrast barium enema or colonoscopy were used to determine the anatomical distribution of disease.
During each of the first two years after diagnosis, gastrointestinal symptoms recorded on standardised forms were classified as quiescent, mild, moderate, or severe as defined in Table I. For all 100 patients, the influence of anatomical localisation of disease, sex, severity of gastrointestinal symptoms, duration of daily prednisone use, and of nutritional intervention on the height velocities during each of the first two years were analysed by multiple regression analysis.
Stepwise model selection was used.
The coefficient of determination (R (adjusted)) was used to measure the proportion of variation explained by individual factors.
Before multiple regression analysis, univariate tests were used to assess the independent effect of each factor on height velocity.
t Tests were used for two level factors; ANOVA was employed for factors with several levels, and simple linear regression for continuous variables.
The outcome of patients who had completed their linear growth (defined by attainment of Tanner stage 5 pubertal development and less than 1 cm of growth in 12 months) at the time of the study was also reviewed.
Standard deviation scores (SDS) for height at diagnosis and at ultimate follow up were calculated according to the equation:
where χ 2 is the observed height, χ 2 — the mean height for the given age and sex, and Sχ 2 — the standard deviation of the mean.
The program CASP was used for this purpose.
The χ 2 — and Sχ 2 — for a given age and sex were obtained from the data of the National Center for Health Statistics.
Univariate tests and multiple regression analysis were used to assess the influence of anatomic localisation of disease, sex, overall gastrointestinal symptom severity (as defined in Table II), and surgical intervention on the change in SDS for height over the total period of follow up.
Results are expressed as mean (SD).
Univariate and multiple regression analysis was by SAS and Proc REG was used for all regression analysis.
All computations were on a DEC System 5000 computer running Ultrix Version 4.1, Research Computing, The Hospital for Sick Children.
Results
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Between January 1980 and June 1988 one hundred children (66 boys, 34 girls) at Tanner stage 1 (n=76) or Tanner stage 2 (n=24) of pubertal development were diagnosed at the Hospital for Sick Children to have Crohn's disease.
The mean age at diagnosis was 11.3 (2.3)(range 5.4–16.6) years.
Disease was localised to the terminal ileum above or plus caecum in 41 patients, ileum plus colon in 36, more proximal ileum or jejunum in 14, and the colon alone in nine children.
The mean duration of symptoms before diagnosis was 9.1 (11.4) months.
The mean standard deviation score (SDS) for height at diagnosis was -1.11 (1.28), and was similar for both males (-1.14 (1.26)) and females (-1.05 (1.33)).
Poor growth was cited as a presenting symptom for 31 of the 100 children.
The height of 21 patients was less than the third centile according to the charts of Tanner and Whitehouse (SDS for height <-1.8).
Bone age was delayed by more than two standard deviations for chronological age in 21 of the 27 patients for whom it was determined.
FIRST AND SECOND YEARS AFTER DIAGNOSIS
Eighty five of the children were treated with prednisone during the first year (1 mg/kg/day for six weeks then tapering to discontinue over one to two months).
Table I summarises their subsequent clinical course.
After initial treatment 14 patients had no further gastrointestinal symptoms and normal complete blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate for the remainder of that year (quiescent disease).
Fifty four children had intermittent or continuing mild symptoms not requiring further prednisone during the first year.
Twenty three children had more severe but intermittent symptoms and nine had chronically severe disease throughut the year.
Twenty six children received at least two courses of daily prednisone in the regimen described.
Alternate day treatment was used in 11 patients for one to five months.
Nutritional treatment was used in eight patients (seven elemental diet, one total parenteral nutrition) for two to four months during the first year.
The range of sevirty of gastrointestinal symptoms was similar during the second year of follow up; 23 patients had quiescent disease, 42 children mild symptoms, 25 moderate, and nine severe (Table I).
Prednisone was used less during the second year; twenty six patients received one course and 10 children two or more courses.
Eight patients received alternate day treatment for periods varying between two and 12 months.
Twelve patients were treated with nasogastric tube feeding of an elelemental diet for intervals of two to 12 months and one with central line parenteral nutrition for eight months.
Eight children were started on immunosuppressant drugs (azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine) during the first two years after diagnosis.
Twelve patients underwent intestinal resection during the first two years of follow up.
The mean height increment during the first year after diagnosis was 4.4 (2.3) cm.
Forty children failed to achieve a normal prepubertal growth velocity of 4 cm per year.
During the second year, the mean height velocity was 5.1 (2.7) cm.
Thirty three children grew less than 4.0 cm.
Severity of gastrointestinal symptoms was the major factor influencing linear growth during the first two years.
Height velocity decreased with increasing gastrointestinal symptoms (p<0.01, R=0.16 during year one and p<0.01, R=0.20 during year two).
The Figure shows the mean height velocity during each year according to severity of gastrointestinal symptoms.
The duration (in months) of daily prednisone treatment adversely affected height velocity in year two when analysed independently by simple linear regression (p=0.01).
After adjusting for severity of symptoms, however, duration of corticosteroid administration was not a significant predictor of height velocity.
No differences in mean linear growth velocities were found between males and females or among patients stratified by anatomical localisation of disease.
As exemplified by the year two data shown in Table III, fewer patients with ileal and caecal inflammation or ileal inflammation alone grew at a subnormal velocity.
Yearly height increments did not vary consistently with duration of nutritional treatment.
Long-term course
The 100 children were followed up for 4.9 (1.8) years (minimum two years) to a mean age of 16.1 (2.2) years.
Table II summarises the spectrum of severity of their gastrointestinal symptoms.
After initial treatment the overall clinial course was characterised by only mild gastrointestinal symptoms in 33 children.
In 18 children a period of severe disease resolved or improved (usually after surgical intervention) to similarly mild or quiescent disease for the duration of follow up.
Thirty two children experienced repeated severe exacerbations but also clear cut remissions.
Symptoms were chronically severe and unremitting in 17 patients.
Nineteen patients were treated with immunosuppressant drugs (6-mercaptopurine or azathioprine).
Thirty five children received a period of nutritional treatment (4 total parenteral nutrition, 31 nasogastric tube feeding).
Intestinal resection was performed in 36 patients during the period of follow up.
Forty nine children grew less than 4 cm per year during at least two years of follow up.
Bone age was delayed by more than two standard deviations in 42 of the 60 patients for whom it was determined.
A subset of 67 children (42 males, 25 females) had reached maturity (defined by Tanner stage 5 and less than 1 cm of height increment during the preceding year) by the time of this study.
Their mean age at follow up was 17.6 (0.9) years for males and 17.0 (1.1) years for females.
Ultimate SDS for height of this subgroup was -0.82 (1.11) compared with -1.14 (1.21) at diagnosis.
The change in SDS during follow up was +0.35 (1.08).
Despite the high frequency of growth impairment as a complication of pediatric Crohn's disease, 45 of the 67 patients had maintained or increased their SDS for height during a follow up interval of 5.4 (1.7) years.
Tables III to VI give the variation in ultimate height with individual factors.
The change in SDS for height during follow up varied according to the overall severity of gastrointestinal symptoms as defined in Table II (p=0.03, partial R=0.10) and according to sex.
Females showed greater height gain with a change in SDS score of +0.66 (1.27) compared with +0.16 (0.90) for males (p=0.02, partial R=0.07).
The ultimate SDS for height of females was -0.48 (0.91) and for males -1.02 (1.19).
Eighteen of the group of 67 children underwent resection before completion of growth.
Their SDS for height increased by 0.45 (0.91).
The 49 children not treated surgically increased their SDS score for height a similar amount (0.31 (1.33); p=0.52).
Table III shows that increments in SDS for height were comparable among patrients stratified by disease location (p=0.25).
Children with isolated jejunal, or proximal ileal inflammation, or both were disadvantaged, however, by their short stature at diagnosis.
Six of 10 with only such small bowel involvement were below the third centile for height when their disease was recognised.
Of all patients followed up to maturity 17 were below the third centile for height at diagnosis (SDS for height -2.81 (0.57)).
Although their linear growth improved (change in SDS for height=+0.87 (0.93), 10 of the 17 had final heights below the third centile (SDS for ultimate height=-1.94 (0.93)).
Discussion
This study presents data on both the initial presentation and the long term clinical course of childhood Crohn's disease.
The 100 consecutive patients were all Tanner stage 1 or 2 at the time of diagnosis.
This restriction was applied primarily so that the frequency of growth impairment and its natural history could be determined in an at risk population.
Furthermore, referral patterns in Metropolitan Toronto and surrounding areas are such that young teenagers and children are almost invariably sent to inflammatory bowel diseases clinic at the Hospital for Sick Children for confirmation of diagnosis, treatment, and follow up care.
The patient sample therefore resembles that of a population based study.
Our data, as summarised in Tables I and II, emphasise the variability of severity of illness encountered among young patients as recognised previously among adults with Crohn's disease.
One third of the children experienced no more than mild symptoms after initial treatment and were not subsequently treated with corticosteroids during the follow up period.
The classic pattern of exacerbations of disease activity of sufficient severity to warrant corticosteroid treatment interspersed with convincing remissions was found in 32 patients.
Another 18 experienced a dramatic improvement as their previously severe disease entered a sustained quiescent phase most often after intestinal resection (14 patients), but sometimes coincident with use of immunosuppressive medications two patients), bowel rest one patient), or both (one patient).
Seventeen children failed to achieve remission but had chronic intestinal symptoms despite treatment throughout their course.
Such variability in clinical course dictates that treatment of childhood Crohn's disease be tailored to the individual patient.
The potential complication impairment of growth in Crohn's disease is unique to pediatric patients.
Its reported frequency depends very much on definition.
Impaired height velocity is the most sensitive index.
Kanof et al reported a decrease in height velocity in 88% of Tanner 1 or 2 patients at the time of diagnosis and before treatment.
Our data show that despite treatment nearly one half (49%) of 100 such children grew less than 4 cm per year during at least two individual years of follow up.
Bone age, although determined in only 60 patients, was delayed by more than two standard deviations in 42 of these.
Severity of gastrointestinal had the most pronounced influence on linear growth velocity during each of the first two years of follow up.
As would be expected months of daily prednisone treatment also adversely affected growth.
Alternate day prednisone was not often used, even though such treatment has been recommended by some gastroenterologists as routine maintenance treatment of Crohn's disease.
The ebenficial effect of this practice on activity of disease and linear growth has not been subjected to confirmation in a controlled trial.
The variability in the clinical course of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease as described in this study makes us reluctant to advise a regimen such as alternate day corticosteroids from the time of diagnosis.
One third of the patients had only mild symptoms after the initial treatment of their disease.
The role of alternate day corticosteroids among children who experience chronic or frequently relapsing symptoms, however, deserves further study.
Only eight and 12 children respectively received nutritional treatment for varying intervals during years one and two.
Such infrequent use prohibits any conclusion about the outcome of these patients compared with the others.
Furthermore, nutritional treatment tended to be recommended for the more symptomatic and already growth impaired children.
Several prospective studies have shown improvement in linear growth in individual children with nutritional restitution.
A randomised prospective study is currently evaluating the effect of intermittent elemental diet administration v alternate day prednisone on the long term cinical course and growth of children with Crohn's disease.
The efficacy of elemental diet treatment in controlling disease activity makes it an important potential alternative to traditional corticosteroid treatment, particularly for children.
Despite the frequency of growth impairment during the course of childhood Crohn's disease, the 67 children followed up until completion of linear growth ultimately maintained their height centile (SDS for final height of -0.82 (1.11)v SDS for height at diagnosis of -1.14 (1.21).
Because height centiles before illness were not often available, however, the impact of inflammatory bowel disease on their genetically determined growth potential cannot be completely assessed.
Overall severity of gastrointestinal symptoms influenced the final height centile as it had height velocity during the initial years of follow up.
The poorer prognosis for linear growth among boys who develop Crohn's disease before puberty has not been previously reported.
Ultimate standard deviation score for height was -0.48 (0.91) for females and -0.02 (1.19) for males despite comparable height centiles at diagnosis.
As the severity of Crohn's disease and linear growth velocity during the first two years of follow up among males and females were comparable, it is possible that varying demands on growth during normal puberty may account for these differences.
Males grow more during normal puberty than do females.
In the presence of chronic illness, the nutritional requirements for the greater and more sustained normal growth spurt are less likely to be met.
It may be particularly important, therefore, to aggressively target nutritional treatment at boys with Crohn's disease, by using long term nocturnal nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding.
The role of surgery as a means of improving growth in childhood Crohn's disease is controversial.
Castille et al reported greater ultimate height in a surgically treated cohort of children compared with those managed medically.
We recently reported out experience with intestinal resection.
Height velocity in the first year after operation increased dramatically compared with year before operation among patients with growth potential.
As a follow up to these findings we analysed the effect of intestinal resection before completion of growth on ultimate height.
The net change in height centile compared with diagnosis was comparable for surgically and non-surgically treated patients followed up to completion of their growth.
Neverthless, a beneficial effect of surgery on ultimate height is suggested, particularly given the more severe disease of the surgically treated group.
The children who were below the third centile for height at diagnosis (SDS for height <-1.8) are of particular concern.
Although with treatment they made gains in growth at least comparable with other patients, 59% (10 of 17) followed up to maturity failed to reach the third centile for adult height.
Special consideration of alternative strategies, such as nutritional or surgical intervention, is warranted for children who are already stunted at the time of diagnosis and therefore need extra catch up growth.
The importance of early recognition of Crohn's disease before it has such an adverse impact on linear growth is highlighted.
The 67 children who had reached maturity at the time of this study tended to have been diagnosed earlier in the decade than those still growing.
The predominance of patients below the third centile in this earlier cohort (17 of 21) suggests that indeed more prompt identification of Crohn's disease now occurs.
Sulphate reducing bacteria and hydrogen metabolism in the human large intestine
One of the main functions of the large intestine is to salvage energy from dietary carbonhydrate which has neither been digested nor absorbed in the small intestine.
This salvage occurs through a process known as fermentation in which anaerobic bacteria breakdown carbohydrate to short chain fatty acids (SCFA), which in turn provide energy for the host.
The major carbohydrates available for fermentation are resistant starches, non-starch polysaccharides (dietary fibre), and a variety of unabsorbed sugars and oligosaccharides.
Other substances can also be fermented including dietary proteins and host derived substrates such as pancreatic enzymes, mucis, and sloughed epithelial cells.
The fermentation of organic matter by gut micro-orgamisms is mediated by a number of interdependent reactions in which complex polymers are first broken down to their constituent monomers by hydrolytic enzymes synthesised by the bacteria.
They are subsequently oxidised to SCFA, lactate, succinate, ethanol, and the gases H 2 and CO 2 .
In some people, methane is also produced.
Fermentation is regulated by the amount of substrate available and its chemical composition, the substrate specificities and perferences of the bacterial species present and the metabolic pathways through which they metabolise the substrate.
Host factors such as transit time may also play a part.
Hydrogen is an important product of fermentation and is primarily formed by bacteria as a ‘sink’ for the disposal of reducing power (electrons) generated during oxidation of sugars and amino acids.
In mammalian cells oxygen is used as the terminal electron acceptor and reducing power is disposed of in the form of H 2 O, this is not possible, however, in anaerobic metabolism.
For example some bacteria form ethanol, lactate, or succinate and do not evolve much H 2 because they dispose of reducing energy in these electron sink products.
Hydrogen formation results principally from the oxidation of pyruvate, formate, or reduced pyridine nucleotides (NADH + , FADH + ).
Moreover, many clostridia generate H 2 from pyruvate via ferredoxin, whereas enterobacteria evolve the gas through cleavage of pyruvate by puruvate formate lyase.
The formate produced is then converted to CO 2 and H 2 .
The partial pressure of H 2 has no effect on its production from pyruvate, but accumulation of the gas inhibits formation from the oxidation of pyridine nucleotides.
Since the regeneration of oxidised pyridine nucleotides through H 2 production enables increased substrate level phosphorylation to occur, an efficient H 2 removal may be a contributing factor in maintaining the fermentation balance in the colon.
Hydrogen partial pressures in the colon are kept low by losses in breath and flatus and by the activities of hydrogen utilising species such as methanogenic, acetogenic, and sulphate reducing bacteria.
Between 30 and 50% of people in western countries harbour methanogenic bacteria in their colons.
These bacteria grow by reducing CO 2 and H 2 according to the following equation:
Thus, 4 mol of H 2 are converted to 1 mol of CH 4 .
Methane production is an effective and safe pathway for H 2 disposal and occurs in most animals.
In people who do not excrete CH 4 , other routes for microbial H 2 disposal frequently exist.
An important alternative is the reduction of sulphate by sulphate reducing bacteria.
We have shown that sulphate reducing bacteria occur in large numbers (ca 10 8 –10 10 (g dry weight gut contents)2 -1 ) in non-methanogenic but not in methanogenic individuals.
Sulphate reducing bacteria utilise H 2 according to the following equation:
As in methanogenesis, 4 mol of H 2 are consumed in the formation of 1 mol of product.
Unlike methanogenesis, however, the product is not a harmless gut, but is highly toxic hydrogen sulphide, an agent that is potentially damaging to the colonic epithelium.
People who harbour sulphate reducing bacteria in their large bowel have higher levels of sulphide in their faeces than methanogenic subjects.
The main substrates for colonic sulphate reducing bacteria are fermentation products former by other bacteria, such as acetate, propionate, lactate, butyrate, succinate, ethanol, pyruvate, some amino acids, and H 2 CO 2 .
Species that can utilise long chain fatty acids and alcohols (up to C6) have also been isolated by chemostat enrichment.
These strict anaerobes are the final link in the food chain that develops in the gut ecosystem and use sulphate as a terminal electron acceptor during oxidative reactions.
The predominant sulphate reducing bacteria found in the gut belong to five genera, namely Desulfovibrio ,Desulfobacter ,Desulfomonas ,Desulfobulbus and Desulfotomaculum .
Species that use molecular H 2 as an electron donor in the gut belong to the genera Desulfovibrio and Desulfobulbus .
Desulfovibrios account for approximately 66% of all colonic sulphate reducing bacteria, while Desulfobulbus spp. constitute about 16%.
Fermentation experiments in our laboratory have shown that colonic sulphate reducing bacteria outcompete methanogenic bacteria for H 2 .
More recently, however, Strocchi et al have postulated that methanogens were able to competitively displace other H 2 consuming bacteria in mixed faecal slurries.
In this study, sulphate reducing bacteria must have been absent, or their activities limited in the non-methanogenic samples tested, because it is highly unlikely that methanogenic bacteria will displace sulphate reducing bacteria for this mutual growth substrate given an adequate supply of electron acceptor (sulphate).
The physiological explanation for this resides in the greater affinity of sulphate reducing bacteria for H 2 compared with methanogenic bacteria (Ks of Desulfovibrio vulgaris , 1 µmol.1 -1 ; Ks of Methanobrevibacter smithii , 6 µmol.l -1 ).
Moreover, the oxidation of H 2 by sulphate reducing bacteria is thermodynamically more favourable (DG '=-152.2 kJ per mol) than by methanogenic bacteria (DG '=1131 kJ per mol).
The outcome of competition is largely dependent on sulphate availability, with sulphate reducing bacteria outcompeting methanogenic bacteria for the mutual growth substrate H 2 in the presence of sulphate.
Strocchi et al did not enumerate viable sulphate reducing bacteria in their study, and the addition of 20 mM sulphate to non-methanogenic faecal slurries made little difference to sulphide production, indicating an absence of viable sulphate reducers.
In contrast, we have found that in two geographically and nutritionally diverse populations, viable sulphate reducing bacteria were present and active in all non-methanogenic samples tested.
Thus, if sufficient sulphate is available in vivo, our belief is that sulphate reducing bacteria will be responsible for most of the H 2 utilised by the gut microflora.
When sulphate availability is limited, methanogenic bacteria may then predominate.
Other lines of evidence support this hypothesis.
For example, if sulphate is added to the diet of methanogenic individuals, competitive displacement of methanogenic bacteria occurs and hitherto undetectable sulphate reducing bacteria begin to appear in faeces within a few days.
This, effect is observed only in about 50% of methanogenic individuals, however, suggesting that sulphate reducing bacteria and methanogenic bacteria coexist in some, but not all, people.
Furthermore, in whole body calorimetry studies when total H 2 and CH 4 excretion were measured in healthy subjects eating test meals of various fermentable carbohydrates, the amount of excreted H 2 that could be accounted for was much less in non-methanogenic subjects.
For example, in response to a 15 g dose of lactulose, methanogenic subjects excreted mean (SEM) 1150 (212) ml hydrogen equivalents, while non-methanogenic volunteers excreted only 327 (88) ml.
These data support the existence of alternative pathways for H 2 disposal in man.
For sulphate reducing bacteria to outcompete methanogenic bacteria for H 2 in the colon, there must be an adequate supply of sulphate.
Studies of sulphate absorption using ileostomists have indicated that concentrations of this anion can vary considerably in diet and that amounts reaching the colon may range from 2 to 9 mmol.day -1 .
Other potential sources exist, including highly sulphated polysaccharides such as chondroitin sulphate.
Colonic mucins are also highly sulphated, more so in fact than mucins produced elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract.
There are many species of bacteria of the Bacteroides fragilis group that are able to degrade these substances and thereby release free sulphate which would then become available for utilisation by sulphate reducing bacteria.
If this is indeed the case, then the amount of sulphated glycoprotein produced by the host, its degree of sulphation, and the activities of the hydrolytic bacteria involved in releasing free sulphate from these polymers, would all influence sulphate reducing bacteria growth.
Because mucin structure and production varies between individuals, there may possibly be a genetic predisposition to the acquisition of sulphate reducing bacteria.
Another pathway of H disposal is by the activities of acetogenic bacteria, which also grow in the colon.
Species that reduce CO 2 with H 2 do so according to the following equation:
Acetate production from CO 2 occurs in the rat caecum and in the gut of termites.
Significant acetate production as a result of H 2 dependent CO 2 reduction has also been reported in human faeces in the absence of methanogenesis.
In terms of energy, however, H 2 /CO 2 acetogenesis, with a free energy change of -95 kJ per mol, is considerably less efficient than either dissimilatory sulphate reduction or methanogenesis, and in most anaerobic ecosystems, hydrogen metabolism is dominated by one or other of these processes.
However, pH can influence the outcome of competition, with acidic conditions selecting for acetogenesis, and it is possible therefore that the luminal pH in the colon is important in this respect.
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that homoacetogenesis is amajor route of disposal of H 2 in the human colon since molar ratios of acetate, propionate, and butyrate are similar in methanogenic and non-methanogenic people.
Comparison of SCFA concentrations int he gut of known acetogenic animals, such as the termite, with man, shows that in the insect acetate accounts for 94% of the total compared with only 57% in the human caecum.
What are the clinical implications of all this?
Effective H 2 disposal during fermentation is essential for normal large bowel function.
In man, the principal routes are via methanogenesis or dissimilatory sulphate reduction.
Methanogenesis is a safe and effective disposal route for H 2 .
Methane is non-toxic and allows a large volume of H 2 to be removed, thereby potentially reducing any gas related symtoms.
In the absence of either methanogenic bacteria or sulphate reducing bacteria in the colon, H 2 accumulates in excessive quantities and this may be an important factor in pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis.
Other ways of disposing of H 2 include acetogenesis and dissimilatory nitrate reduction, for which H 2 is the preferred electron donor.
Acetogenesis is probably the most favourable H 2 disposal method, since this makes additional energy available to the host from fermentation through acetate absorption.
However, the evidence for significant homoacetogenesis in man is still inconclusive.
Sulphate reduction is probably the least desirable route.
The main product, sulphide, is toxic to cells and impairs cellular metabolism through inhibition of cytochrome oxidase.
Sulphide may also destroy the disulphide bridges in mucus, in turn leading to a breakdown of the protective layer of the epithelium.
Moreover, other sulphydryl compounds have been implicated in colonic disease since Roediger et al have shown that mercaptoacetate and mercaptobutyrate affect fatty acid metabolism in colonocytes in a manner that is characteristic of the defect found in ulcerative colitis.
We have shown that ulcerative colitis patients have a very high carriage rate of sulphate reducing bacteria and raised sulphide values in faeces.
Thus the removal of H 2 in the large gut may follow a number of pathways.
It is clear from studies in man that either methanogenesis or dissimilatory sulphate reduction predominate in some populations.
Because of the known toxicity of sulphide in the gut we suggest that the role of sulphate reducing bacteria in the pathogenesis of colonic diseases warrants further investigation.
Bowel function and irritable bowel symptoms after hysterectomy and cholecystectomy — a population based study
Abstract
This study examined all the women who had had hysterectomy and cholecystectomy in a defined population (79 and 37 respectively, out of 1058) to explore unsubstantiated beliefs that link these operations with bowel dysfunction.
Bowel habits, irritable bowel syndrome symptoms, and whole gut transit time were calculated from records of three defectations.
Compared with unoperated controls, women after hysterectomy were more likely to consider themselves constipated; they also strained more and admitted more often to bloating and feelings of incomplete evacuation.
Their stools tended to be lumpier and, in women over 50 years, transit time was longer.
When women treated by cholecystectomy were compared with women having newly discovered, asymptomatic gall stones, they more often described defecation as urgent but had no other detectable differences.
In conclusion symptomatic constipation is frequent in women after hysterectomy and that, after cholecystectomy, bowel habit is not consistently changed but the rectum seems to be more irritable.
There is a widespread but poorly substantiated belief that hysterectom yis associated with bowel problems, especially constipation and irritable bowel syndrome.
In published series of patients with constipation and irritable bowel syndrome or functional abdominal pain there is an excess of womeh who have had a hysterectomy but this may be because women who are referred to hospital with these disorders tend to be anxious and polysymptomatic.
This could also be because women with unexplained lower abdominal pain are often referred in the first instance to gynaecologists, who may not consider an intestinal cause until they have removed the pelvic organs.
Associations between diseases can be established only by population based studies.
In the one such study reported, 91 women who had had a hysterectomy were more likely than age matched controls to report infrequent defecation and to have consulted a doctor for constipation.
This study lacked objective or prospective data and was biased by the exclusion from the controls of people with irritable bowel syndrome.
The findings conflict with those of Prior et al who studied 205 women before and after hysterectomy.
Six months after the operation, constipation (defined as <3 stools/wk or frequent straining) had gone away more often than it had developed (12 v 7 women respectively) and the prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome was unchanged.
Thus the present situation is confused.
Existing reports have depended on self reported defecation frequency which is prone to wrror and on reports of straining at stool, which is unreliable because it is a symptom of irritable bowel syndrome as well as of constipation.
An exception is a study of whole gut transit time in 26 women before and six months after hysterectomy; there was no systematic change.
Diarrhoea after cholecystectomy is a well recognised factor but is usually considered to be rather rare and to be caused sometimes by bile acid malabsorption of obscure origin.
Its prevalence is unknown except that, in a retrospective analysis two years after cholecystectomy, eight of 93 patients were said to have loose stools and bouts of watery diarrhea.
The aims of this were to find out if the prevalence of bowel symptoms is indeed increased in women after hysterectomy and those treated by cholecystectomy, using a random sample of the population and prospectively recorded data as well as questionnaire responses.
Subjects and methods
The subjects of this study were 1058 women aged 25–69 who, between October 1987 and March 1989, attended a survey in East Bristol concerned with gall stones, bowel function, and abdominal symptoms in the general population.
They were the 70.2% of a stratified random sample of women in this age group who accepted an invitation to have ultrasonography of the gall bladder and to answer questions about bowel function, etc.
Two of the questions concerned cholecystectomy ahd hysterectomy.
All those who said they had had the first operation had an appropriate scar and ab absent gall bladder on ultrasonography.
A history of hysterectomy was accepted without further checks.
Thirty seven women (aged 25–68, mean 47 and median 48) had had cholecystectomy and 79 (aged 29–68, mean?? and median 50) had had hysterectomy, seven of whom had had both operations.
The time elapsed since the operations was: cholecystectomy 3 months to 26 years, mean 7 years; hysterectomy 4 months to 31 years, mean 11 years.
To determine the effect of cholecystectomy, the women who had had this operation were compared with the women who were discovered on ultrasonography to have gall stones (n=48, aged 25 to 67, mean 45), all but three of whom were asymptomatic.
Similar controls could not be identified for the women who had had hysterectomy, so comparison was made with all the women who had an intact uterus and an intact gall bladder (n=950, including 41 with asymptomatic gall stones).
Comparisons were made of the following indices of bowel function: stated frequency of defecation per week, mean interval between recorded defecations, a score for stool form, and calculated whole gut transit time.
The last three were taken from forms on which subjects recorded three consecutive defecations, this being done satisfactorily by 77% of the subjects.
On these forms, subjects recorded the date and time of each defecation and whether or not they strained (held their breath and pushed) to start defecating and whether or not they strained to finosh.
They also graded each stool on a 6 point scale sensitive to intestinal transit time (Table I).
For each subject a stool form score was calculated by simple addition of their three gradings, giving a range from 3 (consistently constipated) to 18 (consistently loose).
Whole gut transit time was calculated from the following equation: Whole gut transit time (h) =103–1.23 (DF) -4.69 (SFS) +0.638 (IDTI) where DF is stated defecation frequency, SFS is stool form score, and IDTI is the mean interdefecatory time interval in hours from the bowel record form.
Transit time calculated in this way correlates well (r=0.74) with mean transit time measured directly using multiply shaped radio opaque pellets and stool radiography (Probert C J, Emmett P M, Heaton K W, unpublished data).
A questionnaire was used to discover the presence and frequency of seven irritable bowel symptoms: recurrent intestinal pain, abdominal bloating, feelings of incomplete evacuation, passage of mucus, straining to finish defecating, urgency of defecation, and passing runny stools (information on the last two was unavailable in 17% of subjects).
The first four symptoms encompass the six Manning criteria for diagnosing irritable bowel syndrome.
For this study recurrent intestinal pain was defined as abdominal pain that had occurred on more than six days in the past year and was relieved by defecation or whose onset was associated with more frequent or looser stools.
Other symptoms were deemed to be present if they occurred on at least a quarter of the days or occasions, except that passage of mucus was taken as a symptom if it had ever occurred (this being normal clinical practice).
The number of symptoms was computed for each subject and the groups were compared for the proportion having 1 and 2 symptoms.
The prevalence of these symptoms in the whole population has already been published.
Subjects were asked if they considered they were ever constipated.
Possible answers were never, occasionally, quarter to half of the time, usually, or always.
They were also asked if they had ever consulted a doctor about recurrent bowel symptoms or abdominal pain.
Analysis of variance,t tests, Mann-Whitney tests, and χ 2 tests were used as appropriate.
In this population, bowel function and transit time are different in women of childbearing age (25–49) and older women, with a greater tendency to constipation in the first.
Therefore, comparisons of bowel function and transit time were made separately in the two age groups.
This was not necessary with irritable bowel syndrome symptoms as their prevalence does not change with age in this population.
Results
HYSTERECTOMY
Women who had had a hysterectomy tended to defecate less often than the uterus intact controls.
Mean values were not significantly different (Table I) but the older women who had had the operation were more likely than their controls to report <5 defecations per week (27% v 9%, p<0.01) and also more likely to report <3 defecations per week (11% v 2%, p<0.025).
Stool form score tended to be lower — that is, more constipated (Table I).
Again this was not significant; however, estimated intestinal transit time was significantly longer in the older women who had a hysterectomy and tended that way in the younger one (Table I).
Self reported constipation for at least a quarter of the time was more common in whomen who had had hysterectomies than controls (at 25–49 years, 20% v 9%, NS; at 50–69 years, 22% v 8%, p<0.025).
Operated subjects also recorded more episodes of straining on their bowel record forms.
Straining to start with all three defecations was recorded by 24.7% v 12.4% of controls (p<0.01), and straining to finish by 12.3% v 4.1% of controls (p<0.01).
Women who had had a hysterectomy had an increased prevalence of bloating, incomplete evacuation, and straining to finish, but no difference with respect to pain, mucus, urgency or runny stools (Table II).
Overall, they had more irritable bowel syndrome symptoms (p<0.002).
The proportion of women with 1, 2, or 3 symptoms who had reported these to their general practitioner was not significantly different in those with hysterectomy and those without.
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
Compared to women with gall stones, women with cholecystectomy showed no difference in frequency of defecation, stool form score or estimated intestinal transit time (Table III).
With respect to symptoms they were much more likely to have urgency of defecation, 44% having this symptom.
With all the other symptoms there was no difference (Table II).
Compared with all the women with the gall bladder present and an intact uterus, that is the same control group as used for the women with hysterectomy, women who had had cholecystectomy were no different with respect to all four indices of bowel function; for example their estimated transit time was 64 (SD 27) hours v 63 (SD 23) hours.
With respect to symptoms they were again much more likely to have urgency of defecation (44% v 13%, p<0.001).
They were also mroe prone to feelings of incomplete evacuation (27% v 12%, p<0.025).
The survey included 838 men aged 40–69.
Among them were 14 men with cholecystectomy and 44 with gall stones; these did not differ significantly with respect to any of the measurements made in this study.
This was also true if the men with cholecystectomy were compared with the 780 men with normal gall bladders.
There were two women with cholecystectomy who reported frequent urgency and had objective evidence of diarrhoea in that their estimated intestinal transit times were 20 and 18 hours.
Neither had consulted a doctor about bowel problems.
Discussion
HYSTERECTOMY
In this population women who had had hysterectomy were more constipated than women with an intact uterus assessed by several criteria: more infrequency of defecation and slower transit time (in older women), more straining at stool by both report and record, and a greater tendency to regard themselves as constipated.
We suggest, therefore, that there is a real change of colorectal function in women who have had hysterectomy and that there is objective evidence for this in older women.
Prior et al found no change in transit time after hysterectomy.
Nearly all their women, however, were aged over 50 and, in our study, it was women under 50 who had significant differences.
Possible explanations for a difference between older and younger women are that the operation has a delayed effect, that the operative technique has changed over the years so that it is less likely to affect bowel function, or that gynaecologists are doing fewer operations on women with pelvic pain of intestinal origin.
The data do not prove that the operation precedes the bowel dysfunction, and it is possible that women who are troubled by the symptoms of constipation are more likely to report gynaecological symptoms to their general practitioners.
The women with hysterectomy, however, who had bowel symptoms were no more likely to have reported them to their doctors than other women.
If hysterectomy does change bowel function it seems likely from our data that the primary problem is in the act of defecation rather than in colonic function, as there was little or no change in stool form yet half the subjects felt they were prone to constipation and a quarter strained with every recorded defecation.
If the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome requires the presence of abdominal pain (as recently recommended) then our data show no increased tendency to irritable bowel syndrome in women after hysterectomy.
In this we agree with Prior et al .
There was a trend towards more intestinal pain in the women with hysterectomy and this might have become significant with larger numbers of subjects.
There was a definite increase in some abdominal symptoms, namely bloating, incomplete evacuation, and straining to finish, but all these symptoms occur with constipation as well as irritable bowel syndrome.
A limitation of this study is that we had no information on the type of hysterectomy — abdominal or vaginal.
There is evidence, however, that the two operations do not differ in their effects on bowel function.
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
Our failure to find a difference between cholecystectomy and gall stone subjects could, in theory, be because a high proportion of the second group having a non-functioning gall bladder as, from the physiological standpoint, a non-functional gall bladder is equivalent to cholecystectomy.
This is an unlikely explanation, however, because, in the population, most people with gall stones have functioning gall bladders.
Our study indicates that there is no systematic change in colonic function after cholecystectomy.
Urgency of defecation is excessively common, at least in women, and there is a tendency to more feelings of incomplete evacuation, suggesting aht the rectum is more sensitive or irritable.
This is not easily explained.
There is increased bacterial degradation of bile salts after cholecystectomy and the main degraded bile salt, deoxycholate, induces urgent defecation if it is instilled into the rectum.
The relevance of this is uncertain, however, as aqueous phase concentrations of dihydroxy bile acids are not raised in the rectum patients with post-cholecystectomy diarrhoea.
This study suggests that, if it exists, cholecystectomy induced diarrhoea is rare.
We found two women (6%) who had rapid transit time and could be considered as having clinical diarrhoea but neither had consulted a doctor about it and we do not know when their diarrhoea began in relation to their operation.
In any case, the prevalence of chronic functional diarrhoea in the population is about 4%.
A large prospective study is needed to establish whether and how often cholecystectomy causes diarrhoea and whether men and women react differently to the operation.
DNA damage in the stomach after vagotomy measured by 3 2 P-postlabelling
Abstract
This study analysed gastric mucosal DNA by P-postlabelling in a series of patients who have had previous vagotomy for benign peptic ulcer disease.
DNA adduct levels were found to be significantly higher in patients who had had previous truncal vagotomy than in those who had had previous highly selective vagotomy (p<0.001).
Intragastric bile concentrations were also considerably higher in patients after truncal vagotomy but there was no correlation between intragastric bile concentrations and DNA adduct levels.
These results suggest that, although duodenogastric reflux may be a cause of gastric mucosal DNA damage in the stomach after vagotomy, measurement of total intragastric bile does not does not accurately reflect genotoxic insult.
Although the incidence of gastric cancer is falling in all countries for which reliable data are available there are still certain groups of subjects believed to be at increased risk of developing this disease.
Large cohort studies have indicated that one such group consists of patients who have had previous vagotomy for benign peptic ulcer disease.
The reason for this increased risk is still the subject for debate, although two theories predominate.
One suggests that the change in the intragastric environment after vagotomy leads to an increased concentration of potentially carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds within the stomach.
The other favours reflux of either bile or duodenal content as the important carcinogenic factor.
Although the exact agents responsible are not known, it is probable that initiation is induced by a chemical carcinogen.
There is considerable evidence to show that many chemical carcinogens act by forming stable covalent bonds with cellular macromolecules such as DNA.
In animal models the presence of carcinogen DNA adducts has been shown to lead to specific mutations within DNA including the activation of known oncogenes and the persistence of DNA adducts in a tissue may be correlated with an increased risk of developing cancer in that tissue.
The identification of DNA adducts in human tissues may therefore provide a means of studying the processes participating in human carcinogenesis.
Until recently, however, detection of DNA adducts in human tissue has proved difficult as adduct levels are extremely low (commonly less than 1 adduct/10 nucleotide bases).
Conventional methods of adduct detection such as high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) or antibody techniques have proved to be too insensitive unless large quantities of DNA are analysed.
The technique of P-postlabelling is more sensitive and is able to detect DNA adducts without any previous knowledge of their chemical structure.
With modifications of either nuclease P1 enhancement or butanol extraction the assay is sensitive enough to detect adducts in microgram quantities of native human DNA and has been used to detect and quantify adducts in a number of human tissues.
Although some DNA adducts are lost in the course of DNA extraction during the enhancement procedures and in the chromatography stage of this assay, and this means that true adduct levels tend to be underestimated, valuable information on relative adduct levels is emerging.
Using this technique, Spigelman et al have examined DNA extracted from the foregut of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.
In these patients they found higher adduct levels in the duodenum than in the stomach and they suggest that pancreatic obiliary secretions may play a part in foregut carcinogenesis in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.
This finding is of great interest with regard to the postvagotomy stomach.
If bile reflux is important aetiological factor in gastric carcinogenesis in this situation, it might be expected that gastric mucosal DNA should also show evidence of bile related adduction.
To test this hypothesis we have examined gastric mucosal DNA for the presence of DNA adducts.
Using the P-postlabelling method with butanol extraction as an enhancement procedure we have compared adduct levels in a group of patients who have had either a previous truncal vagotomy and drainage where bile reflux might be expected or a previous highly selective vagotomy where bile reflux is less common.
Intragastric bile acids were also measured in these patients and adduct levels correlated with exposure to bile.
Materials and methods
ENDOSCOPY AND COLLECTION OF SAMPLES
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed under light sedation after an overnight fast.
Immediately upon entering the stomach, a sample of gastric juice was aspirated into a sterile Wallace bronchoscopy suction bottle for pH and bile estimations.
Ten gastric mucosal biopsy specimens were required for DNA extraction.
After careful examination of the stomach, duodenum, and any stoma that might be present, 10 gastric mucosal biopsy specimens were taken from different parts of the stomach.
These specimens were pooled and immediately frozen.
They were stored at -70°C until analysed.
The pH of the gastric juice was measured with a Philips digital pH meter and the juice samples stored frozen at -70°C until analysed for the presence of bile acids.
DNA EXTRACTION AND ANALYSIS
The pooled endoscopic biopsy specimens were thawed, homogenised, and incubated in sodium dodecyl sulphate and proteinase K (Boehringer, East Sussex, UK).
DNA was isolated using a standard solvent extraction procedure and treatment with ribonuclease A and ribonuclease T1 (Sigma, Poole, Dorset, UK).
DNA was dissolved in aqueous solution in a total volume of 500 µl.
The purity and concentration of the DNA was estimated by ultraviolet spectrophotometry and re-extraction performed until the A260/280 ratio was close to 1.8.
For the purposes of postlabelling, a volume of DNA solution containing 5 µg DNA was evaporated to dryness in a Univap rotor evaporator (Uniscience, Cambridge, UK) and digested to mononucleotides with micrococcal nuclease (Sigma, Poole, UK) and spleen phosphodiesterase (Boehringer, Lewes, UK).
Adducted nucleotides were concentrated by butanol extraction ad describedby Gupta, re-evaporated to dryness, and dissolved in 10 µl of distilled water.
Each sample was labelled with 100 µCi of [γ-P]-ATP synthesised by the method of Johnson and Walseth using two to three U of T4 polynucleotide kinase (NBL, Cramlington, UK) per sample.
Excess ATP was destroyed with potato apyrase (Sigma, Poole, UK) and labelled, adducted nucleotides were separated by chromatography on PEI cellulose plates (Camlab, Cambridge, UK) as described by Gupta.
Adduct spots were visualised and counted as previously described and adduct levels calculated by the method of Gupta.
Samples were analysed twice, with a different batch of ATP each time and the results averaged.
BILE ACID ESTIMATION
Gastric juice samples were thawed and bile acid concentrations estimated using the Sterognost 3α spectrophotometric kit (Nyegaard, Oslo).
STATISTICS
Statistics were anslysed using the FIRST statistics package (Serious Statistical Software, Willaston, South Wirral).
Statistical differences between groups were estimated with the Mann-Whitney U test and correlation coefficients calculated with the Spearman rank test for non-parametric data.
Results
PATIENTS
Eighty eight patients attending the Gastric Follow-Up clinic at York District Hospital were entered into the study.
All patients were volunteers and all had had previous vagotomy for benign duodenal ulcer disease.
Smoking and drug histories were taken although no patient was receiving any treatment that would be expected to give rise to DNA damage.
The Table gives details of patients with respect to age, length of time since operation, intragastric pH, and smoking history.
The two groups are remarkably similar with respect to age, male/female ratio, length of time since operation, and percentage of smokers.
DNA ADDUCTS
DNA adduct spots were identified in all samples tested.
There was no evidence that the nature of previous surgery had any effect upon the pattern of adduct spots seen although occasionally highly distinctive adduct patterns were seen, which were clearly specific for a given patient.
DNA extracted from the gastric mucosa of smokers tended to have a dense pattern of adduct spots similar to that reported in other tissues of smokers.
Adduct levels ranged from 0.7 adducts/10 nucleotides to 29 adducts/10 nucleotides, which is similar to values reported for other tissues.
Adduct levels tended to be higher in smokers than in non-smokers.
The mean adduct value found in smokers was 9.6 adducts/10 nucleotides compared with only 6.0 adducts/10 nucleotides in non-smokers (p=0.034 Mann-Whitney U test; Fig 1).
Adduct levels were also significantly higher in patients who had had previous truncal vagotomy and drainage (mean adduct level=10.2 adducts/ 10 nucleotides) than in those who had had highly selective vatogomy (mean adduct level= 3.3 adducts/10 nucleotides; p<0.001 Mann-Whitney U test; Fig 2).
INTRAGASTRIC BILE ACIDS
Intragastric bile acids were measured in 55 of 88 patients.
They were significantly higher in patients after truncal vagotomy and drainage (n=37; mean=3.5 mmol/l) than after highly selective vagotomy (n=18; mean=0.24 mmol/l; p<0.001 Mann-Whitney U test)(see Fig 3).
Discussion
Evidence from animal studies shows that the presence of carcinogen DNA adducts may be associated with an increased risk of developing cancer.
Although at present there is insufficient evidence to extrapolate these findings to the human situation, the finding of chemically modified DNA in human tissues is clearly worrying.
This study has shown that DNA adducts are readily identifiable in human gastric mucosal DNA.
Adduct levels were found to be higher in smokers than non-smokers and adduct levels were significantly higher after truncal vagotomy and drainage than after highly selective vagotomy.
Both these findings are in accord with epidemiological data on gastric carcinogenesis.
An increased risk of developing gastric cancer in the smoking population has been highlighted in a number of large scale prospective cohort studies and there is increasing evidence accumulating from postlabelling studies that DNA adducts can be correlated with smoking history.
This has been most clearly shown for lung tissue but smoking related adducts have also been described in a number of other tissues for which smoking has been implicated as a cancer risk factor.
We have previously shown that adduct levels in DNA extracted from gastric cancers are higher in smokers than non-smokers and this study therefore suggests that smoking related adducts may be found in non-neoplastic as well as neoplastic mucosa.
An increased risk of developing gastric cancer after previous vagotomy has also been reported.
Although the nature of the vagotomies surveyes in these reports is not stated, the follow up period is such that they must have been truncal vagotomies.
To date there is no evidence to suggest that there is an increased cancer risk in those patients who have had previous highly selective vagotomy and hence our finding of higher adduct levels in the DNA of patients after truncal vagotomy is again in accord with epidemiological data.
While it is easy to comprehend the cause of DNA adducts in the smoking population, the origin of the adducts found after truncal vagotomy is rather more obscure.
Although the chromatography eluants used in this study are particularly suited to detecting tobacco related carcinogens — and will miss some small molecular weight adducts altogether — it is unlikely that smoking can account for the increased adduct levels found as the percentage of smokers in the truncal vagotomy group (54%) was very similar to that of the highly selective vagotomy patients (52%).
The most obvious explanation is that reflux of duodenal content into the stomach after operation is responsible.
Bile or components of bile have been identified as potential carcinogens in other organs such as the colon or pancreas and it has been suggested that the increased risk of developing gastric cancer after gastric surgery is a function of duodenogastric reflux.
In the rat model, operations that lead to duodenogastric reflux give a higher yield of gastric tumours in animals dosed with carcinogen.
Conversely, operations that divert bile away from the stomach will ameliorate dysplastic features induced by previous gastric surgery.
This argument is supported by the report of Spigelmann suggesting that exposure of the foregut to bile may give rise to DNA adducts.
Our data would support this hypothesis but also suggest that bile does not act as a simple genotoxic carcinogen for, although the intragastric bile concentrations found after truncal vagotomy were higher than those found after highly selective vagotomy (Fig 3), there was no correlation between bile concentrations and DNA adduct levels (Fig 4).
It is feasible that there is some subcomponent of bile that is responsible for DNA adduction.
There is evidence to suggest that the operation of vagotomy changes the ratio of primary and secondary bile acids found in the gall bladder and that it is the secondary bile acids that are carcinogenic.
The assay system used in this study measures total bile content and does not distinguish between classes of bile acids hence differences in constitution of bile would go unnoticed.
Similarly, if non-bile components of duodenogastric reflux are responsible for adduction, then measurementof intragastric bile will only act as a crude marker for reflux and not reflect the true carcinogenic potential of the gastric juice.
Likewise, the carcinogenic action of bile may be related to the duration of exposure of gastric mucosa to biliary carcinogens.
The assay used in this study measures bile concentrations at a single point in time and may well not be an accurate reflection of overall exposure.
Finally, it must be considered that the bile is acting as a non-genotoxic carcinogen.
That certain carcinogens exert their effect without binding to DNA is well known.
In the rat model for example it has been shown that the compound butyl hydroxy anisole, which is carcinogenic in the forestomach, does not bind directly to DNA.
It will however increase the binding of other carcinogens to gastric mucosal DNA and it is conceivable that bile acts in a similar manner.
The P-postlabelling assay suffers from the drawback that the nature and origins of the adducts detected is unknown.
Thus the adducts detected in this study may not be derived from bile at all but merely have their binding to DNA increased by bile.
Whatever the agent responsible, or its mode of action, this is another factor to be considered when selecting an operation for benign peptic ulcer disease.
At present ulcer recurrence rate, postoperative complication rate, and cancer risk are the major factors determining the choice of operation and current opinion is tending to favour the highly selective vagotomy.
To date this operation seems to be free of cancer risk although one case of cancer has been reported seven years after operation.
If the experience with partial gastrectomy and truncal vagotomy is relevant, a latency period of about 20 years is required before any cancer risk becomes apparent.
Highly selective vagotomy was introduced about 20 years ago and hence any cancer risk should become apparent in the next few years.
Our results will be reviewed with great interest in this context as they may show that the risk of cancer will be less after highly selective vagotomy than after truncal vagotomy.
Thrombosis of splenic artery pseudoaneurysm complicating pancreatitis
Abstract
The natural history of pseudoaneurysms complicating pancreatitis is unknown.
A patient with chronic pancreatitis is described in whom thrombosis of a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm occurred.
Early diagnosis and radical treatment of a bleeding pseudoaneurysm is mandatory.
When elective treatment is considered, however, contrast enhanced computed tomography may be useful just before surgery as thrombosis may occur.
Arterial pseudoaneurysms are classic complications of pancreatitis, especially when pseudocysts are present.
Bleeding pseudoaneurysms may be life threatening and require early diagnosis and radical treatment.
We report on a case of thrombosis of a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm complicating chronic pancreatitis.
Case report
A 43 year old man with several years history of alcohol abuse and with chronic pancreatitis confirmed at endoscopic retrograde pancreatography presented in October 1990 for recrudescent epigastralgia.
Clinical examination was normal.
Laboratory tests showed an inflammatory syndrome/erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 91 mm/h (normal <15), fibrinogen 7.44 g/l (normal 1.80–4.00), and C reactive protein 120 mg/l (normal <7); a mild hyperleucocytosis was seen at 12.6×10/l (normal 4–10).
Pancreatic enzymes were of normal values.
A computed tomography examination showed a pseudocyst, 3 cm in diameter, in the pancreatic head and several pseudocysts located behind the body of the pancreas; a dilatation of the main pancreatic duct was seen in the tail.
Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography showed irregular dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in the tail and opacification of three pseudocysts, one in the head and two in the body of the pancreas.
The patient stopped any alcohol intake but his pain worsened despite analgesics.
Three weeks later, a second CT examination was performed.
It showed an eccentric contrast enhancing mass, 1.5 cm in diameter, within one of the corporeal pseudocysts in which density was increased (Fig 1).
A coeliac and splenic angiography showed a postostial pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery without active bleeding (Fig 2).
Stable catheterisation of the splenic artery near the ostium was not possible, precluding transcatheter embolisation of the feeding artery.
Selective catheterisation of the pseudoaneurysm itself was not attempted because of the risk of rupture.
Somatostatin infusion (Somatostatine UCB 250 µg/h) was given to reduced pancreatic secretion and elective surgical intervention was decided on for the seventh day.
Computed tomography, performed the day before planned surgery, showed a spontaneous hyperdensity and a lack of contrast enhancement of the pseudoaneurysm, suggesting recent thrombosis (Fig 3).
A coeliac angiography confirmed the thrombosis of the pseudoaneurysm and the permeability of the splenic artery (Fig 4).
Computed tomography performed two months and one year later showed regression of the clotted pseudoaneurysm and progressive disappearance of the pseudocysts.
Discussion
Arterial pseudoaneurysms are not uncommon with acute or, more often, chronic pancreatitis especially when pseudocysts are present.
Pseudoaneurysms are caused by enzymatic digestion or local compression of the vessel by the pseudocyst.
Because of its proximity to the pancreas, the splenic artery is the most commonly affected vessel.
Visceral pseudoaneurysms are difficult to diagnose.
They may be detected with computed tonography and duplex sonography, but selective angiography is still the diagnostic examination of choice.
The main risk of visceral pseudoaneurysm is rupture and consecutive bleeding.
This risk is much higher in pseudoaneurysms secondary to pancreatitis.
Bleeding can occur directly or through the pseudocyst, if present.
This may cause secondary rupture in the main pancreatic duct, the peritoneum, the retroperitoneum or more often in an adjacent viscus such as duodenum, stomach or transverse colon.
Early diagnosis and radical treatment are thus mandatory.
Surgery is the classic treatment of pseudoaneurysm but transcatheter arterial embolisation seems to be a very attractive alternative either to permit further elective surgery or as a definitive treatment with good results and a lower mortality than surgery.
The incidence and natural history of pseudoaneurysms complicating chronic pancreatitis is unknown.
At angiography performed in patients with chronic pancreatitis without gastro intestinal bleeding pseudoaneurysms have been seen in 10–21% of cases but only 1–8% of gastrointestinal bleedings in patients with pancreatic pseudocysts are thought to be pseudoaneurysm related.
These data suggest that not all pseudoaneurysms will lead to gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
Spontaneous regression of small visceral pseudoaneurysms has been reported, including pseudoaneurysms of the splenic artery.
Several authors have thus recommended a conservative approach for asymptomatic patients with visceral pseudoaneurysms smaller than 2.5 cm in diameter, except for women of child bearing age.
Spontaneous early thrombosis of pseudoaneurysms secondary to pancreatitis has never been described, however, except in one case affecting the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery.
Pseudoaneurysms complicating pancreatitis are thought to be the most life threatening of all splanchnic artery aneurysms with death rate greater than 50%.
We have no clear explanation for the thrombosis of the pseudoaneurysm in our case.
It may be related to the catheterisation of the coeliac trunk and the splenic artery.
Trauma during catheterisation seems unlikely, however, because the splenic artery remained permeable on follow up studies and catheterisation of the pseudoaneurysm was not performed.
Somatostatin is known to reduce splanchnic blood flow without modifying systemic arterial blood pressure.
The mechanism of action is still debated.
Some authors have suggested that somatostatin may act by a direct vasoconstrictive effect on the splanchnic arterioles or may lower intestinal vasodilating hormones and glucagon.
It has been shown that somatostatin ha sno effect on haemostasis, and particularly on platelet aggregation, with clinical doses of 250 and 500 µg/h in non-diabetic subjects; only with a higher dose (750 µg/h) were circulating platelet aggregates detected.
The role of somatostatin, infused at a rate of 250 µg/h, in our patient remains thus hypothetical.
In conclusion, early diagnosis and radical treatment of symptomatic peripancreatic pseudoaneurysms are mandatory.
When transcatheter embolisation is unsuccessful, however, and in the absence of acute bleeding that requires emergency surgery, a contrast enhanced computed tonography just before elective surgery may be useful as thrombosis may occur.
Further investigations about somatostatin in this field could also be of interest.
Serum concentrations of laminin in cirrhosis of the liver
Abstract
Laminin, a glycoprotein synthesised by Ito cells, has been considered a marker of fibrogenesis.
The behaviour of laminin and clinical and laboratory data in 83 patients with cirrhosis were studied to find the factors associated with increases in this glycoprotein.
There were increased concentrations of laminin in 62.7% of the patients (40% of the Child's A, 64.5% of the Child's B, and 75% of the Child's C) categories.
Significant differences in laminin concentrations were found between the Child's grades (p=0.009) and between patients and controls (p<0.0001).
Correlations were found between laminin concentrations and mean corpuscular volume, aspartate aminotransferase, asparate aminotransferase: alamine amunotransferase ratio, alkaline phosphatase activity, bilirubin and glucocholic acid concentrations, and hypoalbuminaemia — that is, variables related to liver insufficiency and alcohol intake.
Moreover, patients with an alcohol intake higher than 100 g/day had higher lamininin concentrations than those with a lower intake (p=0.03).
Conversely, there was no significant association with portal hypertension.
Multivariate analysis showed that mean corpuscular volume, bilirubin concentrations, and hypoalbuminaemia were independently associated with laminin concentrations.
Poor degradation associated with liver insufficiency seems to play an important part in the increase in serum laminin concentrations in these patients.
Laminin is a glycoprotein with a molecular weight of about 850 kdaltons, mainly synthesised by Ito cells or lipocytes located in the hepatic space of Disse.
It constitutes a part of the extracellular matrix along with other proteins (collagen and elastin), glycoconjugates (structural proteins and proteoglycans), and glycosaminoglycans.
Under some inflammatory stimuli Ito cells can transform into myofibroblast-like cells, thus increasing the synthesis of the different components of the extracellular matrix.
Accordingly, laminin has been considered to be a marker of fibrogenesis.
In liver disease, laminin concentration has been related to the degree of portal hypertension and some authors have suggested that laminin concentration can be used to evaluate the portal venous pressure.
The meaning of the serum concentrations of laminin is difficult to interpret, however, because they are influenced by some poorly known factors.
Also, laminin has been related to alcohol abuse and alcoholic liver disease.
This study was carried out to compare the serum concentrations of laminin in patients with cirrhosis with comprehensive clinical and laboratory tests in each patient to identify the factors associated with the increase of this glycoprotein.
Methods
Sixty two men and twenty one women patients with cirrhosis confirmed by biopsy were included in the study.
Ages ranged between 25 and 83 (mean 56.5) years.
All patients were grouped according to the classification of Child and Turcotte with the modifications of Pugh et al and Christensen et al , which are closely related.
There were 20 patients in the Child's A, 31 in the Child's B, and 32 in the Child's C categories.
All patients were evaluated within 24 hours of admission.
Blood and urine were collected stimultaneously for assessments in the laboratory.
The samples that were not processed immediately were frozen at -20°C until analysis.
All patients underwent ultrasonographic evaluation and portal hypertension was assessed according to established crieria, including an enlarged portal vein, absence of variations with respiratory movements, splenomegaly, portal venous collaterals, recanalisation of the umbilical vein, and detection of hepatofugal flow with a real time/Doppler system.
Laminin was measured by radioimmunoassay (Hoeschst-Behring, Frankfurt).
The upper limit of normality was established as 1.8 U/ml, which corresponded to the mean +2 SD of a control group composed of 81 HBsAg negative healthy subjects with ages ranging between 18 and 64 (mean 40.9) years.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was used for correlations between continuous variables.
The comparison between two categorical variables was made with the χ 2 test.
The Kruskal-Wallis test and the Mann-Whitney U test were used to compare groups as appropriate.
A p<0.05 level for a two sided test was considered statistically significant.
To assess the independent effect of predictor variables on the laminin concentration (dependent variable), we used a multivariate linear regression modelling technique with forward stepwise addition of variables and a probability of <0.05 for the F test used as a criterion for the addition of a predictor variable.
Laminin was the continuous variable for most statistical tests.
It was used as a categorical variable whenever the definition of abnormal values — that is, greater than the upper limit of normality — was necessary to calculate sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values.
Results
The mean laminin concentration of all patients with cirrhosis was 2.35 U/ml, with the highest concentrations in patients in the Child's C class.
We found no differences between the sexes, and age did not significantly influence the concentrations of laminin.
Table I shows the laminin values according to the Child's classes.
The severty of liver disease as measured by Child's classes was significantly associated with laminin both in serum concentrations (p=0.009) and in the percentage of above normal values (p=0.038).
Also patients with cirrhosis had significantly higher concentrations of laminin in serum than controls (p<0.0001).
Table II shows the correlation between laminin concentrations and other laboratory.
No obvious relation was found between the laminin concentrations and viral markers, cholelithiasis, ultrasonographically and clinically evaluated portal hypertension, oesophageal varices, drug addition, smoking habits, treatment, previous icteric, encephalopathic, ascitic or gastrointestinal haemorrhages, aetiology, reason for admission, urinary bilirubin and urobilinogen concentration, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or quantity of ascites.
On the contrary, relations were found with telangiectasis (p=0.01), spider naevae (p=0.02), and malnutrition (p=0.02).
Significantly higher concentrations of laminin were found in patients whose alcohol intake was higher than 100 g/day compared with those with a lower intake (p=0.03), although there was no significant correlation between laminin concentrations and the amount ingested or with the years of ingestion.
Laminin had a sensitivity of 66.6%, specificity 60%, efficiency 65.9%, positive predictive value 92.3%, and negative predictive value 20% with a prevalence of 87.8% to detect portal hypertension.
In a crossed comparison, Child's B and C class patients without oesophageal varices had substantially higher laminin concentrations than Child's A class patients with such varices with a p value close to the level of significance (p=0.068) despite the low number of patients that fulfilled these requirements.
Finally, the multivariate analysis showed that mean corpuscular volume (p=0.01), hypoalbuminaemia (p=0.01), and bilirubin concentrations (p=0.005) were independently associated with serum laminin concentrations, whereas asparate ammotransferase activity and portal hypertension were not.
When alkaline phosphatase was included in the analysis instead of bilirubin, only mean corpusculor volume and hypoalbuminaemia showed a significant association with laminin.
Discussion
We found abnormal laminin concentrations in most of our patients with cirrhosis, and these were significantly different from controls.
Other authors have also found such differences.
Increases in laminin concentration have been closely related to portal hypertension.
Some of the authors reporting this, however, have compared laminin concentrations in non-homogeneous liver diseases of different severity, and none has evaluated liver function simultaneously.
We did not find a significant association between laminin concentrations and portal hypertension in our patients with cirrhosis, and laminin concentration had insufficient sensitivity, specificity, efficiency, and predictability to be clinically relable in the detection of portal hypertension.
Conversely, we found a highly significant association with the severity of liver disease as measured by the Child's classes.
There was also a significant association with clinical signs of severe liver dysfunction and with laboratory variables that reflect impaired liver function, such as bilirubin and glycochoic acid concentrations and hypoalbuminaemia.
Moreover, patients with the most severe cirrhosis without oesophageal varices had substantially higher laminin concentrations than the least severe ones with varices, suggestingthat it is liver dysfunction and not portal hypertension that is associated with the increased laminin concentrations.
Other authors have also found a correlation with severity in alcoholic liver diseases as classified by other indices.
Probably the relation found by some authors with portal hypertension is an indirect one, and could be explaiend by the higher rate and degree of portal hypertension in patients with the most advanced liver disease who also have an impaired liver function.
We do not believe that cholestasis is an important factor in the increase in laminin despite the significant correlation found with bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase, because alkaline phosphatase activity was not significantly associated with laminin in the multivariate analysis.
On the other hand, bilirubin concentration increases with the severity of liver cirrhosis and, in fact, is one of the variables used to evaluate this severity.
The increase in laminin concentrations in these patients could be due to increased synthesis by Ito cells.
Also the liver plays an important part in the clearance and excretion of glycoproteins, and the functional state of the liver, particularly the liver endothelial cells, can lead to a poor metabolism of laminin.
Finally, laminin could escape to its degradative process in the liver via portosystemic shunts.
Laminin has been related to alcohol intake.
We have found a significant association with alcohol intake and with alcohol markers such as mean corpuscular volume and the asparate aminotransferase:alamine amunotransferase ratio, but not with the duration of the alcohol intake.
Also van Zanten et al found significantly increased laminin concentrations in patients with alcohol abuse without cirrhosis and Nouchi et al reported decreasing laminin concentrations in alcoholic subjects after one week of abstinence.
We conclude that patients with cirrhosis have raised serum laminin concentrations independent of portal hypertension, and that liver dysfunction seems to have a pathogenetic role in the increase of this glycoprotein.
Laminin concentration is also related to alcohol intake.
This glycoprotein could be used as amother marker of severity in these patients.
Isotope gastric emptying tests in clinical practice: expectation, outcome, and utility
Abstract
Tests of gastric emptying with modern scintigraphic methods are recommended in the clinical management of gastric disorders.
An adult of 472 gastric emptying tests carried out over a 10 year period was performed to discover the reasons for requests from consultant clinicians, their anticipation of the results of tests, and the influence of the results upon the subsequent management of their patients.
Excluding control (n=47) and research (n=50) studies, there were 375 clinical referrals that could be grouped under the headings: non-ulcer dyspepsia (n=72), suspected diabetic gastroparesis (n=18), peptic ulcer (n=15), suspected delayed gastric emptying after surgery (n=154), dumping and diarrhoea (=107), and other indications (n=9).
Although the results were abnormal for 55 (48%) of the ‘medical’ patients, they did not seem to influence clinical management.
Delayed gastric emptying after surgery was confirmed in only 20% of patients referred with this clinical diagnosis.
Conversely, most (79%) of the patients referred with dumping and diarrhoea exhibited abnormally rapid emptying.
Isotope gastric emptying studies may be useful in clinical practice.
The results are often at variance with the clinical diagnosis.
Clinicians must take into account the nature of the test meal used when results are correlated with clinical features.
Gastric emptying tests with radiolabelled meals and gamma camera imaging have proved popular for many years in clinical research and physiological studies.
We suspect that departments that have developed gastric emptying test protocols have, as we have, offered a service to clinicians within the region for the assessment of patients with symptoms possibly caused by abnormalities of gastric emptying.
We have seen no reports, however, that describe in detail the use of such a service by local clinicians.
Many articles have appeared which describe potentially useful clinical applications of gastric emptying tests but to discover the clinical value of these tests a comprehensive audit of the service is required.
We believe it would be useful to analyse the sources of referral, the nature of the clinical problems, the suspected abnormalities — rapid or delayed emptying, and whether the result of tests had any significant influence on decisions about treatment.
In this report we present an alysis of 472 gastric emptying studies carried out in the Department of Nuclear Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital between 1981 and 1991 at the request of consultant clinicians in hospitals throughout the Mersey Region.
Those studies, the minority, performed as part of clinical trials or formal clinical assessments are indicated as such as mentioned only for completeness.
The analysis has been achieved by detailed review of hospital case sheets.
Referring clinicians gave permission for this to be carried out and the study was approved by the local Hospital Ethical Committee.
Patients and methods
Copies of reports of 472 gastric emptying studies performed in the Department of Nuclear Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital between 1981 and 1991 were reviewed.
There were 47 control studies, 50 research studies (no clinical diagnostic problem), and 375 studies carried out as part of the clinical service offered by the Department, at the request of consultant clinicians.
The hospital case notes of all referred patients were reviewed in detail, and the following information noted:(1) the referring Hospital;(2) the referring clinical discipline;(3) the patient's symptoms and ‘working’ diagnosis;(4) whether the clinician's notes, before the gastric emptying study, indicated a prediction of abnormally rapid or abnormally slow gastric emptying;(5) the influence of the result of the gastric emptying study upon the subsequent clinical management.
Unless otherwise requrested gastric emptying was assessed using a standard physiological test meal incorporating technetium-99m (9 9 m Tc) labelled bran and semisolid in character.
When specifically requested, emptying of liquid was assessed using 15% dextrose labelled with 9 9 m Tc-ldiethylene triamine penta-acetic acid.
Results
The normal range of responses to testing was taken from 47 studies carried out on normal healthy volunteers.
Details of these studies have been reported previously.
The semisolid test meal (37 subjects) was found to have a mean half emptying time of 45 minutes with no appreciable lag phase.
For the liquid test meal (10 subjects) the mean emptying at 15 minutes was 10%.
For both tests, data from control studies were used to derive 95% confidence intervals for all points on the emptying curves for normal subjects, which were then used to assign normality or abnormality to the results of subsequent studies.
Three types of abnormal results were recognised and all abnormal results were judged to be one of these types: rapid emptying, slow emptying, or biphasic emptying (early rapid emptying followed by normal or slow emptying).
Thirty six patiens with peptic ulceration were studied before and after operation, as part of a research protocol.
Similarly, there were nine patients who were studied after pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, and five patients with a diagnosis of achalasia of the cardia.
For these patients there was no doubt about the diagnosis or unexplained symptoms.
These patients have been excluded from further analysis.
Other patients whose studies were part of a research protocol have been included in the subsequent analysis as these requests for gastric emptying studies were intended to establish diagnoses, albeit to define groups of patients for further evaluation.
There were therefore, 375 patients referred for diagnostic purposes.
Patients referred for diagnostic studies were grouped according to their symptoms, whether symptoms developed after operation, and according to the stated anticipation of the result, slow or fast emptying, recorded by the referring clinician.
‘NON-ULCER DYSPEPSIA’: NO PREVIOUS SURGERY
Seventy two patients (ages 16–72) with unexplained dyspeptic symptoms of duration six months to seven years were referred by medical (52 patients) and surgical (20 patients) consultants.
All received the standard semisolid test meal.
The result was normal for 39 (54%) patients, rapid for 17 (24%), biphasic (early rapid then normal) for four (5%), and slow for 12 (17%) patients.
The results did not seem to influence subsequent clinical management of these patients in any way that would have differed appreciably from management without this information.
SUSPECTED DIABETIC GASTROPARESIS
Eighteen diabetic patients (ages 22–70) with upper gastrointestinal tract symptoms, mostly anorexia and vomiting, were referred by consultant physicians (16 patients) and studied using the semisolid test meal.
Gastric emptying was normal or biphasic in eight patients, rapid in seven and delayed in three patients.
PATIENTS WITH PEPTIC ULCER
Fifteen peptic ulcer patients who were not part of any formal trial of treatment, were referred, chiefly by surgeons (12 patients) presumasbly to help choose the most appropriate operation.
Studies using the semisolid test meal showed normal gastric emptying in six patients, normal emptying after a rapid early phase in five patients, uniformly rapid emptying in three, and slow emptying in one patient.
Only the result for this last patient is noted to have influenced the choice of operation.
SUSPECTED DELAYED GASTRIC EMPTYING AFTER SURGERY
There were 154 patients (ages 20–83) complaining of vomiting and epigastric pain or discomfort after various upper gastrointestinal tract operations (Table I).
Clinically delayed gastric emptying was suspected.
These patients were referred more commonly by surgeons (127 patients) than physicians (27 patients) and had had symptoms for between two months and six years.
Gastroscopy and barium studies had shown various ‘abnormalities’ of uncertain significance (62 patients — Table II), or no abnormality (92 patients).
Gastric emptying studies were carried out using the 15% dextrose test meal for 16 patients and the semisolid test meal for 138 patients.
Gastric emptying was confirmed to be abnormally slow in 31 (20%) patients.
Emptying was normal in 27 (17%) patients, and either uniformly rapid (31 patients — 20%) or biophasic with an early rapid phase (65 patients — 42%) in the remainder.
Ultimately, 10 (6%) patients from within the whole group had further surgery the nature of which seemed to have been influenced by the results of the test.
Six patients had planned operations cancelled because of the test result.
For 98 (64%) patients there was no recorded indication that the result of the test influenced subsequent management.
DUMPING AND DIARRHOEA
One hundred and seven patients, 102 (95%) of whom had had a vagotomy or partial gastrectomy (Table I), were referred because of suspected rapid gastric emptying as a cause or feature of dumping syndrome and diarrhoea, or both (Table I).
Sixteen (15%) of these patients were referred by physicians, the rest by surgeons.
Sixty eight (63%) patients were men and ages ranged rom 22 to 73 years.
Duration of symptoms varied from two months to 15 years.
Nineteen (18%) patients were studied using 15% dextrose, while 88 (82%) patients were assessed using the semisolid test meal.
Gastric emptying was shown to be very rapid or biphasic with a rapid early component in 85 (79%) patients, normal in 14 (13%), and abnormally slow in eight (7%) patients.
Within the whole group, according to the case records, revisional surgery planned before the study was cancelled as a result of the study in two cases.
Twelve patients had revisional surgery and it seems likely that the results of tests helped with the treatment decisions for these patients.
OTHER INDICATIONS
Abnormal results were obtained for three of nine other patients referred for gastric emptying tests (systemic sclerosis — 3 patients, gastro-oesophageal reflux — 2 patients, distal pancreatectomy — 2 patients, adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis — 1 patient, chronic renal failure — 1 patient).
Table III shows pattern of referral from different types of hospital and the two main disciplines.
Overall, 72% of referrals were from surgeons and 64% of referred patients were men.
Discussion
In this study the number and type of referrals, and the test methods and results have been obtained from contemporaneous files of duplicate request and result forms kept in the Department of Nuclear Medicine in which complete records are held.
Information obtained retrospectively from case notes is unreliable but generally the correspondence to be found in case notes showed the clinician's reason for referring a patient and gave reliable clues to the prediction of the result.
We are well aware, however, that the results of this study do not form a basis for firm conclusions about the pathophysiology of specific clinical disorders.
Surgical referrals outnumbered medical referrals by about three to one, a reflection of the predominance of surgically induced abnormalities of gastric emptying among all patients with clinically recognised disorders of gastric emptying.
Not surprisingly, the greatest number of referrals per total inpatient bed numbers were from the Royal Liverpool University Hospital, where there is the facility to carry out gastric emptying tests on site.
A similar number of referrals came, however, from nearby large district general hospitals.
Fewer patients were referred from peripheral hospitals in the region, even though one would expect the many peripheral hospitals jointly to have seen as many patients with similar problems as the fewer large central district general hospitals.
The results of tests carried out on patients with non-ulcer dyspepsia illustrate the limited role for tests of gastric emptying in the management of patients with symptoms not attributable to previous surgery.
Although many patients in this group had abnormal results, both fast and slow emptying, the characterisation of an abnormality of gastric emptying in a patient with non-ulcer dyspepsia does not necessarily provide a key to effective treatment.
It cannot be assumed that symptoms are caused by disturbed gastric emptying.
In practice, moreover, treatments for such patients tend to be chosen empirically and worked through on a trial and error basis, whatever might be thought to be the underlying pathophysiology.
The results for patients suspected of having diabetic gastroparesis — more patients with rapid than with slow emptying — might seem surprising but illustrates an important consideration that is too easily overlooked.
Rates of gastric emptying vary enormously in the same individual depending on the nature of the test meal studied.
Overall, the most significant abnormality seems to be a divergence of the emptying rates of liquids and solids with liquids emptying faster than normal and solids being retained in the stomach for longer than normal.
The ‘semisolid’ test meal used in our studies behaves as a slow emptying liquid.
Thus there is no appreciable lag phase before emptying and the curve is non-linear.
In the diabetic subjects studied, therefore, the possibility of gastric retention of solids has not been answered.
There may be confusion in the clinical diagnosis of delayed gastric emptying after upper gastrointestinal tract surgery, and there are traps for the unwary.
Often, the vomiting of good may be thought to point to the presence of a simple, partial mechanical obstruction to gastric emptying.
Usually, however, the situation is more complicated than this; in such patients gastric emptying of liquid, as this study shows, may be abnormally rapid, while concurrent retention of solids suggests the maintenance of antral sieving with failure or inhibition of effective trituration.
Gastric emptying studies with a truly solid meal could be helpful in the assessment of these patients.
Such a test has not been routinely available in our Department and this could be seen as a shortcoming in the service that has been offered, as well as a limitation to the scope of this study.
Nevertheless, it seems worth pointing out that gross gastric retention of solids can usually be confirmed quite easily by gastroscopy after a six hour fast, while the key gastric emptying study, with liquid or liquid like test meal, is applicable in postoperative patients with vomiting and epigastric pain after meals to confirm that there is no mechanical obstruction, and to warn that a further simple gastric drainage procedure may do more harm than good.
An attempt to determine before operation whether peptic ulcer patients are at risk of developing postvagotomy symptoms seems laudable but in practice such clues as there may be are probably too subtle to identify with any confidence from a non-invasive gastric emptying test.
Perhaps a more fruitful method should involve direct intraduodenal instillation of nutrient liquid in response to which some subjects may develop signs and symptoms of vasomotor dumping.
Most patients clinically suspected of dumping or diarrhoea after having a vagotomy or gastrectomy did indeed exhibit abnormally rapid gastric emptying.
It seems prudent to confirm that such patients do have rapid gastric emptying, particularly if remedial surgery is being considered.
Unfortunately, most patients exhibit abnormally rapid gastric emptying of liquids after truncal vagotomy or partial gastrectomy irrespective of whether or not they have symptoms, and there is considerable overlap of results between symptomatic and asymptomatic groups.
Gastric emptying tests cannot therefore be used to make the diagnosis, although they can, nevertheless yield results consistentwith the diagnosis.
A test before remedial surgery can, in addition, be useful when reassessment, after further operation, is required.
We believe that the results of this survey help to highlight the clinical circumstances in which tests of gastric emptying may be useful.
Patients with ‘non-ulcer dyspepsia’ who seem refractory to all treatments might be assessed in this way to ensure they do not have a gross disorder of gastric emptying, but the likelihood that the result will advance clinical management seems small.
Patients with vomiting of food after upper gastrointestinal tract surgery should be studied if there is doubt, after an endoscopy and barium studies or both whether they have some form of mechanical obstruction, but usually they do not.
For patients with postoperative dumping or diarrhoea it is prudent to assess gastric emptying before starting remedial surgery.
If the patient's symptoms do not warrant such treatment, there seems little point in requesting studies; the result is likely to show rapid emptying of liquids even if the symptoms are only mild.
Reversible bilateral ureteric obstruction due to a pancreatic pseudocyst
Abstract
An unusual case of bilateral ureteric obstruction and hydronephrosis due to pancreatic pseudocyst formation, after an episode of acute pancreatitis is reported.
All abnormalities resolved with conservative management.
Possible reasons for such ureteric obstruction include periureteric fat necrosis by pancreatic enzymes and compression by the inflammatory mass.
Pancreatic pseudocysts are localised collections of pancreatic secretions occurring as a result of pancreatic inflammation and ductal disruption.
They develop in about 10% of patients with acute alcoholic pancreatitis.
Pseudocysts may be complicated by infection, haemorrhage, rupture, and by compression of adjacent organs.
Bilateral ureteric obstruction due to pancreatitis has been reported once before and in that case enzymatic digestion of the ureters was the likely cause of obstruction.
We present a case of bilateral hydroureter and hydronephrosis in which compression from a large pseudocyst seems to have been the cause.
Complete resolution occurred with conservative management.
Case report
A 36 year old man with a background of heavy alcohol intake presented to another hospital with a four day history of abdominal pain, vomiting and jaundice.
Plasma hepatic transaminase activities were raised and a diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis was made.
The acute symptoms resolved.
Persistent pyrexia and bilateral pleuritic chest pain and effusions, however, prompted transfer to this hospital.
On admission here, he had a low grade pyrexia, bilateral pleural effusions, and moderate smooth hepatomegaly.
Results of investigations included: haemoglobin 10 g/dl (normal range (NR), 14–18 g/dl), white cell count 12.9×10/l (NR, 4.8–10.8×10/l), platelets 673×10/l (NR, 150–400×10/l), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate 132 mm/hr.
Mean corpuscular volume was 99 fl (NR, 80–92 fl) and plasma gamma glutamyl transferase was 2.9 uka/l (NR, 0.1–0.8 uka/l).
Serum creatinine, amylase, serum asparate transaminase, and serum alanine transaminase were within the normal range.
Plasma albumin was 28 g/l (NR, 36–44 g/l).
Chest radiography confirmed bilateral pleural effusions, more considerable on the left, and linear atelectasis at the lung bases.
Lung perfusion scan was normal.
Pleural aspirate was an exudate.
Ultrasonography showed hydronephrosis of the left kidney, which was confirmed by intravenous urography.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed appreciable pancreatic enlargement and widespread increase in the amount of soft tissue in the retroperitoneum extending into the pelvis, with additional soft tissue masses in the presacral region and the left side of the pelvis.
The findings were highly suggestive of recent pancreatitis with pseudocyst formation.
The patient was managed conservatively with regular monitoring of renal function and of pseudocyst size.
Six weeks later, CT scanning showed a bulky pancreas and a large pseudocyst of the lesser sac, with fluid tracked down on the left side of the retroperitoneum in the anterior compartment, anterior to Gerota's fascia as far as the left iliac dossa.
There was now bilaterial hydroneophrosis with obstruction at the pelvic inlet (Figs 1 and 2).
No surgical intervention was undertaken.
The patient was regularly reviewed.
Ultrasonography four months later showed improvement, with resolution of hydronephrosis on the left and minimal hydronephrosis on the right.
CT scan, ten months after his initial presentation, showed persistent irregular enlargement of the body and the tail of pancreas with multiple small pseudocysts.
Hydronephrosis and hydroureter had resolved (Fig 3).
At all times, renal function as assessed by serum creatinine and creatinine clearance remained normal.
The patient persisted with heavy alcohol consumption and, one week following his last CT scane, died suddenly.
A limited postmorten examination performed elsewhere found death due to a myocardial infarct.
Discussion
Pancreatic pseydocyst formation is a complication of severe pancreatitis and most commonly follows alcoholic pancreatitis.
Pancreatic pseudocysts extend along the fascial planes, following the line of least resistance and may extend from the mediastinum to the groin.
Adjacent structures may be eroded or compressed.
It is rare, however, for the urinary tract to be affected.
A fistula between a pancreatic pseudocyst and the left renal pelvis has been reported, as has a left pancreatic perirenal fistula.
Ransohoff described a patient with a pseudocyst that eroded directly into the kidney causing cross haematuria.
Pseudocysts may compress or indent the kidney or may displace the ureter.
Isolated ureteric obstruction is a rare complication of pancreatitis.
One previous case of bilateral ureteric obstruction after pancreatitis has been reported and it has also been described in an alcoholic patient with a large pseudocyst.
In contrast with our patient, ureteric obstruction was complete.
At surgery, both ureters contained isolated necrotic segments and histological examination showed obstructed ureters with acute and chronic inflammation surrounded by fat necrosis and calcification.
Direct compression of the ureters was not the cause of the obstruction, which was thought to be because of enzymatic degradation of the ureters.
In contrast with our patient, although no material was available either before or after death for histological study, the absence of complete obstruction and the spontaneous resolution suggests that the ureteric obstruction was a result of compression from the pseudocyst.
There is controversy about the management of pancreatic pseudocysts.
Operative intervention is recommended for pseudocysts greater than 6 cm that persist more than six weeks or that are of an indeterminate age, the rationale being the presumed high rate (30–50%) of life threatening complications.
Operative management is not without risk, however, as it has a reported 5–12% death rate.
Our experience with this patient agrees with the view that many such patients can be managed conservatively with careful clinical and radiological follow up.
In summary, we report a case of a retroperitoneal pancreatic pseudocyst causing distal bilateral ureteric obstruction and bilateral hydronephrosis.
Complete resolution occurred with conservative management.
Molecular biology.
Setting the stage in colorectal cancer?
Over 18 000 people die each year in the UK from colorectal cancer.
The mortality has remained largely unchanged over the decades despite greater public awareness and better diagnostic facilities.
Improving the outlook for patients will require either diagnosing cancer at an asymptomatic and presumably earlier phase or offering more effective treatment for those with advanced disease.
Recent studies have expressed cautious optimism both for screening and for the use of adjuvant therapy, yet closer examination raises as many doubts as hopes.
Faecal occult blood screening
Faecal occult blood testing is the only realistic method available today for periodic screening of people deemed to be at average risk of colorectal cancer.
Results of well controlled studies offer considerable hope of an improvement in survival.
Duke's A and B lesions account for our 75% of cancers detected in asymptomatic individuals by initial faecal occult blood testing, while less than 50% of symptomatic patients are comparably staged at diagnosis.
Now a report from the Minnesota group seems to confirm these expectations with a 33% reduction in cancer related mortality over 13 years.
There are, however, concerns still to be allayed.
Thirty eight per cent of the annually screened population in the Minnesota study underwent colonoscopy because of the low specificity of the rehydrated guiac slides.
Despite this, only 50% of cancers in this group were actually detected by faecal occult blood testing, the remainder arose as symptomatic cancers in the period between screenings.
Clearly, only a percentage of lesions bleed at any one time and it may be that screening favours the detection of more slowly growing tumours (length or time bias).
The lack of specificity of faecal occult blood testing also results in large numbers of unnecessary colonic evaluations, adding greatly to the cost of such programmes.
The decrease in mortality in the Minnessota study may relate to the high percentage of colonoscopies performed rather than the faecal occult blood testing per se and if so, lends support to the concept of endocsopic screening as proposed by Atkin.
Genetic screening
Until recently, research in molecular biology was limited by the expensive and technically demanding procedures needed to detect abnormalities within the genome.
The polymerase chain reaction, which enables the millionfold amplification of short segments of DNA, has now brought genetic research within reach of small laboratories.
Genetic mutations play a major, though complex role in sporadic colorectal cancer and the detection of genetic changes rather than occult blood in stool might form the basis of screening tests in the future.
There are theoretical advantages in searching for DNA mutations rather than occult blood in stool.
DNA is extremely stable, whereas blood, especially from the right colon, may be degraded by bacteria and subsequently not detected by the guaiac method.
This may explain the predominance of rectosigmoid cancers detected by faecal occult blood testing.
The specificity of DNA mutations ensures that adenomas or carcinomas are present, thus eliminating the problem of a false positive result.
Sidransky has reported the identification of tumour derived DNA in the stools of patients with colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps and p53 mutations have been detected in the DNA of epithelial cells isolated from the stool of patients before colonoscopy.
While these techniques are not sufficiently developed to use in other than a research capacity at present, they offer the hope that, in future, it will be possible to identify asymptomatic individuals by testing their stools against a panel of DNA probes.
Screening high risk individuals by colonoscopic methods is an established procedure, but identification is crude except for those few families with hereditary colorectal cancer.
Currently, patients at risk of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) undergo the ordeal of regular colonoscopic evaluation from early adulthood to middle age before the diagnosis can be confidently excluded.
Molecular biology will allow a scientific approach to identify the population at risk.
The FAP gene, thought to be crucial in the development of colorectal cancer in these patients has been localised to chromosome 5q, and has been characterised.
Identification of this gene provides an opportunity to screen for disease within polyposis families at birth.
The study of patients with FAP has led to a greater awareness of the importance of family history in apparently sporadic colorectal cancer.
Houlston et al estimate the lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer as 1 in 10 where the proband is aged under 45 at diagnosis, and 1 in 6 where two or more first degree relatives are affected.
Colonoscopy, using these estimates, yields a sizable number of adenomatous polyps; however, the point at which the potential benefits of intensive screening by endoscopic or radiological methods is outweighed by the risks involved is difficult to determine.
Again, molecular biology may be of value in the identification of susceptible members within hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer families.
The recent localisation of a hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer gene to chromosome 2 provides confirmation of a genetic predisposition to colorectal cancer within certain families and may allow the introduction of effective screening programmes for these people.
Adjuvant therapy and staging
The value of an accurate, objective staging system cannot be overemphasised now that large studies have shown adjuvant therapies to be beneficial in selected groups.
Patients with high risk rectal cancers who undergo curative surgery and receive adjuvant therapy with 5-flourouracil and radiotherapy may expect an improvement in survival.
Patients with Duke's C cancer also represent a group with a poor prognosis — 65–75% die within five years of surgery — and benefit from combined therapy with 5-flourouracil and levamisole.
These studies show that if we can define a population with a high risk of recurrent disease then the outlook may be improved by medical treatment.
In terms of prognosis after curative surgery, Duke's B colorectal cancer represents a therapeutic dilemma.
More patients fall into this category than any other but despite the relatively localised extent of disease the long term outcome is unpredictable, 35–40% dying as a result of metastatic spread.
Trials of adjuvant therapy have, to date, shown no benefit for these patients.
This may be partly explained by the large study population needed to show even a modest advantage; the statistical power of the study being proportional to the number of deaths within the population.
The identification of factors within Dukes's B colorectal cancer associated with recurrence would modify patient selection for trials of adjuvant therapies and help avoid unnecessary treatment of the 60–65% of those who remain disease free without their use.
The inference is that present histological systems such as those of Dukes, Jass, and the TNM classification fail to predict consistently a prognosis with confidence.
Various non-histological features such as age, sex, symptom presentation, tumour size, site, ploidy status, and tumour marker levels may all be helpful when considering long term outcome, however, these indices still fail to predict disease recurrence with precision.
In addition to providing possible screening tests for colorectal cancer, molecular biology will be extremely useful if an improved staging system can be constructed.
Genetic staging
Data is accruing which suggest that molecular biology may be of help in this staging process.
A range of abnormalities has been identified in colorectal cancer including ras mutations and deletions of gene sequences on chromosomes 5, 17, and 18.
Mutations may result in the activation of oncogenes or the inactivation of tumour suppressor genes, leading to abnormal or unregulated cell growth.
Other mechanisms may also be at work.
Recently, a hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer gene has been localised to chromosome 2.
This gene seems to be neither an oncogene nor tumour supressor gene, but could be responsible for an increase in genetic instability by way of multiple replication errors within the genome.
The FAP gene has ras mutations may be important initiating events in colorectal cancer, but seem to have little independent prognostic importance.
In contrast, allelic losses on chromosomes 17 and 18 confer a poor prognosis independent of conventional staging as do a combination of c-ki-ras gene mutations and p53 overexpression, as measured immunohistochemically.
Allelic losses, insertions, and point mutations have been detected on many other chromosomes but it has still to be established whether such changes function simply as markers for colorectal cancer, or as potential prognostic indicators.
The stepwise progression of colorectal cancer through a series of genetic alterations as proposed by Vogelstein is attractive in that it postulates an inter-relationship between the accumulation of genertic changes and tumour stage.
It is therefore reasonable to suggest that a staging system might be devised which is based upon the type and genetic changes associated with conventional tumour stage and, more importantly, with survival.
The present consensus is that the behaviour of colorectal cancer seems to be dependent on the total number of genetic changes present in tumour tissue rather than their order, and that patient survival is inversely proportional to the number of allelic losses found in tumours.
While it is clear that specific genetic alterations serve as prognostic indicators, not all correlate with a poor prognosis.
The presence of multiple replication errors or microsatellite instability within tumours is actually associated with increased survival., Future studies in this area will help to elucidate these relationships more precisely.
In the study of colorectal cancer we are fortunate that there exists both a familial form of the disease and a precursor lesion, namely the adenomatous polyp.
These characteristics have been employed to great effect by geneticists, and advances to date have been remarkably swift.
A haematological screening test for FAP is now possible and there is potential to design screening tests for hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer and asymptomatic sporadic disease in the future.
A staging system for established cancer might also be based on genetic mutations.
If the study of genetic aspects of colorectal cancer continues at its present pace, molecular biology may soon outgrow its immediate role as a research tool and take its place on the clinical stage.
Bile duct injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: the value of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatorgaphy
Abstract
This study describes the value of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in patients with bile duct injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Twelve consecutive patients were studied over a one year period.
In all patients the biliary tree was visualised during ERCP.
Four patients had complete bile duct obstruction, seven patients had a stricture (two with concomitant leakage), and one patient had leakage from a hepatic branch.
Three patients with complete obstruction, presented with a relatively prolonged symptom free, ‘silent’ period before diagnosis.
In all four patients with complete transection, a proximal hepaticojejunostomy was performed.
In one patient with a tough fibrous stricture, secondary to incorrect clip placement, passage of the guidewire was impossible, leaving surgical reconstruction as the only therapeutic option.
All remaining seven patients with leakage or strictures, or both were successfully treated by endoscopic sphincterotomy only (n=1) or sphincterotomy and subsequent stent placement (n=6).
When patients do not recover uneventfully after laparoscopic cholecystectomy even without cholestasis or jaundice, early ERCP is recommended as a safe and valuable method to detect bile duct injury and to suggest treatment.
Subsequently, more than half of such patients can be treated endoscopically.
Extended follow up is needed to evaluate the longterm results.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the most popular method for removing the gall bladder.
Early data suggested that the incidence of bile duct injury, which is 1 in 1000 after open cholecystectomy, might be 1 in 100 after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Recent reports, however, show that the incidence may decrease to 0.3–0.5% as experience increases.
Postoperative bile leakage and benign bile duct stricturing after open cholecystectomy can be diagnosed safely and effectively with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
Subsequent endoscopic management can be successful in most cases.
It has not yet been well defined, whether a similar approach is justified for bile duct injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Therefore, we evaluated the role of diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy in a consecutive series of patients referred to our gastroenterology department with bile duct injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Patients and methods
Between May 1991 and June 1992, 12 patients (nine women) were referred for ERCP from different hospitals, because of suspicion of bile duct injury after laparoscopic removal of the gall bladder.
Table I summarises the clinical features of these patients.
Visualisation of the biliary tree was performed by standard ERCP, with sedation by midazolam given intravenously.
Our technique and results of endoscopic treatment of bile duct injury after open cholecystectomy have been described in detail elsewhere.
In essence our policy is as follows (Table II): when bile duct leakage is present, we prefer to decompress the biliary tree through endoscopic sphincterotomy, often followed by shortterm (4–6 weeks) insertion of a biliary endoprosthesis.
When stricturing is present, dilation is attempted by longterm stenting, preferably with two 10 French gauge (Fg) polyethylene endoprostheses for one year.
These stents are electively exchanged every three months to avoid clogging induced cholangitis.
Results
CASE 1
A 34 year old woman was referred for ERCP, 17 days after laparoscopic removal of a shrunken gall bladder, containing one stone.
An operative cholangiogram was not performed.
Because of some peroperative bile leakage, a subhepatic drain was positioned and antibiotics were given for five days.
Postoperatively, the patient complained of vague abdominal discomfort and the drain was removed after two days.
Blood chemistry was monitored regularly, but showed only moderately raised liver enzymes after two weeks.
Abdominal ultrasound imaging showed non-dilated bile ducts, several fluid collections, and guided puncture yielded bile.
At ERCP a complete stop, resulting from a surgical clip at the level of the cystic duct was visualised.
During laparotomy, 2 cm of more proximal bile duct was missing and bile leaked from the common hepatic duct into the abdominal cavity, explaining the absence of obstructive jaundice.
A proximal hepaticojejunostomy with a Roux-en Y loop reconstruction was performed and the patient was discharged after three weeks.
CASE 2
A 57 year old man was referred for ERCP, 49 days after laparoscopic removal of a chronically inflamed gall bladder with many adhesions.
An operative cholangiogram was not performed.
Postoperatively, the subhepatic drain produced 250 ml bile per day.
Unfortunately, the patient initially refused to have an ERCP.
After accidental drain removal, the abdomen distended rapidly and ultrasound showed the presence of ascites.
At relaparotomy a large bile duct defect was seen, located 1.5 cm proximal to the cystic duct and a Roux-en-Y loop was anastomosed over the perforated area.
The patient became septic and was referred to our intensive care unit.
Subsequent ERCP showed a total stop at the level of the mid common bile duct (CBD).
During the second relaparotomy, multiple abscesses were drained.
Eventually, the patient improved and IODIDA scintigraphy after one month, showed adequate drainage through the jejunal loop.
CASE 3
A 21 year old woman was referred for ERCP, 27 days after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Peroperative cholangiography showed two clips partially placed over the CBD, which were subsequently removed.
Three weeks after this procedure, the patient became jaundiced.
Ultrasound did not show dilated intrahepatic bile ducts.
At ERCP, a mid CBD stricture at the level of a clip was detected.
Only one 11 cm, 10 Fg stent could be positioned.
The jaundice subsided rapidly and a second stent was inserted after six weeks, to achieve further stretching of the strictured area.
CASE 4
A 29 year old woman was referred for ERCP, 36 days after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Peroperatively, a mid CBD injury was recognised and the procedure was converted to an open cholecystectomy.
The defect was sutured over a T-tube.
On the third postoperative day, the T-tube was removed after cholangiography showed sufficient drainage.
Three weeks after discharge, the patient felt nauseated and blood chemistry showed cholestasis.
Subsequent ERCP showed a subhilar stricture and some contrast extravasation.
Two 14 cm, 10 Fg endoprostheses could be inserted to dilate the stricture.
After the procedure the cholestasis subsided.
CASE 5
A 38 year old woman was referred for ERCP, 18 days after uneventful laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
After two weeks she became jaundiced and was referred with the diagnosis of choledocholithiasis.
Subsequent ERCP showed a transverse clip over the mid CBD causing a total stop (Fig 1).
An attempt to visualise the proximal bile ducts resulted in a small perforation.
Laparotomy showed that the common hepatic duct had been resected erroneously.
A cholangiojejunostomy with a Roux-en-Y loop was performed, with the left hepatic duct approach.
CASE 6
A 39 year old woman was referred for ERCP, six days after uneventful laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Postoperatively she complained of abdominal discomfort and blood chemistry showed cholestasis.
Ultrasound showed a small subhepatic fluid collection.
Subsequent ERCP showed abundant leakage of a hepatic radical and a small sphincterotomy was performed to facilitate bile flow into the duodenum (Fig 2).
Possibly a congenital abnormal connection was present between the cystic duct and the right biliary system.
The patient improved rapidly and had no complaints one year after this procedure.
CASE 7
A 42 year old man was referred for ERCP 55 days after a complicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Peroperatively bile leakage was encountered and the procedure was converted to a laparotomy.
After CBD exploration a T-tube was positioned, which was removed after 10 days.
Nearly two months later the patient complained of itching and cholestasis was diagnosed.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a stenotic area in the mid-CBD, with prestenotic dilation.
After failed ERCP elsewhere, ERCP in our centre confirmed the presence of a stricture at the level of a clip.
One 14 cm, 10 Fg, stent was positioned and exchanged for two stents after six weeks.
CASE 8
A 43 year old woman was referred for ERCP 70 days after uneventful laparoscopic removal of a shrunken gall bladder.
Postoperatively, production from the subhepatic drain diminished initially, but after seven days increased to 300 to 500 ml bile per day.
Ultrasound showed a non-dilated biliary tree and subhepatic fluid collections.
These bilomas were drained percutaneously and several attempts at cannulating the CBD elsewhere were unsuccessful.
Subsequent ERCP in our institution showed a complete disconnection at the level of the mid CBD with contrast leakage.
Despite the non-dilated biliary tree, a percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram was feasible: there was no communication between the right and the left system and both branches drained in a subhepatic collection.
Laparotomy showed erroneous resection of the total hepatic duct confluence.
A double cholangiojejunostomy reconstruction with Roux-en-Y loop was performed with a good result.
CASE 9
A 33 year old obese woman was referred for ERCP 34 days after uneventful laparoscopic removal of a chronically inflamed gall bladder, containing one stone.
After three weeks she complained of itching and blood chemistry showed cholestasis.
At ERCP a mid CBD stricture was visualised at the level of some clips, with concomitant contrast leakage and an endoprosthesis was inserted.
After six weeks, the leakage had stopped and two 10 Fg stents were inserted.
CASE 10
A 45 year old woman was referred 13 months after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
After five days, an ERCP elsewhere showed bile leakage from the cystic duct stump and a small endoscopic sphincterotomy was performed, followed by stent insertion.
The leakage subsided rapidly and after three months the stent was removed.
Unfortunately, the patient developed pain and cholestasis and a stenosis at the level of the hilum was diagnosed.
Three subsequent balloon dilations were unsuccessful and finally the patient was referred to our institution.
During ERCP a firm stricture, of 3 mm in length, was visualised at the level of several clips and only one 10 Fg endoprosthesis could be inserted initially.
After six weeks the stricture was further dilated with two endoprostheses.
CASE 11
A 61 year old man was referred for ERCP nearly two years after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
After 35 days he became jaundiced.
ERCP elsewhere showed a distal obstructing stone, which was successfully removed with a balloon after sphincterotomy.
In addition, a small fistulous tract originating from the cystic duct stump was diagnosed.
Twenty months later, the patient again complained of pain in the right upper abdomen.
Blood chemistry showed recurrent cholestasis.
Subsequent ERCP showed a very tight mid CBD stricture at the level of several clips (Fig 3).
During two consecutive attempts, passage of a guidewire was impossible.
After these manipulations, one clip migrated into the CBD and was successfully removed with a Dormia catheter.
Later on a hepaticojejunostomy was performed with good result.
CASE 12
A 35 year old woman was referred for ERCP seven days after uneventful laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Three days postoperatively she felt nauseated.
Blood chemistry showed cholestatic liver enzymes and ultrasound showed dilated bile ducts.
At ERCP a subhilar stricture was visualised with surrouding clips and one 14 cm, 10 Fg stent was inserted successfully (Fig 4).
A second stent was positioned after six weeks.
Discussion
In all the 12 patients referred with suspicion of bile duct injury, the biliary tree was successfully visualised during ERCP.
This led to a further diagnosis and aided treatment strategy.
Remarkably, previous abdominal ultrasound showed non-dilated intrahepatic bile ducts despite the presence of major bile duct injury in four patients.
In general, the clinical presentation of postoperative bile duct injury includes distinct symptoms such as cholestasis, jaundice, persistent bile drainage by drains and sepsis as described after open cholecystectomy.
More important, however, is the occasional presence of an initial relatively symptom free period, which can mislead the clinician.
In this study, three patients (cases 1, 5, and 8) with complete bile duct transection had indeed initially little, if any, complaints.
This symptom free period lasted for several days and even weeks.
After this clinically ‘silent’ period, the patients eventually developed cholestasis.
Surprisingly, subsequent ERCP showed a complete bile duct obstruction.
In all three patients, subsequent laparotomy showed a distal CBD occluded by clips and a partially resected common hepatic duct, with free bile leakage into the abdominal cavity.
Unhindered bile flow from the liver, may explain this initial ‘silent’, anicteric period.
According to our experience, the severity of bile duct injuries seems to be changed after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
For the last decade, about one patient a year was referred to our department with a total bile duct transection after open cholecystectomy.
In contrast, after the introduction of the laparoscopic approach, four patients have been referred with total bile duct transections during a one year period.
Important factors that may contribute to this apparently increased incidence of major bile duct injuries after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, are absence of three dimensional depth perception during laparoscopy, a changed view on the operative field, and stenting of the common bile duct by anterior traction on the gall bladder to dissect Calot's triangle.
In general, a large proportion of bile duct injuries can be attributed to the learning experience of the surgeon.
All four patients with complete bile duct transection were treated with a proximal hepaticojejunostomy with Roux-en-Y jejunal loop.
When the total common hepatic duct was resected, the left hepatic duct approach was used for the hepaticojejunal anastomosis.
It was difficult to perform a suficiently wide bilioenteric anastomosis in two of four patients, because of a non-dilated biliary tree.
Whether this will influence the longterm patency of the anastomosis, remains to be seen.
The treatment of bile leakage after open cholecystectomy, by endoscopic sphincterotomy or stent placement has been reported to yield acceptable results, especially when the patient is referred in an early phase.
In this study, all three patients with bile leakage were also successfully treated endoscopically.
This shows that similar guidelines for decompression of the biliary tree after open cholecystectomy, can be applied after laparoscopic cholecystectomy as well.
The role of endoscopic stenting for postoperative biliary strictures is still debated.
We have advocated initial endoscopic stenting for bile duct strictures after open cholecystectomy.
Bile duct stricturing after laparoscopic cholecystectomy is often due to clip mis or displacement.
When these strictures are temporarily dilated by endoscopic stenting, the permanent presence of these clips might perhaps induce restricturing after stent removal.
Nevertheless, a proximal hepaticojejunostomy in a young patient seems unattractive and justifies exploration of other, less invasive, alternatives.
Moreover, in case of endoscopic failure surgical options are still available.
Six of seven patients with a stricture, had successful stent insertion.
Extended follow up is required, to assess the longterm effects, particularly the stricture recurrence rate after final stent removal.
In one patient, who presented with a stricture nearly two years after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, surgery seemed to be the only option.
Even after transpapillary removal of one clip, guidewire passage remained impossible.
Occasionally, however, stent placement can become feasible after endoscopic clip removal.
Intraoperative cholangiography, performed in only one patient in this study, can be helpful in delineating the biliary anatomy to avoid iatrogenic injury.
Possibly, selected or routine use of intraoperative cholangiography could have prevented or diagnosed some of the injuries.
When bile duct injury is diagnosed, optimal management can only be achieved by a team, including surgeon, endoscopist, and radiologist.
This study has shown that clinicians must be aware of the occasional ‘silent’ period after major bile duct injuries.
Whenever patients do not recover uneventfully after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, early ERCP is a safe and valuable approach to visualise the location and extent of any lesion.
More than half of such patients can be treated endoscopically.
Radiation enhancement of laser palliation for advanced rectal and rectosigmoid cancer: a pilot study
Abstract
Laser palliation for advanced rectal or rectosigmoid cancer requires repeat treatments every four to six weeks.
Thirteen patients (seven men, six women) age range 65–91 (median 81) received additional external beam radiotherapy in an attempt to reduce the range of laser treatments required.
After successful laser recanalisation, patients were treated with a dose of 30–55 Gy in 10–20 fractions.
Bowel symptoms were well controlled for prolonged periods in 11 patients (85%) and further laser procedures were only required every 19 weeks median (range 6–53 weeks).
The laser energy required after radiotherapy was only 800 J/ month (median).
Survival was 14 months (median, range 2.5–20 months) for the seven patients who have died.
Seven patients received laser treatment only for three months or more (median 14 weeks, range 13–39).
In this group control of symptoms required procedures every four weeks (median) before radiotherapy and 20 weeks (median) afterwards.
The laser energy required before radiotherapy was 15000 J/month and 2000 J/month afterwards (Wilcoxon rank sum p<0.01 for both).
Radiotherapy was well tolerated in all but one patient.
Three patients developed strictures after radiotherapy but all were dealt with endoscopically.
There were no complications solely due to endoscopic procedures.
Additional radiotherapy enhances laser palliation for inoperable rectal or rectosigmoid cancer.
The treatment of choice for rectal and rectosigmoid cancer is complete surgical resection.
Unfortunately many patients present tumours too extensive to resect or they are unfit for such surgery.
The proportion of patients in this group varies between studies but is over 10%.
A further group with anastomotic recurrences are often unsuitable for further surgery.
Palliative resection carries a high mordbity and a mortality of 10–30%.
The survival after palliative surgery is limited; one study found a median survival of only eight and 14–16 months in such patients with and without liver metastases.
A recent review advises that surgeons should treat surgically incurable patients with local methods only which are both cost effective and carry a low morbidity and mortality.
Nd YAG laser treatment for inoperable rectal and rectosigmoid cancer offers good palliation.
Troublesome symptoms such as bleeding, discharge, tenesmus, and constipation (due to partial obstruction) can be controlled in most patients with minimal morbidity.
One study reported less satisfactory results although these may be at least partly explained because patients were not brought back as often for follow up treatments as in other studies.
Repeat sessions every four to six weeks are required for good control of symptoms.
This is not surprising as the Nd Yag laser is only capable of safely treating intraluminal tumours.
Treatment debulks the tumour and has an immediate beneficial effect on bleeding and discharge but disease is left in the rectal wall and beyond the lumen in local nodes so tumour regrowth occurs fairly rapidly.
Radiotherapy, however, has the potential for treating the entire tumour and local regional draining sites and thus should be complimentary.
It has an established record in the treatment of rectal cancer and is commonly used as adjuvant treatment after operation for Dukes B and C cancers.
The risk of local recurrence in this setting is reduced and a randomised MRC trial looking at survival is presently in progress.
Results from the first major series of patients treated by radiotherapy alone for rectal cancer were published in 1956.
Symptomatic palliation was achieved in most patients but complications were common.
Half of the patients required colostomies either due to obstructive symptoms before radiotherapy or from radiation induced fibrosis.
Since that time there have been several studies with more modern radiotherapy techniques and fractionation to minimise complications and maximise symptom control for advanced cancers.
Although symptoms can be controlled in most patients it takes several weeks for maximal effect and prolonged relief requires higher radiation dose regimes.
These carry a higher risk of complications such as radiation swelling or fibrosis, which can in turn lead to obstruction and may even require permanent colostomy.
By laser treatment and radiotherapy we aimed to achieve the benefits of both while minimising complications.
Laser treatment can offer rapid relief of rectal discharge and obstructive symptoms, which should reduce the risk of obstruction from radiation induced swelling or fibrosis.
Radiotherapy often relieves pain that is untreatable with laser, and may give better long term control so that repeat laser procedures are required less often.
A recent pilot study with combined laser treatment and radiotherapy in oesophageal cancer produced promising results.
Here we present the results of a prospective pilot study of combination laser and radiotherapy for palliation of advanced rectal cancer.
Patient and methods
PATIENT SELECTION
Forty seven patients with rectal and rectosigmoid tumours referred for laser treatment during an 18 month period between February 1990 and August 1991 were considered for inclusion in this study.
All patients had been considered unsuitable for surgery either due to incurable disease (documented distal metastases or advanced locoregional disease), or high surgical risk such as advanced age or severe cardiorespiratory disease; 80% were tertiary referrals.
The figure gives a detailed breakdown of patients included and excluded from the study.
After further assessment six patients were considered to be inappropriate referrals and were returned for surgery (two total obstruction, one tumour invading anus, three fit for surgery and resectable by anterior resection).
A further eight patients with villous adenomas but no evidence of malignant change were deemed unsuitable for the study and were given laser treatment only.
Of 32 patients with proved cancer given laser treatment 12 (38%) were entered into the study.
Reasons for exclusion in this group were large liver metastases (seven), carcinoma but considered unfit for radiotherapy (seven, including two sigmoid lesions), refusal of radiotherapy (three), previous radiotherapy (one), rectovaginal fistula (one), unable to pass stricture (thus radiotherapy likely to induce obstruction)(one).
Thirteen patients (seven men, six women) age range 65–91 (median 81) were considered suitable for radiotherapy by the radiotherapist (JST) after a good initial laser result.
All these patients had presented with rectal discharge or bleeding, nine also had diahorrhoea and two had obstructive symptoms.
Two also had tenesmus.
Eleven of these patients had rectal or rectosigmoid adebicarcinoma (including one with cancerous change in a villous adenoma), one had direct rectal invasion from cervical cancer, and one an extensive villous adenoma (with no documented focus of adenocarcinoma).
Eleven were considered unfit for surgery including three with metastases and three recurrences after surgery, two of whom had rectal stump recurrences after abdominoprineal resections.
The other two tumours were unresectable at laparotomy.
The tumour length was 2–14 cm (median 5 cm) and the lower margin of the tumour was at 0–14 cm (median 6 cm) from the anal verge.
At least six patients with lesions less than 7 cm from the anal margin would have required permanent colostomy if palliative resection had been carried out.
Eight patients had circumferential lesions (C3) and five had circumferential lesions (C2).
ENDOSCOPIC TECHNIQUE
Whenever possible treatments were performed on an outpatient basis.
A sodium phosphate enema is usually adequate preparation for rectosigmoid lesions; more proximal lesions required rectal washout or occasionally full bowel preparation.
The technique is as for treating oesophageal cancers and has been published previously.
RADIOTHERAPY
All patients were irradiated by supervoltage teletherapy (cobalt 60).
The target volume was generally determined by computed tomography scanning and, if necessary, barium studies and treatment was delivered with anterior and posterior opposed fields in all cases.
Dosage was decided on the basis of the patient's general condition, more radical regimes being offered to the younger and fitter patients.
Ten received a dose of 30 Gy in 10 fractions and one patient was retreated with the same dose when rectal discharge recurred after nine months.
One patient received 40 Gy in 20 fractions and a further two patients received doses of 50 and 55 Gy in 20 fractions.
All treatments were given on consecutive days (weekends excepted).
PATIENT FOLLOW UP AND EVALUATION
Ten patients underwent check sigmoidoscopy three to six weeks after radiotherapy was completed.
Response to radiotherapy was assessed and further laser treatment performed if a viable tumour was identified.
Three patients did not return fr a check as they were free of symptoms.
Patients with little or no residual intraluminal tumour and a good lumen (implying minimal risk of obstruction) were not given a further follow up appointment.
Those with tumour regrowth requiring laser energy of around 5000 J or more and those with a stricture that would not immediately allow passage of an endoscope were given a follow up appointment at four to six weeks for repeat laser endoscopy.
This was essential because if there is a possibility of obstruction developing it is inappropriate in this patient group to wait for symptoms to develop.
Inevitably, follow up appointments were given to some extent on a subjective basis according to the laser endoscopist's previous experience.
As all these procedures were carried out by two endoscopists (IRS and SGB) we do not consider that this led to significant bias.
All patients were subsequently contacted monthly by the research nurse (ST) to document progress and assess the necessity for further treatment.
Patients were evaluated according to endoscopic result, early and late functional success, necessity for repeat endoscopic treatment, and dose rate of laser energy required to control intraluminal tumour (averaged laser energy per month).
STATISTICAL METHODS
Paired data for laser energy per month required and for frequency of endoscopic treatment before and after radiotherapy were analysed with the Wilcoxon signed rank test.
Results
Table I gives a summary of the results for endoscopic and symptomatic success.
ENDOSCOPIC DATA
All patients seen for check endoscopy had good control of symptoms at that time.
Eight had minimal or no tumour present at endoscopy and the endoscope passed through the stricture with no difficulty.
(None of these patients required more that 2000 J laser treatment at this time.)
In this group further procedures were performed when recurrent symptoms occurred (median every 20 weeks, range 6–42 weeks).
The remaining two patients had tight strictures with obvious tumour shrinkage.
The stricture was clearly infiltrated with tumour in both these patients and further laser therapy was required in order to pass the endoscope above the level of the stricture.
These two required regular follow up to prevent them obstructing.
They had procedures on average every 10 weeks for a follow up of 15 and 16 months to death.
(One with liver metastases and one tumour cachexia).
Three patients declined to come for a check endoscopy immediately after radiotherapy as they had no bowel symptoms.
Two of them never required further endoscopy as their local bowel symptoms remained well controlled (survival 2.5 and 14 months).
The third, a 69 year old patient with an inoperable rectosigmoid cancer, underwent further laser treatment 10 months after radiotherapy when she developed recurrent rectal discharge.
This was controlled with 5000 J laser energy after which the patient had no further rectal symptoms to death six months later.
(She did, however, also have some chemotherapy the details of which are unknown).
SYMPTOMS
Laser treatment was considered to be successful if symptoms caused by intraluminal tumour were reduced to an extent that enabled the patient to lead a lifestule appropriate to his or her age and general condition without constant concern for bowel function.
Initial laser treatment had been successful and bowel symptoms were well controlled for the first two months after radiotherapy in all patients.
Long term success (to date or to death) was achieved in 11 of 13 (85%) patients.
One long term symptomatic failure occurred in a demented 81 year old man who presented with obstructive symptoms and rectal discharge and was found to have a circumferential rectal lesion.
He did well for a year before developing intermittent rectal incontinence.
This may be at least partially related to his dementia as the tumour appeared well controlled endoscopically.
He is alive and under follow up surgery was not deemed appropriate due to his generally weak condition.
The second failkure occurred in a 77 year old man who presented with severe secretary diarrhoea (15 motions per day), hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, and prerenal failure.
He had a 14 cm circumferential villous adenoma but no focus of malignancy was detected on repeated biopsies.
Surgical resection proved impossible after he had a cardiac arrest on the operating table.
He underwent 11 laser procedures before radiotherapy, which controlled the discharge and fluid and electrolyte loss and the tumour length shrank from 14 cm to 8 cm.
Laser procedures were required, however, every four weeks.
Initially symptoms were well controlled after radiotherapy but the mucus discharge became troublesome again after two months.
The patient was reluctant to have further surgery but eventually agreed.
The second procedure went smoothly (as the fluid and electrolyte problems remained controlled after laser and radiotherapy treatment), an abdominoperineal resection was performed and the patient remains well six months later.
Histology of the surgical specimen showed no cancer.
TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
Whenever possible laser and radiotherapy were performed on an outpatient basis although many patients came from long distances so radiotherapy had to be given as an inpatient.
Days in hospital ranged from mil to 52 (median 20 days).
Overall the number of laser treatments required ranged from zero to 20 (median five).
The number before radiotherapy was one to nine (median two) and after radiotherapy nil to 11 (median three).
Table II shows the laser treatment intervals required to control symptoms.
The treatment intervals before radiotherapy are given for the patients who were followed up for three months or more while undergoing laser treatment.
This period was chosen as we considered that it was th minimum required to obtain a good baseline for treatment frequency and laser energy requirements for good tumour control.
The initial treatment intervals start from the time of completion of the initial recanalisation, whether this took one or more treatments.
Some patients were brought back routinely four weeks after recanalisation and most four to eight weeks after radiotherapy.
The routine checks distort the data to some extent but because checks were performed both before and after raditherapy the bias is minimised.
The figures show a dramatic increase in treatment interval from four weeks before treatment to 20 weeks after, the treatment interval for C2 tumours being longer than that for C3 (p<0.01).
In terms of laser energy required to control symptoms (excluding initial recanalisation (Table III)) there was also a dramatic reduction in the figures per month required before and after radiotherapy indicating a corresponding reduction in the regrowth rate of intraluminal tumour bulk (<0.001).
SURVIVAL AND COMPLICATIONS
To date 7 of 13 (54%) of the patients in this study have died; survival in this group was 2.5–20 months (median 14 months).
Six patients are still alive and have been undergoing tratment for 5.5–24 months (median 15 months).
No serious endoscope complications occurred.
Radiotherapy was generally well tolerated.
One patient suffered with transitory lethargy during treatment, which may have been related to radiotherapy.
Three patients developed fibrous or neoplastic strictures after radiotherapy.
All were dealt with endoscopically.
One, in a 91 year old woman with inoperable rectal cancer, was particularly tight and required follow up laser treatment every six weeks.
She eventually died after 65 weeks of successful treatment, with severe cachexia and large bowel obstruction. at the end, her general condition was considered to be too poor to justify a defunctioning colostomy.
Discussion
Laser treatment is now established in many units for palliation of symptoms in patients with inoperable rectal cancer.
It is effective in 80% and is a particularly gentle and safe treatment not requiring general anaesthesia and carries a low risk serious complications.
The problem of the need for frequent follow up procedures is, however, a major one as this is invonvenient and sometimes distressing for the patient.
Laser treatment can be technically difficult, particularly in patients in whom the endoscope will not pass the stricture.
It usually takes longer than with oesophageal tumours and constitutes a considerable workload.
This small pilot study shows promising results for the combination of aser and radiotherapy rectal and rectosigmoid cancer.
The treatments should be complimentary, laser treatment to give rapid relief of troublesome discharge and obstructive symptoms and radiotherapy to attack the entire tumour bulk, and this seems to be confirmed.
Also, endoscopic treatment has the advantage of pre-emptying the obstruction that may result from radiotherapy.
Both endoscopic and symptomatic results were impressive.
Only two patients in this study failed to achieve long term functional success.
The patient with a villous adenoma had a very extensive lesion which was initially 14 cm long and it was a notable success to control his troublesome rectal discharge at all.
Even he had definite symptomatic and endoscopic benefit from additional radiotherapy and his general conditioned improved enough for him to undergo successful surgery.
The reduction in follow up procedures to one every 20 weeks or so for C2 tumours and 10 weeks or so for C3 tumours is a useful improvement in follow up requirements.
The reduction in laser energy per month required for good symptom control is another indicator that suggests benefit from radiotherapy.
Only 12 of 32 patients referred with rectal or rectosigmoid cancer who received laser therapy during the 18 month period were entered into this study.
We were reluctant to submit patients with very poor prognosis to a two week course of radiotherapy and the small proportion entered reflects the extent of disease and poor general condition in this elderly group who are referred for laser treatment.
The median survival of a year or more with symptoms controlled in most of those treated represents a very satisfactory outcome.
Despite the development of radiation strictures in three patients none required open surgery.
All were controlled for long periods with endoscopic treatment altough it is possible that obstruction contributed to death in one patient.
There are several other treatments available for palliation of rectal and rectosigmoid cancer; these include electrocoagulation, transanal resection, and cryotherapy.
They are all more aggressive than treatment with laser and carry a higher risk of complications and only cryotherapy can be performed without general anaesthesia.
All of these treatments, however, suffer from the same inability to reach tumour outside the bowel wall.
It is likely that a combination of these modalities with radiotherapy might also be complimentary.
To further clarify the benefit of the combination of topical techniques for tumour destruction and external beam radiotherapy randomised studies are required.
Colonic dysfunction in acute diarrhoea: The role of luminal short chain fatty acids
Abstract
Faecal concentrations and output of short chain fatty acids (SCFA) were assessed on successive days by gas-liquid chromatography in 24 patients with acute watery diarrhoea.
Absorption of water and sodium from the rectum was also measured by a dialysis technique in 17 of these patients and in nine normal subjects in the presence and absence of luminal SCFA.
Faecal SCFA concentrations were low on the first day of diarrhoea (mean (SEM) 9.9 (5.8) mmol/kg) and increased to 94.8 (16.4) mmol/kg by the fifth day.
Faecal output of SCFA corresponded to these figures.
Net water absorption, in the absence of luminal SCFA, was stopped in patients with acute diarrhoea (59 (81) nl/cm/min) compared with healthy controls (322 (63) nl/cm/min)(p<0.01).
Luminal SCFA restored net water absorption to 184 (67) nl/cm/min in patients with acute diarrhoea (p<0.01).
Net absorption of sodium decreased in patients with acute diarrhoea in the absence of liminal SCFA, but returned to normal with luminal SCFA.
Net secretion of potassium increased in acute diarrhoea, and did not change in the presence of SCFA.
Defective absorption from the rectum in acute diarrhoea is reversed by luminal SCFA.
The reduction of luminal SCFA in acute diarrhoea treated conventionally may be a factor contributing to colonic dysfunction.
The normal absorptive capacity of the colon, estimated to be as much as six litres per day, should be able to compensate for significant fluid losses from the small intestine in secretory diarrhoea.
While fluid secretion in human cholera is thought to occur predominantly from the small intestine, recent data suggest that water absorption from the colon is reduced or that the colon may even be in a net secretory state.
It has also been shown that cholera toxin and heat stable enterotoxin of Escherichia coli can induce fluid secretion in the rat colon.
Short chain fatty acids (SCFA), the main anions in the colon, and a potent stimulus for sodium absorption, can reverse toxin induced net water secretion in the rat colon.
This suggests two possible mechanisms for the reported abnormalities of fluid absorption in the colon in cholera — the direct effect of cholera toxin or a reduction in SCFA generation from unabsorbed dietary carbohydrates because of changes in the colon.
This paper confirms abnormal fluid absorption in the colon in patients with acute watery diarrhoea including cholera, and shows that the concentration and output of SCFA in faeces in patients with acute watery diarrhoea is reduced, and that the addition of luminal SCFA can reverse the impairment of colonic absorption.
Methods
SUBJECTS
patients with acute watery diarrhoea presenting to the hospital Emergency Service were admitted to a metabolic ward for the study.
All the patients had diarrhoea of less than three days.
None of them had been treated before admission to hospital, and none had any other medical disorders.
Treatment for all these patients was standardised and consisted of correction of dehydration by the administration of World Health Organisation glucose oral rehydration solution supplemented by parenteral fluids where necessary.
If tolerated, a normal diet was introduced after the second day.
None of the patients received antibiotics.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics and Research Committees of the Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore.
Twenty four patients, 14 male and 10 female, presenting with watery diarrhoea clinically diagnosed as cholera in the Emergency Service, were included in the study.
Their ages ranged from 18 to 65 years.
Eleven of these patients were recruited for the study during the first 24 hours of illness.
A diagnosis of cholera was confirmed in 15 patients on the basis of isolation of Vibrio cholerae from the stool.
FAECAL COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS FOR SCFA
Faeces were collected in plastic buckets to which 10 ml of thiomersal solution (1:1000) had been added and immediately stored at 4°C.
The 24 hour collection was pooled daily, homogenised, and weighed and aliquots were stored at -20°C until analysis.
Where necessary, known amounts of distilled water were added to the faeces before homogenisation.
SCFAs were extracted into ether from acidified aliquots of faeces after the addition of isovaleric acid (10 µmol per g faeces) as an internal standard.
The ether was evaporated under nitrogen after the addition of 4M NaOH, and extracts stored at -20°C until analysis.
Before analysis, the extract was acidified with 4M H 2 SO 4 and dissolved in n-hexane.
SCFAs were measured in the extract by gas-liquid chromatography on a Pye Unicam PU 4550 chromatograph.
One µl of extract was injected into a column of 20% neopentenyl-glycolsuccinate on Gaschrom Q 80–100 mesh, and SCFA concentrations calculated using internal standards.
ABSORPTION FROM THE RECTUM
Absorption of water and sodium from the rectum was studied by in vivo dialysis, as described previously, with minor modifications.
Briefly, dialysis tubing of 6 mm diameter was filled with 2 ml of either of the two test solutions and left in the rectum for a period of one hour.
The sequence in which these test solutions were used was randomly varied.
The solutions used were 140 mmol/l NaCl (solution I) or a solution containing Na 140, acetate 60, propionate 40, butyrate 20, and chloride 20 mmol/l (solution II).
The composition of the second solution was designed to reproduce the usual concentrations of SCFAs in normal faeces.
Both solutions had identical molarity (280 mosm/kg).
Polyethylene glycol 4000 (PEG 4000, 4 mg/ml) was added as a non-absorbable marker.
PEG 4000 was assessed turbidimetrically, sodium and potassium by flame photometry, and chloride in a CCM1 (Chemlab, UK) chloride meter.
Net absorption of water and electrolytes was calculated using standard formulas.
In vivo dialysis of the rectum was carried out in nine normal volunteers without gastrointestinal symptoms, and in 17 of 24 subjects with acute watery diarrhoea.
Ten of these has V cholerae isolated from the stool.
In vivo rectal dialysis reflects epithelial transport if the dialysis bag is in close contact with the rectal mucosa, and does not equilibrate with faeces or fluid.
The application of this test to patients without diarrhoea has been validated, and the test was discarded in normal volunteers if the contents of the bag were stained by faeces.
In patients with diarrhoea, successful studies were possible in only 17 of 24 subjects.
The contents of the bag were not faecal stained in any of these.
Seven subjects were unable to retain the bag in the rectum for the duration of the test, because of the presence of fluid in the rectum with the urge to evacuate.
It was presumed that, in the others, there was no significant fluid in the rectum during the test.
The possibility that the contents of the dialysis bag may change if suspended in a solution mimicking diarrhoeal stool water was also examined.
Dialysis bags constructed as above, and filled with each of the two test solutions, were suspended for an hour at 37°C without stirring in 10 ml of a solution of the following composition (mmol/l): Na 135, K 15, Cl 100, HCP 3 40, acetate 10.
This solution is similar in composition to adult cholera stool.
In tests with solution I (NaCl 140 mmol/l), the PEG concentration changed from 3.88 mg/ml to 3.80 mg/ml, and the sodium concentration from 140 to 139 mmol/l at the end of an hour (mean of three tests).
In tests with solution II (SCFA mixture), PEG concentration changed from 4.17 mg/ml to 3.94 mg/ml, and sodium concentration from 139 mmol/l to 142 mmol/l at the end of an hour.
This shows that there is no appreciable difference in dialysis bag content after an hour's suspension in artificial stool water, whether the bag contained sodium chloride alone or the SCFA mixture.
STATISTICS
All values have been expressed as the mean (SEM).
The significance of differences between means was assessed using the Kruskal-Wallis test or the Wilcoxon signed ranks test as appropriate.
Results
FAECAL CONCENTRATIONS AND OUTPUT OF SCFA IN DIARRHOEA
The concentration and output of SCFA in faeces was low on the first day of illness, but returned towards normal by the fifth day (Table I).
Differences between the means of the first five days of illness were significant by the Kruskal-Wallis test (p<0.01).
Patients proved to have V cholerae infection had changes in SCFA concentrations and output similar to patients from whom the organism was not isolated (Figure).
ABSORPTION FROM THE RECTUM
Table II shows that control subjects had net absorption of water and sodium with solutions I and II.
The presence of SCFA in solution II significantly enhanced the absorption of sodium (p<0.05).
In patients with acute diarrhoea, solution I was associated with a significant reduction in the absorption of water and sodium (p<0.01 and <0.05 respectively).
With solution II, however, the absorptionof water improved and sodium absorption returned to values seen in control subjects (p<0.01).
Net secretion of potassium into the lumen was significantly increased in acute diarrhoea and was unchanged by the presence of luminal SCFA.
Net absorption of chloride was seen from solution I, which contained 140 mmol/l of chloride, but not from solution II, which contained only 20 mmol/l chloride.
Net absorption of chloride from solution I was significantly decreased in patients with acute diarrhoea (Table II).
Absorption of water and sodium from the rectum was similar in patients from whom V cholerae was isolated and those in whom this organism was not isolated.
Discussion
Perfusion of the colon, with a colonoscope in place, has shown impaired absorption of fluid and electrolytes in patients with cholera.
This study confirms the presence of this abnormality in patients with acute watery diarrhoea, by a dialysis technique that assessed absorption from the rectum.
The finding in this study of the abolition of net water absorption from the rectum is compatible with the earlier perfusion study of the whole colon, which showed zero net water absorption in cholera.
This study shows that luminal short chain fatty acids (SCFA) overcome this absorptive defect, extending the finding in experimental animals that SCFA can reverse secretion induced by enterotoxins in the colon in vivo.
There is a possibility that rectal dialysis in patients with diarrhoea may reflect exchanges of fluid within the bag with faecal water in the rectum of these patients.
For two reasons, however, we feel that such exchanges were not an important confounding factor in our patients.
Firstly, in seven of our patients, the dialysis bags were expelled from the rectum along with rectal water; in the others the rectum presumably did not contain more than small amounts of fluid.
Secondly, dialysis bags with the two test fluids were suspended for an hour in a solution of composition similar to cholera stool.
In these studies, a minor decrease in PEG concentration (signifying fluid accumulation in the bag) was noted with both the solutions tested.
On the other hand, in the in vivo dialysis studies, a decrease in PEG concentration was noted with solution I, while PEG concentration increased significantly with solution II (signifying net absorption).
This suggests that the results obtained indeed reflect epithelial transport.
SCFA can maintain normal fluxes in one direction of sodium and chloride in vitro even after a secretory stimulus, a finding that has been interpreted to mean that the pathway for electroneutral NaCl absorption stimulated by SCFA remains unaffected by cyclic AMP.
As neutral sodium absorption, however, is not the main absorptive pathway for sodium in the human descending colon, the basis for the present findings remains unclear and an antisecretory effect of SCFA is not excluded.
Similar results were noted both in patients with confirmed cholera and in a clinically similar group of patients with acute watery diarrhoea from whom V cholerae was not isolated.
Net secretion of potassium into a potassium free solution, also seen in this study, was not reversible by luminal SCFA, and may represent stimulation of active potassium secretion by secondary hyperaldosteronism in these patients.
This study also reports a low faecal output and concentration of SCFA in patients with acute diarrhoea.
This is more prominent in the early stages of the diarrhoeal illness, and returns to near normal by the fourth day, by which time the faecal weights are coming down.
As luminal SCFA maintain normal colonic absorption in acute diarrhoea, the decrease seen in faecal SCFA output may be of clinical significance.
This low faecal output of SCFA seems likely to reflect impaired generation of SCFA rather than enhanced absorption of SCFA in the presence of diarrhoea.
Reasons for impaired formation of SCFA could include a decreased dietary intake of unabsorbed carbohydrate, a reduction in bacterial flora due to a ‘washout’ effect of diarrhoea, and changed conditions for fermentation in the colonic lumen.
The oral intake of complex carbohydrates is often restricted in patients with an acute diarrhoeal illness.
Starvation reduces colonic luminal SCFA concentrations in experimental animals.
This may be one factor responsible for the low SCFA output reported in these patients with acute diarrhoea.
In addition, studies in children and in adults with acute diarrhoea have reported a shift to comparatively more aerobic faecal flora, which could influence SCFA growth in the colon.
Studies show that the severity of diarrhoea can be influenced by the salvage of fluid by the colon.
In pigs infected with the transmissible gastroenteritis virus, the occurrence of clinical diarrhoea is related to the capability of the animals for colonic fermentation and SCFA production.
One possibility is that continuing SCFA production can improve fluid absorption in the colon and minimise symptoms.
Similarly, the exaggerated response, in starvation, of the rectal mucosa to a secretory stimulus may be as a result of a lack of luminal SCFA.
In addition, a deficiency of short chain fatty acids in the colonic lumen can in itself change absorption of fluid.
Efforts at improving oral rehydration solutions have hitherto focused on the role of various substances in improving small bowel absorption.
Colonic function is impaired, however, in acute diarrhoeal disease, perhaps in part because of low concentrations of SCFAs.
Cereal based oral rehydration solutions are significantly better than the standard glucose oral rehydration solutions in the treatment of diarrhoea.
While this is attributed to the presence of oligopeptides and amino acids in the former, their role in the provision of colonic luminal SCFA has not been explored.
Similarly, the addition of food to oral rehydration solution further restricts fluid losses and significantly shortens the duration of diarrhoea.
A significant proportion of dietary carbohydrate and starch remains unabsorbed in the small intestine, and this may be increased in acute diarrhoea.
These provide excellent substrates for the generation of SCFA within the colonic lumen.
Attention to enhancing colonic conservation in acute diarrhoea by increasing luminal SCFA may further improve the efficacy of oral rehydration treatment.
Gene expression in Barrett's mucosa: acute and chronic adaptive responses in the oesophagus
The oesophagus is of major interest in the biological study of the alimentary tract in that the epithelial cells have a remarkable ability to adapt to chemical and mechanical injury.
In particular, the induction, promotion, and progression of normal or inflamed squamous oesophageal epithelium to Barrett's mucosa and ultimately adenocarcinoma as a result of chronic gastro-oesophageal reflux disease has varied but distinct morphological stages suitable for the study of sequential gene expression.Some of the cellular mechanisms for adaptation which underlie this latter process are now known.
Squamous oesophageal cells are highly sensitive to refluxed gastric acid and intrusive inflammatory cells: cell loss and necrosis are the earliest histological findings.
In this regard one of the early ‘adaptive’ responses to increased cell loss in reflux oesophagitis is an increase in the proliferative zone height to maintain or even, in some individuals, increase epithelial thickness by trophic stimulation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) contained in the adjacent endothelium.
Another mechanism, poorly understood until recently, is the increase in the proliferative zone length by the exaggeraton of the folds in the basal epithelium (papillae formation) to enable an increased proliferative compartment to generate and maintain the same size of superficial (differentiated) epithelial compartment.
These latter adaptive changes also occur in other squamous epithelia and it can be interpreted, therefore, that the proliferative organisation of the oesophagus and the skin are generally similar.
In one regard, however, their respective organisation may be very different as is seen in the location of the putative epithelial stem cells in epithelial ‘down growths’ in hyperproliferative states, the papillae (in the oesophagus) and then rete pegs (in the skin).
The oesophageal stem cells in the proliferative zone, as a rule, proliferate more slowly and do not migrate to maintain their ‘niche’ in the epithelial/ mesenchyme interface whereas their progeny (the transit amplifying cells) divide and migrate sideways, upwards and, during inflammation, probably downwards also into deeper layers.
As a result, during vigorous proliferation the basal layer folds where the stem cells are located because the daughter cells migrate away from the stem cells (proliferative flux) and may in addition create ‘expansive pressure’ because they are more actively dividing.
Therefore, the epithelium immediately above the putative stem cells in the papillae may be much thinner than that above the daughter cells in the inter papillary layer (the opposite to the skin).
In this regard the functional stem cells remain in a relatively superficial position in the epithelium making them far more accessible to refluxed chemical mutagens permeating through the thin upper layers than their counterparts in the flat basal layer.
Paradoxically, the more severe the reflux the higher are the papillae and hence the more likely are the stem cells to be damaged.
It seems that this latter development may potentially underlie the subsequent promotion of acid resistant lineages (gastric metaplasia) because the non-resistant oesophageal stem cells (or possibly also the stem cells of the submucosal oesophageal glands) are either damaged or die, whereas others which have the ability to redifferentiate to a mucin secreting phenotype survive.
In addition, there is indirect evidence to suggest that if mixed gastric and duodenal contents or duodenal contents alone are refluxed then the resulting epithelium will consist of an intestinal phenotype as these cells are bile resistant lineages (intestinal metaplasia).
Furthermore, it has previously been shown that bile may either be more directly noxious to the oesophageal cell proteins (including perhaps also the DNA) than acid and may also generate abnormal nucleic acid metabolism making these cells more liable to death or serious epigenetic or genotoxic damage.
In this regard, the usual site for the intestinal metaplasia is at the most proximal edge of the Barrett's mucosa, furthermost from the stomach and nearest the mouth where the pH will be either neutral or alkaline, partly because of alkaline saliva so that pancreatic enzymes will be most biologically active.
As a result the oesophagus is selectively replaced by metaplastic cells expressing different phenotypes according to the type of refluxed contents.
These metaplastic epithelia are apparently regulated by autocrine mechanisms (usually by action of transforming growth factor alpha (TGFα)) but are not autonomous (partially transformed cells).
In Barrett's metaplasia at least one novel cell lineage is identifiable in between the true metaplastic epithelium especially near sites of active or previous ulceration.
This lineage is morphologically and phenotypically similar to those observed immediately adjacent to other chronic gastrointestinal ulcers, for example in peptic ulcer and Crohns' disease.
The lineage consists of glandular structures which secrete large amounts of EGF and additional peptides (including the Trefoil peptide family), with putative growth regulatory actions, into the superficial compartments of adjacent metaplastic glands.
As a result, the Barrett's metaplastic glands receive trophic stimulation both from endogenous peptides and an exocrine supply.
In most Barrett's metaplastic glands the epithelium is stable and grows in synchrony with surrounding squamous epithelium and oesophageal glandular mucosa.
In approximately 30% of cases the epithelium does not change to a homogeneous phenotype and this is characterised by an ‘incomplete’ intestinal epithelium with both gastric foveolar and intestinal goblet cells and enterocytes.
It seems that in this latter phenotype glandular tissue may be generated by stem cells with aberrant differentiation or competing stem cell lineages because heterogeneous phenotypes are present in the same gland.
In addition glands have aberrant proliferative control evidenced by the observation of the characteristic extended or abnormal proliferative zones associated with increased growth factor expression.
Subsequently some of these cells may become fully transformed and hence express an ‘abnormal’ phenotype visible different from surrounding cells by promotion of dysplastic clones, in part, by expression of oncogenes especially c-erbB2.
As this process continues, the probability of regression diminishes and cells may ultimately progress to metastases, partly because of the disruption of the final regulatory barrier (negative feedback control by transforming growth factor beta (TGFΒ), tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and p53).
In summary, oesophageal squamous epithelium adapts to increased chemical damage and cell loss by acute and chronic responses.
In the former the oesophagus increases the growth fraction (number of cells dividing) by hyperplasia and elongation of the proliferative compartment.
The chronic response occurs when the initial increase in cell proliferation fails to compensate for the cell loss.
In this regard there is subsequent selection of specialised lineages of columnar mucous partly as a result of change in the phenotype of the relatively exposed squamous (or glandular) stem cells.
Each lineage has specific functions, such as the protection against acid (gastric metaplasia), protection against bile (intestinal metaplasia), and repair of ulceration (present in up to 30% of patients with Barrett's mucosa)(the ulcer associated cell lineage).
It may be that these differences in proliferative organisation between the skin and oesophagus explain why metaplasia and cancer are relatively rare in response to contact carcinogens in the former but common in the latter epithelium.
As has been suggested in some other epithelial cancers the oesophageal stem cells are possibly the initial target for carcinogens and therefore these cells in particular require urgent study in the future as this disease is increasing dramatically in the western world.
It is seen, therefore, that the range of oesophageal adaptive responses to environmental stimuli is diverse but that the identification of these serial events forms a unifying hypothesis which has important clinical and research implications.
Pancreatic and synovial type phospholipases A2 in serum samples from patients with severe acute pancreatitis
Abstract
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is the rate limiting enzyme in the formation of prostaglandins and probably plays a key part in the pathology of various inflammatory diseases.
In acute pancreatitis, the catalytic activity of PLA2 in serum correlates with the severity of the disease.
The cellular source of the catalytically active PLA2 in serum of patients suffering from acute pancreatitis and other diseases is unknown.
Immunoassays for the measurement of pancreatic group I PLA2 and non-pancreatic synovial type group II PLA2 have recently been developed and the present study investigated the presence of group I and group II PLA2s in serum samples from 36 patients with severe acute pancreatitis.
The catalytic activity of PLA2 showed a highly significant correlation with the concentration of synovial type PLA2 (r=0.939, p=0.001) but not with the concentration of pancreatic PLA2 (r=0.067, p=0.698).
The results suggest that pancreatic PLA2 circulates mostly as inactive enzyme in patients with acute pancreatitis whereas synovial type PLA2 is responsible for the increased catalytic activity of the enzyme and thus might be associated with the pathophysiology of the disease.
Phospholipase As (PLA2) is a lipolytic enzyme that hydrolyses phospholipids — for example, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, and phosphatidylinositol — into corresponding lysocompounds.
PLA2 is the rate limiting enzyme in the early steps of eicosanoid synthesis, and therefore is considered to play a key part in the production of inflammatory mediators.
The enzyme is widely distributed in various tissues and cells; in fact, it is said that PLA2 has been found in every tissue studied.
Rich sources for the isolation of PLA2 are pancreatic tissue and juice, and snake and bee venoms.
Pancreatic and venom PLA2s have been divided into two groups on the basis of the amino acid sequences of the enzyme proteins.
Group I PLA2 contain a cysteine at position 11 forming a disulphide bridge with a cysteine at position 77.
Group II PLA2s lack this disulphide bridge and the corresponding cysteines.
Group I PLA2s are those found in the mammalian pancreas and venoms from Elapidae (cobra) and Hydrophiiae (sea snakes).
Group II PLA2s are found in venoms from Crotalidae (rattle snakes) and Viperidae (old-world vipers).
The PLA2 found in synovial fluid in a group II PLA2.
It has been postulated that PLA2 is associated with the pathology of various diseases, such as acute pancreatitis, septic shock, and multiple injuries involving infection, tissue damage, or inflammation.
In acute pancreatitis, the catalytic activity of PLA2 is increased in serum, especially in the severe necrotising form of the disease.
The concentration of immunoreactive pancreatic PLA2 in serum is also increased, but this increase only partly explains the abnormal catalytic activity of PLA2 in serum samples from patients with acute pancreatitis.
This finding indicates that the catalytically active PLA2 in serum in acute pancreatitis not only originates from the pancreas but also from other sources.
The cellular source of the non-pancreatic PLA2 found in serum is unknown as yet.
We have recently developed immunoassays for the measurement of pancreatic group I PLA2 and non-pancreatic synovial type group II PLA2 in serum and other body fluids.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the presence of group I and group II PLA2s in serum samples from patients with acute pancreatitis.
Materials and methods
PATIENTS
Thirty six consecutive patients treated for severe acute pancreatitis and its complications in the intensive care unit of the University Central Hospital of Turku were included in the study.
Inclusion criteria were the classical clinical findings of acute pancreatitis (abdominal pain and tenderness, nausea, and vomiting) and more than a twofold increase in urinary amylase activity (in 34 patients the increase was more than threefold).
Contrast enhanced computed tomography (n=29), or operation (n=15), or both confirmed the diagnosis in 32 patients and it was confirmed by ultrasound scan in the remaining four patients.
According to those examinations there were 21 necrotising and 15 oedematous episodes of acute pancreatitis.
The mean age of the patients was 42 (range 24–72) years and there were 32 men and four women.
The aetiology was alcohol abuse in 26, gallstones in five, and other or unknown in five patients.
There were 29 first attacks and seven repeat attacks.
The mean duration of stay in the hospital was 19 (range 7–140) days and in the intensive care unit seven (3–20) days.
Twenty two patients managed with spontaneous breathing of 28–40% oxygen and the others needed mechanical ventilation.
Serum creatinine values were above normal (<120 µmol/l in men and <100 µmol/l in women) in 10 patients.
The mean simplified acute physiology score of the patients was 11, indicating that the mean risk of death was 24.5%.
The C-reactive protein value on admission to the intensive care unit was >100 mg/l in all patients except one.
Three patients had a positive blood culture (Straphylococcus aureus ,Bacillus cereus ,Bacillus megaterium ,Aspergillus fumigatus ).
Four patients died of acute pancreatitis and its complications.
METHODS
The catalytic activity of amylase in urine was measured with a commercial kit (Merck, Germany), the concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) in serum by immunoturbidimetry and the concentration of creatinine in serum with a commercial kit (Boehringer Mannheim, Germany).
The catalytic activity of PLA2 (cat-PLA2) in serum was assayed with micellar radioactive phosphatidylcholine as substrate.
The concentration of pancreatic (group I) PLA2 (pan-PLA2) in serum was measured by a time resolved fluoroimmunoassay with a monoclonal (mouse) antibody raised against human pancreatic PLA2.
The concentration of synovial type (group II) PLA2 (syn-PLA2) in serum was measured by a time resolved fluoroimmunoassay with a polyclonal (rabbit) antibody raised against recombinant syn-PLA2.
Serum samples were obtained routinely daily during the treatment in the intensive care unit.
The samples were stored at -20°C until assayed.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Student's t test and Pearson's correlation were used for statistical analysis.
Results
The Figure shows the time courses of syn-PLA2, cat-PLA2, and pan-PLA2 in serum samples from patients with oedematous or necrotising episodes of acute pancreatitis.
The mean values were considerably increased above the corresponding reference intervals during the first three days in the intensive care unit.
The syn-PLA2 and cat-PLA2 values changed in concert, whereas the pan-PLA2 values were increased at the early stages of the disease and then decreased rapidly.
The syn-PLA2 and cat-PLA2 values of patients with the necrotising form of acute pancreatitis had a slight tendency to increase during the first six days whereas the values in patients with oedematous acute pancreatitis decreased.
The differences in the syn-PLA2, cat-PLA2, or pan-PLA2 values between the groups of patients with oedematous and necrotising acute pancreatitis were not significant.
The car-PLA2 values had a highly significant correlation with the syn-PLA2 values in the regerssion analysis (r=0.939, p=0.001), whereas there was no correlation with pan-PLA2 or CRP or between PLA2 and CRP (Table).
Discussion
In 1961 Zieve and Vogel reported increased lecithinase A (phospholipase A2) activities in serum samples from patients with acute pancreatitis.
Later, Schmidt and Creutzfeldt found increased concentrations of lysophosphatidylcholine in necrotic pancreatic tissue in acute pancreatitis.
Subsequently, it was postulated that pancreatic PLA2 might play an important part in the pathology of acute pancreatitis.
Schröder and coworkers reported that the increase in the catalytic activity of PLA2 in serum correlated with the severity of acute pancreatitis.
Experimental results indicated that the enzymatically active PLA2 found in serum in experimental porcine pancreatitis might originate from the pancreas.
Findings from surgically treated human cases did not, however, substantiate the pancreatic origin of the catalytically active PLA2 present in serum in acute pancreatitis.
When specific immunoassays for the measurement of PLA2 became available, it was found that the concentration of immunoreactive pan-PLA2 is nearly always increased in the early stages of acute pancreatitis.
The catalytic PLA2 activity was not invariably removed from serum, however, by immunoabsorption with a specific antipancreatic PLA2 antibody.
Therefore the source of the circulating PLA2 in acute pancreatitis was not always the pancreas.
Also, the severity of the disease did not correlate with the increase in the immunoreactive pan-PLA2 in serum, whereas the increase in the catalytic activity of PLA2 effectively separated the severe necrotising forms from the mild oedematous forms of acute pancreatitis.
Moreover, the present study indicated that the syn-PLA2 and cat-PLA2 values of patients with a necrotising form of acute pancreatitis had a tendency to remain increased for a longer time than the values in patients with oedematous acute pancreatitis.
We found a highly significant correlation between the catalytic activity of PLA2 and the concentration of syn-PLA2, but not pan-PLA2, in serum from patients with severe acute pancreatitis in the present study.
Thus pan-PLA2, which is readily released from the pancreas into blood in acute pancreatitis, circulatesmostly as inactive enzyme.
The changes in cat-PLA2 and syn-PLA2 values may reflect the clinical state of the patients, because we found recently that the increases in the concentrations of cat-PLA2 and syn-PLA2 were associated with pulmonary and renal complications in acute pancreatitis (Grönroos J M and Nevalainen T J. Unpublished data).
The present results results confirm earlier findings that pan-PLA2 values increase at the early stages of the disease and then rapidly return to normal.
The early increase of pan-PLA2 values probably reflects the time of destruction of pancreatic tissue.
Group II PLA2s occur in synovial fluid, platelets, placenta, and inflammatory cells and exudate.
Besides acute pancreatitis, increased catalytic activity of PLA2 in serum is associated with many diseases involving infection, tissue destruction, and inflammation including septic shock, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple injuries.
Ourselves and others have recently found, by new immunoassays, increased concentrations of syn-PLA2 in serum samples from patients with septic fever and infections.
The blood culture was positive in three patients in the present study.
In these patients the concentration of syn-PLA2 in serum was very high (>1000 µg/l) at the time of the positive cultures.
The cellular source of group II PLA2 found in serum samples from patients with acute pancreatitis and other inflammatory diseases remains unknown.
It was proposed recently that group II PLA2 might represent an acute phase reactant.
Hepatoma cells in culture secrete PLA2 into the culture medium when stimulated by interleukin 6.
We have recently found by our immunoassay considerable amounts of syn-PLA2 in synovial fluid and seminal plasma, and detected the enzyme by immunohistochemistry in cartilage and Paneth cells of the intestinal mucosa (Nevalainen T J and Haapanen??.
Unpublished data).
The determination of immunoreactive synovial-type PLA2 as described in this paper might be helpful in the early assessment of the severity of acute pancreatitis.
The therapeutic implications of the present findings are to be established in acute pancreatitis.
PLA2 has been considered earlier to act mainly as a harmful agent in the pathology of various inflammatory diseases including acute pancreatitis.
Pancreatic PLA2 seems to be non-toxic to pancreatic acinar cells, however, although toxic effects have also been found.
Human group II PLA2 purified from cartilage seems non-toxic to cells in culture (Nevalainen T J and coworkers.
Unpublished results).
As an acute phase reactant, the role of group II PLA2 in infections and inflammatory diseases might be related to the host's defence against invading micro-organisms and tissue destruction.
We conclude that the catalytic activity of PLA2 in serum in acute pancreatitis is due to the presence of a synovial type group II PLA2.
The PLA2 activity is not dependent on the concentration of pancreatic group I PLA2 in serum.
Eradicating Helicobacter pylori infection lowers gastrin mediated acid secretion by two thirds in patients with duodenal ulcer
Abstract
Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) raises serum gastrin but it is unclear whether this stimulates increased acid secretion.
Gastrin mediated acid secretion and plasma gastrin after the intravenous infusion of gastrin releasing peptide was studied in nine H pylori negative and nine H pylori positive healthy volunteers, and in 11 duodenal ulcer patients.
Nine of the last group were re-examined one one after eradication of H pylori .
The median acid output (mmol/h) to gastrin releasing peptide (40 pmol/ kg/h) in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers was 15.1 (range 3.3–38.3), which was three times that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (median=5.5, range 1.0–9.0)(p<0.02).
The median acid output in the duodenal ulcer patients with H pylori was 37 (range 8.5–57), which was >six times that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
Eradication of H pylori in the duodenal ulcer patients lowered their acid secretion by a median of 66% (range 30%-80%)(p<0.01) and to values equivalent to the H pylori positive healthy volunteers.
The pepsin output in response to gastrin releasing peptide followed the same pattern as the acid output.
The median plasma gastrin concentrations during gastrin releasing peptide were similar in the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients (150 ng/l, range 95–400) and H pylori positive healthy volunteers (129 ng/l, range 23–420) and both were appreciably higher than H pylori negative healthy volunteers (60 ng/l, range 28–135)(p<0.005 for each).
Eradication of TH pylori lowered the plasma gastrin in the duodenal ulcer patients to values equivalent to the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
These findings show a threefold increase in acid secretion in H pylori positive healthy volunteers that is explained by H pylori induced hypergastrinaemia and a sixfold increase in acid secretion in the duodenal ulcer patients that is explained by the combination of H pylori induced hypergastrinaemia and an exaggerated acid response to stimulation by gastrin.
Eradicating H pylori lowers gastrin mediate acid secretion by 66% in duodenal ulcer patients as a result of the resolution of the hypergastrinaemia.
Increased gastrin mediated acid secretion seems to be the key factor in the pathophysiology of duodenal ulceration and explains the role of H pylori infection in the disorder.
Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) infection is now recognised to be the main acquired factor in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulcer duodenal ulcer disease.
It is present in >95% of duodenal ulcer patients and numerous studies have shown that eradicating the infection dramatically lowers the ulcer relapse rate.
The mechanism by which this infection, which predominantly affects the antral mucosa, predisposes to ulceration of the duodenum is unknown.
Also, the reason why only a small proportion of subjects with this common infection develop duodenal ulceration is unclear.
We and others have shown that both duodenal ulcer patients and healthy volunteers with H pylori have increased basal and meal stimulated gastrin concentrations that fall after eradication of the infection.
Though gastrin is recognised to be the main mediator of meal stimulated acid secretion, the effect of H pylori on acid secretion remains unclear.
A major reason for this is the technical difficulty of reliably determining acid output in response to a meal.
To overcome this problem we have measured gastrin mediated acid secretion after the intravenous infusion of gastrin releasing peptide.
This stimulates the release of engogenous gastrin, which in turn stimulates acid secretion, and thus makes it possible to measure accurately the combined functional response of the antrum and body of the stomach.
Gastrin releasing peptide like peptides also stimulate the release of cholecystokinin and somatostatin as well as other gastric inhibitory hormones and in this way stimulate the response to eating.
To elucidate the effect of H pylori on gstric function, we have examined basal and gastrin mediated acid secretion in healthy volunteers with and without H pylori and also in duodenal ulcer patients before and after eradicating the infection.
Patients and methods
Eleven H pylori positive patients (eight men) with chronic duodenal ulcer disease proved by endoscopy, nine H pylori positive healthy volunteers (seven men), and nine H pylori negative healthy volunteers (six men) were studied.
The three groups were matched for age and body weight.
There were eight smokers in the duodenal ulcer group and three in each of the other two groups.
Duodenal ulcer patients were asked to stop any antisecretory treatment two weeks before the secretory studies.
None of the healthy volunteers were taking any drug and none reported major gastrointestinal symptoms.
H pylori infection was confirmed in the duodenal ulcer patients by microscopic examination of antral biopsy rapid urease test (CLO test) on antral biopsy, and by C urea breath test.
In healthy volunteers,H pylori state was determined by the C urea breath test.
SECRETORY STUDIES
All subjects reported at 0900 after a 12 hour fast.
An orogastric tube (Anderson Inc, New York) was swallowed and its position in the dependent part of the stomach checked by the water recovery test.
After emptying the stomach, intermittent suction was applied using an intermittent suction unit (Ohmeda, Columbia, USA) that applies suction for 20 seconds in each 32 second cycle.
Three 15 minute collections were obtained basally and at each of the following rates of intravenous infusion of gastrin releasing peptide: 10, 40, 100, and 200 pmol/kg/hr.
Blood samples were collected every 15 minutes for gastrin determination and the plasma stored at -20°C.
The secretory studies were all performed with the investigator blind to the subjects' H pylori state.
Gastrin releasing peptide was purchased from Cambridge Research Biochemicals (Cheshire, England) in 0.5 mg aliquots.
Each aliquot was made up into a stock solution by dissolving in sterile water.
0.1 ml of 50% acetic acid solution was added to stablilise the solution.
Aliquots were stored at -80°C.
For each study the aliquot was further diluted in 0.9% NaCl solution.
The volume and pH of each gastric juice collection was recorded and its hydrogen ion concentration measured by titration with 0.1 N NaOH to pH 7 using an autotritrator (Radiometer ETS 822).
Gastric juice aliquots for pepsin measurement were centrifuged at 4°C.
One ml of each aliquot was added to 0.3 ml of a Glycerol/ HCl (10 mmol) solution 50/50 vol/vol).
Samples were stored at -80°C before determination of pepsin activity by the method of Gray and Billing.
Basal acid output was calculated by taking the mean of all three 15 minute samples before gastrin releasing peptide infusion.
Acid and pepsin outputs for each gastrin releasing peptide infusion rate were calculated by taking the mean of the second and third 15 minute collections.
Pepsin measurements were not performed in two of the 10 duodenal ulcer patients after treatment.
Gastrin was measured by radioimmunoassay with antiserum R98 that has a sensitivity of 5 ng/l.
The basal gastrin value for each subject was measured by taking the mean of the three samples obtained before the start of gastrin releasing peptide infusion.
The gastrin value at each infusion rate of gastrin releasing peptide was measured by taking the mean of the two values at 30 and 45 minutes of each infusion.
To ensure accuracy, gastrin measurements were performed in the same assay batch.
For this reason, gastrin results are not available in two of the 11 duodenal ulcer patients before treatment and two of 10 duodenal ulcer patients after treatment who entered the study later.
ERADICATION OF H PYLORI
After the above secretory studies, 10 duodenal ulcer patients were treated with tripotassium dicitratobismuthate 120 mg three times daily, metronidazole 400 mg three times daily, and amoxycillin 500 mg three times daily for three weeks.
One month after completion of this treatment their C-urea breath test was repeated to assess the H pylori state.
Their secretory studies were also repeated at this point.
STATISTICS
Statistical analysis of unpaired data was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test and of paired data using the Wilcoxin test.
A p value of <0.05 was taken as significant.
The study was approved by the Western Infirmary Ethical Committee.
Results
The repeat C-urea breath test at one month after completion of the triple anti- H pylori treatment showed that the infection had been eradicated in nine of 10 duodenal ulcer patients.
BASAL GASTRIN
The medium basal gastrin (ng/l) was increased by a similar extent in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (45, range 10–88) and H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients (47, range 22–175) compared with the H pylori negative healthy controls (25, range 15–48)(p<0.005 for both)(Fig 1A).
After eradication of H pylori the median serum gastrin in the duodenal ulcer patients fell to 28 (range 12–65)(p<0.02 v before eradication), which was similar to the value in the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
BASAL ACID SECRETION
The median basal acid output (mmol/h) was similar in the H pylori negative (1.3, range 0.7–4.6) and positive (2.2, range 1.0–13.3) healthy volunteers (Fig 1B).
It was increased in the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients (6.6, range 3.1–23.2), however, compared with both the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (p< 0.005) and H pylori positive healthy volunteers (p<0.05).
Eradication of H pylori lowered the median basal acid output in the nine duodenal ulcer patients to 3.6 (range 1.2–8.4)(p<0.01 v before eradication), representing a median reduction of 50% (20%-80%).
The basal acid output in the one duodenal ulcer subject in whom H pylori infection was not eradicated was similar before (3.7) and after (4.8) the triple treatment.
GASTRIN RESPONSE TO GASTRIN RELEASING PEPTIDE
At the gastrin releasing peptide infusion rate of 40 pmol/kg/h the median plasma gastrin concentration (ng/l) was increased to a similar value in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (129, range 23–420) and H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients (150, range 94–400) and each was higher than that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (60, range 28–135)(p<0.005 for each)(Fig 2A).
After eradication of H pylori the median gastrin concentration in response to gastrin releasing peptide 40 pmol/kg/h in the nine duodenal ulcer patients fell to 68 (range 23–115)(p<0.02 v before eradication), which was similar to the value in the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
Though the gastrin concentration increased with increasing gastrin releasing peptide infusion rates, the four groups of subjects showed the same pattern of response at each infusion rate (Fig 3A).
The statistical differences between the groups were the same at each infusion rate as that seen at 40 pmol/kg/h.
We chose to present the results of the individual data points for the 40 pmol/kg/h gastrin releasing peptide rate as the gastrin concentrations stimulated by this are closest to those seen after a meal.
ACID RSPONSE TO GASTRIN RELEASING PEPTIDE
At gastrin releasing peptide 40 pmol/kg/h the median acid output (mmol/h) in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (15.1, range 3.3–38.3) was about three times that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (5.5, range 1.0–9.0)(p<0.02)(Fig 2B).
At this infusion rate the median acid output in the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients was 37 (range 8.5–57), which was about twice that of the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (p<0.02) and six times that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (p<0.001).
After eradication of H pylori the acid output in the nine duodenal ulcer patients fell by a median of 66% (range 30%-80%) to a median value of 13.7 mmol/h (range 6.2–24)(p<0.01) and thus became similar to that of the H pylori positive healthy volunteers but remained higher than the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (p<0.005).
Gastrin mediated acid secretion did not fall in the one patient whose infection was not eradicated (Fig 2B).
The acid response to gastrin releasing peptide was again consistent in the four groups at each of the infusion rates of gastrin releasing peptide studied (Fig 3B).
PEPSIN RESPONSE TO GASTRIN RELEASING PEPTIDE
The pepsin response to gastrin releasing peptide showed the same pattern as the acid response at each infusion rate of gastrin releasing peptide.
The differences between the groups, however, were most evident at the gastrin releasing peptide infusion rate of 100 pmol/kg/h (Fig 4).
In response to gastrin releasing peptide 100 pmol/kg/h the median pepsin output (units/h) in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (18, 15–43) was higher than the H pylori negative volunteers (12, 6–25)(p<0.02).
The median pepsin output in the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients (29, 19–60) was higher than both the H pylori positive (p<0.005) and negative (p<0.001) healthy volunteers.
Eradication of H pylori in the duodenal ulcer patients lowered their pepsin output by a median of 55% to 17 units/h (11–55)(p<0.03) making them similar to the H pylori positive healthy volunteers.
Discussion
This study shows that chronic H pylori infection is accompanied by appreciably increased gastric acid output in both healthy volunteers and duodenal ulcer patients.
It also shows that the infection increases both basal and stimulated acid secretion.
In the healthy volunteers with H pylori both their basal gastrin and gastrin respose to gastrin releasing peptide were increased compared with the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
The two-three fold increase in gastrin response to gastrin releasing peptide in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers is consistent with their previously reported two-three fold increased gastrin response to a meal.
The design of this study allowed us to show that this increased gastrin response is accompanied by a concomitant threefold increase in acid secretion.
This is consistent with the recent studies showing that the increased gastrin concentration in H pylori infection is due to a rise in the biologically active G17 form of the hormone.
The duodenal ulcer patients with H pylori infection resembled the H pylori positive healthy volunteers with respect to their serum gastrin concentrations both basally and at each infusion rate of gastrin releasing peptide.
This is consistent with our previous findings that the gastrin response to a meal is exaggerated by a similar extent in H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients and H pylori positive healthy volunteers.
The H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients and H pylori positive healthy volunteers differed, however, with respect to gastrin mediated acid secretion, which was increased six fold in the first but only threefold in the second when compared with H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
The fact that the duodenal ulcer patients secreted more than twice as much acid as the H pylori positive healthy volunteers despite having equivalent gastrin concentrations shows that the duodenal ulcer patients have an exaggerated acid response to stimulation by gastrin.
This finding is consistent with the previous studies showing that duodenal ulcer patients have an increased sensitivity to pentagastrin as well as to endogenous gastrin released in response to a peptone meal.
Our data, therefore, show that subjects with H pylori infection who develop duodenal ulceration have two disturbances of gastric function:(1) increased release of gastrin by the antral mucosa and (2) an exaggerated acid response to stimulation by gastrin.
It is this dual defect that causes their considerable sixfold increase in gastrin mediated acid secretion.
The increased antral gastrin release is explained by the H pylori infection though the mechanism by which the infection stimulates gastrin release is unknown.
It may be secondary to the recent findings of reduced somatostatin concentrations in the presence of H pylori infection.
The exaggerated acid response to gastrin can be explained by the increased parietal cell mass present in duodenal ulcer patients.
The increased parietal cell mass may be due to the longterm trophic effects of H pylori induced hypergastrinaemia on the oxyntic mucosa, due to smoking, represent the genetic factor in duodenal ulcer, or be due to any combination of these.
After eradication of H pylori infection in the duodenal ulcer patients their gastrin fell to the same value as the H pylori negative healthy volunteers and this was accompanied by a 66% fall in their gastrin mediated acid secretion after gastrin releasing peptide.
This brought acid secretion in the duodenal ulcer patients into the range of the H pylori positive healthy volunteers but it did not fall to the values of H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
This is explained by the fact that eradicating H pylori resolved the increased acid secretion caused by the increased antral gastrin release but did not resolve that caused by their exaggerated acid response to gastrin.
The second finding is consistent with our previous study showing that the response to pentagastrin stimulation in duodenal ulcer patients is not changed after eradication of H pylori .
The fact that the exaggerated acid response to gastrin did not resolve after eradication of H pylori does not exclude it being due to trophic effects of H pylori induced hypergastrinaemia on the oxyntic mucosa.
The half life of the parietal cell is 23 days in rats and presumably much longer in man and therefore it could take many months for resoluion of an increased parietal cell mass.
Increased basal and nocturnal acid output are also important features of duodenal ulcer disease and in this study the median basal acid output of the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients was five times that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
After eradication of H pylori in the duodenal ulcer patients both their basal acid output and basal gastrin fell by 50%.
Though gastrin is considered to be the main mediator of food stimulated acid secretion, its role in the regulation of basal acid output is unclear.
The fact that the fall in basal gastrin with eradication of H pylori in the duodenal ulcer patients was accompanied by a fall in basal acid secretion suggests that the increased basal gastrin was stimulating gastric secretion in the absence of food.
Further evidence of this is the fact that the value of gastrin that increased acid secretion after gastrin releasing peptide in the H pylori negative healthy volunteers was equivalent to the basal gastrin value in the H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients.
Though basal gastrin was increased to a similar extent in H pylori positive healthy volunteers and H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients the first did not have a significantly increased basal acid output.
This may be explained by the fact that the increased basal acid output in duodenal ulcer patients was due to their combination of increased basal gastrin and exaggerated acid response to gastrin.
It is probable that the increased basal gastrin is also stimulating increased basal acid secretion in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers, which will become discernible after lowering of the gastrin by eradicating the infection.
In addition to increased acid secretion, duodenal ulcer patients are known to have increased pepsin secretion and it is the increased exposure to this combination of acid and pepsin which is likely to be injurious to the duodenal mucosa.
In our studies pepsin output correlated closely with acid output.
The beneficial effect of eradicating H pylori in duodenal ulcer patients is therefore explained by the consequent lowering of gastric acid and pepsin secretion to the values present in non-ulcer (H pylori positive) subjects.
The finding in this study that gastrin mediated acid secretion is so appreciably increased (sixfold) in duodenal ulcer patients compared with true normal subjects (H pylori negative healthy volunteers) implies that it is likely to be the key factor in the pathophysiology of duodenal ulcer disease.
The effect of H pylori on gastrin mediated acid secretion provides a scientific explanation for the role of the infection in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulceration.
Because of the fact that permanent reduction of acid secretion can be achieved by a single course of H pylori eradication treatment, there seems little justification to continue to treat duodenal ulcer patients with repeated courses of expensive acid suppressive treatment.
Effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori on gastric juice ascorbic acid concentrations
Abstract
Ascorbic acid, the reduced form of vitamin C, may protect against gastric cancer and is secreted by the normal stomach.
Secretion is impaired in Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) associated chronic gastritis.
In this study we examined if eradication of H pylori improves gastric juice ascorbate values.
Fasting gastric juice and plasma samples were collected at endoscopy from patients participating in trial of H pylori eradication for duodenal ulcer disease and intestinal metaplasia before and up to 15 months after attempted eradication.
Ascorbic acid and total vitamin C concentrations were determined by high performance liquid chronatography.
In 12 patients in whom H pylori was successfully eradicated gastric juice ascorbate and total vitamin C concentrations and the ratio of juice to plasma vitamin C rose after treatment.
Analysis after treatment suggested that the rise was greatest in patients with high final plasma vitamin C concentrations, even though these did not change with treatment.
By contrast, in 22 patients in whom H pylori eradication was unsuccessful there were no significant changes in juice or plasma concentrations after treatment.
It is concluded that successful eradication of H pylori improves secretion of vitamin C into gastric juice.
It is speculated that this increases protection against gastric cancer.
Ascorbic acid, the reduced form of vitamin C, is thought to protect against gastric cancer.
This may be through its action in scavenging nitrite and thus preventing the formation of nitrite derived mutagens, or alternatively through its less specific anti-oxidant properties.
There is evidence that ascorbic acid is secreted in high concentrations into the normal stomach.
This secretion fails with the onset of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) acute gastritis and remains impaired in H pylori associated chronic gastritis.
H pylori infection has been shown in prospective epidemiological studies to be a risk factor for gastric cancer.
Can gastric juice ascorbic acid secretion be restored by eradication of H pylori ?
Methods
This hypothesis was tested by two ongoing trials of H pylori eradication treatment, one in patients with duodenal ulcer (DU) disease and the other in patients with intestinal metaplasia (IM).
The primary aim of the first trial was to discover if, after conventional healing of duodenal ulcers, eradication of H pylori prevented ulcer relapse.
The primary aim of the second trial was to see if eradication of H pylori led to resolution of intestinal metaplasia.
PATIENT RECRUITMENT
The main selection criterion in the DU trial was a duodenal ulcer, freshly healed by standard acid supressive treatment.
All subjects gave fully informed written consent.
For the IM trial, subjects with intestinal metaplasia in previous gastric mucosal biopsies were identified from pathology department records and were asked to participate in the study.
All gave fully informed written consent.
They had another endoscopy and four antral and four body biopsy specimens were obtained for histological examination.
Intestinal metaplasia in four or more biopsy specimens was the main criterion for inclusion in the study.
TREATMENT
Patients in the DU trial were randomised to receive one of two treatments for one week: either colloidal bismuth subcitrate (DeNol tab) 120 mg four times daily alone, or in conjunction with ampicillin 500 mg four times daily and metronidazole 400 mg three times daily.
Patients in the IM trial were randomised to receive two weeks of treatment with either placebo (lactose tablets) or a combination of colloidal bismuth subcitrate (DeNol tab) 120 mg four times daily, oxytetracycline 500 mg four times daily, and metronidazole 400 mg three times daily.
FOLLOW UP
Both trial protocols required endoscopy to be performed before the start of treatment, and one, six and, 12 months after the end of treatment.
In the DU trial an endoscopy was also performed on development of symptoms suggestive of ulcer relapse.
SPECIMEN COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
At each endoscopy, biopsy specimens were taken for histological examination (DU trial: two antral, one body; IM trial: four antral, four body).
An attempt was made where possible to aspirate gastric juice using a Teflon catheter passed down the suction biopsy channel.
Collection was not always successful and thus samples were not obtained from all subjects at all stages of the trials.
Gastric juice was stored at -70°C in an equal volume of 2% metaphosphoric/0.5% sulphamic acid until analysis.
Blood was drawn into a heparinised container for vitamin C assay and plasma was stored at -70°C in two volumes of 2% metaphosphoric acid.
Gastric juice and plasma ascorbic acid concentrations were determined by high performance liquid chronotography using acetonitrile mobile phase and an electrochemical detector.
Total vitamin C concentrations were determined by a modification of our original technique after reduction of dehydroascorbic acid to ascorbic acid at 45°C for 120 minutes in the presence of excess dithiothreitol.
Gastric biopsy specimens were assessed by a single histologist (Dr M F Dixon) according to the Sydney classification system.
H pylori was stained for by the modified Giemsa method.
Eradication of H pylori was defined as negative results by histological tests in all biopsy specimens at least four weeks after the end of treatment.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The juice vitamin concentration data showed skewing and therefore analyses were performed using non-parametric methods.
Subjects were divided into one of two groups according to whether H pylori eradication was successful or not.
Subjects in whom only before or after treatment values were available were excluded from the main analysis.
Where subjects had several after treatment values available the latest was chosen for analysis on the grounds that this would best reflect the longterm effect of eradication.
Statistics were performed using Minitab v8.21 (Minitab Inc, Pennsylvania, USA).
For each subgroup a Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare before and after treatment concentrations of gastric juice ascorbic acid and total vitamin C, plasma total vitamin C, and the ratio of gastric juice to plasma vitamin C. The estimated median within subject before to after treatment differences and their approximate 95% confidence intervals were calculated using Minitab procedure WINT.
Unpaired analyses between groups were performed using a Mann-Whitney rank test.
Quoted p values are two tailed and an α level of 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Altogether 131 juice and 119 plasma samples were obtained from 58 patients in the DU trials and 11 patients in the IM trial.
There were no significant differences in before treatment juice or plasma results between patients drawn from the two trials and so the two datasets were combined to increase the power of the study.
Paired before and after treatment juice values were available for only 34 subjects (12 with successful H pylori eradication, of whom nine were from the DU trial; 22 with failed H pylori eradication, 20 from the DU trial).
In some of these subjects plasma values were not available.
Fewer than expected samples were obtained from patients with successful H pylori eradication as the eradication rate with triple treatment in the DU trial was low at an overall 50%.
There were no significant differences between before treatment gastric juice ascorbate or total vitamin C concentrations, or plasma total vitamin C concentrations between the two subgroups.
The median times between start of treatment and the final follow up examination did not differ between th two subgroups: 63 days (range 35–224) inthe successful eradication group, 118 days (range 35–454) in the failed eradication group (2p>0.50; Mann-Whitney rank test).
Figures 1 and 2 show the effects of treatment on vitamin C concentrations in the two subgroups are shown in and summarised in Table I.
Gastric juice ascorbic acid and total vitamin C concentrations, and the ratio of gastric juice to plasma total vitamin C rose significantly after treatment only in the group in whom H pylori was successfully eradicated.
The changes in gastric juice ascorbic acid in the H pylori eradicated group were significantly greater than in the non-eradicated group (2p=0.038; Mann-Whitney).
The changes in gastric total vitamin C and the juice:plasma ratio were also higher in the H pylori eradicated group but did not reach statistical significance (2p=0.14 and 0.11 respectively; Mann-Whitney).
Plasma vitamin C concentrations did not change significantly with treatment in either group.
The results of gastric juice against plasma concentrations according to H pylori status are shown in Figure 3.
This includes the unpaired datapoints and the repeated post-treatment datapoints which were excluded from the above pairwise analyses.
This indicates that broadly similar juice ascorbate concentrations were found in H pylori positive and negative subjects when plasma vitamin C concentrations were below about 30 µmol/l, but above this threshold H pylori eradicated patients tended to have higher juice concentrations.
Table II shows this further by the changes in juice concentrations that occurred in the two subgroups according to whether the final plasma vitamin C concentration was high or low.
The before to after treatment changes in gastric juice ascorbic acid (2p=0.023; Mann-Whitney rank test) and total vitamin C (2p=0.036) were significantly larger in the H pylori eradicated patients with higher plasma concentrations than in those with lower concentrations.
In patients in whom H pylori eradication failed, changes in juice vitamin concentrations did not differ significantly according to the final plasma value.
One patient (man aged 69) in whom H pylori had successfully been eradicated was recalled for further study.
On recall, fasting gastric juice ascorbate concentration was only 4 µmol/l and plasma vitamin C was 5 µmol/l.
Sixty minutes after 500 mg of ascorbate was given intravenously, however, gastric juice ascorbate concentration had risen to 248 µmol/l.
After one week of ascorbic acid (1 g orally daily) his fasting gastric juice ascorbate was 692 µmol/l (36 hours after last oral vitamin dose), plasma vitamin C having risen to 128 µmol/l.
Discussion
In this study, gastric juice concentrations of ascorbic acid and total vitamin C, and the concentration gradient between plasma and gastric juice were improved by eradication of H pylori .
As eradication of H pylori is known to restore chronic gastritis to normal, this is in agreement with findings of low juice ascorbate concentrations in H pylori chronic gastritis and high concentrations in patients with normal gastric mucosa.
The effect of eradication in this study was variable, however, as some patients exhibited appreciable rises in juice vitamin concentrations whereas others showed little change.
It is likely that this variability was related to the individual's ascorbic acid state (Table II).
Patients who were comparatively deficient in vitamin C with plasma concentrates below about 30 µmol/l did not secrete much ascorbate into gastric juice even after H pylori eradication.
High increments in gastric juice ascorbate concentrations only occurred if the subjects had final plasma vitamin C concentrations above approximately 30 µmol/l.
This is a retrospective analysis and so should be interpreted with caution, but our study of one patient with vitamin C deficiency and with H pylori eradicated does lend some supporting evidence.
H pylori infection is now recognised as a major independent risk factor in the cause of gastric cancer.
Reduction of gastric ascorbate secretion may be one mechanism by which it increases the risk.
An attempt could be made to reverse this by increasing the dietary intake of vitamin C, but we have shown in a region of Venezuela with a high incidence of gastric cancer that oral vitamin C supplementation alone is insufficient to increase gastric juice ascorbate concentrations in the presence of H pylori infection.
We conclude from this study that H pylori eradication enhances gastric juice ascorbate secretion, and thus increases intragastric anti-oxidant protection.
Further work is underway to confirm whether dietary vitamin C supplementation enhances this effect, and to discover if such an approach can reverse precancerous conditions in the gastric mucosa.
Influence of dietary fat on duodenal resistance to acid
Abstract
Three experimental diets were prepared from a standard formula plus pure oleic, linoleic, or eicosapentaenoic acid (2% by weight).
Mucosal resistance to acid was tested in anaesthetised rats fed the experimental diets for at least four weeks (60 rats per diet) by duodenal infusion of HCl (200 to 700µmol) 30 minutes after pretreatment with either saline or 100µmol HCl (used as a mild irritant).
Rats were killed one hour after the test and the duodenal damage was assessed ‘blindly’ using a combined macroscopic and histological score.
Differences were tested by analysis of covariance of the dose-response curves.
Mucosal resistance was similar in the three groups when the acid challenge was given after saline pretreatment.
Resistance to acid in all three groups was significantly increased by previous exposure to 100µmol HCl (p<0.01).
Interestingly, rats fed a linoleic or eicosapentaenoic supplemented diet after pretreatment with HCl developed significantly higher resistance to acid than those fed the diet with oelic acid (p<0.05).
Pretreatment with indomethacin suppressed the difference between diets.
In conclusion, dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids enhance duodenal resistance to acid by potentiation of adaptive cytoprotection.
The duodenal mucosa is normally challenged by intermittent exposure to acid, because of the periodic emptying of the gastric content into the duodenal lumen.
During fasting, the intraduodenal pH fluctuates widely within a range of 1 to 7.
These fluctuations probably result from interaction between phasic gastroduodenal motility and intermittent pancreatic secretion of neutralising bicarbonate.
In previous studies in the rat, we reproduced the intermittent duodenal acid exposure that occurs physiologically, and observed that pulses of acid entering the duodenum trigger a response of adaptive cytoprotection by the duodenal mucosa and stimulate the release of cytoprotective prostaglandins into the duodenal lumen.
Hence, we postulated that adaptive cytoprotection maintains a physiological equilibrium between duodenal mucosal resistance and luminal acidity.
In experimental models of gastric damage, there is evidence that the ability of the gastric mucosa to synthesise prostaglandins plays an important part in mediating adaptive cytoprotection.
Other investigators claim that endogenous prostaglandins may not be essential since gastric cytoprotection persists after pretreatment with prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors.
In our model of duodenal adaptive cytoprotection, a normal mucosal capacity to synthesise prostaglandins seems to be a necessary requirement, since pretreatment with indomethacin abolishes the protective response and, conversely, administration of exogenous prostaglandins restores the protection.
Mucosal prostaglandin biosynthesis can be influenced by the chronic intake of precursor fatty acids such as linoleic acid or eicosapentaenoic acid.
Oral administration of linoleic acid, a polyunsaturated omega-6 fatty acid, leads to noticeable increases in the release of prostaglandin E 2 into the gastric lumen in rats and humans.
On the other hand, a fish oil supplemented diet, rich in the omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid, was shown to reduce the mucosal generation of prostaglandin E 2 while enhancing that of prostaglandin E 3 .
Thus, the dietary intake of precursor fatty acids can directly influence the rate and pattern of prostaglandin generation by the gastrointestinal mucosa.
This study aimed to investigate whether the resistance to acid of the duodenal mucosa can be modulated by the dietary content of fatty acids.
To this end, three experimental diets were prepared from a standard rodent diet supplemented with pure oleic, linoleic, or eicosapentaenoic acid.
Mucosal resistance to acid was tested in anaesthetised rats by duodenal infusion of graded doses of HCl using a tube implanted in the proximal duodenum.
In the first series of experiments, acid was administered into the duodenal lumen after pretreatment with saline to test the resistance to acid applied directly to the mucosa.
A second series of experiments tested the mucosal resistance to acid after pretreatment with a mild dose of acid to induce adaptive cytoprotection.
Finally, we tested the effects of indomethacin on diet induced protective changes.
Methods
ANIMALS AND DIETS
Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 110 to 120 g were purchased from Interfauna (Barcelona, Spain).
The animals were maintained in a restricted access room with controlled temperature (23°C) and a light-dark cycle (12 hours: 12 hours), and they were housed in rack-mounted cages, each containing a maximum of six rats.
The experimental diets were prepared from a standard formula that included the following semisynthetic components (wt/wt): 20% casein, 1% methionine, 32% corn starch, 15% sucrose, 5% methyl-cellulose, 12% fat emulsion (Calogen, Scientific Hospital Supplies, Liverpool, UK; consisting of 50% water, 11% linoleic acid, 28% oleic acid, and 9% saturated fatty acids), 3% balanced salt mixture, 0.1% α-tocopherol (Roig Farma, Barcelona, Spain), and a 10% supplement including vitamins, inerals, and dextrin (Seravit, Scientific Hospital Supplies).
The basic diet was supplemented with 2% by weight of either oleic acid (18:1 omega 9; 95% purity, Roig Farma), linoleic acid (18:2 omega 6; 95% purity, Sigma, St Louis, Mo, USA) or eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5 omega 3; 96% purity, Nissui Pharmaceutical, Yuki, Ibaragi, Japan), to obtain the oleic, linoleic, or eicosapentaenoic acid diets respectively.
Table I shows the final fatty acid composition f the experimental diets.
The mixture was thoroughly blendedwith 150 ml/kg of a 2% solution of polyvinylpyrrolidone (Roig Farma) in ethanol:water (50:50) used as compactant, asnd dried out at 40°C into biscuits.
Batches were prepared twicea week and stored at 4°C for a maximum of four days.
PROTOCOLS
One hundred and eighty rats were included in this study.
They were randomly assigned to receive either the oleic, linoleic, or eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented diet and were continued on the same diet for at least four weeks before entering the experimental protocols.
Body weight gain was checked every week.
The study included four protocols as follows:
Protocol 1 investigated the influence of the experimental diets on the resistance of the duodenal mucosa to acid as assessed by direct instillation of acid into the duodenal lumen.
Protocol 2 studied the phenomenon of adaptive cytoprotection in response to mild irritation of the duodenal mucosa in the three experimental groups.
Protocol 3 studied the effects of indomethacin pretreatment on adaptive cytoprotection in the three experimental groups.
Protocol 4 quantified the in vivo intraluminal release of prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) in response to duodenal perfusion with acid.
Protocol 1: effect of diet on duodenal resistance to acid
After an overnight fast in cages designed to avoid coprophagia, rats were anaesthetised (urethane, 1.25 g/kg given intraperitoneally, Fluka Chemie, Buchs, Switzerland) and a tracheostomy was performed.
The abdomen of each rat was incised and the stomach and duodenum were exposed.
A double lumen tube, prepared from polyvinyl chloride tubing (ID: 1.40, OD: 1.90 mm; Abbot, Sligo, Eire), was inserted through the forestomach into the gastric lumen and passed through the pylorus.
The tube was held in place by ligatures around the entry point (forestomach) and the pylorus.
One of the lumens was used to drain the gastric contents by siphonage.
The second lumen opened just beyond the pylorus and was used for pulse instillations of normal saline or acid into the duodenal lumen.
Finally, the abdominal wall was sutured.
Rats received a 1 ml saline bolus through the duodenal line every 30 minutes for two hours to achieve full equilibration and to avoid any effects of laparotomy.
Thereafter, an additional 1 ml pulse of hydrochloric acid at a dose of 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600 µmol was instilled, each dose level was given to four rats from each dietary group.
Rats were killed by cervical dislocation under anaesthesia one hour after the instillation of acid.
The stomach and duodenum were removed and immediately fixed by intraluminal perfusion of a neutral buffered 10% formalin solution for 30 minutes via the double lumen tube used in the experiments.
Thereafter, the specimens were carefully opened along the greater curvature, laid on and pinned out on a flat surface.
The mucosa was examined and lesions scored macroscopically according to the presence of petechiae or necrotic mucosa (Table II).
The length of the damaged area was measured.
Longitudinal sections along the duodenum were stained with haematoxylin and eosin for histological examination.
Macro- and microscopic evaluation and scoring of the lesions were performed by a pathologist who was unaware of the treatment administered to each rat.
A global score of duodenal damage was obtained by summation of macroscopic (mucosal appearance, length of damaged area) and histological (depth of mucosal necrosis, vascular thrombosis) findings (Table II).
Protocol 2: effect of diet on adaptive cytoprotection
Matched sets of rats from each dietary group were prepared according to the surgical procedure described in the previous protocol.
This protocol tested mucosal resistance to acid after mild irritation.
The rats received a 1 ml saline bolus through the duodenal line every 30 minutes for two hours to achieve full equilibration.
Thereafter, two additional 1 ml pulses were instilled: a 100 µmol HCl bolus, as a mild irritant, and a pulse of 300, 400, 500, 600, or 700 µmol HCl after a period of 30 minutes.
Each dose level of HCL was given four rats from each dietary group.
A bolus of 100 µmol HCl was used as mild acid irritant since this amount and concentration of acid is comparable with the average gastric acid secretion of the conscious male Sprague-Dawley rat.
The rats were killed 60 minutes after the last pulse and the duodena were removed to determine the macro- and microscopic scoring of the mucosal lesions as discussed above.
Protocol 3: effects of indomethacin
To study the effect of cyclo-oxygenase inhibition by indomethacin on the adaptive response induced by mild acid irritation, rats were surgically prepared as above.
They received saline pulses through the duodenal line for two hours, and thereafter a 100 µmol HCl pulse followed by 200, 300, 400, or 500 µmol HCl 30 minutes later.
The protocol was performed in 16 rats from each dietary group that received indomethacin (5 mg/kg subcutaneously) 30 minutes before the 100 µmol HCl pulse.
Sixty minutes after the last pulse, the rats were killed and their duodena subjected to evaluation of the mucosal lesions as detailed above.
Protocol 4: duodenal release of prostaglandin E 2 
Four rats from each dietary group were included in this study.
After an overnight fast, rats were anaesthetised (urethane, 1.25 mg/kg intraperitoneally) and a tracheostomy was performed.
The abdomen of each rat was incised and a perfused duodenal loop was prepared using a double lumen polyvinyl chloride tube (ID: 1.40, OD: 1.90 mm).
The first lumen was used for drainage of gastric contents, and the second, which opened just beyond the pylorus, was used for duodenal perfusion.
The intestinal wall was transected 3 cm distally to the pylorus and ligated to a glass cannula for collection of the perfusate.
Pancreatic and bile ducts were ligated, and the abdominal wall was sutured.
Isotonic saline heated at 37°C was continuously perfusedat a rate of 8 ml/h into the duodenal loop, and the perfusate was collected in 15 minute fractions.
After a 90 minute baseline period, we instilled a 100 µmol HCl pulse (1 ml volume) through the duodenal line and the perfusion was stopped.
After a two minute exposure to acid, the perfusion was resumed for a further 90 minute period.
Samples collected during the first 10 minutes after the acid pulse were discarded.
The prostaglandin E 2 concentration in the perfusates was measured by specific radioimmunoassay (RIA).
Tritiated standard was purchased from Amersham International (Buckinghamshire, UK).
Antiserum was kindly donated by Dr J A Salmon (Wellcome Research Laboratories, Beckenham, UK).
Perfusate samples were assayed for PGE 2 without prior extraction and HPLC-purification.
Direct PGE 2 RIA has a sensitivity of 15 pg/ml.
Prostaglandin E 3 can be measured by a combined HPLC-RIA method.
After extraction and HPLC-fractionation of the samples, the appropriate eluates are subjected to RIA using the PGE 2 antiserum, that cross-reacts with PGE 3 at 14%.
The detection limit of this method is about 100 pg/ml.
STATISTICAL METHODS
Results are presented as mean (SEM).
Duodenal damage scores were plotted against the dose of acid instilled into the duodenal lumen.
Dose-response curves were constructed by weighted least squares regression analysis of the data on a third order polynomial model using a computer program (Sigmaplot, Jandel Scientific, Corte Madera, Ca, USA).
Statistical difference between curves was tested by analysis of covariance of damage scores per acid dose level.
Differences in duodenal prostaglandin release were determined using a two way analysis of variance for multiple comparisons, and the Student's t test for single comparisons.
Results
EFFECT OF DIETS ON BODY WEIGHT
Ten rats from each diet group were placed in individual metabolic cages to monitor their daily food intake and body weight gain.
The three diets were isocaloric and equally well accepted by the Sprague-Dawley rats.
As shown by Table III, the daily food intake and body weight gain during the first week on the diet were similar in rats fed either the oleic, linoleic, or eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented diet.
The rats exhibited a satisfactory weight gain over the four week period and there was no significant difference in body weight or health status between the three experimental groups.
Body weight gain was satisfactory in all rats included in this study.
DUODENAL RESISTANCE TO ACID
Figure 1 shows the mean scores of duodenal damage induced by instillation of HCl into the duodenal lumen after saline pretreatment.
Global scores including macroscopic and histological data were plotted against doses of HCl and the curves of duodenal resistance to acid corresponding to the three dietary groups were drawn by polynomial regression analysis.
As shown by Figure 1, the resistance of the duodenal mucosa to an acid challenge was similar among the three dietary groups at the five dose levels tested, and there was no significant difference between diets.
ADAPTIVE CYTOPROTECTION
Exposure of the duodenal mucosa to a mild dose of acid (100 µmol HCl) significantly enhanced mucosal resistance to a subsequent acid challenge.
Figure 2 shows the comparison between acid induced damage scores after saline pretreatment and after mild acid irritation in rats fed the oleic acid diet.
Figure 2 clearly shows that a phenomenon of adaptive cytoprotection occurred in animsl fed the oleic diet at the various levels of acid injury tested, since pretreatment with a 100 µmol pulse of HCl induced a significant shift of the curve to the right (p<0.01).
Thus, infusion of similar doses of acid caused significantly lower damage scores after mild acid than after saline pretreatment suggesting that the rat duodenum is able to withstand higher doses of acid after amild challenge.
Figures 3 and 4 show the curves of duodenal resistance to acid in rats fed the linoleic and the eicosapentaenoic acid diets, respectively.
Again, there is a significant difference between the curves of mucosal resistance after saline and after mild acid exposure (p<0.01).
That is, the duodenal mucosa became more resistant to acid after a mild acid challenge, indicating that adaptive cytoprotection occurred in rats fed the linoleic or the eicosapentaenoic acid diet as observed in the oleic diet group.
However, comparing Figure 2 (oleic acid diet group) with Figures 3 and 4 (linoleic and eicosapentaenoic acid groups, respectively) it is evident that the gap between the saline and mile acid pretreatment curves is wider for the two latter fatty acid groups.
This would suggest that the shift to the right after mild acid pretreatment is more important in rats fed diets supplemented with a polyunsaturated fatty acid than oleic acid.
As previously shown in Figure 1, there was no difference between the three experimental groups in mucosal resistance to acid after saline.
In contrast, when comparing the adaptive cytoprotection curves (Fig 5), the difference between diet groups is evident and significant (p<0.05).
Thus, duodenal damage scores were significantly higher in rats fed oleic acid diet than in those fed either the linoleic or eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented diet.
This finding suggests that the increase in mucosal resistance produced by adaptive cytoprotection becomes much stronger in linoleic or eicosapentaenoic acid fed rats than in those fed the oleic acid diet.
There was no significant difference between the linoleic acid and the eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented groups.
Correlation between macroscopic and histological scores was very close (r=0.828, n=168).
Thus, when considering macro- and microscopic data independently, the same results were obtained: mild acid pretreatment enhances mucosal resistance in the three experimental groups but changes are significantly more noticeable in linoleic or eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented groups than in oleic acid fed rats.
EFFECTS OF INDOMETHACIN
Figure 6 shows the curves of duodenal resistance to acid after mild acid irritation (100 µmol HCl) in rats pretreated with indomethacin.
All groups exhibited higher damage scores than those observed in the adaptive cytoprotection experiments shown in Figure 5 (p<0.05).
On the other hand, after indomethacin treatment there was no statistical difference between the three dietary groups.
Thus, indomethacin treatment suppressed both adaptive cytoprotection and the difference between dietary groups.
DUODENAL RELEASE OF PROSTAGLANDIN E 2 
The release of PGE 2 into a perfused duodenal loop is shown in Table IV.
During the baseline period, PGE 2 was released at a significantly higher rate in linoleic acid fed rats than in the oleic acid or eicosapentaenoic acid supplemented groups.
After an intraduodenal pulse of 100 µmol HCl, the release of PGE 2 appreciably increased in all three groupsof rats.
Changes were significant up to 45 minutes after HCl stimulation.
It is interesting to note that the prostaglandin response was more pronounced in linoleic fed rats than in the other groups.
The release of PGE 3 in eicosapentaenoic acid fed rats was below the detection limit of our combined HPLC-RIA method.
Discussion
This study aimed to investigate whether changes in the type ofdietary fat would influence the susceptibility of the duodenal mucosa to acid induced lesions.
For this purpose, three special diets were prepared from a standard diet that was supplemented with oleic or linoleic acid or eicosapentaenoic acid.
Our results suggest that diet supplementation with linoleic acid or eicosapentaenoic acid compared with oleic acid enhances the resistance of the duodenal mucosa to acid by potentiation of adaptive cytoprotection.
The diets were isocaloric and hence, the body weight gain and the daily intake of food were similar in the three experimental groups.
Therefore, it is unlikely that the beneficial effects of the polyunsaturated diets were the result of a difference in caloric consumption.
The findings observed in this study are most probably related to differences in the fat composition of the diets.
The three experimental diets differed in their content of polyunsaturated fatty acids, since the linoleic and eicosapentaenoic acid diets were rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids compared with the oleic acid diet, although essential requirements of polyunsaturated fatty acids were amply satisfied by all three dietary regimens, as also evidenced by the normal growth of the rats.
Thus, differences in the dietary intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids between the three experimental groups were probably responsible for the variances noted in the resistance of the duodenal mucosa to acid.
Either polyunsaturated fatty acids enhanced mucosal resistance or the oleic acid supplement weakened the defensive mechanisms.
It should be emphasised that when acid was applied directly to the duodenal mucosa without prior irritation, there was no difference in mucosal resistance in the three dietary groups tested in our study.
Thus, changes in the physico-chemical properties of mucosal cell membranes as a consequence of the putative variations in their fatty acid composition are unlikely to be responsible for the beneficial effect of diet, since those structural changes would also intervene when the acid load is delivered to the mucosa without prior irritation.
The beneficial effect of the diets supplemented with polyunsaturated fatty acids was only observed when the acid challenge took place after mild acid irritation, suggesting that the dietary manipulation increased the ability of the mucosa to promote a defensive mechanism against the acid challenge.
Diet supplementation with fatty acid precursors of eicosanoid synthesis may influence the adaptive response of the duodenal mucosa to acid.
In the gastrointestinal tract, local eicosanoid synthesis and metabolism seem to be governed by intraluminal, neural, and hormonal factors.
Diet may be particularly relevant as a regulator of eicosanoid biosynthesis, since the dietary intake of fatty acids can directly influence the pool of precursors in the membrane phospholipids of epithelial cells in the gastrointestinal mucosa.
In fact, dietary linoleic acid increases the release of prostaglandin E 2 into the gastric lumen in rats and humans.
Previous studies by out own group showed that changes in the dietary intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids may also modify the pattern of eicosanoids synthesised by the rat gastrointestinal mucosa.
Thus, after four weeks on an eicosapentaenoic acid rich diet, the generation og PGE 2 and 6-keto-PGF 1 a by gastric mucosal specimens was significantly reduced, whereas at the same time we observed substantial generation of previously undetectable PGE 3 .
In the present study, we have shown that instillation of 100 µmol HCl into a perfused duodenal loop triggers the release of PGE 2 , and the response is quantitatively more important in rats fed the linoleic acid supplemented diet than in the other two experimental groups.
The release of PGE 3 , however, was below the detection limit of our combined HPLC method, and we were not able to detect if such an enhanced response is also present in eicosapentaenoic acid fed rats.
An enhanced generation of either omega-3 or omega-6 derived prostaglandins possessing cytoprotective properties could account for the protection against acid-induced duodenal lesions in rats fed the polyunsaturated fatty acid diets, though this cannot be confirmed with the present data.
The experiments using indomethacin to inhibit cyclo-oxygenase activity would support the above concept, since indomethacin suppressed all differences between the three experimental groups suggesting that in the absence of normal prostaglandin generation, there is no beneficial effect derived from the dietary supplement with polyunsaturated fatty acids.
The effects of indomethacin, however, may also involve alternative mechanisms.
Cyclo-oxygenase inhibition may divert the metabolism of the precursor fatty acid through the lipoxygenase pathway, favouring the production of leukotrienes with potent chemotactic activity.
It has been recently shown that leukocyte accumulation within the mucosal blood vessels plays an important role in the pathogenesis of indomethacin induced gastropathy.
Nevertheless, if in our experiments the effects of indomethacin were mediated by an increased production of leukotrienes, one would have expected that indomethacin reversed the beneficial effect of the linoleic diet but not that of the eicosapentaenoic acid diet, or at least not to the same extent, since the lipoxygenase products derived from eicosapentaenoic acid are weaker proinflammatory mediators than products derived from arachidonic acid metabolism.
It has been shown that oral administration of lipid mixtures containing surface-active phospholipids provides significant protection to the gastric mucosa against a variety of ulcerogenic agents, including acid.
These lipids form a hydrophobic lining on the mucosal luminal surface that repels the back diffusion of acid ions (H + ) and therefore provide an effective ‘mucosal barrier’ against acid erosion.
Hypothetically, such an effect could have occurred in our experiments using diets that differed in their fat composition.
However, our experiments were performed after an overnight fast (16 hours), and influences derived from the presence of traces of food within the duodenal lumen can be excluded.
In addition, palmitic acid, a saturated fatty acid, was shown to be the main component of the protective lipid mixtures and indomethacin pretreatment did not abolish their beneficial effects.
The latter point in particular suggests that our findings reflect a different phenomenon, since we found protection when using diets supplemented with polyunsaturated fatty acids and this protection was suppressed by indomethacin pretreatment.
However, it is possible that both phenomena (adaptive cytoprotection and surfactant lipid barrier) are integrated in a common protective mechanism, as far as the enhanced mucosal ability to synthesise prostaglandins would facour the prompt accumulation of hydrophobic phospholipids on the mucosal surface in response to mild irritation, rendering the mucosa more resistant to subsequent acid challenge.
In summary, our study shows that adaptive cytoprotection of the duodenal mucosa to luminal acid can be modulated by the dietary intake of fat.
Diets rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids enhance the phenomenon of adaptive cytoprotection and render the duodenal mucosa more resistant to acid.
These indings may be relevant for the prophylaxis of duodenal ulcer disease in humans, an appealing concept indirectly supported by epidemiological and experimental data suggesting a relationship between the incidence of peptic ulcer and the consumption of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Cigarette smoking and parity as risk factors for the development of symptomatic gall bladder disease in women: results of the Royal College of General Practitioners' oral contraception study
Abstract
The effects of cigarette smoking and parity on the development of symptomatic gall bladder disease remain controversial.
These relations have been examined in a cohort of 46000 women followed for up to 19 years during the Royal College of General Practitioners' (RCFP) oral contraception study.
During follow up, 1087 women were recorded as experiencing their first ever episode of symptomatic cholelithiasis (International Classification of Diseases, 8th revision (ICD-8) 574) or cholecystitis (ICD-8 575).
Smokers were more ikely to develop symptomatic gall bladder disease than non-smokers (relativerisk 1.19; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.06–1.34) and there was a significant trend with the number of cigarettes smoked daily (test for trend x=7.58, p<0.01).
This relation was most apparent among never users of oral contraceptives, although similar trends were found among current and former users.
A significant direct relation between symptomatic gall bladder disease and parity was also found (test for trend x=21.89, p<0.001).
When all were examined together a trend of increasing risk with lower social class was also found (test for trend x=5.72, p=0.02).
Current users of oral contraceptives had a moderately increased risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease (relative risk 1.15; 95% CI 0.99–1.34), unlike former users (relative risk 1.03; 95% CI 0.90–1.18).
These results suggest that smoking and parity are important risk factors for the development of symptomatic gall bladder disease in women.
It is currently thought that cholesterol gall stones arise because of a triple hepatobiliary defect: cholesterol supersaturation of gall bladder bile, reduction gall bladder contractility, and increased rate of cholesterol nucleation, probably due to mucin glycoprotein hypersecretion.
Two recent case-control studies have suggested that smoking might protect against gall stone disease.
Both found a halving in risk of gall stone disease for smokers compared with non-smokers.
Previous reports have indicated, however, that smoking is associated with an increased risk of gall stone disease.
Evidence for a positive association between parity and gall bladder disease is also contradictory, notwithstanding many studies of this relation.
Pregnancy could affect each of the processes involved in gall stone formation.
For example, progesterone impairs gall bladder contractility, and oestrogens may increase cholesterol saturation of bile and gall bladder prostaglandin synthesis, and thus possibly mucin secretion by the gall bladder mucosa.
A previous report from the Royal College of General Practitioners' (RCGP) oral contraception study suggested that the pill accelerated the development of symptomatic gall stone disease in women prone to the disease.
This report has used further data from the RCGP oral contraception study to examine the influence of smoking and parity on the development of gall stone disease.
Methods
The organisation and methods used in the RCGP study have been described in detail elsewhere.
Briefly, over a 14 month period starting in May 1968, 1400 general practitioners throughout the United Kingdom recruited 23000 women who were using oral contraceptives and a similar number of women who had never used these preparations.
The two groups were age matched and all women were married or living as married.
Data on smoking habit and social class were collected at recruitment, at which time 48% of pill users smoked compared with 42% of the controls.
Social class was based on the occupation of the women's husband.
Every six months since recruitment, the general practitioners have supplied information about any use of hormonal preparations including oral contraceptives, any pregnancies, any operations, and all newly presenting episodes of illness.
These results relate to data available at April 1987, by which time about 65% of sucjects were no longer under observation, mainly because they have moved from the recruiting doctors' practice.
All women who experienced their first ever episode of symptomatic cholelithiasis (International Classification of Diseases, 8th revision (ICD-8 code 574) or cholecystitis (ICD-8 code 575) were included in this analysis.
For the 108 women with both conditions, only the first episode was counted.
The diagnosis was that given by the reporting general practitioner, and each event was categorised according to the woman's contraceptive state at the time of the event.
Events occurring during pregnancy were excluded, together with the related periods of observation.
The incidence rates were indirectly standardised for age and parity at diagnosis and social class at recruitment, with the total study population as the reference population.
All rates quoted are per 1000 women-years.
The method of indirect standardisation involved applying stratum specific rates from the total cohort to the person-years of observation in the relevant stratum of each contraceptive group.
These expected numbers were used to weight the observed incidence rates.
Confidence intervals were calculated on the assumption that the variance of the log relative risk is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the observed number of cases in the two groups being compared.
Test for linear trends were based on Mantel's method modified to accommodate standarised data.
Results
A total of 1087 women had a diagnosis of symptomatic gall bladder disease (cholelithiasis (ICD-8 574) or cholecystitis (ICD-8 575)).
The rate of gall bladder disease was not affected by age (Table I).
SMOKING
Women who smoked were significantly more likely to be diagnosed as having gall bladder disease; rate 2.26 per 1000 women-years among non-smokers, 2.69 per 1000 women-years among moderate smokers (1–15 cigarettes per day), and 2.74 per 1000 women-years in heavy smokers (16 cigarettes per day)(test for trend: χ 2 =7.58, p<0.01)(Table II).
The relative risk for all smokers compared with non-smokers was 1.19 (95% confidence interval (95 of CI) 1.06–1.34).
Higher rates of symptomatic gall bladder disease were seen among smokers in each oral contraceptive group, although the trend was only significant for never users of the pill.
PARITY
A clear trend of increasing risk with increasing parity was seen in each of the oral contraceptive groups (Table III).
The rate of symptomatic gall bladder disease among women of parity 1 was generally twice that of their nulliparous counterparts.
SOCIAL CLASS
When all women were examined together, there was a significant trend of increasing risk of gall bladder disease with lower social class.
Similar trends were found in each of the contraceptive groups, although these did not reach statistic significance (Table IV).
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE USE
Compared with never users the relative risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease in current users was 1.15 (95% CI 0.99–1.34), and in former users 1.03 (95% CI 0.90–1.18).
Discussion
The results of this long term prospective study stuggest that cigarette smoking, parity, and possibly lower social class are important risk factors for the development of symptomatic gall bladder disease in women.
The overall incidence of symptomatic gall stones among the 20819 women who said they were smokers at the start of the study was 20% higher than that found among the 25558 non-smokers.
The relation with smoking was most apparent in those women who had never used oral contraception.
The rate of symptomatic gall bladder disease roughly doubled once a woman had been pregnant.
Women in social classes IV+V had a 25% greater risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease compared with those in social classes I+II.
The validity of these findings needs careful consideration.
This study assessed symptomatic gall bladder disease rather the total occurrence of the condition.
It is likely, however, that symptom free and symptomatic gall bladder disease share a common pathogenesis and thus we believe it remains valid to examine factors that predict symptomatic episodes of the illness.
The data are based on reports supplied by the participating general practitioners.
Although about 20% of the women were taken into hospital at the time of their illness, we do not know how many of the episodes were confirmed radiologically or at operation.
This apparent lack of confirmatory evidence would be important if the general practitioners diagnosed gall bladder disease differently among patients with particular characteristics — for instance, if they made the diagnosis more often in smokers than non-smokers.
Although possible, we think it unlikely for this to have occurred for risk factors such as smoking and parity.
On the other hand it is possible thatsuch a diagnostic suspicion bias accounts for the modest increase in risk among current users but not former users of the pill, although previous work has suggested that this pattern of risk may be due to an accelerating effect of the pill.
By 1987 about 65% of the women were no longer under observation, mainly because they had moved from the recruiting doctors' practice area.
These women were more likely to be younger, of higher social class, and low parity than those still in the study, but their smoking habits ar recruitment were no different.
Furthermore, the characteristics of pill users no longer observed were similar to never users no longer observed, so comparison between contraceptive groups also remains valid.
The smoking data have not bee updated since recruitment.
Many of the women will have stopped and few will have started smoking.
Resulting misclassification will tend to dilute the effect of smoking and so our risk estimates are likely to be underestimates.
We were not able to adjust for the possible confounding effect of body weight as this information has not been collected.
A direct relation between body mass index and the risk of gall bladder disease has been described.
Another cohort study has found that pill users tend to be slightly lighter than non-users.
It seems unlikely, therefore, that the ability to adjust for body weight would have materially affected the results that relate to pill use.
Also, because smoking tends to be associated with a lower body mass index, our inability to adjust for any confounding due to body weight will have tended to result in an underestimation of the effect of smoking.
Previous studies of the effect of smoking on gall bladder disease have reported conflicting results.
The Framingham population cohort study found that compared with non-smokers, those who smoked had a lower rate of clinical gall bladder disease, a difference that reached borderline statistical significance.
The authors were unable, however, to correct for confounding other than by age and sex.
Smoking was also found to be associated with a substantial protective effect in a case-control study of symptomatic gall bladder disease, and in a recent case-control study of patients undergoing cholecystectomy.
In both of these studies the control group, hospital inpatients and community controls, had unusually high smoking rates.
Interpretation is therefore problematic.
By contrast, three other studies have found a positiveassociation between cigarette smoking and gall bladder disease.
Petitti et al found a statistically significant increased risk of clinical gall bladder disease among smokers in a case control study of female twins and Layde et al found an increased risk in a cohort study of women attending British family planning clinics.
The third study found a direct relation between smoking and clinical gall bladder disease among men but not among women.
Two large population surveys with ultrasound to detect gall bladder disease have also shown an increase in the overall prevalence of gall bladder disease among male but not female smokers, although the findings were not clear cut.
For example, the increased risk found by Jorgensen showed only a weak dose-response relation, and the effect found by the Rome Group for Epidemiology and Prevention of Cholelithiasis was reduced after adjustments for confounding factors.
On balance the better controlled studies have shown that cigarette smoking promotes gall bladder disease.
At present, we do not know how smoking might promote either gall stone formation or the development of symptoms.
Smoking could affect gall bladder pathophysiology — for example, by stimulating mucin secretion and thus promoting cholesterol monohydrate nucleation — a critical step in gall stone formation.
Certainly smoking stimulates mucin secretion by the respiratory tract mucosa, probably by a direct irritant effect.
Recent evidence suggests, however, that nicotine inhibits gall bladder bile mucin concentration.
Alternatively, smoking could exert an effect on gall bladder contractility, possibly by inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.
There is, however, conflicting evidence regarding the effect of inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis on gall bladder contractility.
Interest in whether parity and the use of oral contraceptives are associated with the development of symptomatic gall bladder disease has been stimulated by the consistent finding that women of reproductive age have a higher incidence of symptomatic and symptom free gall bladder disease compared with men of the same age.
Previous reports have found that parity did not increase the risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease, increased the risk after a single pregnancy, or only increased the risk after several pregnancies.
Thijs and colleagues recently reviewed the results of all controlled studies on this issue and noted that a statistically significant positive association between parity or pregnancy was found in 26 of 42 studies.
Nevertheless, the most recent large epidemiological study to consider this issue, the American Nurses Health study, which found no relation between parity and the development of clinical gall stone disease.
Inconsistencies in the results of previous studies may be due to variations in the level of symptom recall, patient complaint, or consultation with medical practitioners and type of investigation performed on the various study populations.
An alternative explanation might be that pregnancy increases the risk of gall stone formation only transiently.
Thijs et al have postulated that pregnancy exerts an effect that disappears after about five years.
Some studies they suggest may have failed to detect an effect of parity because they did not concentrate on this risk period.
Pregnancy is often associated with two definite gall bladder abnormalities — namely, reduced gallbadder contractility which is believed to be due to raised progesterone concentrations, and the development of biliary sludge.
Biliary sludge contains cholesterol crystals, calcium bilirubinate granules, and very high concentrations of mucin glycoprotein, a putative nucleating agent.
Many studies suggest that sludge formation is a marker of gall stone formation.
A recent Italian study showed that during pregnancy or the puerperium 41% of women develop biliary sludge.
Progression to gall stone formation in a sizeable proportion of these subjects may be the mechanism whereby pregnancy predisposes to gall stone formation.
Early studies of the effects of oral contraceptives suggested that the pill was associated with a large increase in risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease.
Most recent studies have, however, failed to confirm this.
Scragg et al in a case-control study found that ever user of the pill was associated with an increased risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease in women younger than 29 years and a reduced risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease in older women.
We were unable to find such a relation.
Our results suggest that at most, current use of the pill is associated with only a small increase in risk of clinical gall bladder disease, which disappears after stopping the pill.
If it is not due to diagnostic suspicion bias then postulated mechanisms might include changes in gall bladder contractility associated with the progesterone content, or increased cholesterol saturation of bile due to the oestrogen content.
In summary, cigarette smoking, parity, and possibly lower social class were associated with an increased risk of symptomatic gall bladder disease in women.
The effect of smoking was most apparent in those who had never used oral contraception.
Use of the oral contraceptive pill was associated with a small increase in risk that was limited to current users.
Nerve involvement in fluid transport in the inflamed rat jejunum
Abstract
Net fluid transport was measured in denervated jejunal segments of rats infected with larvae of Nippostrongylus brasiliensis .
On days 6–9 after nematode inoculation, when the jejunal segment exhibitd macroscopic and microscopic signs of inflammation, net fluid absorption was noticeably attenuated compared with control and in eight of 26 experiments a net fluid secretion was seen.
To determine whether enteric nerves participated in the response, intravenous hexamethonium (10 mg/ kg body weight) was given or lidocaine (1% solution) was placed on the serosa of the intestinal segment.
Both drugs significantly reduced fluid secretion or increased fluid absorption.
The effect was more pronounced the lower the rate of fluid absorption or the higher the rate of fluid secretion.
The inflammatory response influenced intestinal fluid transport partly via activation of the enteric nervous system.
It was estimated that 50–60% of the change in fluid transport caused by the parasite could be ascribed to activation of intramural nervous reflexes.
The effect of hexamethonium indicates that a cholinergic synapse is present in the secretory nervous reflux activated by inflammation.
Experiments were also performed on animals on days 11–14 after infection when the nematodes had been expelled from the animal.
A large net fluid absorption was then recorded.
During the last decade evidence has been accumulating that fluid secretion in the small intestine is often evoked via stimulation of the enteric nervous system (ENS).
This was originally suggested by the work of Cassuto et al , who, in a series of reports, showed that secretion evoked by cholera toxin in anaesthetised rata and cats was mediated to a large extent via the ENS.
It was subsequently shown that this was also the case for intestinal secretion caused by the heat stable enterotoxin from Escherichia coli , certain bile salts, ricinoleic acid, serotonin, and prostaglandin E 2 (for reviews consult Lundgren et al and Jodal).
The role of the ENS in the secretory response to 5-hydroxytryptamine and prostaglandins suggested that nerves may also be involved in secretory states accompanying an inflammatory response.
This proposal was tested in rat experiments by Brunsson, who showed that the fluid secretion evoked by an invasive strain of Salmonella typhimurium (R5) was turned into absorption after giving intravenous hexamethonium or by exposing the intestinal serosa to lidocaine, a local anaesthetic.
This study was designed to investigate further the relationship between inflammation and fluid transport in the small intestine of the rat.
For this purpose rats were inoculated with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis by injecting the parasites subcutaneously.
On day 3 the nematodes reach the small intestine and on days 6–8 an inflammatory response in the jejunum is seen.
Ten to 12 days after inoculation, the worms are expelled from the small intestine and the inflammatory response fades away.
Fluid transport was measured in vivo in rats before and after expulsion of the parasite and the possible involvement of ENS in the response was tested pharmacologically.
Methods
ANIMALS
Sprague-Dawley rats (Alab AB, Stockholm, Sweden) weighing 300–400 g were given a subcutaneous injection of 600 larvae of Nippostrongylus brasiliensis in 0.5 ml saline.
Rats were housed in standardised environmental conditions (22°C, 60% humidity, light 6.00–18.00 hours).
The animals were studied on days 6–9 or 11–14 after being injected with larvae.
ANESTHESIA AND OPERATIVE PROCEDURES
Anaesthesia was induced by Mebumal (60 mg.kg -1 body weight) and maintained with chloralose (100 mg.kg -1 bw) as a bolus plus 20 mg.h -1 .
kg -1 body weight as an infusion.
A tracheotomy was performed and a tracheal cannula was inserted to maintain a free airway.
Catheters were inserted into the femoral artery and vein for blood pressure recordings and drug administration, respectively.
To prevent acidosis due to the operative trauma an infusion of a glucose-bicarbonate solution (see below) was given intra-arterially at a rate of 0.03 ml.min -1 .
A Statham pressure transducer (Model P23AC) was connected to the arterial catheter and arterial pressure was continuously recorded on a Grass polygraph.
The abdomen was opened by midline incision.
A 5 to 10 cm long segment of the jejunum was selected.
In the experiments performed on days 6–9 after injecting the larvae, the part of the jejunum with the most severe signs of inflammation was selected for the experiment.
The remainder of the small intestine and the colon were removed.
All nerves in the tissues around the superior mesenteric artery were cut, thereby accomplishing denervation of the extrinsic autonomic nervous supply to the intestinal segment.
The rat was placed on a thermistor controlled operating table.
The rat, except for its head and theopening of the tracheal cannula, was then placed in a plastic box.
In the box the humidity was high and the temperature was maintained at 35°C by a lamp outside and a thermocouple sensor inside.
The temperature of the animal was monitored continuously by a thermocouple thermometer in the mouth.
In this way body temperature was kept constant and the evaporation of water from abdominal tissues was minimised.
RECORDING OF INTESTINAL NET FLUID TRANSPORT
Net fluid transport was measured in two ways.
In some experiments net fluid transport was measured by the method originally described by Cassuto et al .
The intestinal segment, covered by a thin plastic sheet, was placed on a plastic plate specially designed for this purpose.
The distal end of the intestinal segment was connected via a plastic tube to a basin on the plate.
This allowed free passage of fluid in and out of the segment, confirmed by flushing the segment via a cannula in the proximal end.
The plastic plate was suspended 3–5 mm above the abdominal wall from a force displacement transducer (Grass FT3C).
The other method used for fluid transport measurements was similar to the one just described, the only difference being that the segment was continuously perfused at a rate of 0.1 ml.min -1 by a pump (Isamatec, Switzerland) via a closed system connecting the two ends of the segment.
The system contained a reservoir (volume 25 ml) to minimise recirculation (for details, see Jodal et al ).
Net fluid transport was considered to be equal to changes in the intestinal weight, which was continuously monitored by connecting the force transducer to a Grass polygraph.
Net fluid transport was calculated from registration periods lasting for at least 15 minutes and related to the serosal surface area measured after the experiment.
Net fluid transport was expressed as µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 serosa.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
A constant net fluid transport was recorded for 30–60 minutes.
Hexamethonium (10 mg/kg) or atropine (0.25 or 0.5 mg/kg) was injected intravenously and fluid transport was followed for another hour.
In the lidocaine experiments a 1% solution of the drug was applied to the serosal surface (0.5 mg/cm intestine).
HISTOLOGICAL PROCEDURES
A 10–15 mm long part proximal and distal to the experimental segment, as well as part of the experimental segment itself, were cut open and immersion fixed in an isotonic formaldhyde-acetic acid solution.
After dehydration in ethanol, embedding in paraffin, and sectioning, the tissue was stained for mast cells in 0.5% Toluidine blue in 0.5 M HCl.
DRUGS AND SOLUTIONS
Atropine sulphate, hexamethonium bromide, and naloxone were purchased from Sigma Chemicals, St Louis, MO.
The lidocaine solution used is one that is commercially available from Astra AB, Söderta 3lje, Sweden (Xylocain, 1%).
The intestinal mucosa was exposed to a solution with the following composition (mM): NaCl 122; KCl 3.5; KH 2 PO 4 1.2; MgCl 2 1.2; CaCl 2 2.5; NaHCO 3 25; mannitol 30.
The solution administered intra-arterially throughout the experiment contained 110 mM glucose and 40 mM NaHCO 3 .
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The Wilcoxon paired signed rank test or sign test was used when the animals served as their own controls.
Otherwise the Mann-Whitney U test was used.
Differences resulting in p values of 0.05 or less were considered significant.
Results
The intestine exhibited obvious macroscopic signs of inflammation (oedema and hyperaemia) on days 6–9 after nematode inoculation.
Moreover, many nematode larvae were seen in the intestinal lumen.
In histological specimens a significantly reduced number of mucosal mast cells was found.
In some experiments the mucosa was completely devoid of mast cells.
In the histological sections nematode larvae were also observed.
In the macroscopically normal intestine from animals infected 11–14 days before the experiment the number of mast cells was increased while the worms were no longer seen.
Net fluid transport was measured in 26 rats on days 6–9 after they had been infected with the parasites.
In nine animals the experiments were performed on days 11–14 after infection.
Since rates of fluid transport were similar, regardless of the method used for estimating fluid transport, the results from the two methods were pooled.
Figure 1 and Table I show net fluid transport measured during control conditions lasting for at least 45 minutes in rats injected with the larvae and in those not exposed to the nematode (control rats; Fig 1).
Compared with the control animals, both groups of infected rats exhibited a significantly different fluid transport.
On days 6–9 fluid transport was lower than in the control rats (p<0.01), and on days 11–14 it was significantly greater (p<0.01).
Net fluid transport on days 11–14 after infection was significantly higher than that seen on days 6–9 (p<0.0001).
In eight of 26 animals a net fluid secretion was seen on days 6–9.
In three other experiments fluid transport in the jejunum was nil.
In all experiments performed on days 11–14 a high rate of net fluid uptake was recorded.
An attempt was made to determine if fluid transport varied between days 6 and 9.
It can be seen in Table I that the average rate of fluid transport reached a minimum value of 6 µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 on day 7.
The variation between animals was so large, however, that no statistically significant difference could be shown between the observed transport rates.
To investigate whether the ENS was involved in the secretion seen on days 6–9, two types of experiments were performed.
In one series (n=9) intravenous hexamethonium (10 mg/kg) was given.
This nicotinic receptor blocker significantly influenced fluid transport in the inflamed intestines (Table II, Fig 2)— fluid absorption was increased or fluid secretion was significantly decreased in six of nine experiments (Fig 2).
A statistically significant increase in fluid uptake was also caused by hexamethonium in experiments on control rats not exposed to the nematode, fluid absorption increasing from 48 (15) to 71 (16) µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 (mean (SEM); n=10).
In another type of experiment performed on days 6–9 after inoculation of the animals with the parasite, the serosal surface of the inflamed segment was exposed to lidocaine (1% solution).
Experiments were performed on 11 rats.
In eight animals lidocaine decreased fluid secretion or increased fluid absorption (Table II, Fig 2).
In control rats lidocaine increased the fluid uptake from 74 (11) to 93 (16) µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 serosal surface (n=5).
This effect was not statistically significant.
The quantitative effects of the drugs were related to the rate of fluid secretion or absorption.
The drug was most effective when fluid absorption was low or when the intestine was secreting, as is apparent in Figure 2, in which the change in fluid transport evoked by hexamethonium or lidocaine is plotted versus the rate of net fluid transport recorded before giving the drug.
The correlation coeficient between these two variables was 0.72 (p<0.01).
In four experiments performed on days 6–9 after inoculation, intravenous atropine (0.25 or 0.50 mg.kg -1 ) was gven.
No effect on fluid transport was seen.
A high rate of fluid absorption was recorded on days 11–14.
Histological investigation of the intestine did not show any morphological features that could explain the physiological observations.
Discussion
Larvae of Nippostrongylus brasiliensis injected into the skin migrate to the lungs and move from the third to the fourth stage of their life cycle.
Via the trachea and the oesophagus, they eventually reach the small intestine.
In the upper half of the jejunum they cause a noticeable inflammatory response.
Around day 12 the worms are eliminated from the host.
In this report we investigated fluid transport in rats on days 6–9 or 11–14 after having been injected with the larvae.
There were obvious macroscopic and microscopic signs of inflammation on days 6–9.
A few days later inflammation had diminished and in some animals the jejunum looked macroscopically normal.
A noticeable reduction in fluid uptake or an apparent fluid secretion was seen on days 6–9, although the recorded secretion was not as large as one would expect from the rather pronounced inflammatory response in the jejunal segment that was investigated.
In contrast, a pronounced net fluid absorption was recorded on days 11–14.
These findings agree with results reported by other researchers investigating fluid transport in vivo.
Symon studied net fluid and sodium transport in the jejunal segment with the most severe inflammation 10 days after inoculation.
He found that fluid and electrolyte absorption had become secretion.
Similarly, Scofield, studying the entire small intestine, reported decreased fluid absorption on day 10.
Nolla et al made a more thorough analysis, determining fluid transport on days 4, 6, 9, and 13.
On days 6 and 9 fluid transport was significantly decreased in the jejunum compared with control values whereas this was not the case on days 13 and 19 after inoculation.
Several reports also suggest that the absorption of other nutrients than water, such as hexoses, amino acids, and fatty acids, are decreased in the inflamed jejunum.
Observations made in vitro on stripped intestinal preparations generally agree with the present findings.
Perdue et al measured basic electrical parameters in the rat small intestine in Ussing chambers during experimental conditions similar to those in this study.
The short circuit current (SCC) rose significantly from day 4 to 7 after inoculation, reaching a value twice that of control in the face of an unchanged electrical conductance.
Radioactive tracer studies suggested that the increase in the SCC reflected a change in sodium and chloride transport from net absorption to net secretion.
On day 21 the monitored electrical parameters were back to control values.
Taken together the results from the in vivo and in vitro studies summarised above clearly indicate that the epithelial absorptive capacity of the rat jejunum is appreciably reduced during the days preceding the expulsion of the parasite.
Castro et al used another parasite,Trichinella spiralis , to study the effect of intraluminal parasites on intestinal functions, including fluid and electrolyte transport in vivo.
In agreement with our findings, they showed that the rat intestine secreted fluid on day 5 after parasite administration.
On day 30, when the nematodes had been expelled from the gut, fluid transport was back to control values.
The results of this study clearly suggest that the decreased fluid transport seen in the jejunum on days 6–9 after inoculation was at least partly mediated via activation of the enteric nervous system.
This conclusion is based on the experimental results obtained with hexamethonium and lidocaine.
The relative extent of involvement of the enteric nerves is difficult to ascertain since for technical reasons no control fluid absorption was recorded in the present animals before exposure to the parasite.
A rough calculation can, however, be made based on the rate of fluid absorption observed in the control rats.
It was about 80 µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 after administration of hexamethonium or lidocaine.
From the results reported in Table II and the correlation in Figure 2, it can be calculated that about 50% of the observed change in fluid transport was mediated via the ENS, when net fluid absorption had stopped.
With increasing rates of secretion an increasing fraction of the change in fluid transport caused by the nematode was mediated by nervous mechanisms.
Mucosal mast cells in the rat intestine are drastically affected by an infection with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis .
A reduction in number occurs as the larvae infect the intestine.
After about a week a dramatic increase in numbers occurs parallel to the elimination of the nematode.
During the initial phase, newly formed mast cell components such as histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes may be released.
These substances are all known to be mediators of inflammation and are at least partly responsible for the macroscopically obvious inflammation of the intestine on days 6–9.
They may also participate in the activation of the enteric nervous system.
Brunsson studied the effect of an acute inflammatory response in an experimental model using an invasive strain (R5) of Salmonella typhimurium .
Net fluid transport was measured 18 hours after inoculating the intestine with the bacterial strain.
A net fluid secretion was observed in almost all experiments, secretion averaging 99 µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 serosa in 26 experiments.
This secretion is significantly higher than that observed in the present study on days 6–9 (Table I).
In Brunssons's experiments, hexamethonium often turned fluid secretion into fluid absorption.
Average fluid transport was 48 and -15 (secretion) µl.min -1 .100 cm -2 after giving hexamethonium (n=11) and lidocaine (n=8), respectively.
These observations suggest that an acute bacterial inflammation evokes a more pronounced intestinal net fluid secretion than the inflammation caused by Nippostrongylus brasiliensis .
Using the same value for control absorption as above one can estimate that hexamethonium blocked about 85% and lidocaine about 50% of the secretion caused by the bacterium.
To summarise, the observations reported in this study and in that of Brunsson clearly indicate that ENS plays an important role in the fluid secretion seen in intestinal inflammation.
This is not surprising considering that most inflammatory mediators have been shown to be able to stimulate enteric nerves.
We showed this in vivo for serotonin and prostaglandins.
A large number of in vitro studies in Ussing chambers have shown that many compounds released by inflammatory cells (eg monokines, various enzymes, and free radicals) activate enteric nerves either directly or via the formation of prostaglandins (for a recent review, see Hinterleiterner and Powell).
In fact, the ENS can be looked upon as an amplification system for the inflammatory response.
The physiological and pharmacological studies of ENS indicate that there are at least two types of reflexes in this part of the autonomic nervous system.
There exist reflex arches confined to the gastrointestinal wall (‘intramural reflexes’).
They often contain a cholinergic synapse and can therefore be shown with the use of a nicotinic receptor blocker.
Experimental evidence also exists for the presence of axon reflexes in the alimentary canal.
Capsaicin is often used as a pharmacological tool to study such a type of reflex.
The results of Brunsson's study and the present one indicate that intramural reflex(es) are involved in the fluid secretion caused by intestinal inflammation.
To what extent axon reflexes are involved cannot be judged from the results of the present study.
The rate of fluid transport observed on days 11–14 was approximately twice as high as that seen in control animals.
A similar observation was made by Scofield who studied fluid transport in vitro.
In a histological investigation of the intestine we were unable to show any morphological changes that could explain the physiological observations.
Our earlier studies of fluid transport during various physiological and pathophysiological circumstances suggest that variations of fluid transport are mainly caused by changes in fluid secretion from the crypts.
Thus, the observations made on days 11–14 may be explaiend by a noticeable inhibition of crypt fluid secretion caused by an unknown mechanism.