

INSIDE FANTASTIC GIGANTIC PIXIES POSTER
TAKING THE MANCS TO THE YANKS
THE CHARLATANS CROSS THE GREAT DIVIDE
NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN WOULD YOU HAVE SEX WITH THIS BAND?
Who's that old tosser at the bar?
JOHN PEEL
THE CURE ‘Mixed Up’ LP reviewed
FIRST REPORTS
ACADEMY ALL-STARS
Mac, Edwyn, Roddy and Mary Chain support the Cocteaus!
THE FINAL show of the Cocteau Twins' UK tour on Sunday night turned into an all-star bash, with support slots from Jim and William Reid of The Jesus And Mary Chain, Edwyn Collins, Aztec Camera's Roddy Frame and megamouth Ian McCulloch.
The Mary Chain got things off to a low-key start with tasteful semi-acoustic versions of three songs and were followed by Collins in an extremely silly hat (see above) who chundered through his first solo single, ‘Don't Shilly Shally’.
With the arrival of Roddy Frame (‘Are you ready to rock like a bitch, Roddy?’ quoth Collins), the duo launched into a raggedly brilliant reading of Orange Juice's ‘Consolation Prize’.
The pair seem made for a comedy double act should their singing careers ever falter.
Fame was joined by the big Mac who, fag in hand, warbled his way through ‘Candleland’ and, for the climax, Collins returned for a sensitive run through the Velvet's ‘Pale Blue Eyes’.
Apparently no one had told McCulloch what key the rest were playing in but, technical matters aside, the whole thing was lapped up keenly by the crowd.
Rumoured appearances from The Breeders and Mick Jones failed to materialise but then you can't have everything.
CRAZYHEAD are out on the road to promote their new LP ‘Some Kind Of Fever’, released next week.
This week they play Nottingham Venus on November 8 then Manchester University 8, Leeds Duchess of York 10, Walsall Junction Ten 11, Bristol Bierkeller 12, York University 16, Newcastle Riverside 17, London Charing Cross Road Marquee 20, Norwich Waterfront 23, Dundee Fat Sams 25, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 26, Edinburgh Venue 28 and Aberdeen Caesar's Palace 29.
Support on all dates will be Goat, currently in the studio recording the follow up to their Jamie Stewart produced mini-album ‘As You Like It’.
GRANT HART, former Hü Dü drummer, has signed a deal with Rough Trade for his new band Nova Mob.
Grant released his first solo LP ‘Intolerance’ on SST records last year and has just completed the follow up entitled ‘The Last Days of Pompeii’, due for release early next year.
THE THIRD ICA Rox Week at The ICA in London's Mall kicks off next month with The Boo Radleys and The Transmitters on December 3, The Real People and Swirl 4, Whycliffe and If 5, Fatima Mansions and Milk 6 and Echo And The bunnymen 7 and 8, support to be confirmed.
Tickets are –6 (£5 for UB40s and students) plus £1 membership to the ICA.
GUMBALL, the new band formed by ex-Dinosaur Jr and BALL man Don Fleming and who support Teenage Fanclub on their UK tour, release their debut EP on Paperhouse records this week.
The tracks are ‘All The Time’ backed with ‘Yellow Pants’, ‘Gettysburg’and ‘Gettysburg (Twister Mix)’.
Also in the band are Jay Spiegel on drums and Eric Vermillion on bass.
Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth also plays keyboards on one track.
THE RAMONES play a one-off date at London Brixton Academy on December 8 as part of their European tour.
This is the only date they are going to play in the UK and tickets are now on sale.
THAT PETROL EMOTION, recent Sounds cover stars New Fast automatic Daffodils, Marc Almond and Bass-O-Matic are amongst the acts taking part in the Life Serenaids event at London's Brixton Academy this month.
These are three gigs leading up to World AIDS day on December 1, to raise funds for the Terrence Higgins Trust, the organisation that supports people who are HIV positive and people with AIDS-related illnesses.
The line-up is Marc Almond, Everything But The Girl, Carmel, Jools Holland and Working Week on November 28, That Petrol Emotion, Billy Bragg, Cabaret Voltaire, New Fast Automatic Daffodils and Stereo MCs 29, The Adventures Of Stevie V, Bass-O-Matic, Inner City, MC Kinky and to DJs 30.
Tickets are £10 per night, excluding booking fee, from the Academy Box Office.
There is a special hotline on 071 734 8932.
SWIRL, the Manchester-based band who recently supported New FADs on their dates, headline at Aylesbury Civic Hall November 9, Brighton Richmond 11, Bath Moles 13, Norwich Waterfront 14, London Islington Powerhaus 16, Liverpool McMillans 28, Blackpool Jenks 30, Manchester International One December 14.
They also play the London Mall ICA Rock Week on December 4.
OCEAN COLOUR SCENE undertake their first headlining UK tour, starting at Windsor Psykik Dancehall on November 8 then Portsmouth Ritzy's 15, Canterbury Kent University 16, London Ladbroke Grove Subterania 17, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 22, Edinburgh Venue 23, Newcastle University 24, Manchester Polytechnic 27, Birmingham Burberries 27, Wolverhampton Polytechnic 28, St. Helen's Citadel 29, Norwich Waterfront 30, Leeds Warehouse December 3, London Ladbroke Grove Subterania 4, Sheffield Leadmill 5, Bristol University 7 and Bedford Esquires 8.
THE LEVELLERS are out on the road (there's a surprise!) right up until Christmas.
The dates start at York Warehouse on November 5 then move on to Dundee University 7, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 9, Middlesbrough  Teesside Polytechnic 10, Cambridge Junction Ten 12, Birmingham University 13, Derby Dial 14, Manchester Boardwalk 15, Bradford Queen's Hall 16, Hull Adelphi 17, Nottingham Polytechnic 18, Doncaster Jug 20, Coventry Keele University 21, Sheffield Polytechnic 22, Leicester Princess Charlotte 23, Stoke Place 26, Southampton Raffles 27, London Charing Cross Road Marquee 30, Harlow Square December 1, Bristol Fleece & Firkin 2, London Charing Cross Road Marquee 14, Brighton Zap 16 and London Harlesden Mean Fiddler Acoustic Room 21.
THE BEAT CLUB, a Miami duo, release their debut single ‘Security’, on Rob's Records next week, the label launched by and named after New Order manager Rob Gretton.
The single was a big acid hit in 1988 and was played in clubs here as an import.
It has been radically remixed by Bernard Sumner, who also supplies vocals and is backed with ‘Security Dub’ and ‘Rebel Sun’.
An LP from The Beat Club will follow in January.
High man hoarse
Riot follows at Newcastle gig
THE HIGH were forced to cancel dates last week at Manchester Hacienda, Kent University and Portsmouth Polytechnic after singer John Matthews (above left) contracted flu and was unable to sing.
The singer was unable to complete the show at Newcastle University on October 28, which resulted in a mini-riot.
A spokesman for the band said: ‘He managed the first number, but had to leave the stage, almost collapsing, halfway through the second song.
The remaining band members stayed on stage to perform a 15-minute instrumental version of ‘Bombay Mix’, a huge live favourite, which brought the house down…literally!’
The High then went offstage.
They planned to go back on and complete their set with vocals from Cressa of The Stone Roses, who had been on the whole tour and knew most of the songs.
But in the sold out hall, a full scale riot had broken out and police who had been called did not allow the band to go back onstage.
There were six arrests and a number of injuries.
The Manchester date has already been rescheduled for December 3 — the other dates are not yet confirmed but will be around this time.
Existing tickets are valid for the new dates although refunds can be obtained if required form point of purchase.
HAVANA 3AM, the band formed by ex-Clash man Paul Simenon, will release their eponymous debut LP, which was recorded in Tokyo in only four weeks, on IRS Records at the beginning of next year.
The band, who've been gigging only sporadically, will play at least one London show before the end of November.
ROCKY ERICKSON is the subject of a tribute LP due for imminent release on Fire US.
The LP will feature versions of the former 13th Floor Elevators singer's songs by The Jesus And Mary Chain, Primal Scream, Bongwater and REM among others.
Rocky himself, currently in a Texas mental hospital, will be released to play at the launch party!
POP FANS BOTTLE VEGA
ALAN VEGA was bottled offstage at London Kentish Town Town And Country Club last Saturday, November 3, where the ex-Suicide cult hero was playing as special guest of Pop Will Eat Itself.
According to eyewitnesses, as soon as Vega came onstage, some of the crowd started throwing glasses at him.
The venue only serves drinks in plastic glasses, but almost a full pint of beer hit Vega on the head.
Vega went ahead with his set, playing material from his recent ‘Deuce Avenue’ album, while the audience began to shower him with beer and spit.
The audience began chanting ‘You fat bastard!’ to which Vega responded, ‘Suck my dick!’.
Eventually, someone broke one of the windows in the lavatory and hurled a large piece of glass onstage at Vega and after only three songs, he left the stage.
The following night, Vega was prepared to go on but it was decided that since the crowd seemed even more hyper than the previous evening, the risk of damage to singer and gear was felt to be too great.
He was eventually paid off — and apparently he got more money for not appearing than playing his set.
This is very much in the Vega/Suicide tradition: in 1978 when Suicide supported The Clash on their UK tour, there were incredible scenes of carnage as the band were attacked by meathead Clash fans with bottles and fireworks.
It seems that the more things are different, the more they stay the same!
Vega admitted that it was reminiscent of those halcyon days except that‘compared to the Clash audience, these guys are just a stream of piss!’
‘I actually found the crowd quite exciting,’ Vega told Sounds, ‘It's just a shame that the audience, the promoters and Pop Should Eat Itself (sic) couldn't handle me!’
AZTEC CAMERA, currently riding high in the charts with ‘Good Morning Britain’, will play a one-off date at London Brixton Academy on December 20 — the last date of their current world tour.
They are presently in the US.
SWERVEDRIVER release their second EP through Creation Records next week.
The tracks are ‘Rave Down’, ‘She's Beside Herself’ and ‘Zedhead’.
The band play gigs in support of the release at Middlesbrough Polytechnic on November 8 then Edinburgh University 9, Glasgow College 10, Aberdeen Caesar's Palace 11, Stirling University 12, Stoke Freetown 21, Leeds Duchess of York 22, Northampton Irish Centre 23, Brighton University 24, Norwich Waterfront 26, Nottingham Venus 28, Rayleigh Pink Toothbrush 29 and Liverpool Planet X 30.
There will be further dates in December including one at London Malet Street ULU on December 13.
THE HINDU LOVE GODS, the collaboration between REM members Mike Mills, Bill Berry and peter Buck, with vocals from Warren Zevon, release their first single, a cover of Prince's ‘Raspberry Beret’, on November 12.
The other tracks are two covers of classic clues songs: Willie Dixon's ‘Wang Dang Doodle’ on the 7-inch and, on the 12-inch and CD, Muddy Waters' ‘Mannish Boy’.
There will be an album from the band, full of unlikely cover versions.
LOOP are out on the road throughout December.
The band, who have been supporting Jane's Addiction in Europe, kick off at Bradford University on December 3 then Glasgow Mayfair 4, Manchester International Two 5, Norwich UAE 7, Coventry Tic Toc 8, Bristol Bierkeller 9, Dublin McGonagles 14, and Belfast Connor Hall 15.
There will also be a London gig at the Kilburn National, although a date has not been confirmed.
Support will be from Sweet Tooth and Of Cabbages And Kings.
DONOVAN the legendary singer-songwriter who will support Happy Mondays on their UK dates, releases a new LP on November 19.
‘Rising’, on Permanent, was recorded live and features all his best known sons plus several new tracks.
CARTER FOR CHRISTMAS
CARTER THE UNSTOPPABLE SEX MACHINE, currently recording their second LP in South London (provisionally entitled ‘4 Weeks At The Betty Ford’), have set up a Christmas mini-tour.
Dates are Gloucester Guildhall Arts Centre December 1, Birmingham University 7, Bolton College Of Higher Education 8, Hull New Adelphi 9, Cambridge Junction 10, Oxford Co-Op Hall 12, London Kentish Town Town And Country Club 14, Windsor Old Trout 20 and Harlow Square 22.
There will be a different support band every night and everyone attending the London Town And Country Club gig will get a free 7-inch single — featuring an as yet undecided live track from the Anytime, Anyplace, Anywhere tour and a track from the new LP, due for release in early 1991.
THE FARM SET OUT ON ‘CLUB-STYLE’ FORAYS
The farm set out on a series of club-style UK shows in the wake of their successful September gig at London's Town and Country Club, which featured DJs Dean Thatcher and Rocky & Diesel.
The farm had lined up a series of dates last month, but cancelled them due to recording commitments.
They also wanted to get away from the idea of the traditional rock tour.
The new dates kick off at Nottingham Rock City on November 28, with guest DJs Terry Farley and Phil Perry, then go on to Liverpool Royal Court (with Farley and Dean Thatcher) December 1, Brighton The Event (with Perry and Justin King) 3, Manchester International Two (with Thatcher and Farley) 15, Glasgow Plaza (with Slam DJs and Rockey & Diesel) 18, London Charing Cross Road Astoria 20 (with Farley, Andrew Weatherall, Thatcher, Rockey & Diesel, Glen Gunner and Stripey), winding up at Liverpool Royal Court, with Phil Perry, Justin Robinson and Greg Fenton, on December 21.
Support bands have yet to be confirmed, but Deep Joyn will join the band for most dates.
The Farm are up to‘Groovey Train’ with Terry Farley and their mate Suggs.
Roses sign for £5m?
‘Bollocks’!
THE STONE ROSES have not signed to CBS Records, despite rumours currently doing the rounds in Manchester that they have signed for £5 million.
A CBS spokesman did not exactly say ‘Bollocks!’ when we phoned to ask him if it was true — but his denial implied that he reckoned our enquiry was testicular in the extreme.
Meanwhile, spokesmen for The Stone Roses, including their management, denied that the band had even left Silvertone, and said that they are currently talking to a number of record companies.
Any attempted departure from Silvertone, anyway, is likely to start court battles over the band.
The price on the Roses' heads seems to swell almost daily.
In fact, one rumour sweeping a London pub last week suggested that Free Lunch Records, home of Ruptured Dog, had offered £5m to each member of the band.
But later the story was found to be bollocks.
CHAPTERHOUSE release their second EP on Dedicated records next week.
The ‘unburst EP’ has three self-penned tracks and a cover of The Beatles' ‘Rain’.
The others are ‘Something More’, Satin Safe’ and ‘Feel The Same’.
Chapterhouse play live dates at London Camden Palace November 13, London Islington Powerhaus 22, Portsmouth Ritzy 24, Wolverhampton Irish Centre December 7, Reading University 8 and Windsor Psykik Dancehall 19.
THE FAMILY CAT are on tour this week starting at Bournemouth Polytechnic on November 9 then Southend Esplanade 11, Canterbury University of Kent 12, Kidderminster Market Tavern 13, Swansea University 14, London Malet Street ULU 16, Gloucester Arts Centre 17, Bristol Fleece And Firkin 18, Dudley JBs 23, Hatfield Polytechnic 24, Coventry Tic Toc 27 and Newcastle Riverside 28.
SENSELESS THINGS return to the UK from Japan to play seven dates, their last of this year.
They start at Bournemouth Polytechnic on November 16, Canterbury University Of Kent 27, Sheffield University 28, Brunel University 29, Cardiff University 30, Warwick University December 1 and Surrey University 2.
The band will start recording their second LP in December.
SHACK play headlining UK gigs at Leeds Duchess Of York on November 15 then Liverpool Temptation Two 17, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 19, Edinburgh Venue 21, Manchester Boardwalk 22 and Cardiff Hanging Gardens 23.
The band also play European dates in Europe as well as joining The Farm, The La's and the Boo Radleys in Paris.
WHO IS DARK MAN?
FIND OUT NOVEMBER 16.
CENSORSHIP CORNER
Cancer and KMFDM record sleeves banned in Germany and US
THE MORAL guardians of Germany and America have been active this week ensuring that youth are not corrupted by ‘obscene’ record sleeves.
KMFDM, a German band, have had their sleeve banned in America — while Cancer, a UK thrash outfit, have had their cover banned in Germany.
KMFDM's recent LP, ‘Naive’, featured cover art by renowned UK design team Brute and has been withdrawn from sale in Sound Warehouse, one of America's largest record chains with over 1,000 shops coast to coast.
Sound Warehouses' argument is that the sleeve is a depiction of rape.
But according to Brute: ‘The scene is depicting a consenting couple making love on a deserted beach while in the distance a nuclear bomb is exploding.
The look of horror on the girl's face is because she has seen this over her boyfriend's shoulder.
KMFDM singer En Esch said: ‘You can buy crack in the streets and guns over the counter, but you can't buy our record.
The funny thing is that more kids will now want to buy the record from the stores where it is actually available.
The moral majority are just defeating their own aims.
Censorship only exposes the offending article to a greater public.
We should be thankful!’
Meanwhile, UK band Cancer have been victims of the dreaded Bundesprüstelle für jugendgefährende Schriften — or National Body For Censorship Of Work Dangerous To Youth.
The committee vets material imported into Germany.
They have deemed that the sleeve of their debut LP, ‘To The Gory End’ is unsuitable for sale there — which in effect means that the album has been banned for sale throughout Germany.
Interestingly, the body is based in Bonn and is not a hangover from the days of the Honnecker regime in East Germany.
In a statement to Vinyl Solution, the band's record company, the committee said that the record sleeve, which features a head with a knife sticking out of it, was unsuitable for sale in German record shops.
‘This record is Heavy Metal, which youngsters in particular listen to.
We go along with the theory that younger listeners will identify themselves with the group Cancer.
Through this, they may begin to see violent actions against other people as being good.
‘Exposure to human suffering, bloodshed and cruelty may, in the long germ, stunt children's sensitivity to violence inflicted on others in real life.’
Cancer responded by saying that they were disappointed because they buy all their hardcore gore videos from Germany, one of the only countries where such material is available uncensored.
Previously, Kiss have had to print different sleeve for the German market because their distinctive logo was felt to be too close to the nazi SS emblem.
KMFDM play dates at Liverpool Planet X on November 7, then Edinburgh Venue 8, Hull Adelphi 9, Yorkshire Hebden Bridge Trade Club 10, London Ladbroke Grove Subterania 11 and Manchester Boardwalk 12.
Support was supposed to have come from the labelmates Thrill Kill Kult, but they pulled out following an incident in Germany, when Kult singer Frantic had had his leg broken in three places after being attacked onstage by ‘neo-nazi’ thugs in the audience.
MILK have released their debut single, ‘Tag’, on Eve Records.
The band, who hail from exotic Camden in North London, have several dates lined up this month at London Kilburn Hibernian Club (supporting Cud and Beef) November 15 then London West Hampstead Moonlight Club 16, Hull Adelphi 23.
They then support Swervedriver on all their dates.
The other tracks on the single are ‘Honey Blonde’ and ‘Wings’.
FAITH OVER REASON, currently supporting Lush on their UK dates, will play headlining dates at Nottingham Polytechnic November 12 then Sheffield University 14, Birmingham Barrel Organ 15, Blackpool Jenks 16, Oxford Fire Station 22, Bath Moles 23, Leicester Polytechnic 26, Manchester Soundgarden 28, Leeds Duchess Of York 29, Edinburgh Calton Studio 30, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut December 1 and London Houghton Street LSE 8.
HORSE LATITUDES, who released their debut LP ‘September Songs’ on Cherry Red Records last month, play a UK tour to promote it at Dudley JBs November 8, London Charing Cross Road Marquee 14, Leicester Princess Charlotte 15, Kent University 17, Nottingham Venus 20 and London Camden Falcon 21.
RUPTURED DOG play the London West Hampstead Moonlight Club (with old punk troupers Chelsea) on November 8 and Kingston Grey Horse 28.
The fantastically-named band have just completed recording their debut LP ‘Human Zoo’ although no release date has yet been set.
TEST DEPT were forced to cancel their gig at London Malet Street ULU on October 31 due to illness.
The band were involved in a car accident and while they had thought that there were no casualties, their sound man subsequently suffered from dizzy spells and was unable to work the night of the gig.
Due to the specialist nature of Test Dept shows, he was unable to be replaced.
Tickets are refundable at point of purchase and the gig will be reschedule in the new year.
The new Test Dept 12-inch and CD single, ‘Pax Americana’, is released next week on Ministry Of Power.
The new LP, ‘Pax Britannica’, will be released next year.
INTERNATIONAL RESQUE have added dates to their tour at Stoke-On-Trent Freetime on November 7, Winchester School Of Art 8, Kidderminster Market Tavern 22 and Oxford Mansfield College 30.
The band have just released their second single, ‘So Way Down’, on Groovy Tunes Records.
THE BRILLIANT CORNERS have added three dates to their tour, at Birmingham St Annes Centre on November 15, Bath Pavilion (with The Moonflowers) 22 and Harrogate (venue tbc) 29.
THE BLUEBIRDS release a new EP, ‘Three Women’, on Dirge next week.
Tracks are ‘Highway’, ‘Valen Valen’ and ‘Woman’.
The band have recorded ‘Just Like tom Thumb's Blues’ for Imaginary's Bob Dylan compilation and play Newcastle Polytechnic November 12, London Camden Falcon 14, Farnham Art College 15, Bath Players 20, Feltham Assembly Hall 23, London Covent Garden Rock Garden 28 and Windsor Old Trout December 4.
World Of Twist take a trip
WORLD OF TWIST release their debut single, ‘The Storm’, on Circa Records next week.
Already tipped as the next major band to emerge from the North West, they play Cambridge Junction on November 26, then Leeds Warehouse 27, Newcastle Riverside 28, Dundee Bar Chevrolet 29, Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 30, Norwich Waterfront December 5, Portsmouth Polytechnic 7, Sheffield Leadmill 8, Liverpool Polytechnic 9 and London Ladbroke Grove Subterania 10.
VARIOUS the ever popular and prolific band, release ‘Dancemasters Volume One’, the first in a series of 20 dance tracks on a double LP from CBS/Epic records.
The first volume, out on November 12, includes Ben Liebrand, The Chimes, LL Cool J, Public Enemy and 3rd Bass.
There will also be a video compilation featuring selected tracks under the title Dancemasters Plus: The Video Mixes out at the same time.
MICA PARIS releases the second single from her new 4th and Broadway LP ‘Contribution’.
‘South Of The River’ was produced by Camus & Andres, two New Yorkers who produced most of the album.
Mica has been touring Europe with fellow artists Aswad and Billy Ocean.
She also appeared at the London Hilton hotel benefit for SCAR, an organisation dedicated to researching Sickle Cell Anaemia.
SCIENTIST releases the follow-up to dance hit ‘The Exorcist’ on November 19 on the Kickin label.
‘The Buzz’ is a heavy techno track, already being played widely as a white label, from the man currently establishing himself as a major techno start thanks to his live performances as well as recorded releases.
Scientist also features on a head to head compilation of Kickin and Vinyl Solution acts, including Eon, Bizarre Inc and Depth Charge, among others.
SOHO will have their ‘Hippy Chick’ single re-released in the near future following their success in the US.
The single entered the Billboard charts at number 27 and is number one on the 12-inch singles charts.
The single was originally on independent label Savage and will be reissued on a major.
THE SINDECUT release their debut LP, ‘Changing The Scenery’, on Virgin records next week, November 12.
The band, who have just finished a tour supporting Soul II Soul are currently playing PAs around the county at Bradford Phase II on November 12 then the Blackpool Soul Weekender 23–25.
ELECTRIBE 101 release their new single ‘Inside Out’ on November 12 through Phonogram.
It's a cover of the song written by mad Scotsman Jesse Rae which was a hit for Odyssey.
The B-side is a new Electribe 101 song.
‘Mummy I'm Sick, I'm Underwater’ with an anti-pop mix of the A-side on the 12-inch along with‘Electribal Memories’.
DEEP JOY have an Andrew Weatherall remix of their single ‘Fall’ out on Braniak.
Musically, they fall between jazz-funk and House beats.
See them live with Weatherall on the decks at London's Camden Dingwalls November 9 and Wardour Street Wag 19.
The support The Farm on their December tour.
RENEGADE SOUNDWAVE release a single from their ‘In Dub’ LP called ‘Thunder II’on Mute records next week.
The single is already big in the clubs and has been remixed by the band.
They sample themselves as well as the Sex Pistols.
Out on all formats, other tracks are ‘Thunder’, ‘Manphibian’ and ‘Mash Up’.
DOUBLE TROUBLE'S COLLECTIVE EFFORT release a stonkin' new cover of Kool & The Gang's ‘Celebrate’ on the Desire label on November 19.
Double Trouble are Leigh Guest and Michael Menson, recently in the charts with their reworking of ‘Love Don't Live Here Anymore’.
LL COOL J releases a new single on Def Jam records next week called ‘Around The Way Girl’, the second to be taken from his recent album.
The track is backed with the LP title track ‘Mama Said Knock You Out’.
Cool J makes his acting debut next year in a film with Michael J Fox in which both play ‘streetwise’ detectives.
MADONNA HITS ALBUM
25 tracks and pair of fat lips to boot
MADONNA releases here long-awaited greatest hits LP next week on WEA records.
‘The Immaculate Collection’ is a double set of 25 tracks including the forthcoming single, ‘Justify My Love’and ‘Rescue Me’.
The full tracklisting is: ‘Holiday’, ‘Lucky Star’, ‘Borderline’, ‘Like A virgin’, ‘Material Girl’, Crazy For You’, ‘Into The Groove’, ‘Live To Tell’, ‘Rescue Me’, ‘Papa Don't Preach’, ‘Open Your Heart’, ‘La Isla Bonita’, ‘Like A Prayer’, ‘Express Yourself’, ‘Cherish’, ‘Vogue’ and ‘Justify My Love’(co-written by and featuring Lenny Kravitz).
All tracks have been specially remixed in Q-Sound, a revolutionary technique which supposedly gives a quadraphonic effect from two stereo speakers and is one of the first ever releases to use this technique.
You don't need special equipment to hear the effect, so it should provide the same sensaround sound on your crappy hi fi as it would on an expensive job.
70 80 90 DECADE REACTION WHAT HAPPENED THIS WEEK IN 1980
On the cover this week is Jimbo Kerr, lead singer with rising starts Simple Minds, whom we declare to be ‘serious dance music’.
His picture is reproduced in a stunning dot pattern which introduces cerebral haemorrhage if looked at from a range of less than ten yards.
And talking of cerebral haemorrhage, Jefferson Starship founder Paul Kantner is recovering from one in an LA hospital.
Doctors pronounce his condition ‘extremely serious but no longer dangerous’.
Other big news involves a recent World In Action TV exposé on chart hyping.
The record industry watchdog body, the BPI, has compiled a report on the matter but has been accused of ‘whitewash’ by its own members, the record companies!
‘The BPI is a joke.
We're sick of the whitewash and the face,’ says a spokesman for Rod Stewart's label, Riva.
And the managing director of RSO storms: ‘We're a laughing stock.
Everyone's laughing at us.’
The Cockney Rejects, peaceful chaps of the terraces, have had to cancel the rest of their tour due to the threat of violence at the gigs.
At one show a ‘posse’ of 400 kids were waiting outside to ‘get’the band and one of their roadies was attacked by a youth with a knife.
Meanwhile guitarist Micky Geggus is due in court on assault charges.
Insiders reckon the group have been ‘hoisted by their own petard’.
Women's lib protestors disrupted a gig by Splodgenessabounds last week in Sheffield, distributing a leaflet entitled ‘Sexism Abounds’.
It seems the fems had been incensed by the (untrue) revelation on a local radio show that the band employed a stripper onstage.
But even when they found out this was a pack of lies, they decided to go ahead with their protest — this time on the basis of stories in the Daily Star alleging that group member Baby Greensleeves practised occasional oral sex onstage with Splodge leader Max.
But, after inconclusive barracking between stage and crowd, Max set the record straight by proclaiming ‘If you  fucking dykes wanna be treated as men you can take a punch in the mouth as well,’ before ‘walloping’one of the demonstrators.
Infa-Riot, ‘new punk’ superstars, played the humble Pied bull in Islington last week but attacked a crowd including Johnny Rotten and Arsenal player Dave Smith.
Lydon was reported to be impressed.
We interview Dennis Waterman, star of the Minder TV show and now recording artiste extraordinaire.
‘I never wanted to be the British equivalent of David Soul,’ says Den.
And he isn't.
We also provide a guide to Minder-speak, which has become something of a fad.
Samples: altar job = wedding, to drop a bollock = to make a mistake, a nice bit of Tom = valuable jewellery.
And so on.
The Chords, latest mod revivalists, are acclaimed ‘the best young band in Britain’ in our feature on the band.
We go on the road with The Cure, who have just released their second album, ‘Seventeen Seconds’.
Robert Smith, pictured in leather jacket and spiky hair, mumbles: ‘I'm still not sure what people make of us.’
Single Of the Week goes to hoary old pubber John Otway for his silly rendition of ‘Green, Green Grass Of Home’.
‘The man is a genius,’ opines reviewer Robbi Millar.
Other notable releases in a so-so week are the debut by The Stray Cats, ‘Runaway Boys’, plus merry jingles from Throbbing Gristle and Devo — and the very first record by The Sisters of Mercy, ‘The Damage Done’.
Apparently it's crap.
Simple Minds are playing Sheffield Poly and we go down to meet them.
It's something of a comedown for the band who've just had their first taste of the big time supporting Peter Gabriel in Europe.
Prophetically, our man in the long mac says: ‘There's no message, no manifesto, no call to arms (yet).’
Hmm.
It's all go on the albums front, with a hearty ***** for both the Mo-Dettes' ‘The Story So Far’ and Adam And The Ants' epic ‘Kings Of The Wild Frontier’.
‘Wanna Buy A Bridge’, an enigmatically titled Rough Trade compilation from the States, gets **** along with Yellow's ‘Solid Pleasure’.
Talking Heads and The Beat are caught live in LA while cover stars Simple Minds at London's Lyceum create a ‘rich, unnerving sound’ according to our chap.
But both The Specials and The Teardrop Explodes are disappointing and the Banshees in Bristol elicit the headline ‘Snoozy Sioux’.
Oh dear.
The letters page contains a plea from R Scott of Doncaster: ‘I am writing to complain about the appalling lack of sexism in Sounds.’
Hopefully R Scott is one of a dying breed.
Bizzerk, By Prize Moron
DOONICAN TO SUPPORT MONDAYS!?!
Mad Manc group could revive career of ‘chunky-knit superman’
Bizzerk exclusive by PETER PORKER and BRIAN THE SNAIL
Trendy followers of top Manchester rockers HAPPY MONDAYS were shocked yesterday when the band — famed for their lose-fitting clothing and ‘drop-out’ attitude — announced they were set to tour with '60s ‘straight’rocker DOONICAN.
BEVERAGE PROBLEM
The band are literally raising the ageing singer's career from the ashes.
Doonican, who rose to fame some 20 years ago with hits such as‘Elusive Butterfly’ and ‘Walk Tall’, suffered a drop in popularity when, at the height of what has become known as the ‘swinging London’phenomenon, he revealed a fondness for rocking chairs and ‘a cup of Typhoo’.
Indeed, many cite his 1966 release ‘What Would I Be’ as a cryptic reference to the singer's ‘beverage’problem, claiming that Doonican's ‘liberal’record company, Decca, formed him to drop the words ‘without a good cup of tea’from the chorus.
EVEN IN HOT WEATHER
As well as championing controversial ‘fuddy-duddy’ ideals, Doonican would cause a stir when he strode down London's fashionable Carnaby Street wearing a navy blue safari suit fastidiously buttoned to the neck — even in hot weather.
on other occasions, he would appear at society functions wearing a chunky-knit pullover and a pair of slacks — in defiant protest over what he might have termed ‘the folly of fashion’(if he'd said anything about it).
NAKED BIRDS
‘'E was weird, 'im,’ recalls Rolling Stone BILL WYMAN of The Rolling Stones, in his autobiography, I'M In The Rolling Stones, Me.
‘We'd go to all these really swinging parties with all these naked birds all over the place, all covered in drugs, and then this geezer in an acrylic suit would walk in. ‘'E wouldn't talk to anyone.
'E just stood there, all miserable, drinking tap water from a plastic cup.
I felt a bit sorry for 'im once, so I sent 'im over a bird but 'e weren't 'aving none of it.
Anyway, I found out 'oo it was, you could've knocked me down wiv a fevver.
‘Nah, it weren't Doonican.
But that's probably what 'e would've acted like if it 'ad been 'im, y'know?’
‘NO SELL-OUT’
These days, however, far from being likely to ignore everyone at a party full of naked birds, Doonican has become king of what has become known as the ‘light entertainment’ circuit in the north-east of England.
Currently thrilling packed houses with his mellow vocal style and uncompromising ‘no sell-out’ cardigans, the singer wishes to point out that though he will be opening for the Happy Mondays at certain venues, he by no means endorses their outrageous and unorthodox lifestyle.
In addition, Doonican points out that in some cases, there will be something of a gap between his performance and the headline act.
‘Not long,’ says the rediscovered superstar.
‘Between about three months and a year, I should say.’
JUST WHO ARE VARIOUS??
Bizzerk investigation by DONNIE TROOSERS and TIM PAPE
CELEBRATING THEIR 25th anniversary this month are VARIOUS, one of the most talented and prolific bands in the country.
Formed over 20 years ago, Various are seldom out of the LP charts.
They release, on average, ten LPs every week on different labels and cover all musical styles from popular classics to death metal.
At the moment, seven of the Top 50 UK albums are by Various, while they currently have four albums in the independent charts.
Yet the band remain mysterious.
And so far they have NEVER played live.
There are no known photographs of Various — their LP sleeves often featuring really crap photographs of couples snogging — and they have never appeared on TV.
Occasionally there are videos by Various, but they invariably feature crap bands miming to their songs.
But we at Bizzerk have finally unmasked the mastermind behind Various — Mr — Mr Reg ‘K-Telestar’ Nobb, 37, a man we met in a Soho pub.
In exchange for £30 cash and six large vodka and Babychams, Nobb, 73, revealed that he is dissatisfied with the way things are going.
‘The kids are being ripped off,’ he told us.
‘Look at all the recent Various LPs.
At least 50 have go ‘Loaded’ on them, the rest have all got a song called ‘Groovy Train’on them.
Various have run out of ideas.
It's stale.
It's time to jack it in.’
Does this indicate that the heyday of Various is past.
Who can say?
The rest of the band were not available for comment, but all the record companies we spoke to assured us that they had enough new material from Various to see us well into the next century.
LET'S TALK BOLLOCKS!…with Liz Fraser
Hi.
You know, every week pop fans stop me on the street, the noo.
And they ask me, Liz, they say.
They say, Liz, the noo.
How come you talk so much bollocks?
And how can we learn to do it, too?
And I say, There's nothing to it.
The noo.
Just follow these three simple steps.
STEP ONE:
Think of a word.
Go on.
Any word.
Make sure it's something cissy, like ‘posy’ or ‘nosey’.
For argument's sake, the noon, we'll use ‘pinky’.
STEP TWO:
Add a word that begins with a different letter but rhymes with the first word.
Don't forget — they're 26 to choose from, so don't be afraid to experiment, the noo.
For this one, we'll use ‘m’.
‘Pinky…minky’.
Got the idea?
STEP THREE:
Add a household item.
Have a look round.
Under the stairs, under the sink, maybe under the bed…
Anyway, Robin's just been poking around and he's come up with a can of Mr Shen, the noo.
So we'll use that.
Ready?
All you have to do is string them together.
And don't forget to use plenty of reverb if you're going for that ‘cathedral of sound’ sound.
All set?
Here goes: ‘Pi-hinkeeeee…mi-hi-hi-hinkeeeeee…misterrrrr…sheeeeeen.’
The noo.
Ahem.
Next: Wayne Hussey
TREND
TRENDIEST brand new fashion accessory for hip London clubbers are PACEMAKERS!
Pacemakers are basically electronic pulse generators, surgically inserted under your long-sleeved T-shirt to make your heart beat when it's feeling a bit dicky.
Just the thing to stop you from dropping down dead after strutting your stuff to the latest chart topper!
Pacemakers, which come in a wide variety of Dayglo colours, can be found at most branches of Top Shop for around £25.
TIP
‘YOU ROCKIN' bitch you’
MAC: GOT a light
PETROLS: FUNDRAISING
THE HIGH: forced to resort to their instrumental catalogue
‘I don't give a shit!’ says singer.
‘I got paid!’
VEGA: ‘COMPARED to The Clash, this crowd was a stream of piss!’
CARTER: THE ideal stocking filler
Farley, Fenton (and a few others) join in the freak-out
HOOTON AND his henchmen: ploughing a furrow round your way soon
ROSES NO deal
JAGGER: JAW
CURE: KISS
THINGS: WHAT they used to be
ABOVE: THRASH outfit Cancer.
On the left are the two offending sleeves — KMFDM's controversial little number above Cancer's ‘To the Gory End’
THE CHAPS take a rare break from Twisting
MADGE GETS some sticks
DENNIS WATERMAN, cool cats (inset: Den drops a bollock)
PHOTO-FILE exclusive: this old picture of Doonican shows what the Irish rocker looked like in the old days before he actually joined Happy Mondays as trumpet player.
On the right he's pictured with group dancer Boz — hotfooting it to the Chinese takeaway.
THE WANDSWORTH SCHOOL CHOIR: are they Various?
Inset: Elton John's ex-lyricist, Bernie Taupin — could he be involved?
The fruitiest, juiciest column in pop
ONE LUCKY READER WINS…
A DAY OUT WITH BANANARAMA!!!
AND STILL those requests come pouring in!
Since last week's bumper post bag caused our 50-storey multi-plex office block to cave in under the sheer weight of ever-hopeful readers' entries, we here at Bizzerk have had to temporarily relocate to a Hawaiian island where cargo boats deliver letters by the sackload for our native postal workers to process.
Sadly, most never make it past the sorting stage and instead wind up as fire-lighters at a nearby sugar plantation.
Among the chaos and competition, however, one lucky reader caught our eye.
Step forward Ben Pearson of Welwyn Garden City, who writes: ‘Dear Bizzerk, I'm a bit of a man's man, me, and I'm fed up of all the blokes writing in who just want to hang around with other blokes.
What's the point?
I'd rather hang about with some tasty birds like those ones in Bananarama.
I'd like that.
None of this poofy stuff.
Can you fit it or what?'
Yes, Ben.
And fix it we shall.
1.
ROUND FOR DINNER
BEN settles down to a romantic candle-lit dinner with JACQUI, JACQUI's friend FIONA, KEREN, KEREN's friend SALLY, and SARAH.
SARAH's friend SHIRLEY, alas, is stricken with the flu and unable to attend the little soirée.
JACQUI: Fancy a grape, BEN?
They're SMALL but FIRM and JUICY.
BEN: Worrr!!!
KEREN: Those apples look nice, don't they?
I'd love to GET MY MOUTH ROUND that GREAT BIG ONE!
BEN: Worrr!!!
2.
AT THE DISCO
BEN and JACQUI (far right) get down to the latest sounds.
KEREN and SALLY (left) share a private joke — possibly at BEN's expense?
KEREN: Do you think, perchance, this is the right time to reveal our true identity?
SALLY: What?
And tell this steaming wet nelly that we are, in fact, THE
QUIREBOYS and that we have a terrible punishment planned to chastise such arrant, nay, wanton sexism?
Not on your life, mate!!!
‘JACQUI’: Pucker up, luvva.
3.
OH NO!
Sick and tired of their ‘wild’ reputation, it seems THE QUIREBOYS have formed a vigilante group to stamp out the more unseemly aspects of boorish male behaviour.
Before we have time to warn him, BEN's head is rudely parted from his shoulders by OTTO, the band's lead guitarist who, for ritual purposes, sports ‘alien’ headgear and a huge, unwieldy occult Afro comb.
OTTO: Women reclaim the night!
BEN: Wow!
YES!!
IT'S THAT AWFUL MOMENT: WHEN STARS GO SENILE…
This week: Wayne Hussey
‘Yo ho ho…98 whores in horse's head…give me the moonlight…and a tower of power…mumbo jumbo…hocus pocus…look, I've only got seven items…ahoy there…avast there me hearties…what do you mean, this is the post office…?
Next week: Ian Astbury
Fancy a puke down the Pet Shop Boys' pan?
Or a blind date with Black Francis??
Just send a picture of yourself, together with your choice of act, to DAY OUT, Bizzerk, Sounds, Ludgate House, 245 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 9UZ — and your wildest dreams could come true!!
RELAX!
Wild rockers choose the laid-back life
FOLLOWING the revelations in last week's Daily Mirror that former wild men of rock, AEROSMITH, now no longer do anything more dangerous than eat sushi and play with their children, Bizzerk has found out that other rock stars are calming down their act too.
For example, former wild man of rock KEITH MONN has moderated his lifestyle.
The zany former drummer with The Why used to be MAD, bad and dangerous to know.
But these days his lifestyle is more relaxed.
So how his schedule compares THEN and NOW!
THEN
11.55am.
Wake up in wrecked hotel room.
12.30pm.
Try to discover which city he's in.
Vomit out of hotel window.
Expel groupies from room.
12.50pm.
Dress
12.51pm.
Breakfast.
If in California, demand faggots and pease at health food restaurant.
Later drink entire case of champagne and drive Rolls Royce into swimming pool.
2.00pm.
Phone up Ringo Starr and Oliver Reed.
Fill swimming pool with Newcastle Brown Ale and drink dry through straws.
2.30pm.
Long distance vomiting contest.
Take some pills that you were given last night.
3.00pm.
Dress up as a gorilla and chase people down Sunset Strip.
Etc Etc
NOW
9.00am.
Dead
10.00am.
Still dead
11.00am.
Not much change
Etc etc
Voice of TREASON
JUST WHERE is the  fucking voice of treason then?
Where have all the peace songs gone?
The silence is deafening as usual— especially from the wanker bands who freely exploit CND logos and all manner of love and flowers imagery to cream in the profits on the back of people who put their  fucking arses on the line for the self same cause.
Of course, as Vietnam proved all too clearly, it's pretty handy to have a war knocking about if you want peace songs to sound like anything other than pathetic, drippy platitudes.
But, for the benefit of those who haven't noticed, we're right on the verge of a war.
Think about that for a moment, cost it's more than just a word, it's potentially the mass genocide of innocent young people on both sides of the divide by the combined efforts of those who consider themselves fit to make such decisions for us, and about us.
When Vietnam got nasty, many bands were finally forced out of their apathy as it became apparent that things like conscription were bringing matters pretty close to home.
Music became the voice of opposition to the war and its senseless waste of life, and effectively found itself a conscience.
Since then, it seems like there hasn't been a war anywhere in the world.
Or, at least, that's the way the music scene would have it, with the exception of some of the more sussed and radical punk bands.
Of curse, there's always a war going on somewhere — but if it ain't good for business, it seems you won't find the concerned young darlings of today writing songs about it.
Indeed, you get the feeling that there'd be more than a few pro-war songs knocking about if it shifted the units.
Like, where were all the anti-war songs when the Falklands were turned into a mass graveyard for the young men of England and Argentina?
Only Crass seemed to bother, and they got questions in the House for their troubles.
And now, here we go again with the Gulf crisis.
As the world and his wife crowd round waiting for war to start, like kids in a school playground chanting ‘fight, fight’, where are all the peace songs?
Pushing to one side the politics of the issue — far too much, in today's musical climate, to expect a song about that — humanitarian gesture son?
Make a comment on stage even, for Christ's sake, about how sad it is that we're staring down the barrel of a gun at a  fuck of a lot of young corpses, widowed wives and fatherless children?
If it's something to do with music reflecting society's tends rather than being the voice of treason, then can we rightly assume that most bands of the last ten years have been pro-Thatcher?
Pro-poll tax?
Obviously not — so now we're faced with a major worldwide catastrophe, where the  fucking noise then, eh?
Where are the mouths behind the peace signs?
FRINGE appeal
END'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN might have been a silly name, stupid haircuts and jump up and down like idiots but that doesn't make them irrelevant.
God knows, even the Clothes Show want to copy their style.
CATHI UNSWORTH follows them to Birmingham to assess their appeal, STEVE GULLICK catches them on the up
AT THE other end of the spectrum from the golden ray of new Manc pop starts, sit five crimped and rather grubby greboes from Stourbridge, Birmingham.
This time last year, End's Atomic Dustbin were opening for The Wonder Stuff on their extensive ‘Hup’ tour.
Yet last night, s fringed singer John recalls with starry eyes, ‘We sold out Leicester University.
Nine hundred people!
It's crazy.’
Like the Inspiral Carpets, the Neds seem to have got the culture/pop crossover exactly right.
Sitting in the unlikely setting of Birmingham Museum's Edwardian Tea Room, our (anti) heroes seem a little shocked at the way things are turning out for them.
Their scrabbling, guitar-fuelled, heads down, drink-up, fozz belch sound follows in the glorious wake of their Stuffie friends, adding a little Wedding Present aplomb for extra appeal.
Only the Neds possess the kind of lands-next-door-making-a-racket charisma that rockets them into your heart.
And their bastardised Phil Oakey fringes are, the entire media agrees, the most potent symbol of the End phenomena.
‘At Reading,’ recounts John, ‘the girl from the Clothes Show was talking to us.
And she said, We want to do a feature on you, we want to do an anti-fashion thing.
Perhaps that's what it is.
Cos Manchester's the fashion.
So it's quite healthy that we're not.’
You have quite a wacky, devil-may-care-image.
‘I think this is a popular misconception,’ bassist Alex sniffs airily.
‘Because I think we're really sensitive, artistic souls.
We met each other at the same art gallery in Milford Haven and the vibe was just right.’
The Edwardian Tea Room, much to the annoyance of the violin soloist in an evening suit, dissolves into giggles.
‘I don't think we're really wacky,’ considers second bassist Mat, recovering from a fit of laughter.
‘I think we make the most of having a good time, which a lot of bands just don't bother saying.
‘How lucky we are to be in a band and not having to get up every morning to do a crappy job.
And how frighteningly immature and unselfconscious we are.’
‘It's alright for people to think we're wacky,’ counters drummer Dan.
‘But it sort of trivialises what we're about.
We might have a silly name, stupid haircuts and we might jump around like idiots, but we're not irrelevant.’
‘The haircuts can't be irrelevant,’ John hurriedly protests.
‘Cos a lot of the fans have got theirs done the same way now.’
INDEED, THERE is nothing trivial about the impact the Neds have had this year.
For all the proof you need, look no further than this year's Reading Festival and the amazing response the Neds got for some T-shirts that they had made especially for the occasion.
‘We've talking about it’, the garments said on the front —‘Now let's  fuck ’, proclaimed the back.
But only a mere 30 were made up.
‘They were a bit of a piss-take,’ says John, ‘of the rock stars backstage at Reading with their shades and leather trousers, being really crass and pathetic.
We just thought the T-shirts were funny, and we had them done because we were absolutely shitting ourselves about playing.’
‘Then, suddenly,’ he grins, ‘there were absolutely ridiculous amounts of money being offered for these T-shirts.
‘It went from 60 quid to 300 in a morning!
We said, Don't be so bloody stupid, go and make your own.
The security guards all wanted them!
‘And I was walking past the T-shirt stall and this girl I know who does Jesus Jones' T-shirts ran over to me and said, This guy wants to talk to you — he wants to talk to you — he wants to buy the rights for that T-shirt and put them in the shops!
And this is the same day!
It's ludicrous.’
If it hadn't been for the Neds' moral scruples, those garments could have been bigger and cooler than F**k.
Still, after such an accolade, their next conquest should surely be a performance on perennial kiddies' fave, Top Of The Pops.
With the latest single, ‘Until You Find Out’(which is typically raucous and sweetly nasty affair and their last release for Chapter 22 before signing a distribution deal with CBS), the Neds could be posed for some real chart action.
‘Yep!
You're right,’ beams Mat.
‘I think we'd be brilliant.
Anyone who saw us, even if they loathed us to death, they'd have to take notice.
It'd be something they remembered.’
‘It's good to see real bands on Top Of The Pops,’ adds John.
‘The Wedding Present were brilliant.’
‘My nan waited up till half past three to see us on The Chart Show,’ says guitarist Rat shaking a tousled head.
‘And she's that short-sighted that the video moved so fast she couldn't see me.’
Setting up their own label with CBS backing, could help the Neds achieve this aim all the more quickly.
‘Definitely,’ nods Mat.
‘It means people can actually get hold of the record this time around.
They can get it in small towns and villages, not just from London.
‘We'd never have done it if we didn't think the advantages outweighed the disadvantages.
They (the record company) were impressed with how far we'd got doing things our own way.’
DO THE Neds have any theories as to why they appeal to so many people and why things have happened so quickly for them?
Could it be that people can easily envisage themselves being in End's Atomic Dustbin?
‘A lot of people could do what we're doing,’ ponders Rat, ‘but the fact is we're doing it and they're not.
A lot of people have said to us that our gigs remind them of when they're in the bathroom, miming with a tennis racket, pouring water over their heads for that sweat experience.’
‘some people want mystique,’ furthers John.
‘We don't.
You've got to hear the band sounding crap sometimes.
So you don't get the wrong impression — that everything's polished.
‘The impression the audience get is a lot different to the impression people who really know us have.
I think that's the attraction for us.
Our fans want to jump about and have a good time, which is what we want to do.’
And so touchingly modest, too!
‘Reading was the best day of all our lives,’ sighs Mat.
‘We were crying, the following were crying.
They were as nervous as we were.
We were sitting in our caravan, and John Peel was going through the line-up.
Our name came up, and we got a really big cheer.
It was brilliant.’
‘All we have to do now,’ smiles John, ‘is make an album brilliant enough to follow it up.’
Oh, greboes, I think the world loves you.
ELEKTRA WARRIOR
Lest we forget Elektra's 40th birthday, LENNY KAYE has put together a CD — which sees the label's current roster (Pixies, Mondays, etc) the interpret the work of their predecessors.
ANDY ROSS reports.
LENNY KAYE, sometime guitarist and sometime producer, is a man in his 40s with facial lines that turn up at the edges and spell affability.
The lace holes on his shoes are mapped out in a rather racy zigzag pattern, and he used to play in Patti Smith's band.
He is also the honoured fellow entrusted with the task of pulling together ‘Rubaiyat’, the 38-track celebration of Elektra's 40th anniversary.
Through some judicious editing of the contributions of Shinehead and Teddy Pendergrass, Kaye managed to shoehorn the material into two CDs, utilising the maximum 74 and a half minutes available on both (the excessive running time provided a convenient excuse for dispensing with the need for a vinyl format).
The brief was for current Elektra roster acts to interpret the creative outpourings of their predecessors on the label: the result is an excusably, and laudably, up and down affair, with pale recreations nestling up to inspired rethinks.
Switching effortlessly into promo interview automatic pilot mode, Lenny tells it like it is.
‘Rubaiyat’ is trying to tell the story of a record company, in the present tense,’he says.
‘The record company being Elektra, which through four very different decades, has maintained a certain sense of style, not just in terms of its music, but also in terms of having a strong sense of artistic integrity.’
ELECTRA KICKED off with the folk music of the '50s, went through the late '60s underground of the Doors/Stooges/MC5, drifted into the Asylum California scene of the '70s and arrived in the '90s of new boss Bob Krasnow whose tenure has seen the addition of soul, in the shape of Pendergrass, Anita Baker and others.
Kaye's role was collate and to act as guide.
It seems unlikely that, prior to the project, The Sugarcubes were familiar with Sailcat's unforgettable ‘Motorcycle Mama’…
‘They certainly weren't!
They were actually my first choice to do the Stooges cover (new jazz wacko John Zorn eventually thrashing through ‘TV Eye’), but they must have thought that was too predictable.
So I sent them a tape of stuff, and they liked that track.
Theirs was one of the first cuts to come in and, when I heard it, I realised this vague concept could really work.
You could tell they were having a blast doing it, and without taking the piss.’
And Faster Pussycat tromping Carly Simon's ‘You're So Vain’?
‘Well, it kicks ass, as we say in the bang-your-head-circles.
They do it hard, not with a smirk on the face.
I don't mind a sense of humour as long as you burn me offstage when you're doing it.’
That's in the spirit of the project?
‘Oh, absolutely.
There isn't a track on it that I feel doesn't do what it should do, which is taking a song out of its time and place and whisking it into the present to make it meaningful today.’
Perhaps some of the performances are too reverential?
‘I don't think so.
In the case of The Cure, they sent in three versions of The Doors' ‘Hello I Love You’.
The slow version has the most depth, and maybe it'll turn up on a 12-inch some day, but I really opted for the fast one, because it seemed a really nice way to start the album.’
IN FEATURING the majority of Elektra's roster (Mötley Crüe being the principal absentee), big names rub track listings with minnows and oddballs: Jackson Browne, Tracy Chapman and Metallica intermix with Pixies, Happy Mondays, and Billy Bragg, while luminaries Danny Gatton, Sara Hickman and The Shaking Family also chip in.
To Kaye, this jumble of reputations and styles makes the record — I mean CD.
‘To me, a record company isn't just about its superstars.
It's one shot wonders and weird groups that come and go in the bat of an eye — this strange serendipity that happens.’
Serendipity translates as the Gipsy Kings flamencoing up The Eagles' ‘Hotel California’, Javetta Steel's gospel rendition of ‘I'd Like To Teach The World To Sing’ and the classical renegades Kronos Quartet's remarkably sympathetic ‘Marquee Moon’.
And Kaye's personal estimate of ‘Rubaiyat’?
‘Some of it really moves me, and some of it cracks me up — kinda what you go through at a birthday party.’
Pouting or sneering?
Sticking them out, sucking them in — what's all the fuss about?
We took a handful of blubbery beauties and a fistful of raging rockers and had a good hard look at the pros and cons of facial deformity.
Lip-o-sections by DAMON WISE
Gob only knows
POUTING
BIG, BEE-STUNG, firm and bouncy, pucker up and stick 'em out.
Fat lips, suction-powered, sullen and sultry erupting at ninety degrees to the chin in huge, pneumatic Revlon-smeared skin cushions.
Flesh folds to die for, convex cake-holes for budding Bardots — male and female — to puff and point in hot surrender or childish defiance.
The bread and butter of pin-up prominence, the slobber-chops of gender blur, preaching petulance to the hungry masses.
Sensual love-blimps, billowing out like hillocky, hummocky, water bottles of desire, bulging with hidden promise and a hint of, hmm, ignorance.
Brain-dead beauties with lips that gibber, lips that quiver, lips that mushroom to the size of minor continents before the startled eyes of glamour photographers.
Snogging tackle for stonking wet smackers, warm and reassuring like a comfy settee.
For these people, their face is their fortune but the gift of the gob pays extra dividends.
Smug but sexy dumbo darlings, lens-friendly superstars plugged into the ears and groins of a love-struck generation.
The eyes may have it but the mouth can flaunt it.
Hail the art of kisser control.
Big mouth strikes again…
This week: well, just where is the voice of treason?
STEVE IGNORANT of Crass: peace song veteran
‘At Reading the girl form the Clothes Show was talking to us and she said, We want to do a feature on you, we want to do an anti-fashion thing’ JOHN END
THE ONLY way was ‘Hup’
END'S ATOMIC Dustbin: unfashionably fashionable
LENNY: A man out of time
‘When I heard The Sugarcubes' cut, I realised this vague concept could really work.
You could tell they were having a blast — and taking the piss’ Lenny Kaye
SNEERING
HALF-COCKED, DERISORY, curled in contempt.
The brains in rock wear their disdain on the top deck, a glimpse of the ivories to warn off the unwary and make it clear that they are outsiders.
Cynical cool.
Snickering cool.
The ultimate cool.
Easily faked but hard to sustain, cool that says, Don't  fuck with me, when all around are begging for it.
Hard cool.
Leader cool.
Leather trews or gold ropes and chains, from Brooklyn to Bracknell, the code of confidence cuts through.
Scaredy-cats scurry when these bad-bastard mongrels make it, Thunderbird-handed, into town.
Parents cut off their private parts, lest they ever have children to fall prey to monsters like these.
The Devil's spawn, black hearts with rhythm in their souls who jeer at the weaknesses of little people unfit to lick the dirt from their boots.
The Satanic few, nails-hard and unafraid.
Unrepentant, ice-box idols, flayed in hell and cast in iron.
Demi-gods of the elements, immense and immortal, too cool too to even think of mentioning, for fear of spontaneously combusting and disappearing in a cloud of unworthy, wretched smoke.
Actually, sneering isn't at all big or clever and most people that do it are as soft as shite, really…
THE SHAMEN have come quite a long way from their origins as an indie psychedelic outfit.
Their first LP, ‘Drop’, wore its influences prominently — from the West Coast Pop Art Experience and Barrett-era Floyd, it strove to be contemporary through the use of samples and anti-Thatcherite lyrics.
The second LP, 1988's ‘In Gorbachev We trust’, saw the Shamen absorbing hip hop and house beats, beginning to explore that year's mushrooming acid club scene.
‘En Tact’, their new LP, finds them at the cutting edge of techno pop, making a chromium dance sound that is as distant from Syd Barrett as it is from ‘Love Can't Turn Around’.
It's a computer driven sound, shamelessly appropriating reggae, house, rap, African sounds, dub — you name it, it's fair game for these cyberpunk magpies.
Their club Synergy is on tour and will be coming to a town near you, where you can experience a live set along with the DJs, lights and neurotechnology that is now associated with them.
The Shamen are a tad pissed off that nobody seems to write about them without dropping in a few drug references.
So much so that Colin, being totally pissed off with the press, hasn't turned up for the interview.
Which is ironic, since we have met up at the Wardour Street, a company specialising in neurotechnology for the consumer.
Literally altering your consciousness — without the use of chemicals — these innovative ‘brain machines’ can ‘zap’your brainwaves from Beta (the state we consider ‘normal’) to Alpha (the waves produced when we are relaxed) and then to Theta (which are produced in sleep).
‘Basically these are meditation machines for lazy Westerners,’ explains Karen at the Mind Gym.
‘They produce the effect of years of meditation.’
Shaman Will Sinnet and your reporter are about to be put onto the same wavelength.
We strap on the goggles and headphones which are wired up to what looks like a drum machine.
The headphones emit a pulsing, comforting sound while lights flicker in synch on your eyelids.
You find yourself gradually losing track of time, the outside world is pushing away — apart from the occasional sound which pulls you back, you do sink into yourself — and time seems to become irrelevant.
We emerge into ‘reality’ feeling distressed, ‘chilled out’and all those other clichés — quite simply, feeling better.
THE MIND Gym have been supplying The Shamen's Synergy club with these brain machines to alter consciousness.
So are these brain machines going to replace drugs?
‘I don't think the things that we have just now are,’ says Will.
‘The brain machine is a device you use to train your mind to do certain things.
But once the technology becomes more refined, I definitely think that in a few years you'll have a lot of people who don't touch chemicals at all.
‘I think what's interesting is…the people (at The Mind Gym) who are doing this thing, they do a lot of communal work where a lot of people will undergo the same program all at the one time and they find that they get a lot of really heavy group processes developing.’
So far, the tabloids only seem to have picked up on the claim that couples using brain machines together have better sex.
‘They would just see it as, It puts you on the same wavelength,’ Will laughs.
‘But what is happening is shared internal experiences that become easy to share with somebody who has been undergoing the same kind of experience, then you can find out a lot more of what you've undergone because people will find different ways of describing it, different metaphors.’
THE SHAMEN have always been victims of tabloid hysteria and censorship.
Their song ‘Happy Days’ from their indie days was chosen to accompany a lager commercial on TV until a local Scottish tabloid discovered that (Shock!
Horror!) the song was an attack on the Falklands war and also that the Shamen were an acid-gobbling baby-eating, Satan-worshipping band of hate.
What do they think of the latest wave of censorship, particularly the Judas Priest case and the hunt for ‘backward masked’ massages?
‘This is one of the things I find really amusing,’ says Will.
‘Subliminal messages are messages that are interpreted by your brain without your being conscious of them.
But they can't turn them round the other way!
I find it really funny, these people playing things backwards, you just want to say your mind hasn't got the capacity to pick out this message as it goes by, turn it around, interpret it and still not let you know what you've just heard!’
We discuss subliminal manipulation, such as the allegation that, when that now-discredited US President was making campaign speeches in the early '70s, clandestine projectors would flash rapid slide images of John F Kennedy, Franklin D Roosevelt, Abraham Lincoln and George Washington behind him, sending out the subliminal message that Nixon was a great President.
‘That example clarifies the problem,’ muses Will.
‘That…let's just call them Them, can we?
They have always had the technology, They have always had control over what goes out, what messages were received by the public without their conscious awareness.
Now, with the advent of new technology, They are losing control of those things.
So it's obvious that the most medieval aspects of that reactionary Them are going to try to close it up.
‘So they pick on people like Judas Priest, they go for NWA, the 2 Live Crew, the Geto Boys.
You're talking there about a bunch of people trying to stop another bunch of people's expression of what they see, when they know absolutely nothing about them.
It's like me telling someone from India that they shouldn't write a book about the caste system, because we don't have one!’
WILL SEES the dance music that the Shamen produce as being what they were always working towards ‘although we didn't know what we were working towards at the time’, and agrees with Timothy Learny's assertion that music and dance can be more powerful agents of changing consciousness than chemicals.
Will recounts a story about Carol Jung, a contemporary of Freud and one of the fathers of modern psychoanalysis.
Jung, unlike Freud, believed that the symbols, or archetypes contained in dreams and hallucinations were more than the manifestation of sexual hang-ups.
‘Jung visited Africa where he was doing work on mythical archetypes.
He came to this village where there was a festival going on, with everyone taking part in a dance.
Jung joined in the dance, and by the time the dance reached its climax, he was so overcome by what he described as ‘archetypal experiences’ that he ran out of the village.
He couldn't take it any more.
He could feel his whole being, if you like, being overcome by these ‘primitive’ archetypal forces!
And conservative forces everywhere have always said that, This (dance music) is the devil's music!’
WHO IS DARK MAN?
FIND OUT NOV 16
GYM'LL FIX IT
CHARLATANS: A fat lip for Tim
DEBBIE HARRY: Mouth almighty
STEVE TYLER: ‘Pump’ -ed up
IAN BROWN: Caught miming to Alvin Stardust 1973 smash, ‘My Coo-Ca-Choo'
MARK (RIDE): Oxford bags?
IAN ASTBURY: In need of lip-removal machine?)
MADONNA: COSMETIC snoggery
MICK JAGGER: Pucker ye not!
IAN McCULLOCH: The Incredible Sulk
WENDY JAMES: Lip up.
Please.
BILLY IDOL: All together, ‘LA Wuh-hu-ma-han’
JOHN LYNDON: LiP service
ELVIS: If you're looking for trouble…
THE FALL: Mark E Moan
LYDIA LUNCH: Tower of sour
BEASTIE BOYS: Scorn to be wild
BOB GELDOF:
SHANE MacGOWAN: Hell's twitch
SID VICIOUS: Looking down on creation
THE AUTHOR (left) gets on Will's wavelength
WILL SINNET: the least pissed off half of the Shamen
NB IT STANDS FOR NEW BANDS
THE SOUND OF SPEEEED
ALL THE LATEST NEWS AND COMMENT IN TRASH AND HARDCORE
NOT CONTENT with being the single most sought-after band on the Sub Pop roster (with no fewer than four major labels seriously chasing their signatures), NIRVANA are playing merry hell with the distributors of their new single ‘Silver/Dive’.
Despite being scheduled for late September, it's still delayed as the label rushes to press enough copies to send it soaring up the charts on the heels of MUDHONEY's pre-posthumous release.
Other releases through the Sub Pop empire (all of which now appear to be subject to the same scheduling difficulties) include THEE HEADCOATS' LP, ‘Heavens To Murgatroid Even!
It's Thee Headcoats (Already)’, the latest release from ex-Milkshake BILLY CHILDISH, Mudhoney frontman MARK ARM's debut solo single, a cover of Bob Dylan's ‘Masters of War’, which has been limited to 5,000 copies, SISTER DOUBLE HAPPINESS’, ‘Wheels A-Spinning’ single and DICKLESS’‘I'm A Man', which should reach the shops soon.
Upcoming for the Xmas rush are new singles from POISON IDEA, SMASHING PUMPKINS and the latest from TAD, with ‘Jinx’.
Glitterhouse are getting firmly back on the boil with the latest from BITCH MAGNET, who appear to have finally untangled themselves from the What Goes On fiasco.
They've got a new LP, out soon titled ‘Ben Hur’, SWALLOW have a new LP, ‘Sourpuss’, ready, and the ex-Chrome man HELIOS CREED has his ‘Boxing The Clown’, LP set to go.
The latest from Aussie tats MR FLOPPY, whose single, ‘100,000 Morrisseys’ has taken everyone by surprise (not least the band who split up soon after its release), is that they've decided to re-form The band, who described The Stone Roses as, ‘A bunch of Pommie scum who can't play and flounce around in flares’, will celebrate with a new EP, tentatively entitled ‘Tubular Bells’.
December's single of the month from North London indie label Clawfist is another double headed coverclash, this time between groovy tapemeisters TERMINAL CHEESECAKE and Brixton guardists GOD.
As with previous singles the idea is that each covers the other's work, TC tackling God's ‘Meathead’, while the latter opt for TC's ‘Carfist’.
To coincide the pair are hoping to play together at The Marquee.
Meanwhile, TC have a new LP, ‘Angels in Pigtails’, out on Pathological.
And God have split from their former record label Beggars Banquet in protest at the poor quality level of the new Charlatans LP and appear to have been joined by Neil from LOOP, who's playing second bass for them.
There are rumours of a deal with New York's Futureshock who already licence the early Godflesh and Bolt Thrower albums in the States and appear anxious to sign God following the success of ‘Meathead’’ on college radio.
Jim Foetus is likely to produce.
The band play The Dome in Tufnell Park November 12.
FOETUS has a new LP, ‘Steroid Maximus’, the soundtrack to a forthcoming movie, out soon.
Advance tapes suggest that it's leagues ahead of the rather dull ‘Thaw’ Housefrau superstar LYDIA LUNCH meanwhile has been recording with pathological monsters OXBOW for their LP ‘King Of The Jews’, which should be out in January when they're set to return to the UK for another series of dates.
Also over here in the new year are URGE OVERKILL, who've been spurred on by the success of their last two singles, ‘Faroutski’ and ‘Ticket to LA'.
They're due here in early March with as an yet untitled LP due out to coincide.
SLINT, Steve Albini's favourite Kentuckyans, have signed to Touch & Go after their departure from the Jennifer Hartman label and should be here in February.
Earlier releases from Touch & Go include the new JESUS LIZARD single, ‘Mouthbreather’, THE DIGITS' single ‘Headless’ and the third LP from FLOUR.
BASS in yo' face
AFTER THEIR recent eponymous chart success, northern bleep boys LFO have set their hands to a remix of the BOTANY 5 cut ‘Lovebomb’, which they've approached with an excitement and verve so often lacking from more established remixers' work.
Taking the techno bones of the original and fleshing them out with a chugging hard funk bassline, they've de-housed the sound to create a tune which complements the original yet is individual in its own right.
Available with the original house mix on the flip, this is a good value 12-inch.
On import at the moment from City Limits records is a single from Americans HOW ‘N' LITTLE.
Stand out track is ‘Jam To It Again’, which mixes well with ‘Thunder’ from RENEGADE SOUNDWAVE's recent ‘In Dub’LP, both tracks being haunted by the latter's ‘Phantom’groove.
Undoubtedly the Gary Lineker of British House is THE SCIENTIST, whose new promo 12-inch proves that under his own name or a pseudonym he certainly is top scorer, not to mention prolific as this is his third single since mid-September.
‘The Bee’ starts with the sound of an irate insect which buzzes its way into an energetic European House groove.
Devoid of any Black Box-style piano histrionics, it is refreshingly upfront.
Check out the untitled flip if you want disembodied childlike voices lost in a bass nightmare.
‘Close Encounters’ on D-Zone by BASSIX takes the familiar motif from the Spielberg favourite, bleeps it up and sets it on top of a busy, almost cluttered, house tune.
Already gaining popularity in the clubs, if the distributors can operate quickly we'll all be whistling this over the breakfast table very soon.
Famous for last year's ‘£10 (And £20) To Get In’, which introduced Suzanne Vega to the House scene long before DNA arrived, UK House team SHUT UP AND DANCE now offer us ‘Rum And Black’, a powerful hiphouse jam, punctuated with a Joan Armatrading sample.
The familiar ragged yet hard construction bodes well for their forthcoming debut LP.
Watch out for future guest appearances from the likes of Dana and Clodagh Rogers.
Meanwhile, the flip side of the single — a NWA-style attack on commercial radio called ‘F**k The Legal Stations’— is as fierce as the promo posters for their LP which show the boys stripped to the waist wielding Oriental knifes and Nanchukas.
Don't mess!
Respect to Music Power.
NO MAN
IN POP anything is possible — even the rehabilitation of Donovan.
‘We're all complete Donovan fanatics,’ admits No Man guitarist Steven Wilson, who has a penchant for dresses in a live context.
‘We must be the only band in history to have paid more than fifty quid for one of his albums.’
Deliciously weightless and tantalisingly dreamy.
No Man's stunning version of ‘Colours’ has just been released as a single on Probe Plus.
It seems to be fuelled by two opposing factors: a love of Donovan (‘He thinks it's lovely, very, very lovely’) and an aversion to the Happy Mondays (whose Shaun Ryder has recently recorded his own interpretation of the same song).
Steven: ‘Happy Mondays’ popularity has been contrived — not by them cos they're not that clever, but by their record company.
Where would they be without Paul Oakenfold or E?’
‘They should be castrated for crimes against the intellect,’ adds singer Tim Bowness.
‘This is the year of the basin headed bricklayers.’
No Man love to provoke.
To them, the most obscene word in the English vocabulary is ‘indifference’.
Steven: ‘I like extreme reactions.
I hate mediocre ones.
I'd like people to absolutely adore us or absolutely loathe us.
I think that's what we base our live performance on.’
In the current climate, any band that describe their music as ‘the sound of John Coltrane fiddling about with Janet Jackson's trouser leg’ are likely to be inundated with accusations of pretentiousness.
But No Man are unrepentant.
Tim: ‘Bowie once said he'd like to form a school of pretension.
Well we'd be happy forming several new schools of pretension.’
Bowie aside, who would No Man ideally like to play with?
Tim: ‘We'd love to share a triple bill with Danny La Rue and Donovan.’
Now that's what I call entertainment.
POST APOCALYPSE
A NEW England is the best, the longest (56 pages) and the cheapest (60p, which includes two flexi discs) of the fanzines yet to succumb to colour pages and advertising.
Remarkably, it seems to be written almost single handedly by one man, Richard Murrill.
Despite the common faults of publishing poetry and extensive reviews of other fanzines (some fanzines seem to contain nothing else!)
A New England manages to successfully mix interviews with nationally-known talent (Senseless Things, Danielle Dax, Family Cat, Popinjays) and local or lesser known groups (The Maybellenes, Deltones, The Sky Dogs, Trees, Brain Box, Perfect Daze, The Motorcycle Boy) tackling each subject with unusual questions.
The best part of the magazine is the wide-ranging review pages of cassette compilations, demos, flexi discs and singles.
You'll be intrigued to read about the Killer Rabbits, The Magic Roundabouts, The Flat Stanleys, Swoop Groove Mungers, The Sheds and The Plastic Snails.
Murrill uses his fanzine to actively promote unknown bands such as the Green Hornets, The Sky Dogs and The Trees whose ‘Love child’ EP is currently available from Time Box/Hype Records at 389 Kentish Town Road, London NW5.
The Sky Dogs' ‘Here It Comes’ 12-inch single is an excellent slice of raw Stooges power and can be obtained from Plastic Surgery Records, 22 Union Street, Maidstone, Kent ME14 1ED or from A New England for £2.
And there's flexis too!
Take note of the technical tips, ‘In the true tradition of flexis, if at first your disc sounds jumpy and unplayable, just stick a coin in the middle and everything should come up roses.’
The first flexi features The Men From Uncle, The Honeymoon and The Rush Goalies.
Predictably, The Men From Uncle have that authentic Monkees sound complete with pathetic hand clapping.
The Honeymoon are better but their ‘How Much More Do You Want’ does sound like The Wedding Present.
The second flexi is on Spike's Label who are based in Halifax.
Unfortunately, this has suffered in the post, but Langfield Crane, Fez and The Chinese Gangster Element all seem to offer power pop in The Housemartins or Bridewell Taxis vein.
Roberta Junk do sound like a wacky tip for the top!
Contact Spike at 6 Lake View, Booth Town, Halifax.
A New England is available from 9 Gainsborough Close, Folkestone, Kent, CT19 5NB.
Snowy Brown
SENSELESS THINGS
L7 ‘DOWN WITH foxcore!’
Donita Sparks, guitar/vocalist of LA's fastest rising all-girl grunge brawlers L7, is distinctively unimpressed by attempts to generate a movement around the new breed of female Stateside rockers.
‘We don't like it at all,’ she protests.
‘It's like saying an all-woman band are just vaginas on stage.
It's really sexist, lumping us together with bands who really have nothing to do with each other, and nothing to do with us.
We've worked hard for too many years to be dismissed like that.’
She need have little fear of her group getting lost in categorisation.
After wowing audiences on their recent British tour with Sub Pop labelmates Nirvana, L7 can be assured of a warm welcome in their own right, having earned a reputation for stage-diving lunacy to match their toughly feminine hard knock rock.
‘Yeah, it's really been fun,’ agrees Donita.
‘The gigs we enjoy best are when the audience are willing to make total assholes of themselves and go really goofy.
That's great, cos it encourages us to make assholes of ourselves.
When it's a good show, I just wish I could put my guitar down and really join in.
One time in Houston, Texas, I stagedived and took about ten people with me.
Even Tad couldn't have done better.
‘But it's odd, we had these great reviews after our Leeds show, and I thought we totally bombed.
After that one, we were ready to throw in the moist towelette, y'know?’
Er, sort of.
What isn't open to misinterpretation is L7's monster sense of humour, frequently revolving around a sexuality that challenges the dozy male preconceptions still prevalent in the r'n'r nuthouse.
Like how do audiences respond to their joking complains about the lack of ‘sausage’ in Germany?
‘Cool guys think it's great and so do cool girls, too.
It's only people who are sexist already who feel threatened.
But there's nothing to be threatened by,’ insists Donita.
‘We're not ballbusters or female chauvinists, we just like to have fun with everybody.’
SCOPE FOR THE FUTURE
The Chameleons were the last band to come out of Aston-Under-Lyme — but don't let that put you off.
TIM PEACOCK predicts scope and glory for the PARIS ANGELS.
Kisses by IAN T TILTON.
LEGEND HAS it that Ashton-Under-Lyme is so grimy that all its flowers are permanently encrusted with soot.
In fact, Manchester's east side (officially referred to as Tameside) is renowned for little more than the sweat and dirt of industry.
The idea that any music scene could exist here seems risible.
And yet, it's this region of slumbag Manchester that has spawned one of the rainy city's brightest current hopes, the Paris Angels.
Coarse vox man Rikky Turner agrees with my assertion about his native Ashton.
‘We're the only thing to have happened from this part of town for ages, he says.
‘The first thing since The Chameleons, I suppose.
But that's cos we're the only ones with any talent.
‘I wasn't into The Chameleons anyway,’ he finishes.
‘They represented the dark, gothy side of music.
I'm not into that kind of doom at all.’
Indeed, the Paris Angels' grade of high pressure, spacey funk is far closer in execution to the dance-enhanced Manc moves of late.
But, as bassist Scott Carey believes, the rest of Manchester is immaterial.
‘As far as we're concerned, it's the Paris Angels and that's it,’ he says bluntly.
‘That's the Manchester scene summed up for you in one sentence.’
‘Yeah, our sound could go anywhere now we've got more money and better equipment,’ continues Rikky.
‘Believe me, we've worked  fuckin' hard to get where we are now after three years of slog.’
JUDGING BY the Paris Angels new single, ‘Scope’, the effort has paid dividends.
It's a step on from the orbital groove of their summer debut, ‘Perfume’, and the crucial 12-inch features a housey cross-current lapping against Steven ‘Toity’ Tajti's contagious keyboard hook, while the flip wheels out a straighter mix and an alternate take (‘Scope Two’) to ensure all-over body spasms.
‘Scope’ looks like an assured chart return.
However, Rikky doesn't approach Angels' music with commercialism in mind.
‘We're willing to experiment in any area outside of heavy metal,’ he admits.
‘We've been doing this Velvets-type thing recently with string.
Like, going over towards classical’
Classical?
Strewth, this all sounds a tad highbrow for a group who persistently hanker after the pleasures of life rather than moan about dark clouds on the horizon.
Rikky: ‘I think hedonism's the one thing bands should be preaching, if they must ‘preach’ anything at all.’
‘Music's not about being political,’ reckons Scott, ‘it's for gettin' off on.
If you're gonna think of anything it should be sex, cos our rhythms are, like…sensual.’
Rikky eyes me darkly.
‘And it doesn't necessarily mean taking loads of drugs either.
I mean, that whole E scene was important for a while.
But I'll tell you this — I've not done E since 1988 and I don't miss it.
‘At the time perhaps it was a creative influence on our music, but all I ended up with was a jaw that continually hurt me.
It's not an important part of any imaginative process any more.’
The seven-strong Angelic throng — completed by co-vocalist Jane Gill, guitarists Mark Adge and Paul ‘Wags’ Wagstaffe and drummer Simon Worrall — are blessed with a sussed, streetwise awareness.
But they also have braincells to rub together — something that outsiders find difficult to stomach.
‘There's a strange kind of jealousy about us that's got around,’ reckons Rikky.
‘When we were in Edinburgh, this bastard stuck a knife in me head for no reason.
It was some kid on a jumped up ego trip.’
Rubbing his head, he continues, ‘I've still got a nice big scar to prove it, but those sort of people have ego problems, not us.’
IT'S NOT as though the Angels attempt to court trouble, either.
In the main, they're not even 24-hour party folk.
‘To me, clubs aren't important at all,’ says Rikky, lighting a foul-smelling Greek cigarette.
‘I just like goin' to the pub.
I'm not on some stupid fame trip.’
Rikky is, however, into travelling.
But with the Paris Angels due to play their first Irish show soon, is he not worried that ‘Scope's sleeve (depicting a cross) might cause offence?
‘Nah, it's not intended that way,’ says the motormouth.
‘Where we're concerned, our religious involvement only goes as far as using images of, say, the Virgin Mary on our sleeves, but it's not us being disrespectful.
As a matter of fact we happen to find certain religious images very beautiful.’
Take his word for it people: Ashton's winged fellowship are homing in on you.
WELCOME TO THE TERROR TOWN
Once reviled in these very pages, FIVE THIRTY bounce back from schooldaze obscurity to swipe two Singles Of The Week.
SAM KING catches some subtle protest action, close up by STEVEN DOUBLE
FORGET THE first record they ever bought, the real test of a band is the first record they ever made.
If you really want to know about The Charlatans, go back to the Tim Burgess' roots with The Electric Crayons.
If you want the truth about rising stars Five Thirty, check out their debut single, ‘Catcher In The Rye’, which was originally released in 1985.
‘We made that when we were still at school,’ says bassist and Mick Jagger lipalike Tara Milton.
‘I remember this dodgy little manager we had at the time sent out five copies, and I can remember the one he sent to Sounds.
We were sitting there waiting to hear what the guy at the other end of the phone thought about it and he came back saying, It's the worst thing anyone here has heard for a very long time — actually I think he was a little more abusive than that, but he went on — I don't like it and I don't know anyone else who would.
Destroyed a few 17-year olds' ambitions for a while, I can tell you.’
Five Thirty's ambitions were rekindled earlier this year when the band (still essentially the same — Tara on bass and vocals, schoolmate Paul Bassett on guitar and vocals and new drummer Phil Hopper) re-released ‘Catcher In The Rye’ as part of their alternative ‘debut’single, ‘Abstain’.
Although less ‘angry’ than in its earlier incarnation, this time it was a Sounds' single Of The Week — not a bad achievement for a band whose rise had only begun in earnest a little under a year ago.
RIGHT NOW, Five Thirty are as enthusiastic as ever.
Tara, with his lumberjack shirt and messy hair than hangs irritatingly over his right eye; Paul with his pudding bowl cut and lightly flared jeans (their sole acknowledgement of prevailing fashion trends) and Phil with his goofy grin and ramshackle cut.
Together they've got the attitude that comes with being a young band who've just spent the last month in the studio recording an album, tentatively called ‘Revelation/s’, which will more than fulfil the potential they displayed earlier this year when — along with the likes of near neighbours Ride (both originally come from Oxford) and Teenage Fanclub — they were seen as the frontrunners of the rising young guitar bands.
Like Ride and TFC, Five Thirty have bypassed this year's indie/dance revolution, basing their success instead on a new guitar-dominated sound that lies somewhere between the caustic experimentation of My Bloody Valentine or Sonic Youth and the more accessible pop sound of the '60s bands like The Byrds and The Who.
A sound that more than anything else is rooted in the excitement of the live arena rather than the cut 'n' mix ethics of the studio.
‘I like the eclecticism of some of that studio stuff,’ admits Tara speaking in his young, snotty Jagger voice.
‘The idea of nicking a Stones riff and putting it behind a James Brown backbeat and howling over the top is pretty appealing, but it's not really what we're into as a band.
‘It's good, though, because in ten year's time you'll be able to do family trees for records.
You'll take a song and trace its riffs back and sit around with your grandchildren playing the originals.
What other art form can do that, trace a masterpiece back to some dodgy Beatles' B-side?
It's going to be like  fucking University Challenge sorting out some of them, through.’
But while Ride and TFC took the indie way out of obscurity, gaining success by giggling like hell while maintaining a strong position in Sounds' indie charts, Five Thirty bit the big one and signed to a major, East West.
‘ABSTAIN’ CERTAINLY confirmed a lot of people's fears for the band's identity within corporate confines.
Although widely regarded as an excellent ‘debut’, it didn't really capture the band's fiery live shows.
Instead of their electrifying wah wah guitar and frantic vocals it was simply the sound of a classic powerpop trio going through a pure, well-cut pop song.
However, any doubts people might have had about the band falling victim to their label's commercial thrusts have been removed by their latest single (and second Single Of The Week), ‘Air Conditioned Nightmare’.
A long time live favourite, it boasts everything that has taken the band from the obscurity of earning five quid a day selling sandwiches to their current position.
Musically it's more in keeping with the spirit of The Jam or The Who than anything Five Thirty have done and its ferocity conceals a highly charged politically-oriented lyric.
‘Lyrics are first and foremost to us,’ maintains Tara, ‘although a good lyric is often slightly ambiguous these days.
You just don't have the people jumping onstage going, F**k Margaret Thatcher, anymore, but you can still make a point.’
The point of ‘Air Conditioned Nightmare’ seems to be that London is sinking into a theme park style existence where everything is becoming increasingly trivialised.
But is this what they think will happen?
‘It already has,’ declares Paul vehemently.
‘No sort of future tense about it, it is and it has been for a long time.
Where we live in North London, we meet so many people and 99 per cent of them are assholes.
That's sad, but it's the way society has raised them.
They're born to be automatons, consumed by baubles and gimmicks.
The other one per cent are artists or outsiders.
It's like a massive  mind-fuck that we're caught up in.
‘People like Amanda de Cadenet (the lacklustre bimbo interest on Channel 4's sad new youth show The Word) who think that no one need be unemployed because they can always go and clean windows are typical.
She's just so full of that middle class attitude that says, These people have made themselves unemployed, now they can get themselves out of it.
They're only really happy when they're coming down on people.
They're the real nightmare.’
SCANNERS
FILM
GOODFELLAS (Warner Brothers — Cert: 18)
SOME SAY Martin Scorsese's return to the streets of Downtown New York makes heroes of the very villains it hopes to  demystify , but GoodFellas' opening scenario leaves us in no doubt.
Driving home with fellow hoodlums Jimmy Conway (Robert de Niro) and Tommy DeVito (Joe Pesci) from a hasty and unscheduled it, petty mobster Henry Hill (Ray Liotta) hears a rattle, we presume, from the engine.
Pulling over, Henry throws open the trunk to reveal the blood-spattered body of a rival mafioso.
Surprise doesn't register, instead, Devito plunges an eight-inch carving knife purposefully and repeatedly into the victim's stomach.
At this point, Scorsese's vision freezes — as it will throughout the movie — and for the first time we hear Henry's thoughts on the matter.
‘As far back as I can remember,’ he confides, ‘I always wanted to be a gangster.’
From this darkly humorous curtain-raiser, Scorsese steps back in time to Henry's adolescence and time spent as a local don's errand boy.
We see him move slowly through the ranks, from fencing stolen goods to torching ailing business interests.
Scorsese's catches the delirium of Henry's formative years with mesmerising verve.
As he courts his wife-to-be, Karen (Lorraine Bracco), we follow Henry through smokey, half-lit mob haunts where shady wiseguys (the likes of Freddy No Nose, Jimmy Two Times) offer a top of the hat and a sharp one-liner to Scorsese's fluid, intrusive camera.
These early days, breathless and exciting — bristling with the vicarious thrill of brute, ugly violence — offer the movie's finest moments.
Henry's voice-over adds an amusing counterpoint to the visuals but by the time we reach his eventual arrest, on drugs charges, in '81, Scorsese's frenetic cross-cutting seems to leave the original premise — presumably, the mob's seductive potency — somewhere in the sidings.
Liotta is superb in the central role though Pesci as the mercurial and  psychopathic DeVito easily steals the picture, switching moods on a knife-edge in a calculating yet effortless display of control.
De Niro, curiously takes a back seat, indeed, content to re-invent Noodles (Once Upon A Time In America) with a darker, more sadistic bent.
But it's essentially an ensemble piece.
GoodFellas has its problems and, yes, some flaws, but for sheer dynamic value and hardline, gut direction, few movies around can touch it.
YOU'RE AS OLD AS YOU PEEL
Who's that old tosser at the bar?
Is he there to check out the band or does he just want to feel your bottom while they're on?
Andy Peart risks rectal ructions to find out that it's only genial John Peel, ‘that bloke’ from the radio with a million of records that none of us have ever heard of…
IT MAKES little different to the autograph hunters who regularly congregate outside Broadcasting House whether the passing DJ plays the new Jason Donovan single or a session by a bunch of Japanese thrash merchants.
Having reluctantly signed books and had his picture taken, John Peel, Radio 1 stalwart and musical mentor, shrugs off the attention with characteristic modesty and remarks, ‘I bet they couldn't name one record I've played this year.’
And he's probably right.
With listening figures between a quarter and half a million on his previous midweek early evening spots, the Peel programme has recently switched to the weekend and is now broadcast Saturday and Sunday nights from 11pm until 2am.
Rumour had it that Peel's often wayward left-field tastes were becoming too extreme for the radio bosses who were keen to push their bland and sterile daytime DJ personalities.
Peel's move to a less accessible weekend slot was seen as a step towards the exit door of the Beeb.
However, he denies he was under pressure to move as may have been supposed.
‘Nobody believes it was my idea,’ he sighs, ‘But about eight months ago I explained that I couldn't carry on working those hours.
If I'd been fitter and actually lived in London it wouldn't have been a problem but spending 24 hours a week in heavy traffic, being away from home and missing out on spending time with my children just got me down.
‘I did pick up a lot of younger listeners with the early evening shows and it's harder for them to tune in now, which I regret, but, without wanting to sound melodramatic, I would have done myself a mischief if I'd carried on and I already feel better.’
The new shows, despite being on at rather awkward times, are proving to be more wholesome affairs and are even starting to include interviews with session guests.
‘I've never really done interviews before because I'm so awful at them.
Once I get beyond, When's the new LP out? and When does the tour start?
I run out of questions.
It sounds pathetic but I'm also still quite awestruck when I talk to famous people.’
Ironically bands feel the same way towards Peel.
‘It's a strange situation,’ he continues, ‘When I go and see a band I do feel conspicuous because of my age.
There's never anyone there within 20 years of 50 and when people stare at me they're either thinking I'm a pervert who's going to come over and feel their bottom when the band are on or I'm ‘that bloke’ from the radio.’
With a record collection that numbers 22,500 albums alone (although he admits he could quite easily do without nine tenths of them) the sheer volume of items which arrive at Radio One addressed to John Peel every day is quite daunting.
Yet, he still somehow manages to listen to virtually everything that's sent in and retain the same enthusiasm for music that has been with him through his 23 years at Radio 1.
‘I could do a three hour programme every night of the week and no duplicate anything,’ he enthuses.
‘The problem today is one of quantity rather than quality.
There's so many good bands and good records being made but the audience for them has remained the same size.’
Exactly the same off-air as he is on, it's rare to meet someone who's content with their life and who really hasn't got any unfulfilled ambitions.
‘I've got a home in the country, nothing flash just two farmer's cottages knocked into one, an extraordinary wife, four amusing, insolent children, a couple of cats and dogs, a football team which regularly wins the league title and a job I like doing more than anything else, so although it sounds like terrible sentimental bullshit, I have got everything I ever wanted.
I wouldn't mind being thinner and better looking but those things aren't terribly important in the long run.’
Having got this far there's no reason why John Peel shouldn't continue for many years to come and it'll certainly be a sad day if he ever does decide to hang up those headphones.
‘I'm not the kind of bloke who things about retiring in 14 years or whatever.
There may come a time when I can't find any new records that I like — and it'll certainly be sad day if he ever does decide to hang up those headphones.
‘I'm not the kind of bloke who thinks about retiring in 14 years or whatever.
There may come a time when I can't find any new records that I like — and I certainly couldn't fake it — but at the moment I relish people putting their hands round the door and saying, ‘You call that music?!’.
As you get older you're supposed to drift into becoming more and more conservative but I find myself getting politically angrier with the passage of time.
I'd sooner have my hands cut off than vote Conservative.’
FILM
THE FRESHMAN (Columbia — Cert:PG)
THERE IS a pernicious Hollywood humour that could be called the ‘cute’ school, a breeding ground for movies filled with jokes that scream ‘Gosh, well that is funny’, that fall over themselves to please.
The Freshman is such a film.
On one level The Freshman works exceedingly well, its clever-clever script and free-and-easy exploitation of Matthew Broderick and, remarkably, Marlon Brando find ways to make an audience laugh with a slick vengeance.
Broderick, as Clark Kellog, a smalltown college boy out of his depth in big, bad New York, is excellent — if you can suffer one so purposefully cute.
Brando, as Carmine Sabatini, the Mafia mogul with a heart of gold who takes Kellog under his sentimental wing, is great too, especially as the script bends over backwards to drop references to his Godfather legacy.
All things considered, however, the film doesn't exactly fly so much as hope from one gag to the next, relying on the awe of Brando and affection for the Kellog character to carry it over the many black spots.
With a watertight plot that hardly suffers from its patent simplicity and loose, game playing by its stars, The Freshman manages to repel the cynicism such contrived exercises invite.
The ludicrous premise the film establishes — a nice Mafia man drawn intuitively to some preppy WASP — is pushed just far enough to make this more than abject pap, while leading lady Penelope Ann Miller, as Sabatini's daughter Tina, simply has the looks to pull her part off.
The Freshman though, is essentially a movie-maker's movie, a self-congratulatory in-joke that doesn't take the risk of letting the audience think for itself.
You get the feeling that this is a film made as a gift from the writers to Brando, who probably fancied the idea of a few laughs before it's too late.
But, despite its idiocies The Freshman is funny…in a cute sort of way.
VIDEO
BO DIDDLEY I Don't Sound Like Nobody (Castle Hendring — £9.99)
DO YOU know Diddley?
Well, judging by the response his jerking elementary rhythms receive from this delighted, all-ages gathering in Stockholm, that seems a pretty stupid question.
Of course, Bo's place in rock's hallowed hall of fame was determined long ago, but if you're hankering for music's evergreen roots or simply wish to wallow in the master's genius, then I Don't Sound like Nobody apt title acts as a worthwhile crash course.
For a start, there's no noticeable frills or pretension involved, merely extended live footage of some of Diddley's fave licks.
The near-family, Swedish audience lap it up throughout and it's not hard to see why.
‘Mona’ ensures that if you didn't want to strangle Craig McLachlan before, then you will now, whilst ‘Diddley Daddy’, the kooky 12-bar of ‘Little Girl’and the railroad shuffle ‘Who Do You Love’are fundamental lessons from the face that launched a thousand riffs.
In addition, we're treated to Diddley's special line in leg thrusts and his band's synchronised ministry of funny walks, plus an exclusive interview that drifts between songs, where he explains how he always wanted to be a drummer.
Straightforward and educational, I Don't Sound Like Nobody cuts the crap and lets one of the greats tell it like it is.
FILM
YOUNG GUNS II — BLAZE OF GLORY (20th Century Fox — Cert:12)
JUST WHEN you thought that too many of them had been offed at the end of the first one, out rides the sequel.
Is the Western a dead art form?
Not quite, but this looks suspiciously like the death throes.
That's not to say that Young Guns II is a bad film.
Some of the direction is rather nifty and it's also go the benefit of being very well shot, but then there's a such a hell of a lot of the other type of shooting going on here it's pretty difficult to notice.
Plot gaping wide as a chasm?
Just fire a few bullets, and hopefully the audience won't notice.
The plot, such as it is, involves Billy The Kid (Emilio Estevez — cardboard characters a speciality) being given a pardon by the Governor, shafted by politicians, springing his old mates from the nick, and making a run for the border pursued by another old mate who's sold out to the law.
Some of it's quite funny, Keifer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips are good but the film as a whole seems to wander round making a rather large amount of noise and not doing anything all that interesting.
Naturally there's a massive eat-shit-kill shootout at the end, with enough lead being pumped around to turn the pacific into a toxic waste dump.
But as Phillips' Amerind character would've said, ‘The spirit horse came to cart this one off about an hour ago.’
PRINT
THE QUIET ONE — A LIFE OF GEORGE HARRISON Alan Clayson (Sidgwick & Jackson)
AS WELL as‘the quiet one’, there's always been a tendency to think of George as the mystical or boring one (or the quiet, mystical and boring one — ed).
Alan Clayson's attempt to paint a clearer picture is severely hampered by Harrison's refusal to co-operate, thus leaving Clayson to read every press clipping, interview anyone who ever knew him, and cobble together a book out of it.
Two-thirds of it is about The Beatles, with the last twenty years condensed into a hundred pages, which should give you some idea of how interesting that portion of his life is.
Clayson avoids sycophancy, recounting, for instance, the time when George reacted to news of Brian Jones' death with the comment, ‘I don't think Brian had enough love or understanding’, and the fact he ‘just went back to sleep actually’ when he heard the same new about John Lennon.
This unsensitivity aside, though, George comes over as a pretty decent bloke who simply got fed up with his celebrity status.
All in all, it's an interesting read until the Beatles split around p200, but it's so short on new information that you'll have to know very little about the band to avoid a feeling of déja vu.
Strictly for completists or complete newcomers.
VIDEO
VARIOUS Hard ‘N' Heavy Vol 9 (Virgin Music Video — £9.99)
SOMETIMES THIS sort of thing gets so embarrassing that you feel ashamed to be associated with metal in any way, shape or form.
For some reason, the makers of this trash still think that all metal fans have had their frontal lobes seared from their skulls, and wouldn't know an intelligent sentence if it jumped up and shouted ‘moron’ in their earholes.
So, get yourself a crate of Dorksteiner lager, a gross of king size Rizlas, and settle down with the Rottweiler for an hour and a half of sub-MTV titillating trivia.
The actual content (Anthrax plus hooker's breasts, Manitoba's Wild Kingdom plus a junk food mountain etc etc ad nauseum) is insulting enough but the video magazine format soon gets right up your nose.
Interview, cut, video footage, cut, interview, cut, dickhead mentality cartoon, cut, interview.
That said, there are a few worthwhile bits.
Mother Love Bone manage to talk quite movingly about the wasted death of Andrew Woods, Queensrÿche and Soundgarden make ten-second cameos about the Seattle scene, and Robert Plant and Aerosmith's Joe Perry prove that you don't have to act like a complete  fuckwit when a camera's around.
Metal might be infamous for its excesses, but there's no need to glorify them.
Away with the bloody lot and do us all a favour.
NO MAN: The Hurdy Gurdy men
L7: ‘WE'RE not ballbusters or female chauvinists’
LISTINGS
on the radio
My Jealous God, currently on tour to promote their latest single ‘Pray’, air their brand new session all this week on Mark Godier's show.
Hit The North, a new show on recently launched Radio 5, invites The Parachute Men into the studio to play songs from their new album, ‘Earth, Dogs And Eggshells’.
Friday marks the start of a new music programme as Channel 4 turns its hand to dance.
A mix of ‘live’ performances, the ubiquitous rent-a-crowd dancers and this week Norman Cook explains how police recently raided his bar-b-q believing it to be an illegal rave.
Although they are constantly condemned as a novelty, ‘Cud's ‘Leggy Mambo’ shows a new found musical awareness.
TIM PEACOCK joins them on the road and discovers that they're dab hands at snooker, Ian T Tilton gets them in the frame.
Baize of glory
‘EVERY TIME we do an interview these days, it seems to be Manchester, blah, blah, blah.
‘To me, it's like you're interviewing an apple and you say, Right, Mr Apple, what's this about bananas?
It's nothing to do with us, what's going on in Manchester.’
Holding court in the ritzy bar of Leeds Polytechnic, Cud guitar swinger Mike Dunphy is in a myth-exploding mood.
But be warned: even vitrio-spitting moments contain humorous silver linings with this band, as bassist William Potter demonstrates.
‘Hey, there's a punchline to that isn't there?’
‘Oh yeah,’ retorts Mike, ‘at last you're getting to the core of the issue.’
Groan.
Still, dodgy jokes aside, an evening with Cud is far from predictable.
Earlier on, the band had proved their worth on the college snooker table — much to the dismay of the Students' Union security staff, who obviously feared for the state of the green baize — and drummer Steve Goodwin showed a ruthless streak on the pinball machine.
Cud play to win at all times and no mistake.
THEN AGAIN, the good natured Leeds mob have every reason to feel both happy and competitive.
Their second LP, ‘Leggy Mambo’(on Imaginary), is everything that dedicated Cadets could have wished for — and then some more.
Roping in XTC guitar technocrat Dave Gregory to tweak the dials, ‘Leggy Mambo’(shortened from its original handle, ‘Leggy Mambo Gold Top Copy’) is an engaging, colourful pop offering that sounds shockingly mature in places.
‘I don't know about maturing so much,’ jests William.
‘I think we look more haggard now, if that's what you mean.’
‘It sounds like a cop out to say the songs are better because more money's been spent on it,’ continues Mike.
‘It's just that we've learnt to pay more attention to what we're doing and use our budget wisely.’
Specky crooner par excellence Carl Puttnam joins in the discussion.
‘I write most of the lyrics, but it's strange the way some of them come out,’ he says.
‘There's one track that sounds like it was written by someone much older than me, someone with experience who's married with three kids.’
The number in question (‘Carl's 115th Coach Trip Nightmare’) is actually written about a dream but is a good example of Cud's new found musical awareness.
It's a mysterious, diablo-enhanced thing and fits snugly into an album that takes in pre-pop escapades like ‘Hey Boots’ and ‘Eau Water’and then flits to the lilting balladry of ‘Love In A Hollow Tree’which is capable of passing for Julian Cope on a clear day.
Not bad for a group constantly condemned as a novelty.
‘Y'know, we could go out and make a record full of metal songs or Hammond organ covers and we'd probably be taken more seriously,’ spits Dunphy.
‘Yeah, for a while we really tried to be serious,’ admits Puttnam.
‘Like the last photo session we did, which was really uncomfortable.
But everyone still thought we were being stupid and wacky, so we've given over.
We can't be bothered being anything but ourselves.’
CUD ARE inclined to assign their ‘terminally wacky’ tag to their irreverent cover version of Hot Chocolate's ‘You Sexy Thing’, but Mike Dunphy is certain they'll win through in the end.
‘Anyone who can be bothered to see us will go away having watched a proper band.
They'll know we're not the Barron Knights or something.
‘And it can work for us, too,’ reckons Carl.
‘Because our boundaries are less restrictive, we get away with more.
‘Like, we know The Wedding Present and Dave Gedge has told me before that he's jealous of us cos we can go off on tangents and do our own thing without losing an audience.’
Perhaps not surprisingly, Cud feel their increasing popularity is due to the prevailing attitude of punters who desire a good night out rather than a drubbing from a band preaching a university thesis.
‘There's definitely some truth in that,’ says William, temporarily casting levity aside.
‘But we've never changed out attitudes towards our audience, so it's all down to their approach to us.
Next year, when recession time hits, people might have forgotten us.’
Can you see that happening to you so quickly?
‘I doubt it,’ muses Carl, ‘but I admit we've been lucky and we've had a lot of coverage.
Plenty of other good bands around the country have tried to grab at the coat-tails the Manchester scene and failed as a result.
Fortunately we didn't do that.’
BUT EVEN allowing for their rise in public stature, Leeds' artful loons are wary of any form of bandwagon jumping.
For one thing, ‘Leggy Mambo’ contains no spaced out dance tactics whatsoever.
Carl: ‘No we've deliberately shied away from doing remixes with Boys Own and so forth, because you're really asking for a backlash for starters and also so many dance mixes sound really soft, like PWL productions.
That doesn't suit us at all.
‘The dance mix of ‘Robinson Crusoe’(last Cud single) was done by some local people, Nightmares On Wax, but they work really cheap and no one knows them.
But while that was a good experiment, I don't think it worked anyway.’
Also conspicuous is the almost total lack of wah-wah infested grooves.
Instead, Geordie string pillager Mike Dunphy has remained faithful to his distinctive scratchy rivums and, in turn, has kicked the Cud extravaganza squarely in the udders.
‘It's a question of time and place, though,’ argues Dunphy.
‘I hear so many songs doused in wah-way pedals and think…
Jesus, that could be a great song.
I'd love to hear it straight.’
‘I mean, a wah-wah pedal's alright in context, but it can only be used to make a good son better.
A gimmick like that could only be a small part of Cud now.’
And finally, as ‘Leggy Mambo's’ opening song (‘Now’) suggests, Cud appears to be poised on the brink of far wider recognition.
Typically, the incorrigible William gets in the last word.
‘We wrote that song two years ago, because we knew we were going to do something within two years and now it's happening.
Someone even stopped Carl in the street the other day and congratulated him on how good the album is, so it looks like the world's finally catching up with us.’
Not before time, either, as Cud — once unseeded losers around the indie table — have steamed their way into the ranks.
The road to Sheffield's Crucible starts here.
TWISTING UP A STORMER
Yes, you've heard it before but JOHN ROBB reckons that World Of Twist really have come up with one of the singles of the year in ‘The Storm’.
IT'S BEEN a long time coming, but one of the year's best singles, World of Twist's debut ‘The Storm’, is about to seep its atmospheric vibe into the mainstream.
A thunderous, psychedelicious affair, ‘The Storm’ floats along on the ghostly groove, touching on early '80's electro pop, a late-'80s dance feel and even the danker ends of the late-'60s trip, while the B-side offers a spruced-up version of The Rolling Stones' ‘She's A Rainbow’.
Somewhat enigmatic, The World Of Twist are currently dotted around the south end of Manchester.
They're a late 20s, eccentric troupe fronted by Tony Ogden, an overgrown five-year-old with a leaking thyroid gland and a speedfreak decision making process.
On stage, Tony sways from side to side, sweats uncomfortably and looks shit scared.
He's also completely charismatic.
Cooking up the music with Tony is guitarist Gordon King, a lank, skinny bop of a man, and confirmed trash freak.
Of undetermined role is Julia M Seashells, a two-legged mermaid who presides over Tony with a verbal rolling in: Andy Hobson, who plays keyboards but is worn out from his other job of writing false accounts of Stockport County in the local paper; and the slides and video man Adge, who's responsible for the band's cool stage set which makes watching World Of Twist like peering into a late-'60s trash prog.
RIGHT NOW, though, the king of trash is in command a the record player.
‘Slade Alive’, what a brilliant album!’ gleams Gordon as he digs in early-'70s' vinyl from behind a mound of Elvis ashtrays.
Now where's that Hawkwind album…’
Gordon and Tony are not quite sure how World Of Twist should be presented to the world.
‘I've got nothing to say — Hee!
Hee!
Hee!’ laffs Tony in a Muttley hiss.
‘Our history is boring.
For instance, I don't want people to know that I used to be a drummer.’
‘I'm not sure if we're meant to be making this up or not,’ muses Gordon.
A product of the tail-end of the Northern Soul scene (a mid-'70s underground dance phenomenon equivalent to electro/acid's renegade '90s appeal), Tony and Gordon met up at that hotbed of creativity, Stockport Tech and settled in Sheffield.
The fledgling Twist were a lot more lightweight and bubblegum in style, recruiting Martin Fry's brother, Jamie, on vocals but they eventually returned to Manchester where they dawdled around in their own faffing style and managed to emerge after all the Mancs fuss was over.
Neat timing.
Tony even managed to find time to get involved with the early Interstella.
While Gordon drifted through the Blackburn rave scene at the end of the last year, witnessing some of the heavy handed police behaviour.
‘I just went for a wander outside and all these police burst in,’ he says.
‘It was, like, seven in the morning and the whole thing was over anyway and people were sitting around, the police were getting really heavy.’
World Of Twist are the new generation: post-baggy, post-the whole of the '89 scene, they exist in their own demented black and white sci-fi world.
These are pop visionaries dredging the trash aesthetic and ‘Storm’ is completely worthy of your attention.
MANC-Y DOODLE DANDIES
Stone Roses, Happy Mondays and the Inspirals have all been tipped to break the States but THEY CHARLATANS may have the best chance of all.
JOHN ROBB watches them flap their pop stars lips, jump up and down and spazz dance their way across the world.
Highway starts: STEVE DOUBLE.
LA — IT'S big, tacky, glamorous, sleazy and exciting.
It's also bloody hot.
Sunset Strip drips decadence and dough and stinks of gasoline and excitement…
Californians are 24-hour-party-people and LA is the capital of showbiz excess.
‘Los Angeles?
It's just like Blackpool,’ snorts Tim Burgess, the recently demopped Charlatans vocalist, in his classic Brit ‘impress me’snarl.
Six months after gatecrashing the UK mainstream, this unphased quarter are in the city of Angels — about as far away from their Northwich base (both culturally and geographically) as you can get.
Yet their feet are firmly on the ground.
Number one, number bleedin' one.
The Charlatans' ‘Some Friendly’ debut album shot straight to the top of the Flabby 40, momentarily beating off those Chas & Dave lookalikes, Status Quo and their current ‘Flakiest Hits’stocking filler.
‘Some Friendly’, a neatly produced Chris Nagal run through The Charlatans' current set, carries on — albeit in a tad more linear manner — from where the singles left off.
‘Frendly’ was recorded last June in the wilds of Wales.
It was played down by the band and manager Steve Harrison, who is paranoid about being seen to ‘cash in’, ‘manipulate’ or any of those other snidey cracks that godhead success usually brings.
RIGHT NOW, though, there are bigger concerns.
Prior to their current UK tour, The Charlatans played a four-date opener in the US — taking in New York, Toronto and Ian Astbury's Gathering Of The Tribes workouts in LA and San Francisco.
Someone's going to break the States pretty soon and — with ‘Only One I Know’ a college radio hit on two thirds of the US's 500 stations — The Charlatans are in with a good chance.
In LA, The Charlatans took the stage in eye-scorching midday sunshine.
They arrived a good hour before most of the Californian sun-kissed audience and looked like a pale gang of spotty oik kids playing their hearts out.
Tim resembled the chimp son of Mick Jagger, playing the spoilt brat to the usual hilt — flapping those pop star lips, dragging on a cig, spazz dancin' and splitting the stage set to ‘let the crowd check the band out…’.
‘I've got that ego that makes me want to jump up and down,’ he explains later.
‘You know, to be a spazz — that's me.
I've always been like that.
I always wanted the attention.’
‘I've got that ego that makes me want to jump up and down,’ he explains later.
‘You know, to be a spazz — that's me.
I've always been like that.
I always wanted the attention.’
Hell, yeah!
What else would you want from your frontman?
Fired up by the overwhelming response to the previous night's show in San Francisco, The Charlatans know that the States could be theirs and yet they still feel that it's meaningless.
‘It's no big issue.
It doesn't make any difference to us,’ shrugs Tim in his guttural Salford grind that's been chipped away by ten odd years of living in Cheshire.
‘I mean they will probably release three tracks off the album and all those sort of things, but we don't really care.
It's no big thing to us because we don't really see it.’
Have you got that young upstart's ‘fear of America’?
‘Yeah, I suppose so.
I mean some bands they come over here and they disappear, they forget England.
We definitely won't be changing our sound for America.’
Instead, The Charlatans are using the States to ‘warm up for the British tour’ and to break in new songs such as‘Rainbow Kisser’and another one about ‘people making other people into gods’(Work that one out folks!).
BUT AS they sit here, they seem a million miles from their tranquil Northwich base.
Tim, the gobaholic pretty boy frontman, is already a seasoned media pro — although it rankles the band that it's Tim's face that is being plastered everywhere.
But, hell, that's showbiz.
It's tough to avoid the singer getting the lion's share of mugshots.
‘If I wasn't getting all the media attention I wouldn't be pining for it,’ a modest Tim begins.
‘When we started we didn't know how to talk in interviews and really we still don't, I s'pose.
The same with photos — in fact it wasn't until those Steve Double ones that we were really happy with our pictures.
‘But on the other hand people put you up there.
It's good, I s'pose.
If I get recognised it means the group are doing summat, but you know I can quite happily get through the day without getting recognised…’
While the ebullient Tim chunders on about anything — switching from astute frontman to village idiot at the twist of a phrase — bassist Martin balefully stares at the floor looking ever more intense and occasionally thundering through a paragraph of bile.
Outside, down to earth drummer Jon Brookes looks like he's enjoying the holiday, whilst guitarist John Baker keeps quiet and keyboarder Rob threatens to headbutt LA's rock royalty, insulting the city's fat assets with a drunken Midland blur — he's the band's closest wildman.
‘When Rob was younger he was addicted to glue.
He shoved a bin liner of the stuff over his head, it stuck to his hair and he collapsed.
When he awoke the next morning his dad was beating the  fuck out of him!’ somebody lies later, but it's a neat moral tale, hey kids?
With a hideous roar, an old Sex Pistol plugs in for his set.
Everyone seems shocked to the core by Steve Jones' dreadful slot and The Charlatans huddle around a backstage corner as the cold evening creeps in.
‘We don't want to live the rock ‘n' roll lifestyle, the music is more important.
The most important thing for us is the next song,’ a sensible Tim relates before surging on in overdrive, ‘I  fuckin' love being in The Charlatans.
I  fuckin' love being me — even when I was ten-years-old, I was a bit of a narcissist.
I think that's healthy, if you can't love yourself no one else will!
‘The personalities have got stronger.
It would be stupid to say that there are no egos, there's always been a push and pull and there always will be,’ explains Burgess, coolly positioning himself within the team framework — the intelligent old pop heads and firebrand upstart combination that makes The Charlatans devilish in Brit pop terms.
He looks up at his direct opposite Martin and then adds, ‘Secretly I agree with him and he agrees with me, and we both agree to differ…
Us two we pull in totally different directions but we meet in the middle.
It's that brilliant,’ he laughs.
‘I never like thinking too much, in conversation you should never have to think too much’, he spiels.
SIX MONTHS ago, we were all waiting for The Stone Roses to crossover into the US charts — that was the talk.
The yanks were itching to see the pop conquerors of late '89, but a series of postponed tours and a lack of vinyl has seriously affected the Roses' US invasion potential — not that they care, preferring to slip back into the easy pace of their pre-fuss lifestyle.
Then there was the Mondays, always about to gatecrash the States with their apparently cleaned up act — and their new LP, ‘Pills 'N Thrills And Bellyaches!’ is as close to the US mainstream as the Ryders can get without losing their natural pop suss.
Meanwhile, Inspiral Carpets went in at grass roots level and worked their butts off in the clubs.
The race to break the States is still wide open and The Charlatans are on the frontline with the rest of their strange bedfellows.
‘Over here,’ considers Tim, ‘they keep asking us about Manchester and the Hacienda, or the drugs.
I don't want to talk about it, too many people want to go on about it — but then they seem to think that The Sundays are part of the Manchester thing as well.’
Worried that too many bands are getting signed ‘took quick, before they can develop’, Tim is relieved that The Charlatans had a good few years under their belts.
‘Groups like Teardrop and the Bunnymen had time to develop their own space and sound and then take it out — like us, we had ten songs under our belts.
With Manchester being really blown up, I feel sorry for those groups with two songs who have record companies turning up at their rehearsals.’
But Manchester seems very distant as the sun continues to burn down on the Pacific coast.
The US audience is a very different beast to the home one, mainly composed of cute college kids who dig anything that trundles across the stadium circuit — from Depeche Mode to the more pop orientated gonzoid metal and whatever Brit morsel is dangled in front of them.
At the frontline are the specialists — the college radio trainspotters who area really beginning to make their influence felt.
The US media is a vast and confusing experience — even for Tim.
‘They keep trying to get us to do things.
Like on MTV I had to read these lines, but because I can't read that well I couldn't do it — you know, like dyslexia or something.
They threw us out in the end, they're not very patient these people…’
‘I can't believe the power of MTV,’ adds Martin.
It's a slow job.
Big bucks means long tours, and this either breaks the US or the band.
The Charlatans know this.
With their inbuilt Brit arrogance, they are avoiding the back-breaking circuit slog.
They believe that they will be massive because their records are strong enough.
The front line is taking over college radio and everyone is in with a shout.
‘The Soup Dragons are bigger than The Charlatans over here,’ says Tim.
‘I don't feel competitive, I don't want to get into any bitching.
We just want to create our own space.
If it works out that's great, but we're not a piece of meat.’
‘The Americans asked us if we wanted to come and we said, S'pose so,’ grinds the aptly named bass player Martin Blunt, unravelling his gnarled fingers from their intertwined tense bundle.
The bassist is the perfect and usual foil to the ebullient ‘opinion on everything, me’ vocalist, and seems to be the cornerstone of the five-piece.
A once bitten, twice shy ex-Makin' Time veteran, Martin mumbles in a thick West Midlands drawl that registers about one decibel below the magnetic tape level.
Onstage, he adopts a JJ Burnel bass machine hunch; offstage, he looks constantly bewildered by the whole thing.
In the backstage area of LA's Costa Mesa Pacific Amphitheatre, surrounded by shaggy showbiz monsters who are playing out their early-'70s rock star trip, Martin and the rest of the Charlies seem a tad incongruous.
It gives them just about the only real charisma in the seedy well paid, well heeled, loser pen.
What did you make of New York, Tim?
‘I felt really small in Central Park.
We met the most morbid man in the world when we were there, he took us on a guided tour of all these famous murder sights — including the Dakota building where John Lennon got shot.’
Did you get off on the energy of that fantastic place?
‘Yeah, it was really tense.
When you leave, though, you feel relieved.
But you can't help thinking, Fuck me, that was brilliant.
‘Stockport's dead intense, too,’ he thinks aloud, straightfaced.
‘There's such a gap between the rich and the poor,’ gnashes Martin.
‘SOME FRIENDLY’ itself, the album that only ten days alter would shock Beggars Banquet and raise a half interested eyebrow by galloping to number one, is an affirmation of The Charlatans' pop groove.
It touches on all current styles — from pure Hammond pop to near dance on ‘Polar Bear’.
But behind all this pop sweetness, Tim's gettin' nasty.
‘Flowers’ is about wanting somebody dead.
It's a death threat.
It's directed at somebody who did me over when I was young,’ he waffles matter of factly.
‘And ‘Opportunity's’ about the poll-tax riots.
I was in London when they happened — I just walked straight out of the Tube station and I was in the middle of a mass demonstration.’
Did you join in?
‘Yea, I threw a stone.’
Was there a good buzz in the air?
‘Yea, it was really chaotic.
It was unbelievable — people taking apart shop windows, bins everywhere…
‘Being like an outsider to the group — or on onlooker — a lot of time the music is already written…
I mean the arrangements still need to be done.
I mean, I feel so proud.
It's dead uplifting.
Everyone who's commented on the album so far reckons it's pretty melancholy, but I don't see it like that at all.
I thought it was really uplifting.’
With all the strong gear on the album, ‘Then’ was an odd choice for a single.
‘No, we wanted it that way,’ stresses Tim.
‘We wanted to record ‘Polar Bear’(mooted third single) like it was on the LP — you know, more of a dancey sort of thing — it would have been too light to put out as single, and ‘Then’ was good to back up the first year of The Charlatans.
A lot of people thought that it wasn't commercial, but if you start pandering to that sort of stuff…’
That cocky self belief and confident granite core — as displayed by Tim and Martin, respectively — keeps The Charlatans bang on course.
Well organised, smart, cool pop writers, with all the innocence of a typical small town Brit outfit, these bastards are ready to charm a bundle of dollars out of our transatlantic cousins.
‘Northwich and Los Angeles, they go really well together,’ muses the singer enigmatically.
But then, hell, he should know — there can't have been many other pop entertainers from the Cheshire market town to play here.
It's the next stage for The Charlatans UK…
SINGLES
REVIEWED BY ANDY PEART
SINGLE OF THE WEEK (1)
THE BLAGGERS ITA ‘It's Up To You’(Network 90)
South London Oi boys trade in their boots for a much more refined and punchy new direction which lies somewhere between second album Clash and late '70s punksters the Angelic Upstarts.
Venomously left wing and solidly behind the eminently worthy Cable Street Beat Anti Fascist organisation.
This is the real sound of the street.
(Available for £1.50 from BM Box 1734, London, WC1N 3XX).
MILK ‘Birthquake EP’(Eve Recordings)
Latest offering to appear from the rapidly expanding Camden ‘lurch’ subculture, so named after a divvy dance, although it doesn't quite live up the press release's boast of being ‘the last noise that will cause heavens to crack and earth to rip asunder’(!).
There's too many metal and dirge infested undertones but they'd go down a storm supporting Silverfish.
LIQUID FAERIES ‘Milkstar EP’(La-Di-Da)
Another cracking 12-inch from the relatively obscure La-Di-Da label.
The Liquid Faeries are all chicken wire guitars with a primitive production and basic arrangement.
But they've got that get up and do it attitude which all bands should subscribe to.
Best of a great bunch is ‘This Scene is Happening’ in which singer Kate notes ‘It's so good to be alive’— it is with records like this about.
HALF MAN HALF BISCUIT ‘Let's Not’(Probe Plus)
The most welcome reformation of the year.
They were marvellous at the Reading Festival, bloody marvellous in fact, and ‘Let's Not’ is well up to the standard of first time around classics like ‘Trumpton Riots’and ‘Dickie Davies Eyes’.
The same hilarious dry wit combines with that renowned off-beat sound and Nigel Crossley retains the knack for those sharp one liners: ‘If looks could kill I'd be alright’.
Wouldn't we all.
SLOW DIVE ‘Slow Dive EP’(Creation)
The picture sleeve's whirlpool image is a vivid portrayal of what's in store and Slow Dive have a lot in common with the Cocteau Twins at their most abstract.
Flitting with emotions as if they were confetti, the ‘Slow Dive Ep’ is one of the most beautiful and haunting records of the year and surely confirms Creation's status as one of the very best indie labels.
CARTER (THE UNSTOPPABLE SEX MACHINE)‘Handbuilt By Perverts’(Big Cat)
A 12-inch of the ‘Sheriff Fatman’ and ‘Rubbish’singles put out primarily for the overseas market but available over here because the former is fairly hard to get hold of now.
Includes the cover of the Pet Shop Boys' ‘Rent’ and the wondrous adrenalin rush of ‘RSPCE’complete with arse-kicking drum machine, sceptic guitar overloads and well-sussed lyrics.
THE MISSION ‘Hands Across The Ocean’(Mercury)
At least The Mission haven't turned into redundant dinosaurs like those bastards The Cult, although ‘Hands Across The Ocean’ is fairly ordinary goff fare with only Hussey's clear cut vocals standing out of the mix.
For some reason there's only going to be 2,000 singles pressed which means you're either going to have to be very lucky or start saving your unpaid poll tax money now.
SLEEP ‘Who's The Savage’(Meantime)
Brighton four-piece Sleep have produced a mighty fine debut which is obviously predominantly influenced by US hardcore but also owes quite a large debt to our own Snuff.
Intelligent lyrics and inventive guitar changes protrude through all three lively tracks and they're a fiery proposition live as well.
MILLTOWN BROTHERS ‘Apple Green’(A & M)
Probably the most accessible and immediate Milltown Brothers single so far with clever use of the fashionable Hammond organ and subdued horn section.
Yet they always seem held down by their sheer ordinariness.
Nevertheless, the lyrics are the only thing which spoil the flavour, rambling on without saying much, and ‘Apple Green’ is proof that the Brothers aren't a spent force just yet.
CHEAP
‘Third Term’(Deltic) Re-released as a 12-inch, with the added bonus of a stunning acoustic version of ‘The Newshound’(an acute portrayal of the scum that litter the daily tabloids)— and rightly so, because quite frankly this puts 90 per cent of single released this year into the shade and kicks them in the teeth to boot.
Ex-Adverts frontman TV Smith is by far the most distinguished and compelling lyricist still at work and ‘Third Term’ is the best song written about the state of our wonderful country since The Newtown Neurotics' early '80s classic, ‘Kick Out The Tories’.
A growling guitar and a thumping chorus succinctly condense eleven years of Thatcherism into three power-packed minutes of pent up frustrations and naked emotion.
It bleeds compassion with TV imploring, ‘Don't be poor, don't be young/Don't be old, don't Be Sick/We wanted something better than this’.
Come the glorious Labour victory, ‘Third Term’ should be played at full volume outside Downing Street with special emphasis on the lines ‘I want someone who will not waste my vote, I want someone who will give me hope’.
The fightback starts here.
MY JEALOUS GOD: Radio 1, Nov 12
THE PARACHUTE MEN: Radio 5, Nov 13
NORMAN COOK, Ch4, Nov 9
WORLD OF Twist: pop visionaries
THE CHARLATANS know what the little girls understand
‘Over , they keep asking us about Manchester and the Hacienda, or the drug.s I don't want to talk about it, too many people want to go on about it — but then the Americans seem to think that The Sundays are part of the Manchester thing as well’— TIM BURGESS
CHEAP: BETTER than 90 per cent of this year's singles
SINGLE OF THE WEEK (2)
BLEACH ‘Eclipse EP’(Way Cool)
The reason for Bleach's high media profile recently is simply that they are a pearl in an oyster of normality and the ‘Eclipse EP’ blots out every other noise/female vocal merchants being hailed as the new messiahs with immense ease.
Both ‘Decadence’ and ‘Wipe It Away’suffer slightly from studio nerves and are still breathtaking, but ‘Crimson O’is something else entirely.
Eight minutes of swooning, swirling guitar crescendos undercut by a moody bass and an unrelenting drum beat with Salli's near angelic vocals creating a lulling scenario, akin to reading a novel which stops halfway through.
The rest is left to your imagination.
FLOWERED UP ‘Phobia’(Heavenly)
Not as hopeless as expected but still a million miles from anything approaching relevance or interest.
Stereotypical old dance beats, the same old rave mentality — and will therefore sell by the bucketload.
If this is how bands who openly admit to being influenced by The Clash sound today, poor old Strummer and Jones can't be getting much sleep at night.
STRAWBERRY STORY ‘Easy Peazy Lemon Squeezy EP’(Daisy Chain)
You can't call a song ‘Kissomatic Love Bubble’ and hold your head up in pubic can you?
All right then, just this once, and only because Strawberry Story sound like Andrea from the Darling Buds singing the first Mary Chain album.
Chainsaw guitars and dreamy vocals make for a volatile cocktail which when mixed leaves a sweet taste.
DEAN DWYER ‘Cruelty Called Tonight’(Hit And Run)
Sometimes in darkness you can find light and Deran Dwyer prove the point, concentrating densely on moody atmospherics but at the same time bristling with a blazing guitar which illuminates like a firework display.
Vocals sometimes come across like a throaty Andrew Eldritch and if this was a new Sisters Of Mercy single they really would be worth talking about again and again.
THE SANDKINGS ‘Earthwheel’(Sugarbench)
Did they vanish or did we just forget them?
Unfortunately, ‘Earthwire’ sees The Sandkings peddling uphill and backwards, stepping into dangerous plodding dance territory instead of their usual jangly pop assault.
It's not especially awful but lacks any real bite or hookline — and therefore looks like a sinker.
THE CHARLOTTES ‘Liar’(Cherry Red)
The Charlottes continue to improve with every release, and ‘Liar’ is blessed with a catchy tune underneath Graham's customary sonic guitar booms.
As with the last 12-inch there's also a couple of gems to be found on the flipside — the melancholy ‘Blue’ and a fraught, bastardised cover of ‘Venus’.
Why they haven't emulated the success story of the good but overrated Ride remains a mystery.
JESSE GARON AND THE DESPERADOES ‘Hold Me Now’(Avalanche)
Worth a mention for the bizarre cover of Bachman Turner Overdrive's ‘You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet’ which is rather like Frank Bruno ballet dancing.
Poor old Jesse.
The market for this type of thing is rapidly dwindling, and while the title track is politely inoffensive it has the spark of a box of matches dropped in a swimming pool.
TEENAGE FANCLUB ‘God Knows It's True’(Paperhouse)
Current Sounds favourites and ‘God Knows It's True’ makes all the right noises in all the right places, like an identikit guide of how to make a good record.
The Dinosaur guitar influence is maybe too apparent and they might have to wait until the next one before breaking out of the indie ghetto.
But for the time being this will do nicely.
THE PLAYTHINGS ‘War Madness And Shopping EP’(Corrosive)
Title of the week and sprightly in the extreme.
If The Sugarcubes weren't completely barmy and arty they might have an ounce of the spunk this half London, half Manchester (oh no!) possess.
Tina Wilkinson's striking vocals dart over the aggressive and exuberant title track with charismatic panache.
BASTI ‘Spondey’(Way Cool)
Hardcore dance 12-inch from Norwich seven-piece who are a  riveting live experience too.
Where this wins over the dancefloor bandwagon jumpers is in its upfront and in your face approach rather than being docile.
It also has an underlying pop sensibility, maintaining a steady path instead of wandering into banality.
HEATHER FRITH ‘These Walls EP’(BIG CAT)
The new wave of folk spearheaded by Faith Over Reason and Ruby Blue marches on, and the latest addition is acoustic soloist Heather Frith, who works in the same vein, telling tales of reflection and longing.
Moira from FOR pops up on the title track and ‘New Love’ is especially poignant with its sorry story of broken hearts and fond memories.
CORN DOLLIES ‘Joyrider!’
(Midnight Music)
Doesn't sound much like the Corn Dollies, who used to support The Flatmates, but I'm assured they are one and the same.
‘Joyrider!’ itself is fairly mundane but ‘Slow Death’meanders pleasantly in a 4AD-ish mode with vocals uncannily reminiscent of Ian McCulloch.
However, the Kool Aid Mix of ‘Joyrider!’ is an altogether more disturbingly dancey affair punctuated by taut guitar feedback and strings similar to the shower scene in Psycho.
Confusing.
THE CANDY SKINS ‘Submarine Song’(Long Beach)
The Candy Skins could have named themselves after those stirring Scotts The Fire Engines, who pre dated The Wedding Present's edgy guitars by about six years.
However, this powerful guitar pop onslaught brings to mind the early '80s Liverpool scene which spawned the Bunnymen.
Not so sure about the other two tracks but ‘Submarine Song’ is well produced, well played and leaves a lasting impression.
SINGLE OF THE WEEK
VENUS BEADS ‘Transfixed’(Emergo)
This is so abrasive that it'll damn near cut you in two.
Far too tuneful to be described as hardcore and too noisy to be deemed a pop/punk band, The Venus Beads sit comfortably on the barbed wire fence in between.
Produced by ex-House Of Love guitarist Terry Bickers — spot the guitar intro on ‘Wolf On A Chain’—‘Transfixed’ is a big step on from their great but claustrophobic ‘Heartless’single earlier in the year.
Of the four songs on offer, ‘Cold Inferno’ just about has the edge with Rob's intimidating vocal snarling the ‘Question all that you've been told’refrain.
The guitars snap like a rat trap and a sense of menace pervades the air continually.
‘Transfixed’ is the result of troubled minds coming to terms with the face that a world has gone mad.
LIVES
EDITED BY KEITH CAMERON
Say it loud…
PUBLIC ENEMY Docklands Arena
‘THE MEDIA are trying to say we're racist.
How the  fuck can they say we're racist when we bring black and white people together?’
For a moment Flavour Flav abandons his comical veneer, seemingly anxious to set the record straight.
While Public Enemy's communiqué remains as powerful and resolute as ever, their approach has undergone a subtle transformation.
Faced with a braying crowd intent on lapping up their heroes' every command, Chuck D and Flav keep much of their anger under wraps, supplementing it with several explicit calls for unity and peace.
The underlying message is unequivocal: there's no longer any room for misinterpretation.
As a thousand fists beat as one, Flav, the rap equivalent of The Sugarcubes' Einar, breaks into his regular spoilt kid routine, jumping up and down like someone who's just had his pocket money stopped, while the ‘menacing’ S1Ws, clad in slick white sailor suits, make an appearance as evacuees from a Person advert.
Chuck, though, is already in full flow.
Prowling the stage, Public Enemy's elder statesman is an unmistakable figure of authority, leading the way through the superb ‘Welcome To The Terrordome’ like a preacher declaiming from the pulpit.
When this is quickly followed by ‘Rebel Without A Pause’, there's no doubt — this is something very special.
Despite an awful muddy sound that renders much of Chuck's vocal incoherent, ‘Rebel’ still sounds uniquely pugilistic — a crucial call to arms that never fails to move.
At this point, however, Public Enemy momentarily lose their vitriolic edge.
Chuck goes AWOL, leaving the spotlight on Flav, who swiftly decides it's time for a dose of good old-fashioned farce: ‘Yo, wait a minute man, make some noise, make some  fucking noise England or I'm  fucking out of here’.
Apparently encouraged by the crowd's response, Flav takes matters one step further, inventing a new call and response game wittily entitled, ‘Hey  motherfucker .’
After a tenacious run through ‘Can't Do Nuttin' For Ya Man’— a rather average ditty by PE's high standards — Chuck D thankfully reappears, prompting the S1Ws, now dressed in standard military uniforms, to unleash a synchronised black power salute.
Frustrated by the confines of the stage, Flav and Chuck quickly mount the monitors, as Public Enemy turn the temperature up even further with a blistering version of ‘Don't Believe The Type’ and an explosive ‘Fight The Power’that sees Chuck spit out the admirable line, ‘most of my heroes don't appear on no stamps’with a real conviction.
Tonight, for the most part, Public Enemy gritted their teeth, kept well away from the fire and let their music do the talking.
And, boy oh boy, can it talk.
QUEENSRYCHE/LYNCHMOB

Newcastle City Hall
THE CONCRETE centre of Newcastle on a freezing Friday night and Lynchmob are trying, but they've been well and truly outflanked.
They're not bad, in fact within the self-imposed limited parameters they're quite good.
But when it comes down to it, they're just another extension of the posing and preening junk-culture metal showing now on MTV heavy rotation.
In the face of Queeensrÿche they didn't stand a chance.
Queensrÿche are resolutely hi-tech.
Scott Rockenfield pulses out the backbone framework on his suitably futuristic kit over which Chris DeGarmo and Micahel Wilton drape intricate guitar flesh.
Mikestands are abandoned, and the lighting is minimal but superbly orchestrated theatre.
But what makes Queensrÿche is the humanity moulded with the electronics.
And when it bursts through, it's a flood.
The latest album, ‘Empire’, dominates early on, ‘Resistance’ opening with savagely directed power.
‘Best I Can’ stays faithful to the taped intro before Geoff Tate and the band steer the rest of the song up to the heights, unbridled optimism rampant.
Mood change and ‘Empire’ itself is grandiose, hard-edged realism, vocals flicking through the register as lights strobe across the roof of the City Hall.
The colliding rhythms and whiplash emotion of ‘The Thin Line’ follow, before ‘Jet City Woman’steps up from dubious vinyl to live excellence.
Then, just when you think you've got the gameplan sussed, the ‘Empire’ banner is slid off to be replaced by the ‘Mindcrime’logo.
The crowd go delirious, the band respond with the entire concept.
Individually the songs from ‘Empire’ are as good as anything from ‘Mindcrime’, but played in its entirety ‘Operation: Mindcrime’is phenomenal, stark, and as a uncompromising as they come.
From the savage rallying cry of ‘Revolution Calling’, through the incredible atmospherics of ‘Spreading The Disease’ and on to the concluding ‘Eyes Of A Stranger’, Queensrÿche play its cold glare like the stunning tapestry it is.
Not feet wrong, no note out, meal like it was always meant to be.
Another facet, and the gentle acoustics of ‘Silent Lucidity’ restore the human balance before the much older ‘Take Hold Of The Flame’signs out on an optimistic high note.
Two hours from the start and Newcastle finally releases its collective breath.
If the records are good, the live act's better.
Queensrÿche threw away the rule book years ago.
Now, it's time for the rewrite.
HENRY AND THE MILD MANNERED JANITORS
Edinburgh Floral Riot
THERE MUST be something in the air tonight — apart from the hard frost.
After a magical performance from Galaxie 500, near enough the whole audience has sprinted across town to catch the debut gig of the latest graduates from the Bellshill Academy Of The Performing Arts.
Delightfully christened after the character in Hong Kong Phooey, Henry And The Mild Mannered Janitors could be Teenage Fanclub's kid brother.
Introduced onstage by Bellshill's very own Dick Parnes — Duglas BMX Bandit — they shine instantly, overcoming a recalcitrant PA that that hardly amounts to two tin cans and a piece of string.
The twin guitars ebb and flow on top of a fervent rhythm behind lead singer Hunter Edwards — Dinosaur Jr courting Neil Young.
A younger, more graceful Norman Blake, Edwards, fuelled on nothing more potent than youthful enthusiasm, powers his way through the set.
Half caught through the mumble of the PA, stand our tracks are ‘Anything Goes’— kinda like ‘Freakscene’ on methadone — and ‘Somebody's Loofah’(?).
They finish with a rather ham ‘Ballad Of John And Yoko’, a song better left to their contemporaries but we can forgive them one indiscretion.
Hopefully, YTS permitting, the rest of the country can catch them on the forthcoming Teenage Fannies tour.
Bellshill — East of Seattle.
JOOLZ/REV HAMMER
Barnet Old Bull Arts Centre
LET'S GET this straight —‘folk’ doesn't mean tweed, real ale or ‘nice’.
What's happening, since it's been stolen by a scruffy bunch of articulate punk rockers, is simply rock 'n' roll without the bullshit.
The Rev Hammer stands resplendent in battered hat, pleated hair and a grin so friendly he might even stand a chance of getting in the Camden Palace, and announces ‘There's two shcools of folk — the scholars with 27 different versions of the same sea shanty, and the get drunk/dance a lot/make free love…this is the lot I'm interested in!’
Hot off his guest appearances with the Levellers on the New Model Army tour, his solo set could almost share a bed with blues singers were it not for the updated landscapes: from illegal bare-knuckled boxers and the closing of the mines to adventures in Hackney dole office, all delivered with a street-urchin charm that visibly shocks the one or two tweeders who've mistaken tonight for a ‘folk’ evening.
With pierced nose, wild red hair and an enormous collection of tattoos, Joolz is a revelation.
Her one woman poetry act has mutated almost completely into stand-up comedy with a couple of biting poems thrown in whenever she sees the affair degenerating into shallow entertainment.
Gone is all the cynicism of old, now she's as radical, real and funny as Lenny Bruce — the godfather of alternative comedy.
If you like your humour laced with arsenic bite, check it out — you'll think Ben Elton wears dentures.
WELL LOADED/MAVIS TOI
Camden Underworld
THE MAVIS Toi manage to make a wah wah sound natural, new and nothing to do with bandwagons — an achievement these days.
Singer John O'Brien's newly shaved head makes him look a more handsome version of the butler in Rocky HJorrow, with a voice that drips sex and frustration.
During ‘Love Injection’, we could have got boring in a seedy Berlin bar.
Initially, they play great pop but halfway through the set explode into something far wilder, and the polite applause turns into cheers.
‘The World's Not Ready’ and ‘Swamp’see them alternately resemble Bruce Springsteen and a more sharp and alert Charlatans — well adept at both.
Well Loaded are bursting with life and enough youth to get refused service at the bar.
Blues is viciously streamlined to a sound more U2-mainstreamed and modern, but still wild and down to earth.
They race through Bob Dylan's ‘Subterranean Homesick Blues’ as a breakneck 100 mph rap.
Strobe lights emphasise the madness as vocalist/guitarist Dan calls to mind a longhaired Bez — all mad eyes and weird poses.
He's also a brilliant guitarist, as proved by a solo, Hendrix style, guitar flung round his neck.
Well Loaded are younger than most, full of rock 'n' roll energy and good looks — and are further blessed with an adoring crowd that dance baggy to a total different sort of music.
Only the blues can hold them back.
To boldly go
THE SHAMEN
Sheffield Polytechnic
WHEREAS MOST brands view a live performance as an excuse to caress their inflated egos, The Shamen prefer to remain tucked away in the background — visible yet vulnerable.
This, of course, is an intrinsic part of their grand master-plan.
By gradually rendering themselves invisible, The Shamen turn the spotlight on the evidence, thus temporarily abolishing the perennial barrier that separates the performer from the punter.
Mid you, The Shamen have been blurring boundaries ever since they arrived from out of nowhere, with an interesting selection of LSD tabs in one hand and well-thumbed copy of Lenin Plays Psychedelia (sadly, now out of stock) in the other.
After flirting with paisley-patterned pop but refusing to go all the way, Will and Colin turned their attention to the politics of dancing, falling helplessly under its wily spell.
Tonight, The Shamen prove themselves capable of moving even the most rigid of muscles.
Flanked by two enormous screens which depict various hazy hallucinatory effects, they easy their way in gradually, seemingly unperturbed by the presence of MC Wayne, whose contribution to the evening's entertainment can at best be described as ‘minimal’.
As the words ‘Yeah, let me hear you say it — Shamen in the house’ thankfully take an early retirement, ‘Human NRG’makes a bewitching appearance.
Will, a dreadlocked Dracula with a well-earned dance diploma, suddenly jerks into first gear, strutting his stuff with a new found aplomb, while Colin, a deadringer for ex-Bauhaus ‘star’ David J, steps warily towards the mike to deliver the final part of The Shamen's carefully pre-arranged puzzle.
Impressive through this is, The Shamen don't play their real trump cards until far later in the set.
Boosted by the appearance of an extra vocalist, who immediately endears herself to everyone by shutting out MC Wayne, ‘Omega Amigo’, ‘Pro-Gen’ and ‘Hyperreal’become more ecstatic and lavish than ever — three glistening glimpses of what the future may bring.
Time travellers forbidden from remaining in one place for more than a short while, The Shamen are taking pop to places it's hitherto been excluded from.
Shall we take a trip?
Yes, let's.
KOROVAN MILK BAR
Leeds University
LEEDS UNIVERSITY must surely rank at the worst venue in Europe.
Having opened the doors an hour late, the stewards proceed to examine in detail every bag and every pocket of Pop Will Eat Itself's thousand-strong audience, wasting a further 45 minutes of everyone's time while they play at being customs officers.
These people are tomorrow's bailiffs and policemen.
Laugh at them while you can.
After all that, the merely adequate Korova Milk Bar come as something of a relief.
They approach the indie-dance conundrum from an individual, if not entirely successful, angle — relying on fuzzed guitar chords and angsty whiteboy vocals to throw their bubbling sequencers and off-the-peg drumbeats into perspective.
More '79 than '69, no fake Hendrix-Stones-Byrds impressions, which seems somewhat daring in the current ultra-conservative climate.
But it's not enough.
Although the two singers (can't hear the girl at all) work hard at keeping the onstage adrenalin flowing, ultimately there are too many unmemorable tunes, too many duff-sounding lyrics, to allow them to realise the potential inherent in their half-formed pop sound.
LOUISE LEVINE
Highbury Corner T&C2
MANY MOONS ago, Louise Levine was part of the Puppy Collective, whose Kill Your Puppy is the greatest rock n roll magazine ever.
Time rocks on, and now she's out on her own with a guitar instead of a pen, but a similar equation of pain transmuted into wild pride and sheer beauty.
Like a female Eldritch blessed with the dark side of Patti Smith's voice and persona, Louise drifts off into the sort of ethereal world that brings to mind fear and insanity rather than the more straightforward bliss of, say, the Cocteaus.
Sons like ‘Master Of Paradise’ are emotional glimpses into her very personal world, but it's worth pointing out that this is no way a depressing sort of affair.
‘Ballad Of The White Horse’ starts beautifully and threatens to break down, with Louise babbling like she's speaking in tongues before bringing it all back into some semblance of melodic order.
Sublime.
Louise Levine is, in many ways, the antithesis of all the '90's has been hyped to be about, but far from being her weakness, this is her strength.
She could kill your pet pup with her eyes closed.
THE TAMBOURINES
Liverpool Upstairs At the Picket
EMERGING FROM the chaos of being dropped by Arista as 16 Tambourines, singer Steve Roberts and bassist Tony Elliot have opted for a new guitarist, a new drummer and a radically altered sound.
Tonight's performance, part of an attempt to save the venue from council induced closure, confirms they've also drastically increased their chances of success.
Gone is their habit of rounding off the edges — The Tambourines now make them as jagged as possible; aggressive, articulate and brain blastingly loud.
Drummer Mark bears a spooky resemblance to the dodgy motor dealing brothers in Eastenders but don't be put off.
The whole set builds into a searing two song climax.
A high volume, deranged version of ‘Taxman’, which sets the hall bouncing, leads in to ‘You In Mind’.
The band leave the stage one by one, leaving only Mark hammering away nd the guitar propped against a speaker, feeding back in demonic fashion.
Most people leave desperately trying to stop the ringing in their ears and wondering what the hell happened.
STEVIE SALAS COLOURCODE
Fulham Hibernian
RAISED ON VAL HALEN and Montrose, then schooled by P-Funk godheads George Clinton and Bootsy Collins, Stevie Salas is a natural kind of funk rocker.
The Colourcode play funk as hard as the Red Hot Chili Peppers, but with the feel that the Chilis so obviously lack on their heavy-handed interpretation of Stevie Wonder's ‘Higher Ground’.
Stevie Salas Colourcode have the suppleness which Clinton taught the Chilis on ‘Freaky Styley’, plus a kickin' rock dynamic.
Salas can do a lot of good things and guitar, from Van Halen dive-bomb howling to Nile Rodger's Chic-scratch.
There's also a flavour of The Jim Hendrix Experience about the way the Colourcode rock in classic power trio fashion, although drummer Winston A Watson keeps things simple rather than splashing around in a jazz frenzy.
White dread bass player CJ DeVillar plucks those popping lines as good as the Dan Reed Network's Mel Brannon.
The Colourcode begin with ‘Stand Up!’, an anthem as big and strong as Sly Stone's.
They draw a half dozen songs from their eponymous debut LP, plus one off the next album and encore with a cool-funk reading of ‘Hey Joe’.
A voice in the crowd calls for the mellow ‘Indian Chief’(Stevie's dedication to his father) so they play it, impromptu.
Funk has rarely sounded so heavy, or rock so groovy.
The antidote to the poison is that MTV Rock, Stevie Salas Colourcode's raw soul power is the real thing.
TAV FALCO'S PANTHER BURNS
Islington Powerhaus
THE PANTHER Burns came to London with a fearsome reputation — folk lucky enough to witness their two previous London shows still rave about them, and each of their four LPs has achieved the full Sounds five start treatment.
Sales of the albums have been somewhat minimal, however, the word ‘cult’ probably over-estimating their commercial appeal.
It's a surprise then to find the Powerhaus pretty much packed to the gills.
But wherever these people dragged themselves from, their expectancy hung heavy in the air.
This, is could be argued, was the cause of the gig never quite living up to previous high standards.
Tav & Co are essentially a stripped down rock 'n' roll band, more reliant on rhythm and basic passion than volume and are subsequently unlike to ‘blow away’ the average indie rock lover.
One bloke was overheard at the bar decrying the performance as ‘a  fucking cabaret, man’, a line I'd go along with— but this is one evil  fucking cabaret, man.
They're an odd looking bunch: there's Tav, without moustache, looking like the pimp next door, then there's George Reinecke failing dismally to look cool and Red West on bass showing him how it should be done.
Just when you expect them to lash into some wicked rockabilly they come out with the Radio 4 theme music soundalike of ‘Mala Femmina’.
The following ‘Arkansas Stomp’ gets things going, though, and when a few minutes later they deliver a truly rocking ‘Dateless Night’a great night seems in store.
When midway through the set four go-go dancers appear, the warped cabaret becomes all too slick and momentum is lost.
Fortunately, the high camp of ‘Goldfinger’, ‘The World We Knew’ and Brazil’set them up for a storming end.
And though the surprise early closing of the bar peeved more than one punter (and certainly one reviewer), the blasting semi-hardcore rendition of ‘Bad Motorcycle’ sent all home with a smile of their lips.
No encore was needed, despite the clamour for one and the band left knowing they'd converted all who had come with an open mind.
THE PENNY ARCADE
Hampstead White Horse
THERE'S A strange crowd in the White Horse tonight.
Puzzled looking blokes strain their necks for the dartboard, wide-eyed girls search in vain for the stage.
The coach outside gives the game away — Colchester prodigies The Penny Arcade are playing away and they're bussing 'em in from Essex.
So, to a screech of whistles the band plunge into a set full of jangling guitars and thrashing drums.
Singer Nick Jarvis, resplendent in what looks like a blonde Beatle wig, wrenches tunes from his Rickenbacker that tell of an adolescence spent listening to The Beatles and The Byrds.
‘All Around Her Pretty Head’ is caustic Lennonesque aside at love, ‘If Yesterday Calls’vintage Norwegian wood.
Bolstered by Kierson's flagrant ‘one previous owner’ Manc basslines and Mark Lester's sterling drums, the songs manage to stand up amid the pop-funk (con) fusion that sometimes drifts in.
Things do tend to wane a bit when lead guitarists Ian delivers the short of wah wah riffs that John Squire would leave at home, but no matter.
The boys get sweaty, cymbals get thrashed and encore ‘Headful Of Hope’ sounds like Lloyd Cole's ‘Perfect Skin’grafted onto ‘I Am The Resurrection’.
Nick tells the crowd to ‘piss off’ and they fall about laughing.
Strange.
There are undoubtedly higher mountains to climb, but something tells me underneath that Beatle wig lies a trace of genius.
RATT/WALK ON FIRE
Kentish Town Town & Country Club
ALAN KING is a good singer, gruff, laddish, but, in spite of this, Walk On Fire lack a punch.
They have some strong tunes but these are lost somewhere between weak rock and clumsy pop.
Walk On Fire are neither Guns N' Roses nor Go West.
For all their melody and King's urgency, they are the definitive faceless major label MOR hard rock band.
Ratt, meanwhile, are finished.
They can still play their sticky cock rock hard and tight, but Ratt are too old and desperate.
No backdrop, just a few coloured bulbs, and touts undercutting the box office — smell the rot.
‘Shame Shame Shame’ is a flash start, but a hollow thunder like all Ratt-rokk.
Ratt have some chunky riffs but no great songs.
Guitarist Warren De Martini looks the part — skinny, cocky, codpiece screaming, is all tart and no voice.
Guitarist Robbin Crosby sulks over an equipment failure.
Bassist Juan Croucier rocks like  fuck until humiliated by a beautifully flighted pint of lager.
Ratt fumble and squeak through ‘Wanted Man’, which sounded cool for five minutes in 1984.
A teenage girl climbs on the PA stack to provocatively mouth the words to Pearcy, her chest heaving.
We made our excuses and left.
One of a kind
BLACK FRANCIS
Manette Street Borderline
UP THE road, veteran boogie-meal beasts Blackfoot are packing the Marquee but Charles F easily outbids them in the none blacker rock stakes.
For wandering on stage, Black Francis picks up his guitar and screams into ‘Tame’.
In total darkness.
Suffice to say this is no big production.
The rudimentary lightshow soon kicks in, but really this is just Francis and a few members of the Fender clan: Tele, Strat and Twin Reverb.
As the chubby fallen cherub howls into the first of three solo shows with a head-down run through purely Pixies material, it's all a bit like coming across the devil conducting a cheery pub singalong.
The sheer intimacy forces Black to relent on his normally remote stage presence and let us songs shed some of their comic macabre cool in these affably beery surroundings.
Without the atmosphere of a Pixies show, the songs are stripped down, with only the words and the base structure to see them through.
Doesn't matter, those base structures are peerless.
It's always been hard to equate the scale of the Pixzies' sonic drama with the terminally unprepossessing appearance of its authors.
Here it's even more difficult as Black lurches around in the kind of jacket and jeans ensemble sported TV by dapper TV supa-Scot Rab C Nesbit.
This is all content and no style — visually at least.
Black obviously isn't going to rival Bill Bragg for 'eart-warming’, 'ave-a-go cheery yarn-spinning’.
Either nerves or alcohol turn every attempt at chat into a limping string of words.
‘We got a guy…
Theremin…song,’ he slurs, launching into ‘The Happening’.
Occasionally coherency looks in.
‘Do The Manta Ray’ is ‘another UFO song’, the boogie sequence at the end if ‘River Euphrates’‘a fake Jesus and Mary Chain song’.
Black's surf and Neil Young fascinations had been taken in when The Beach Boys' ‘I Know There's An Answer’ and ‘Youngy's  Fuckin' ’Up’played on the PA before his entrance.
With ‘Levitate Me’ Black enters the spirit of the latter.
Cocking it up, he brings the song to a premature end: ‘ Fuck that song.’
Needless to say, current single ‘Dig For Fire’ isn't played but a VFM set is still rammed through.
All the albums are ransacked gleefully, the audience homing in on the ‘Pilgrim’ selections.
With ‘Nimrod's Son’ everyone brands themselves ‘the son of a mother  fucker ’and supplies the ‘one, two, three, four’chant.
It's safe to say Blackie outplayed Blackfoot.
Tonight the Pixie stood alone and come to the end of the year reckoning, this show'll be near enough out on its own too.
Solo, so high.
False idols
JESUS JONES Kentish Town Town And Country Club
IT'S FUNNY how Hawkwind's ultra-happy laser shows have gotten really hip again while the Hawks themselves remain a laughing stock to most people.
The Jesus Jones show employees enough lights to rival the Blackpool illuminations, while the stage is decked out in a tin-foil type substance — all very '70s.
‘Are…you…satisfied?’ inquires vocalist Mike Edwards in his best piss-take cabaret voice.
They certainly are, though non one's having as good a time as the band themselves.
Low slung guitars and street hero poses are the order of the day — the chaps are moving about like tigers on mescaline.
‘Nothing To Hold Me’, off the next LP, is the highlight of the evening, with keyboard madman Barry D taking over vocals with a mellow rap that begs to be a single.
Indeed Barry is the star of the show even when he's not upfront.
Strobe lights are turned on to full effect for ‘Bring It On Down’, which comes complete with a sample of Donna Summer's old disco smash ‘I Feel Love’, incongruous amidst the white English chaos — albeit a very controlled and theatrical type of chaos.
‘Real Real Real’ is the populist fave, prompting clenched fists and the trippiest lighting, but it's the ‘Info Freako’that really whacks them into their fast lane.
Clad in a white boiler suit, Barry takes his keyboard off the stand, bangs it gently (!) on the floor, then puts it back before one of his customary jives around the stage, whistle in mouth.
His keyboard must really hate him — when he's not ignoring it, he's bashing seven shades of shite out of it.
Playing comes a very pronounced third.
Dry ice appears for the encore.
The Jesus Jones show is very much a ‘show’, and fun though it is, a touch more real damage wouldn't go amiss.
Controlled explosions take you only half way there.
George Berger 
BLEACH'S SALLI: angelic
VENUS BEADS: troubled minds
FLAVOR'S CLOCK gets a bit out of hand…
‘BEAM ME up Scottie…’
Leo Regan
BLACK FRANCIS: a Pixie stands alone Steve Gullick
JESUS JONES: tripping the light fantastic Steve Gullick
ADAMSKI
Birmingham Institute
DR ADAMSKI may have brought his Musical Pharmacy to town, but is he offering a cure or just hawking quack dance mixtures?
He found the right formula with ‘Killer’, but how effective will the rest of his samples prove?
Well, I don't know about a cure, but Adamski certainly possesses a voice similar to that of Robert Smith.
It has the same slightly strained quality fans of the scraggle-topped one find so appealing.
Only thing, he hardly ever uses it.
For most of the 65-minute set Adamski is perfectly happy to twiddle his knobs while the electro-beat crashes on relentlessly around him.
It's more like a demonstration of the latest in keyboards than a live gig.
This is a shame, for although he's admittedly playing to a club audience, you don't have to suppress the songs to maintain the groove — and the doctor has proved with ‘Killer’ and tonight's storming version of ‘Flashback Jack’, that he has some potent stimulants in his black bag.
But tonight Adamski either let the technology take over, or, as I suspect, simply does not have the material (yet) to sustain an evening's entertainment.
The success of ‘Killer’ took everyone — not least Adamski — by surprise.
Hence he had to get an album out sharpish and also undertake a tour of some sort.
While Adamski cues his samples and activates his drum programs, we are treated to an enthusiastic, if inaudible, bongo player, and tow backing singers, one of whom has the added advantage of being a fine mover.
But significantly, Seal, who provided the vocals which transformed ‘Killer’ from a half-decent dance number into a number one hit, is absent.
The set still closes with this song, but it's a wandering acidly mix with sampled snippets of Sea — not exactly lethal.
All in all, I'd rather have missed the pharmacist.
THE ARGUMENTS/LUDICROUS LOLLIPOPS
Kentish Town Bull And Gate
TONIGHT'S HUMBLE bill at the Pop Club went way beyond all expectations of a fairly good evening and turned into a joyous celebration.
Coventry four-piece the Ludicrous Lollipops compete in the same arena as End's Atomic Dustbin but do so with a large amount of panache and with fingers firmly placed on a bouncing, glistening pop pulse.
As their orange balloons float around the Bull And Gate, popping in time with the music, the Lollies inject heart and soul into songs like ‘Your Sun’ and ‘Disinheritance’while their enthusiastic following cavort wildly.
Debut single ‘Mindgames’ sees the band synchronised pirouetting, but their set is over far too quickly.
The Arguments continue along much the same agile lines with singer Juliette bounding around as if she's been plugged into the national grid.
Every one's a winner as they embark on a series of napalm nursery rhymes spiked with grinning guitar and sugar and spite lyrics.
‘Suffocate Me’ revolves around ‘Thinking dirty and talking clean’, while ‘Ecstacy’is pure sex.
What they suggest Kylie Minogue and Terry Marsh do to themselves is unprintable in a family newspaper like Sounds.
As Oliver Hardy might have remarked, ‘That's another fine riff you've gotten me into.’
Sparkling.
JOYRIDERS/WE ARE THE MEN
Glasgow Third Eye Centre
WE ARE The Men are six women, stronger on dialectic than musical ability, doing it for themselves.
A curious combination of two basses, fiddle and accordion meeting the Guardian Women's page.
Crawling out from the wreckage of The Cateran, the Joyriders feature two ex-members, Murdo MacLeod and Kai Davidson, plus one tall American named Rick on drums.
It takes four songs for them to shake off their own ghost, but halfway through the aptly named ‘Long Gone’ it disappears.
In the process they've lost a certain edge, for at the end The Cateran had the rage and the fury of a band at its peak falling apart.
Yet this is supplanted by a more melodic feel, songs like ‘All’ and So This Is What It Comes To’alluding more to REM than former bête noir Hüsker Dü.
Indeed, what still separates the Joyriders from their contemporaries is an ocean — the Atlantic — as witnessed by ‘Cadillac’, with its heartrending guitar break, and an octane-soaked tribute to Saddam Hussein, ‘King Of Gasoline’.
But hey guys, what's wrong with ‘Ford Escort’ and ‘King Of Petrol’?
Yup, a whole culture.
BOYS WONDER
Islington Powerhaus
A LOT of people hate Boys Wonder.
They hate the way all their songs end with a huge clang of guitars, the way they holler things like ‘Viva Boys Wonder!’ s if they're going to be around forever.
In fact, they have been around forever.
Which brings us to the Powerhaus, and the Boys' latest Sinatra-style comeback.
Having been sentenced to death in the mid-Morrissey period for the hanging offence of reinventing laddishness (see The Farm, Flowered Up), they bowl on stage like men released from the Tower.
No surprise then that the first number is ‘Viva Boys Wonder’.
But this time around things are a little different.
Scott's guitar scratches around in search of funkiness on ‘Lose That Girl’ while Rory's drums shuffle off on several fruitless guests for ‘F**I's G**d’.
It's another invasion of the wah wah pedal.
Ben still rolls his eyes and acts the ringmaster in his role as the David Owen of pop.
A leader without a party to go to, he nods and winks his way through the set crammed with seaside singalongs, while brother Scott grins cheesily at the girls during a knockabout ‘Theme From The New Avengers’.
‘This Is Boys Wonder's Lonely Hearts Club Band!’ wails Ben midway through the encore, and for a moment we're transported to Las Vegas.
Every purist in the house winces.
This show will run and run.
THE FALL
Norwich Waterfront
RUTHLESSLY AND efficiently putting down insurrections but retaining the support of the idolising masses, Mark E Smith's Fall dynasty has always led a charmed existence as the band that can do no wrong.
But even the unrestrained delight of an audience gobsmacked at seeing The Fall in such an intimate setting in the wake of the latest reshuffle — and Smith's consummate professionalism — can't disguise an essentially ropey and complacent performance.
Marking their biggest leap forward since perhaps ‘This Nation's Saving Grace’, the ‘Extricate’ album demonstrated The Fall's almost unique ability to become yet more extraordinary as they become less esoteric.
But after tonight's slaughtering of ‘Bill Is Dead’ and ‘Popcorn Double Feature’, even repeated mumblings of the old mantra that ‘Mark Smith is The Fall’are unable to erase the feeling that perhaps this time they've got it wrong.
Giving Martin Bramah and Marcia Scofield the flick has deprived them of more than just some choppily percussive guitar phrasings and deft keyboard work.
Relying heavily on the rudimentary rhythms of pre- ‘Extricate’ era, only ‘Wrong Place, Right Time’and ‘Dead Beat Descendent’rise out of the quagmire.
At other times their self-evident frustration sets your teeth on edge.
A floundering ‘Hit The North’ has bassist Hanley grimacing as the subtleties are pummelled out of it, while ‘White Lightning’has the veins in his neck bulging as he desperately tries to inject some energy tries to inject some energy into proceedings.
But just to prove what a bunch of contrary bastards they can still be, ‘Arms Control Poseur’, combining a relentless bass drum with Smith's diffident sneering, soars about the mêlée, shattering any doubts as to the band's continued well-being.
As irritable as ever (Mark Smith's only comment was to compare the trendy utilitarian decor of The Waterfront to that of an open prison), The Fall's lip cuts more ice when it's backed up by more than just Smith's mouthings.
The stonking irony is that a disappointing Fall gig remains worthy of two of most other bands.
THEE HYPNOTICS/THE DARKSIDE/FILIPINOS
Birmingham Goldwyns
INTO THE valley of the Dolls…and the Stooges, MC5, Velvets, etc etc.
The Filipinos, undaunted by these inevitable comparisons, tear into their set with a crazed gusto worthy of Peter O'Sullivan during the last three furlongs of the National.
A Brummie quintet of dough-faced noise junkies, writhing unashamedly under the influence of classical Stateside garage/grunge nihilism, they evade accusations of mere revivalism on the strength of a feisty Britpunk directness, and singer Billy Child's natural sense of pose, which is as much Robert Plant as Iggy Pop.
Showcasing the likes of ‘Boogaloo’ and ‘What's Done Is Done’, The Filipinos reveal a sure talent for refurbishing the past instead of merely replicating it.
Unfortunately, The Darkside have yet to cultivate the same trick, plying a sulky, introverted bedsit groove than which shows altogether too much reverence to an image of Lou Reed on downers.
It doesn't help that the band are grumpy bastards, expecting monkish silence during songs, and Bros-like adulation afterwards.
Thee Hypnotics, cheerful in the face of technical adversity, are altogether more realistic about the need to earn an audience's attention, and set about their task with vigorous enthusiasm.
Despite blatantly courting affiliation with the drugs'n'rock'n'drugs set, the band have a healthy, fresh-faced energy which suggests the closest they have come to cold turkey is on Boxing Day.
No matter — shooting up on the purest essence of Led Zep, The Stones, and the obligatory clutch of the early '70s Yank noisemaster, Thee Hypnotics leap straight outta the museum and into the '90s, resurrecting the spirit as well as they sound of their sonic ancestors.
‘Resurrection Joe’ is their finest moment, yoking substitute drummer Rat Scabies' pummel-vision stickstorm to a mash of brawny guitars, and a vocal performance of pelvis-grinding intensity.
Cool enough to sweat, good enough to be truly baaad, Thee Hypnotics are a welcome novelty — retro made radical.
FAITH OVER REASON
Sheffield Leadmill
THIS IS the weekend 4AD comes to Sheffield — with Lusy and the Cocteaus playing on consecutive nights — and the Leadmill is awash with celebrities.
Isn't that Tanya Donnelly?
And how on earth did Mr Robin Guthrie squeeze his midriff through the venue's ludicrous sheep-dip turnstile?
Croydon's Faith Over Reason aren't celebrities yet, though it probably won't be long before more pick up on their competent folk-rock.
Three shy boys never look up from their instruments, leaving the clear, dignified voice of Moira Lambert very much centrestage.
The vocals are the songs, anyhow, apart from the occasional flurry of six-string snowflakes.
Strong tunes they are, too.
The chorus of ‘Billy Blue’ might as well have ‘property of Natalie Merchant’stamped all over it, but, what the hell, they're young.
However, too often Faith Over Reason plod where they should shimmer, bore instead of thrill.
Here's why — Moira is a hippy.
Whereas the last few years have seen women such as Liz Fraser, Kristin Hersh and Mary Margaret O'Hara shred the conventions of writing and performance, marrying impressionistic, ‘illogical’ words with disturbed vocalising, Lambert's songs are still very much stuck in the singer-songwriter tradition of narrative and description.
To understand the emotion in the song, you have to follow the words.
It's all painfully literal, and rather old-fashioned.
Lush's large audience, most of whom chatter blithely through the sensitive acoustic numbers, seem to agree.
CARI
Leicester Square Hippodrome
LONDON TOWN's biggest maverick, Cari, the man after whom the band is modestly named, seems to have finally found his pointy toed feet.
Last seen fronting the spasmodically brilliant but ill-fated Riff Raff, tonight he casts the ghosts aside to prove once and for all the capital has an answer to Iggy Pop and Lux Interior all rolled into one.
‘Look at you all, you Quireboys faggots,’ is his opening taunt, before the band detonate the opening ‘Decoy Boy’, a lean, ragged, snarled up song that perfectly encapsulates their attitude.
Without the frills, and lurching, burping drunken stupor of the targeted Quireboys and their ilk, this rock can be a fine beast.
Cari understands this.
The suavely haggard, demonically dark and lanky Cari understands this.
He yowls his way through ‘Rooftops’, bare boned but full of soul.
Simon Girl's guitar is stripped of effects — just brutally direct.
Of course, the mascara-heavy crowd don't all appreciate being insulted, and during ‘America Dream’ a pint sails over into the singer's face.
Like a hell hound, Capri launches into the crowd to grapple his unfortunate prey.
Bad move, pretty punter.
The scrap lasts seconds, the music takes over and no-one can help but dance.
One more song, ‘Ugly’, and it's over.
Tattered and torn, Cari stands alone on the stage.
‘We are the only rock and roll band in London,’ he proclaims.
Believe it.
The Mancunian candidates
NORTHSIDE/INTERSTELLA
Ladbroke Grove Subterania
YET ANOTHER collection of mis-matched Mancunians, Interstella managed to produce a dee-liteful brand of pop music, a mid-air collision between the KLF and KC And The Sunshine Band.
A Mickey Dolenz lookalike beats out bongo rhythms frontstage to complement their dance grooves, while vocalist Stella dances around in her multicoloured cat suit, not yet the most comfortable of performers but there's enough spirit in the band to suggest their debut waxings will be well worth checking out.
Northside have taken a trip from the street to the stage without appearing to stop off at the rehearsal room, and display no remorse at waltzing straight into the charts.
The cynics would have them as some further vehicle for Anthony Wilson's warped megalomania, but despite ‘Shall We Take A Trip’ and its LSD singalong, or the moaning of what sounds like ‘We Don't Care’in another song, the Factory boss is becoming more like Jonathan King than Malcolm McLaren.
These boys are too sussed to believe their own hype but aren't beyond the odd stupid prank.
When Dermo says ‘Let's get foonky woonky’ in his Mancunian draw, it's as far from a fitting description of their music as one could imagine.
Funky is not a word that was ever used to describe Joy Davidson or the Buzzcocks or any other of the straightforward guitar bands Northside best resemble.
That they have charm is undeniable, but initially their set is such a lacklustre affair that you really begin to wonder what all the fuss is about.
A lot falls onto the shoulders of bass-player Cliff, who has to provide the rhythmic muscle as well as carrying the melodies while Tim's guitar playing wavers from the understated to the basic and only adds to the droning quality of the songs.
It's only at the end of their extremely short set that they're gone — only to regroup before delivering a final killer punch.
Northside, y'see, are professionals and follow the policy of always having the crap support band — in this case it's been themselves.
Their encore is the authentic main event, two songs of blissed out brilliance.
Current single ‘My Rising Star’ walks the tightrope of twee and reaches the other side looking like Frank Bruno, a few minutes of charming soul where they set their sights beyond the mundane.
The finale is an instrumental where Tim's guitar finally bursts into life, turning wah way clichés on their heads and encouraging the audience to forget Betty Boo and ‘Do the Dermo’.
A lightweight bout saved in the dying seconds — Manchester's still got a lot to answer for.
Dead but alive (just)
GRATEFUL DEAD
Wembley Arena
A DEADHEAD strewn Wembley, scene of the largest American rapid scale deployment since Saudi, didn't know what hit it.
The waifs and strays from the Dead worldwide carnival are picnicking on blankets in the car park, wandering round with one finger up in the air murmuring ‘Need a miracle’(rough translations: Gissa ticket, guv), and generally making sure nobody gets into Wembley till well after their heroes have ambled onto the stage.
Inside, the 'heads skip round the arena with bells on their ankles, and wave fluorescent plastic tubes in the air — but sadly, tonight the Grateful Dead never manage to make it past the mildly interesting stage.
‘Me And Bobby McGee’, already a low key song, is delivered virtually soporific, Jerry Garcia moving gently around the stage to conserve energy.
As laid back as you can get without being declared clinically brain dead.
Dylan's ‘Maggie's Farm’ comes along without a trace of irony, The Deadheads furiously scribbling the names of the tracks on scraps of paper.
Bruce Hornsby, the latest intrepid pianist (Dead keyboardists and Spinal Tap drummers both have the same life expectancy), has the quick tinkle, and events mosey along gently to the interval.
Forty five minutes later, weird shit starts, then fades into the classic light R&B of ‘I Will Get By’, before they play ‘Darkstar’ over the forests of boom mics and the 'heads go manic.
The 25 minute drum solo's probably a wee bit excessive, though.
You never know what the Dead are going to play — they don't themselves — and according to the experts in the audience, tonight was below par.
Wednesday was good, Thursday is bad.
Tough shit, but with the Dead them's the breaks.
And unfortunately, tonight the audience were far more interesting than the band.
NIGHTSHIFT IT DOESN'T COST A PENNY
GET IT IN!?!— TEL: 071 921 5900…
OR FAX IT IN — 071 928 2852
THE WEDDING PRESENT
There're going to be empty bedsits all round the country as the Weddoes embark on yet another tour.
Tot he cynics their jangling set might seem like an hour and a half of the same song, but, if you've got a winning formula why not stick to it?
A recent Peel session highlighted a lighter more reticent sound, obviously still backed with those gregarious guitars and lovelorn vocals, but whether the Wedding Present will every attempt a new direction remains doubtful.
Their hardcore following don't seem to mind though and hype up every chorus of heartache with relish.
Maybe Gedge and Co can fill the vacant Smiths throne after all.
THE WEDDING PRESENT play St Andrews (Thursday), Dingwall (Friday), Glasgow (Saturday), Hull (Sunday), and Sunderland (Monday).
FIVE THIRTY
Anyone who remembers the magic of the wah way infested '60s, or indeed the brilliance of The Jam is probably far too old and knackered to go to gigs, so here's a chance to grab the best of both worlds, all in one band!
Five Thirty have managed to harness themselves into a sound that nods towards the '60s but keeps its arse firmly placed on a '90s seat and its head ensconced in a pretty rock 'n' roll street attitude.
With the mass of press acclaim that greeted their early shows, and the ‘Abstain’ single, they seem to be able to do no wrong.
Having fought the good fight with anti-poll tax benefits, and the recent back-to-roots tour of London's teething ground pubs, it's out now on another lengthy tour of all those places that you always see in the gig guides and wonder what they're like, paradoxically to promote a single called ‘Air Conditioned’, which these places rarely seem to be.
FIVE THIRTY play Buckley (Wednesday), Lancaster (Thursday), Edinburgh (Friday), Glasgow (Saturday), Newcastle (Monday), and Coventry (Tuesday).
CIRCUS OF POWER
Led by Teenage Mutant Hero Biker dude Alex Mitchell, Circus Of Power are well into the concept or raising hell.
This might be essentially kerosene-laced gutter rock, but very few bands can deliver with the power and energy COP wring out of it.
Trading on the anger inherent in t heir home of New York, COP's tales are sometimes vicious street level tables of the generally seamier end of society.
COP don't believe in pulling punches, and while they're not too high up in the musical originality stakes, there's blood and fire mixed in there somewhere.
CIRCUS OF POWER play London Charing Cross Road Marquee (Thursday), Milton Keynes (Friday), Edinburgh (Saturday), Bradford (Monday), Birmingham (Tuesday).
VENUE VIEW THE CUBE CLUB
Kentish Town, London NW5
A trip to North London in the middle of the week is hardly an inviting prospect but the Cube Club at the Bull And Gate in Kentish Town on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights has made the nearby tube station seem like a home from home for the discerning music lover.
The amiable Cube boys — Chris, Pat and Mark — have continually promoted a wide variety of up and coming acts in a friendly setting and with three bands a night you can usually find something to make your ears prick up.
Plus, the excellent PA won't give you hearing loss.
Recent semi-secret gigs have included Carter (The Unstoppable Sex Machine), Snuff and The Senseless Things.
The word is there's going to be a few more surprises closer to Christmas which makes attendance between now and then damn near compulsory.
In fact the only drawback about the Cube is that you're more than likely to find one or two of the Sounds freelancers propping up the bar but, aside from that, there aren't many better ways to spend the approaching cold winter evenings than in the comfort of decent live music and good company.
ALBUMS EDITED BY KEITH CAMERON
HANKY PANKY
ROLLINS BAND
‘Turned On’(¼ Stick Records)
AT LAST it's here — the God-forsaken rumble the world's been waiting for ever since it became clear just how deadly a live phenomenon the Rolins Band are.
Recorded in Vienna on their '89 tour of duty and mixing established Rollins-show standards from ‘Hot Animal Machine’, ‘Life Time’ and ‘Hard Volume’along with a handful of (as yet) unreleased items — the most spectacular being the towering desolation of ‘Out There’—‘Turned On’is the closest possible documentation of the live Rollins experience short of having the man come and play in your front room.
Never one to idly beat around the bush, Hank gets straight to the heart of the matter, addressing the crowd with all the battle-charred frankness of a heard-headed grunt as he informs them, ‘thanks for coming on down and well, good luck…’
Short, bitter sweet and brutally to the point.
Limbering up for the ensuing psychological/physical endurance marathon on the groove-locked crawling king snake blues of ‘Lonely’, from there on in there's no turning back as Rollins, Andrew, Sim Cain, and Chris Haskett seriously screw on the power, tail-shunting their hysterically intense cover of the Pink Fairies' ‘Do It’ in the process.
Believe it, brothers and sisters, no other band anywhere can so consistently articular what's little short of a full-scale earthquake — one that's flavoured with more than the odd hint of Isaac Hayes, James Brown, Blue Cheer, Swans and vintage Black Sabbath!
Hank high on Sabbath?
Don't look so surprised.
After the searing, palpitating mass of the album's centrepiece — the gargantuan segue of ‘Down And Away’ and ‘Turned Inside Out’— has blown itself into oblivion, Hank is heard introducing the band as ‘Geezer Butler, Bill Ward, Tony Iommi and myself — Ozzy Osbourne’.
Hard as nails he may be but don't let anyone tell you Hank hasn't got a sense of humour.
Total and complete exhilaration — this is the real ‘heavy metal’.
As hellfire-spiced love muffins go this beauty rates five big ones in any self-respecting cookie jar.
MICA PARIS
‘Contribution’(4th & Broadway)
‘CONTRIBUTION’ IS subtle and mesmeric, an insidious dance record.
Excepting ‘Take Me Away’, a more upfront raver, and the brassy ‘Just To Be With You’, these grooves have a lazy quality, smooth and understated.
The songs, though, are too good, and the melodies too strong, for ‘Contribution’ to grow bland.
‘If I Luv U 2 Nite’ is a song Prince wrote for Mica.
The rhythm shuffles like two tracks before it, but as with Sinead O'Connor's ‘Nothing Compares 2 U’, you can sense Prince in the song, particularly in some light, cooing backing vocals.
The lyrics, 2, are unmistakably Prince, all 2s and 4s and Us, with a sentiment similar to Janet Jackson's AIDS generation love song ‘Let's Wait Awhile’—‘it's just that I didn't think our first date should be in bed’.
Featuring guest rapper Rakim, ‘Contribution’ itself is a plea for unity echoed later in ‘Take Me Away’(a bright song with a sad lyric) and ‘Who Can We Blame’.
The latter closes the album with an everyday tale of a desperate kid turned gun-toting cokefreak; Mica's ‘In The Ghetto’.
‘Contribution’ is cool and caring and proves that not all great soul voices are as old-fashioned as Whitney Houston.
WARRANT
‘Cherry Pie’(CBS)
THIS BUNDLE of joy is currently the second-fastest selling album in America, behind George Michael's ‘Listen Without Prejudice Volume 1’.
Warrant are the definitive MTV rock act.
‘Cherry Pie’ is adolescent band slang.
The sleeve art features a busty waitress dropping a slice of cherry pie, the pie frozen mid-air covering her pubic area.
There's a fine line between clever and stupid and Warrant are nowhere near it.
The music is dumb dumb dumb rock clunk, heavily glazed squirming cock-prod riffs and tweety choruses.
‘Uncle Tom's Cabin’ begins with banjo and acoustic guitar by singer Jani Lane's bro (‘courtesy of his mom’!) but it soon gets down to a twin axe wank.
CBS see Warrant as the new Poison and, in yet another amazing rock coincidence, Poison guitarist CC Deville plays lead on the hot pumping title track.
produced to a glittery crunch by Beau ‘Er, Ratt?’
Hill, these tunes leap out from a radio like recent Def Leppard, Nelson and Aerosmith singles, and once you've got airplay, you've got America.
It was said that Warrant's last album — also their first ‘Dirty Rotten Filthy Stinking Rich’— was made without them.
The producer of that record, Stevie Salas, won't deny or confirm the rumours.
‘Cherry Pie’, the band claim, is all their own, and it will make them dollar millionaires.
Think of all those candy bars they'll be able to buy.
HILT
‘Call The Ambulance Before I Hurt Myself’(Nettwerk)
FORMED AROUND the nucleus of Canadian techno trash terrorists Dwayne Goettel and Cevin Key of Skinny Puppy, plus Al Nelson of Flu, the Hilt line-up actually precedes Skinny Puppy by several years.
Nelson and Key played together in punk bands in the late '70s until the latter went to Japan and was taken aback by Tokyo's nascent Technopolitan revolution, with bands like Yellow Magic Orchestra taking the spirit of Kraftwerk into the 21st century.
Returning to Vancouver, he formed a band called Images In Vogue, vaguely New Romantic percussors to this unit which split in 1984.
Six years later, the band reformed as Hilt to make a record, the result being ‘Ambulance’.
It crosses computerised electro rhythms with the mental thrash guitar and vocal elements of Flu, and unlike Frontline Assembly spin-off Noise Unit's recent LP ‘Response Frequency’, the noises on this Hilt album are surprisingly approachable.
There are the almost commercial songs ‘Stone Man’ and ‘Let's Fall Out’.
There's also more humour in the titles, lyrics and samples than we're used to from the techno end of the market.
These eleven tracks (16 on the CD) sound half-improvised, some perhaps quick-fire sketches for other pieces they'll never get around to writing.
Take the spaced out I'm Standing On The Rim’, which has enough hints for at least three other songs.
With Skinny Puppy signed to a major, it looks like they could soon break out of the cult ghetto.
But hopefully their success doesn't prevent another Hilt album one day.
SOFA HEAD
‘What A Predicament’(Meantime)
THE SMALL £5 in the corner (as in pay no more than) is a good introduction to Sofa Head's second album, and inside it shrewdly builds on the foundations set by last year's ‘Pre Marital Yodelling’.
The most immediately noticeable different from their debut is that Claire's vocals sound wholeheartedly more agreeable when she's not being forced to shout along at breakneck speed and ‘What A Predicament’ allows her space to work within its range of varied musical styles.
Sofa Head's greatest asset is the realisation that you don't have to set your sights on one target.
So, from the all out thrash of ‘Invitation To Dinner’ the album veers through the enchanting ‘I Can See You’, where Dr and the Medics meet The Alarm (I kid you not), to the dark, disturbing ‘Come To Daddy’, a frank account of child abuse with nightmarish male vocals and Clair taking the role of the innocent child to chilling effect.
There's even a touch of dub reggae in ‘Fill’, and an intriguing finale which includes smart cover versions of The Doors' ‘Break On Through’ and Suzanne Vegas' ‘Luka’.
Although occasionally slipping into the realms of standard speedcore and generally tackling some well worn lyrical subjects, it's obvious that Sofa Head are intrepid explorers venturing into unchartered waters.
THE JAMES TAYLOR QUARTET’
‘Do Your Own Thing’(Polydor)
THERE ARE two ways of playing the Hammond Organ.
You can either treat it like it's your worst enemy (see The Small Faces, The Prisoners) or you don't.
If you choose the second alternative, the result usually ends up as an unhealthy hybrid of the Sale Of The Century theme and a Mick Talbot solo album.
Fortunately, ex-Prisoner James Taylor is aware of the problem and is finally coming to terms with it after five albums of patchy solo meanderings.
Despite the electricity generated on parts of ‘The Moneyspyder’ and to some extend on ‘Wait A Minute’(particularly the hit-that-never was, ‘Theme From Starsky and Hutch’), James has never quite harnessed the fury of his old band to his all-consuming love of jazz.
But this is a far more coherent assault.
Still, for all its high points (and brilliant sleeve), ‘Do Your Own Thing’ remains an enjoyable but unsurprising album.
The organ seems lost half the time, and without the vocals that enliven the wonderfully funky ‘Love The Life’ and excellent ‘The Money’, side two slips away into formula.
You can almost hear them muttering ‘that's another album done’, come to the end.
As ever, complacency remains James' greatest enemy, when in reality the door is open for a full scale assault on the charts if he and brother David rekindle some of the energy of yore.
Do your own thing by all means, but don't let opportunity pass you by.
RHINO BUCKET
‘Rhino Bucket’(Reprise)
MORE THAN the new AC/DC album, Rhino Bucket's debut has all the marks of classic AC/DC: hard chording, big hooks, simple beats, liquor on its breath.
Were this the new AC/DC record, it would be acclaimed as their toughest, and finest, since ‘Back In Black’.
‘Rhino Bucket’ is a killer headbanger, but it is the work of the Kingdom Come of big-balled bad-boy boogie, so to speak.
If you dig ‘Powerage’ and ‘Dirty Deeds’, you'll dig the Bucket.
Their style is Chuck Berry via AC/DC.
Georg Dolivo's vocals are evocative of Bon Scott, or more accurately a drunk Joe Elliot.
Daniel Rey (New York street rock producer — his credits include the Ramones — turned guitarist in reanimated Masters Of Reality) gives Rhino Bucket a sound like AC/DC used to get with Harry Vanda and Uncle George Young.
Every humming chord recalls ‘Sin City’ or ‘Down Payment Blues’.
To their credit, Rhino Bucket's tunes aren't straight cops, with the exception of ‘Train Ride’, which is, for a minute at least, ‘Ride On’.
Kingdom Come stopped aping Led Zeppelin after that infamous first album.
They turned out to be a good power-rock band doomed by personality clashes and their own audacity.
Rhino Bucket's debut is reminiscent of Kingdom Come's — it's a good album, but it sounds like somebody else's.
THE NORTHSIDE Johnny Fartpants competition was a gas
ANOTHER 25 minute drum solo takes its toll on Gerry Garcia Alastair Indge
THE ROLLIES: total and complete exhilaration
THE WASP FACTORY
‘Pretty Quickly…
Ugly Slowly’(Midnight)
IN THE current lukewarm musical climate there is something very likeable about a record that genuinely leaves you at a loss for words.
In the early to mid-'80s, The Wasp Factory's prole art debut would not have seemed so brave, but in releasing an album bound to infuriate and confuse most who cross its path at this time they really are pressing their luck.
Beginning with the noisy sub-poetic ‘Dies Irae I’(conceivably something an unbalanced literature student dreamed up in desperation) which is invested with an insectival repulsion, The Wasp Factory get right up your nose.
Never mind, though, because the instrumental ‘good Mesh’ rides out, a regular opus next to‘Dies Irae I’, but then so is a malfunctioning washing machine.
Only two tracks in and you're wondering how much you want to go on.
By the time ‘Cobweb Soup’ grinds in on thin guitar it's already too late, as curiously gets the better of you.
Alas, the joke — if that's what it is — is wearing thin, the calamitous arrangements and bland narrative vocals militating against even the most patient hearing.
The strangeness of this music puts you off the scent of its skillfulness, which is a shame in a way, but there's absolutely no way it is unintentional.
The spaced-out freefall of ‘Dog Tooth’ drawing the line for all but the committed to willingly overstep.
Conclusion: The Wasp Factory will sell few records.
ALICE IN CHAINS
‘Facelift’(CBS)
GOD KNOWS what they're putting in the water in Seattle these days, but it's got to be something pretty potent.
Jet City, not content with having Mother Love Bone, the whole Sub Pop thing, and Queensrÿche as its favoured rock sons, now spews up Alice In Chains.
Quality and quantity in one area, and Alice are easily at the twin peaks of both.
The reference points on this aren't easy to track down, but try imagining King's X with Mudhoney influences and you're probably halfway there.
But then, Alice draw so many varied threads into the weave it's difficult to work out exactly where they're coming from.
Two strands running shotgun constantly through ‘Facelift’ are the immense industrial riffs of Jerry Cantrell's guitar and Layne Staley's powerfully emotive singing.
Staley delivers the dark and twisted lyrics with the passion of a soul singer, rising up and above the brood heavy music like a hurricane on heat.
The impact is pretty serious.
Alice stretch riffs out on the rack into huge yomping monsters and whip a metallic tapestry of the bizarre over the top.
‘Man In The Box’ starts with a strange array of almost Eastern textures before bleeding into slow-motion rock, ‘Confusion’goes with grunge driven soul before slowing down again into spaced-out guitar strangeness, and pretty much typifies the way Alice go about things.
This is one band into barrier breaking and category crushing in a big way.
‘I Can't Remember’ throws a curve ball, the expected ballad developing into eerie strangeness, ‘It Ain't Like That’is Sub Prop grunge preceding total fretboard freakout, and ‘Put You Down’rides on the back of a neo-psychedelic '60s power trio workout.
But it's ‘Real Thing’, a vicious, funk-oriented cacophony that truly sends the album out in style and catapults them into the five star catch area.
Alice In Chains are here, and SEattle's never seemed a better place to live.
ALTERNATIVE TV
‘Dragon Love’(Chapter 22)
OL' MARK Perry's been around y'know — in at the start, an integral part, remember '77 — but apart from founding the fanzine, Sniffin' Glue, he's never really made a go of it as a rocker.
Not that ATV haven't had their glory days.
‘Love Lies Limp’ was a hoot in its day, ‘Life’impressed as a deranged protest anthem and ‘Vibing Up The Senile Man’is still prone to be namechecked.
But basically they were always second division stuff.
Even at their best in the early '80s, with the great Alison Phillips on drums, they were merely a poor man's Fall/Three Johns/Creepers, although always reliable for a good live set.
Now ATV are back — older, wiser and still plying an honest trade.
‘Dragon Love’ isn't actually a bad LP, it's just difficult to see why Perry and partner James Kyllo made it.
There are 14 songs here, but no more than five bear a third listen.
Still, when they do get it right, as on ‘Never Give It Up’ and the folk-punk of ‘Company Of Lies’, they sound bloody good, if not exactly vital.
All too often, though, the songs sound like personal little tunes composed on acoustic guitar in the bedroom, padded out (in slipshod fashion) in the studio.
This will probably sound great live…but who's going to be there to listen?
Now if it had been a 12-inch…
FOR A FEW BOB MORE
THE CURE
‘Mixed Up’(Fiction)
WHEN NEWS filtered through that The Cure were set to release an album of dance remixes, angst-ridden sixth-formers from Bristol to Bangor opted for the only avenue open to them: suicide.
Before anyone else hastily reaches for the rope in despair at The Cure's ‘betrayal’ of their faith, I have had but one message: get your act together and think again.
‘Mixed Up’, a collection of radical and not-so-radical reworkings of 12 Cure faves, is, by and large, a joy to behold.
From the polished strains of ‘Lullaby’ to the lop-sided rumble of ‘Never Enough’, ‘Mixed Up’simply emphasises The Cure's innate playfulness — their ability to effortlessly drift in and out of genres while remaining indifferent to the whims of the outside world.
Of course, despite accusations to the contrary, The Cure are no strangers to the delights of the dancefloor.
Although you'd be hard pushed to describe Robert Smith & Co as passionate purveyors of furious funk, ‘Love Cats’, ‘The Walk’ and ‘Let's Go To Bed’did all manage to sneak their way into every disco in town — shifting bottoms and shattering illusions.
But while The Cure have often dabbled, they've never delved in quite this deep.
‘Mixed Up’ employs the talents of various dance luminaries — including Paul Oakenfold, the man latterly behind Happy Mondays, and William Orbit, of Bass-O- Matic fame — in an attempt to twist The Cure's tenacious, highly idiosyncratic pop into devilish new forms, without ever sacrificing the spirit of the original.
That there are only two disappointing tracks, then, is a fitting tribute to the ingenuity of the remixers and the ebullience of the songs.
Surprisingly enough, ‘The Walk’ is the first to fail the all-important quality-control test.
Whereas the original boasted an eerie aura, the remix merely sounds like a half-hearted run through an old New Order B-side.
Although ‘Hot Hot Hot’, the other failure, retains the manic absurdity, it offers little in the way of additional entertainment.
Fortunately, the same can't be said of ‘The Caterpillar’.
Remixed by Bryan ‘Chuck’ New, it's a delightful, dreamy rumble that throws up new points of interest with every turn.
As, indeed, do ‘Fascination Street’ and ‘Lullaby’.
The former incorporates an exhilarating backbeat, lending the song a languorous, sultry feel, while the latter is a tower of strength that wiggles its hips brashly and shamelessly.
‘In Between Days’, ‘A Forest’ and ‘Pictures Of You’are all quite, quite superb.
‘Days’, in particular, is exceptional.
Incorporating the bare bones of the original, William Orbit uses Smith's weary voice as the base, building around it until the whole resembles a gigantic sci-fi puzzle set to music.
If ever any further proof were needed that The Cure operate by their own arbitrary set of do's and don't's, then this is it.
‘Mixed Up’ is a veritable victory of pride over prejudice.
CEREBRAL FIX
‘Tower Of Spite’(Roadracer)
NO, NOT another bleeding crossword.
The cover might be a sub-Tolkien fantasy folly, but don't be put off.
What makes Cerebral Fix — ex-Sounds EP stars — stand out is the way they're busy twisting things around in the Death/Doom category.
And that, in a strand of metal that's rapidly dying on its feet due to excessive plagiarism and a glut of shite bands, means they're way above almost anything the Yank corpse grinders can manage.
This is not a knee-jerk Brit Death reaction, either.
Paul Johnson's production is a masterwork of clarity and while it doesn't quite haul itself up to the avant-garde peaks of Celtic Frost, it hammers off at enough tangents to cover almost all the bases.
The immense rhythmic pounding of ‘Unity For Who’ opens with style, before Simon Forrest's vocals OD into gargle blood range on ‘Enter The Turmoil’.
The next three tracks lace brain-stretching riffs with quick, shrapnel rhythms.
Forrest growls like a hate-curdled zombie over the guitar gridlock, and when everything finally gels, as on ‘Circle Of The Earth’, Cerebral Fix bleed over into the epic.
‘Forgotten Genocide’ is far less interesting — the normal Death turd voyage of a thousand Obituary fixated imbeciles.
But when they hit the power surge of ‘Culte Des Mortes (1)’ or the vicious intro and flowing guitars of ‘Injecting Out’, the Fix stroll into the left-field and cause a serious ruckus.
Not as crazily experimental as Celtic Frost, not as overtly grunge fixated as Obituary, but for sheer controlled power, Cerebral Fix scoop the lot.
THE MEKONS
‘Fun '9O’(Blast First)
LONGER THAN the longest dusty trail, The Mekons' history stretches back to punk rock primitivism and back up to date with C&W-flavoured pop that has gained them a pant-moistening popularity with the critics Stateside and a curiosity corner popularity in Britain.
‘Fun '90’ is an odd one, in which our favourite old people's home have gone DANCE — albeit with the cranky individuality we would have hoped from the band.
Apparently the Stateside A&M label wanted their charges to cut a couple of cover versions, to gimmick up the US public, hoping for some obvious pop.
They reckoned without the band's bloody ‘12 years on the barricades’ stance, so instead of some kinda ‘Sympathy For The Devil’meets T Rex cop-out the Mekes have flipped through their cultural range corner and dug up some tasty oddball goof.
‘Having A Party’, clattering happily along its funky breakbeat, is a proper curio, a cover of warty old folkie Kevin Coyne's gnarled throat original.
The Mekes take control and splatter the whole damn thing with their pop insensibility.
The most famous head that gets the cover treatment is ex-Band frontman turned yup rock jock, Robbie Robertson — his ‘Makes No Difference’ is the most commercial track on the mini-album and is mooted as a single.
Tom Mekon handles the vocal with the clear precise choirboy voice that's always been his strength.
From herein it gets weirder.
Late gonzoid Detroit/NYC journo Lester Bangs has his memory enshrined with ‘One Horse Down’ and its dub partner — 3D colour tracks, crisp production.
Still criminally ignored here in the Blighty, The Mekons prove that early 30s with a penchant for late nights and beer can still cut a rug with contemporary sounds.
Still having fun in 1990.
TEENY CROPPERS
PAIN TEENS
‘Born in Blood’(Trance Syndicate)
A SENSE of the sinister is sadly lacking from contemporary alternative culture.
OK, we've got Hardware and a fistful of talced-up goths but when it comes to ominous undertones the altered States are a league ahead.
David Lynch casts his ubiquitous shadow about while unknown faces below cock equally bemused eyebrows towards sinister smalltown America.
Boston's Pixies represent the cartoon'n'chewing gum element of the weird and New York's Bongwater the acid'n'art school.
But there are darker constituents too.
Houston's Pain Teens are a tad less psychotic than God Bullies but ‘Born In Blood’, their third LP, is still something of a nightmare.
A mish mash of cut-ups, loops and pounding, industrial instrumentation provides an uneasy base behind which singer Bliss Blood (yes, her real name!) weaves her matter-of-fact tracts on bondage, desire and things that would be better off locked safely away.
The opening ‘The Basement’ is most disturbing, Blood explaining what can happen when your parents go away for a few months and leave you with your crippled sister: ‘It started out with spankings with the neighbour looking on/She paid her daughter's boyfriend who would whip me all night long…’
‘Pleasures Of The Flesh’, however, is a clichéd as its title, though the simple paste-up and repeat style of ‘Shotguns’ and ‘Secret Is Sickness’(with its background of baying hounds) restore the mild hysteria.
But it's ‘The Way Love Used To Be’ that stands out through an introduction of romance and a gentle, oriental-sounding backward tape loop.
Unfortunately, it's indicative of the band's limitations that the track reappears in reverse as ‘Desu Evol Yaw’ on the second side and the dog braying motif recurs on ‘Lady Of Flame’.
‘She Shook Me’ provides relieve — literally — with Blood adopting the male perspective for a quick blow job on the common.
Appropriately, an extract of Italian horse racing commentary follows before the Satanic finale of ‘Noh Jam’ which doesn't seem to make much sense even if you rotate your turntable backwards.
‘Born in Blood’, true.
But it's unlikely that the Pain Teens will ever reign there.
THE WORLD OF SKIN
‘Ten Songs For Another World’(Young God)
QUITE WHAT provoked head Skinster Michael Gira's hippyesque conversion over the last couple of years is, at present, still unknown.
What is certain, however, is that around the tail end of the '80s he met fellow Skin victim Jarboe, signed their other band Swans to a disastrous one-album major deal and cheered up.
Therein lies the problem.
‘Ten Songs For Another World’ is the sound of Gira's female half.
Love, warmth, the earth as mother of us all and the inevitable return to the womb are the themes he reiterates, albeit through the familiar, bloated imagery of fat parasites, suicide, blood and pain.
Now at last, after five Swans LPs and two previous Skin outings, he's able to see relief beyond the masochistic joy he takes from brutality, violence and neglect.
At last he's beginning to see the light at the end of the tunnel.
Skin's music echoes this apparent redemption, being far more tuneful than on previous albums, although it doesn't sit comfortably alongside much of the music of the moment.
Songs like ‘Please Remember Me’ and ‘I'll Go There, Take Me Home’move a step beyond the rigid structure of the pair's former material.
There's a hope that's apparent throughout the album, a hope that's in part down to Jarboe's increasingly dominant role.
However, in seeing hope beyond the pain of the moment, Skin have lost their greatest hold on us.
For unless you share their evangelical feeling of redemption, they're likely to leave you behind.
As Jarboe says, ‘Your hopes are redeemed when you feel this pain/Because it's the key to set free your hear again’.
It was better when we were chained down.
NOISE UNIT
‘Response Frequency’(Antler Subway)
NOISE UNIT are Bill Leeb and Rhys Fulber from Frontline Assembly, with Mark Verhaeghen of The Clinic, along with guest guitar and mixing from Revolting Cock Luc Van Ackerit's their second collaboration, recorded in June this year.
There are some relentless industrial dance tracks here, like the opener ‘Agitate’ or ‘In Vain’, which would not be out of place amidst the FLA/Skinny Puppy/Front 242 axis.
But there are some amazing spacey workouts like ‘Forgotten Realm’ and ‘Feel the Anguish’that are a bit like an alternative soundtrack for Eraserhead.
This is perverse dance floor music — miles better to hear in a club than 90 per cent of those insipid remixes and cover versions — but sadly it is only in the ‘elite’ establishments that you will hear this at the decibel level that it demands.
‘Response Frequency’ is the real metal machine music, the sound of the Age Of Anti-Aquarius.
It does not sooth, it doesn't blend in: this is what muzak in the elevators of Hell would sound like.
KMFDM
‘Naive’(War Tax)
WE'RE TALKING blunt.
In a world rife with absurd social niceties, KMFDM stand out by virtue of their name alone — Kill Mother  Fucking Depeche Mode.
Sasha Konietzko and En Esch, it seems fair to say, aren't the sort of boys you take to Uncle Ken's for a glass of ginger beer and a plate of fairy cakes.
Disturbingly brutal and unashamedly cold, ‘Naive’ is the blown out of proportion result of a thousand petty squabbles between a whole welter of influences who have little or nothing in common.
Take the title track which manages to amalgamate an electrifying House beat, a gorgeous gospel backing vocal and a hoarse, scathing roar that sounds uncannily like Davros (yeah, he of ‘exterminate, exterminate’ fame) after a bad bout of bronchitis.
Unlikely though it may sound it kicks with some ferocity.
Side two, however, is no laughing matter.
‘Friedel’ comes careering through the door with an axe in its hand, before forgetting what it was so angry about in the first place, while ‘Liebeslied’is the sort of directionless tosh that gives experimentalism a bad name.
That leaves ‘Virus-Bub’, which momentarily promises to perform minor miracles, but ultimately comes across like a Killing Joke tribute to Gregory Isaacs.
Frankly, ‘Naive’ contains far more threats than thrills.
Dave Gahan, in particular, is advised to keep his distance.
Paul Mardles
RUN WESTY RUN
‘Green Cat Island’(Twin Tone)
THREE ALBUMS down the line and Run Westy Run are boring holes in a potent rockin' oilfield.
Their last, eponymously-titled record pointed the way, but having since roped in REM's Peter Buck to handle production chores, this Minneapolis five-piece are a far more consistent proposition — albeit one still inclined to take five and freak out.
‘Johnny John’ is a seething introductory manifesto, with Kyle Jay and Terrance James' guitars bucking like rapid ponies over Kraig Jarrett's light-fingered bass, while Kirk Justin sings like a drastically disillusioned hick splattered by life.
This recipe comes up piping hot again with ‘Keep Out’, the Hendrix-y bazooka of ‘Whatda’ and ‘Elecktrick Co's’cynical rough and tumble; Minneapolis cousins Soul Asylum and mid-period Replacements crawl from similar woodwork, but it's the Westies' diverting stratagems that stay on the tongue the longest.
Firstly, there's a brace of ballads.
For, during ‘Kiss The Night’, ‘Cardinal Drive’ and the closing ‘So Long’, ‘Green Cat Island’delves into country arpeggios, strains of pedal steel and Byrdsian harmonies with infinite success.
Though there's also room for a slice of crazed abnormality.
Thus, there's the tip-toeing blues of ‘Last Swallow’ which allows Justin's spruced-up Nick Cave intonation to give a would-be sea shanty a good kicking and suggests the Westies' imagination is sufficient to keep them running for a good while yet.
Black gold could soon be within striking distance.
13 ENGINES
‘Before Our Time’(Resonance)
CANADA'S 13 Engines, with their considered blend of ominous guitar and vocals and a sometimes lumbering, limbering beat, should have little trouble making up for lost time with this overdue European release of their excellent debut LP.
‘Before Our Time’ marks out its territory with the opening ‘Come Back Lover’, its grey, deceptively aggressive thrust very much the product of a band born and bred across the lake from Detroit.
‘It's Easy To See’ recalls The Door' blues mutations, revving up only to rev down, John Critchley's deep voice spreading over the song.
‘The End Of Your Chain’ mixes and matches Yardbirds beat with garage bluster, but with erudition and a peculiarly appealing humour — and the guitar charge at the end is great.
Entirely different sides of the Engines come with ‘The Reunion's’ nods at West Coast country-rock, the easy beat carrying tuneful vocals; ‘Cold Pennies’is the same thing minus the country, a thrashing solo section dropped in and out again just.
Fittingly enough, ‘Mothra’, named for Godzilla's arch enemy, is a more aggressive, marching along forthrightly with funny lyrics to relieve the vaguely martial feel.
13 Engines will recall some of early '80s British bands like Echo and the Bunnymen and The Teardrop Explodes, which is no bad thing, but their colonial roots make their sound inescapably one of the New World.
TWO LEFT HANDS
‘Music For The Left Handed’(Off Beat)
THE FIRST thing you notice about this is that the CD package is upside down.
Well, it's upside down if you're right handed.
TLH celebrate left handedness, citing Jimi Hendrix and Django Reinhardt as great left handed musicians.
Maybe so, but this is bollocks.
The fact that BBC and ITV rarely use the old test card any more means that people playing this anonymous instrumental pap are hard up for work.
Hence the rather desperate PR angle to puff this load of gubbins.
Left handed people, as we all know, are all in league with Satan, have deformed brains, are prone to violent behaviour because they can't use scissors properly and are secretly planning to take over the world.
They should be prevented at all costs from making records.
SEALED WITH A X
KING'S X
‘Faith Hope Love By King's X’(Atlantic)
FORGET ALL those floppy-arsed style hippies.
This is real groovy love power.
King's X's first two albums proved the Houston trio one of the more inventive rock groups of their age, and one of the weirdest; those albums were titled ‘Out of the Silent Planet’ and ‘Gretchen Goes To Nebraska’, the latter after a short story written by the drummer!
Such weirdness aside, the heart of King's X's greatness is riff power and soul power.
King's X don't sermonise but spirituality is their music's strength.
The banner ‘Faith Hope Love’ has none of the cynicism of Megadeth's ‘Peace Sells…
But Who's Buying?’.
It is simply, King's X's creed.
Their music is driven by soul-searching.
This record, like its precursors, is restless, questioning (‘We Are Finding Who We Are’).
Its words are deeply personal (‘I only know what I believe’) but they also paint a bigger picture, of man in The New Age.
And that completes this week's Pseuds Corner.
While not as haunted or bizarre as Celtic Frost's ‘Into The Pandemonium’, ‘Faith Hope Love’ is a broad work.
There's plenty of hard riffing here, but ‘Mr Wilson’ begins quirkily, fussily, like The Beatles on ‘Sgt Pepper's’‘Being For The Benefit Of Mr Kite’, and the next song, ‘Moanjam’, roars off like Motorhead's ‘Ace Of Spades’.
The key is, it doesn't sound like tinkering.
Bassist Doug Pinnick sings lead most times, but in drummer Jerry Gaskill and guitarist Ty Tabor King's X have two more fine singers.
Their harmonies — no tricks live — are closer to The Beatles and The Beach Boys than to heavy metal, the hole in which King's X are most often dumped.
‘It's Love’, for example, glides on harmonies huger and more beautiful than anything on Brian Wilson's comeback album.
King's X are very much a cult band at present, but ‘It's Love’ and ‘I'll Never Get Tired Of You’are potential smash hits.
‘Faith Hope Love’ is their third LP and their third masterpiece.
Classic rock born of a love supreme.
DAMN FINE SOUNDTRACK
ANGELO BADALAMENTI
Music From Twin Peaks’(Warner Bros)
DIANE: THINGS sure move slow around here, let me tell ya.
Three years and 245 days into our investigation and Sheriff Truman and I are still batting our heads against the same old' brick wall.
‘Cept today's been different, Diane.
Today brought a strange equilateral package in the post.
I am now holding this package in my hand, Diane.
It's a square kind of envelope and if you open it up there's a round plastic disc inside.
Diane, I believe that if I place this disc onto the rotating turntable of a hi-fi system — not forgetting to place the stylus onto the groove, of course— then we may just find the break we're looking for…
Diane, we've got something here.
Whoever compiled this musical recording is several steps ahead of us.
Take this ‘Laura Palmer's Theme’.
How did this guy know she was dead, hug?
This is a federal case.
And weirdest of all, this is the exact same haunting sound — like, a lavish, moody synth swell with ghostly piano tones, Diane — that we hear whenever Sheriff Truman or I discover another lead.
Damn weird.
And does this ‘Audrey's Dance’ refer to Benjamin's girl, up at the Great Northern?
By the way, if you're ever up there, Diane, they have the most excellent cherry pie.
But, Diane, I have to emphasis another highly strange coincidence — this cool and quirky finger-snap jazz is the exact same sound Sheriff Truman and I hear whenever something vaguely sinister happens in these parts.
Damn strange.
Diane, send this down to the labs.
It's too perfect, too eerie.
That smokey jazz sound, those spooky atmospherics, that beauty of a voice (Diane, her name is Cruise, Julee with two ee's — bring her in for questioning).
But this lady only makes three appearances, Diane.
Hmm.
‘This Nightingale’, ‘Falling’ and ‘Into The Night’— make a note of those titles.
Diane, I think we're almost there.
If anyone knows who killed Laura Palmer, it's these guys.
Meanwhile, I still can't get the taste of that fish filtered coffee out of my mouth…
SUNSPLASH
SWIM ‘Sundrive Road’(MCA)
THE MIDDLE of the road is a dangerous place for a young pop band to pitch its tent — so many that do so are run over by press disfavour and public disinterest.
Yet, with Deacon Blue getting the high score covering Bacharach & David songs, and a lot of new bubblegum little more than MOR, ‘Sundrive Road’ couldn't have arrived at a better time, when there must be a pay-out for mature bands making no bones about playing pop for its own sake.
Although Swim hail from Dublin you will only be able to infer their Celtic roots — they're not a band that wear their heart on their sleeve.
Joe Reilley and Paul Holmes, the band's songwriting partnership, tackle pop head-on, aspiring to make you feel what pure pop can: elusive warmth and some sort of prefabricated goodness.
Their style is that of The Carpenters, Manilow, Joel and their ilk, but younger and (street) wiser, and ‘Sundrive Road’ isn't sterile.
It's full of emotion that, though managed and sculpted to the mainstream — produced to a glowing sheen by Steely Dan hand Garry Katz — has the integrity to evoke smiles rather than condescension.
‘I Believe’ and ‘Rachel’, already released as singles, will stand the test of time, but it isn't until you hear a song like ‘Buffaloes’, with its breathy vocal and unashamedly pretty piano, that you see how and why Swim stand to make a big impression, if not here then in America, where their musical heart has its spiritual home.
‘Road’, with its sweet country twist, is a song destined for Nashville if e'er there was.
‘Then Love Begins’ only lives to be heard on some Midwestern FM easy listening station — which you may find funny or sad in itself.
The fact remains that Swim do for real and extremely well what many pop pretenders talk about.
THE LEATHER NUN’
‘International Heroes’(Wire)
HOUSE ASIDE, European acts have always had trouble being taken seriously in Britain, and though Finland's Leather Nun have always scraped a smattering of cult credibility here, ‘International Heroes’ is a bloody good attempt at becoming just that.
The Leather Nun take their reference points form the wild, romantic stereotypes of the late '50s/early '60s rock'n'roll.
Not a particularly original concept, of course, but the romance here is for Harley Davidsons and Marlon Brando in ‘The Wild Ones’ and every teenage attitude that ever mattered.
It's both refreshingly basic and gloriously polished, Kim Fowley doing the Mr Sheen production work to give it a massive sound.
That said, some of the lyrics don't stand up to too close an inspection: ‘I ride my bike like it's a rocket/I like to pop peoples' eyes outta the socket’ from the equally dubiously titled ‘Whama-Lama-Bam-Bam-Boy’sounds like something outta Bizzerk, while lines beginning ‘Hey pretty mama’should be left in the '70s, where they belong.
But this is all well eclipsed by the sheer class.
Belting tales of outlaw attitude like the born-to-be-wild rocker ‘Ride Into YOur Town’ are juxtaposed to beautiful ballads, like the piano-accompanied ‘How Does It Feel’(‘…to ruthlessly steal my heart like a thief in the night’)—.
All good dirty fun.
It's quite remarkable to think this is the same band responsible for take like covering Abba's ‘Gimme Gimme Gimme (A Man After Midnight)’.
‘International Heroes’ has tack of a infinitely superior nature.
LAWNMOWER DETH
‘Ooh Crikey It's…’
(Earache)
THE MOWER Of Deth has risen from the Earth to spread terror in outer space.
ZZ Top's ‘Afterburner’ rocket-car is threatened by a grinning, chainsaw-handed egg-cum-helicopter.
Crikey!
Lawnmower Deth, the UK's least-favourite Notts Forest supporters, are back.
Seemingly, no-one is safe from their remorseless attacks: right-on 11 year-old skatefreaks (‘Rad Dude’), Ray Reardon (‘Spooky Perv Happenings In The Snooker Hall’), Ozzy Osbourne (‘Betty Ford's Clinic’).
But are Lawnmower Deth a band without pity?
Certainly, song titles like ‘Sharp  Fucka Blades Of Hades (March Of The Mods)’, ‘Sumo Rabbit And His Inescapable Trap Of Doom’ and ‘Got No Legs?
Don't Come Crawling To Me’ suggest so, but Lawnmower Deth are also champions of the oppressed.
‘Sheepdip’ ponders the relationship between man and the humble sheep and concludes that ‘the farmer must die — out of the sheepdip we must now rise!’.
‘Maim Mower Maim’ is the anthem of Deth's Mower Liberation Front.
It's all here — violence, social comment, sex (‘Can I Cultivate Your Groinal Garden?’), drugs (‘Flying Killer Cobs From The Planet Bob’) devil worship (‘Seventh Church Of The Apocalyptic Lawnmower (Skank Mix)’), sex (‘Lancer With Your Zancer’), violence (‘Did You Spill My Pint?’), sex (‘Assume The Position’), devil worship (‘Satan's Trampoline’), sex…
And the music is noisy.
HORNY GENIUS
‘burn Your Sister’(Community 3)
DON'TCHA JUST love those dreamy guitar loops when they're underpinned by some valley girl's prime-time acid flashback?
Bongwater's Ann Magnuson carries the incandescent incense stick for the even; Kim Gordon's a carcinogenic Zippo on full flame.
And lighting up a Swan Vesta midway through this largely obsolete, Midwest guitar slurry is Dawn McCarthy, whose guest vocals put the San Andreas in faults.
Thereafter, the mêlée reverts to a disenchanted dirge — a bass-led rumble, jumbled guitars and a tuneless male vocal merging into a pretty depressing (w) hole.
A coming-round-the-mountain-in-a-12-ton-rig appearance by Killdozer's Michael Gerald raises this Iowa four-piece's spirits, albeit briefly.
No great tunes or psychotic spiels — if burning your sister provides such little fuel maybe it's time to reconsider the rest of the family's future.
BACK TRACKS Tracks from the vaults re-released and reviewed
DAVID BOWIE
‘Diamond Dogs’ /‘David Live’(EMI)
THE BOWIE reissues continue and these two albums, both from '74, represent the end of one chapter and the beginning of another in the grand old duke's career.
‘Diamond Dogs’, his first studio effort since the flabby misfire of his covers album, ‘Pin-Ups’, was the climax (or nadir, depending on how you look at it) of his conceptual style, as previously exercised on ‘Ziggy Stardust’ and ‘Aladdin Sane’.
Purporting to describe the end of the world (‘1984’), one of the track titles, was the chosen dat) and sprawling wildly across musical styles, some might call this album preposterous (several did at the time).
But it's a stonker, kicking off with the memorably camp spoken intro ‘Future Legend’(‘This ain't rock'n'roll — this is Genocide!’) and never looking back through its mixture of theatrical lyricism (get ‘We Are The Dead’ and ‘Candidate’) and chiming guitar rockers, including the classic, near-six minute title track and the oft-resuscitated ‘Rebel Rebel’.
As a concept album, it's remarkably low on conceptual tosh.
Bowie knocked out all the (remarkably groovy) guitar parts himself.
Full value rating too, with extra tracks the previously unreleased somewhat quaint, ‘Dodo’ plus a demo version of ‘Candidate’, both from '73.
‘David Live’, recorded in Philadelphia, finds Bowzer tangling with his back catalogue aided by a band of funkateers including the renowned Herbie Flowers (bass) and Earl Slick (guitar).
Couple this with the subtle change in image (from naked half-man, half-mutt on ‘Diamond Dogs’ to a grey suit) and you have the beginnings the funky sojourn Bowie was about to embark on — which would, of course, peak with ‘Young Americans’and crop up again whenever he was short of a few ideas.
Expanded by three tracks from the original edition — including a brilliant trot through ‘Aladdin Sane's Time’—‘David Live’ is a bit floppy in places in the manner of many live doubles, but it's still a loveable artefact.
RG
WHEN DINOSAURS RULED THE EARTH
LED ZEPPELIN
‘Boxed Set’(Atlantic)
HEFTY ISN't the word for this; it's epic listening, all 54 tracks and scarcely a duffer amongst them.
1990 is a good time for a Zeppelin retrospective since a new generation has grown up without all the negative associations that the band once had.
Back in 1977, they became the living embodiment of everything that was wrong with rock'n'roll.
They were hopelessly out of touch with the times, stadium dinosaurs too big and clumsy to survive.
Robert Plant, in his cheesecloth khurtan, flares and girly locks, babbling a lot of mystical bollocks, looked utterly absurd during those new times.
Unfortunately, punk served to obscure the fact that they made some of the greatest rock ever.
They were consistently better than The Who, The rolling Stones… fuck it, they were better than the Beatles!
This set is a comprehensive history of Zeppelin, the ten years when the dinosaur ruled the Earth.
All the tracks have been remastered from the original tapes and programmed in sequence by Jimmy Page.
That means that certain tracks that were maybe slightly overlooked on the context of the original LP, are showcased here.
You could easily forget how good tracks like ‘Achilles' Last Stand’ from the 1976 album ‘Presence’or ‘Ramble On’from ‘Led Zeppelin II’were, but their inclusion here drives home the point that they are absolute classics.
‘Achilles…’ is a tremendously powerful song, and shows off Jimmy Page as a great guitarist.
Perhaps the reason Zeppelin were so despised after the punk revolution was the fact that they were the ultimate muso band.
It's ironic that you should still make excuses for the fact that the band can play really well, yet there's nothing here that can't be appreciated on the level of a blues number.
In retrospect, it now seems odd that they were considered the ultimate heavy metal band.
Perhaps bands with a dark side, with occult associations, will always be lumped into the HM category.
Yet Zeppelin were in the tradition of the blues, of Robert Johnson and Leadbelly.
What they added was a sense of grandeur — they took blues licks and put them on a epic scale.
Listen to ‘Kashmir’, perhaps the Led Zeppelin song.
It's big, but all muscle, without any excess.
There are two previously unreleased tracks included on the collection: ‘White Summer/Black Mountain Side’, originally recorded for the BBC and ‘Hey Hey What Can I Do’, originally the B-side of ‘The Immigrant Song’.
They are quite unexceptional — good, but unremarkable — and pale beside great, classic, incomparable (OK, calm down — Ed) tracks like ‘Black Dog’, ‘Rock And Roll’ or ‘Heartbreaker’.
Hell, even ‘Stairway To Haven’ is listenable in this context!
The remastering will only really matter if you're one of those bores with expensive stereos, but if you're that sort of person then that's reason enough to buy this.
But even on a crap system there's little difference, it still sounds great.
Sure, you should buy the original albums, but for a substantial taster then this will set you back fewer readies than all ten Zeppelin LPs.
There's the bonus of an informative booklet including loads of unpublished photographs and details of all the tracks.
The set is heard to best effect played from start to finish, so leave yourself a spare five hours, play it real loud (on headphones so as not to disturb the neighbours, of course) and it'll form crop circles in your hair.
TU
Various Artists
‘Happy Daze’(Island)
IT HAD to happen.
Hailed as the current ‘big thing’ for a fair while, the ‘Indie/dance crossover’has been immortalised on a K-tel style compilation, put together by DJ Gary Crowley.
Despite its cash-in character, ‘Happy Daze’ is a belting LP, featuring all the milestones in the indie kids' storming of the charts —‘Loaded’, ‘The Only One I Know’, ‘She Comes In The Fall’, ‘Groovy Train’, etc.
In addition, there are one or two offerings from acts not familiar to high street discogoers: Carter's scorching ‘Sheriff Fatman’, The Shamen's ‘Progen’ and the excellent ‘Big’by Manc contenders New FADs.
Occasionally, things get a little confusing — Ride and the pixies are hardly baggy faves — but the presence of the seminal ‘Taste’ and ‘Velouria’gives the LP more variety than would have been present on a groove-only affair.
They've had the good sense to include the little-aired ‘Think About The Future’ mix of the Mondays' ‘WFL’, but should be questioned about the inclusion of the terminally tacky Soup Dragons' ‘I'm Free’, the success of which marked the point at which cynical goons jumped the wagon and things went sour.
Oh well, enjoy the memories.
GANG OF FOUR
‘A Brief History Of The Twentieth Century’(EMI)
HELL, HISTORY was never like this at school.
Then again, history was never written by men with electric guitars before — we are, for the sake of argument ignoring George Bush performing ‘Barbara Ann’ with the Beach Boys and General Noriega's much admired Elvis medley.
But the Gang Of Four were never just a pop group.
‘A Brief History…’ charts the group's years on EMI, 20 songs ranging from the disaffected to the disenchanted, and never has pop polemic been so incisive.
Although not definitive — where's the rest of ‘Entertainment’?— this album is comprehensive.
Six tracks are taken from that debut album, six tracks that splinter and splutter, Andy Gill's guitar, wired and nervy — Steve Albini's copy of this record must be well worn — exploding like shrapnel amongst Jon King's rantings.
In retrospect, what with ‘Anthrax’, the ultimate anti-love song, and ‘At Home He's A Tourist’(GO4's sole brush with the charts), ‘Entertainment’ was only matched in 1979 by another debut, Joy Division's ‘Unknown Pleasures’.
The Gang Of Four never really regained the heights of that first album, troubled by the inherent contradictions of their own position, sapped by the loss of Allen and Burnham on bass and drums and unhealthily obsessed with the heart of the great beast itself, the USA.
Too clever by half, they could encapsulate in a song-title what most bands could never express in a career —‘We Live As We Dream, Alone’, ‘Capital (It Fails Us Now)’ and ‘To Hell With Poverty’with its neat rejoinder ‘…let's get drunk on cheap wine’.
But that edge and that thrill had gone.
CE 
THE CURE: big fans of GCSE author Jane Austen
KINGS X: a classic
DAVID: THEY called him the Diamond Dog
PERCY: ALL Cheesecloth and flares
IN-TECH
EASY PEAVEY
He gives ya quality gear but he don't take no shit, and if you dare to call him Mister he might just shoot your crawly ass off.
Tony Mitchell takes the steamboat to meet Hartley Peavey, the Mississippi mogul with the most in hi-tech hardware, and finds out that down at Harvey's manufacturing plant, deep in the heart of Smalltown USA, the old ways ain't necessarily the best.
TWENTY-FIVE years ago last month, a teenager by the name of the Hartley Peavey set up a business building guitar amps in his father's music store in Meridian, Mississippi.
Today, Peavey Electronics is one of America's biggest manufacturers of musical equipment.
And, unlike most other famous US instrument firms that were around 25 years ago, it is still owned and run by its founder.
That, says Hartley, is just part of what makes Peavey a ‘different kind of company’.
He's known to be self-opinionated, tenacious, a despiser of ‘corporate bullshit’(a favourite catchphrase is ‘There are no Misters in this company’) and a believer in the absolute rightness of making the best possible product at the lowest possible price.
By instrument industry standards Hartley Peavey is an unconventional operator.
While Peavey are in reality extremely active in the pro audio and hi-tech fields, they're still perceived by Joe Muso primarily as manufacturers of backline amplification.
Inaccurate though this perception may be, it creates a credibility gap which Peavey must yet cross.
It needs to be made clear that a company renowned for making solid, reliable, modestly-priced guitars, amps and cabs can just as easily compete in the glamorous, fashion-conscious world of hi-tech keyboards — a bold move the company have recently taken with their new DPM3.
The 1,800-strong Peavey workforce, spread around 17 plants covering over a million square feet of Mississippi soil, genuinely revere the boss.
His charisma is inescapable, his quotability legendary.
‘I answer to Hartley…
Asshole…anything,’ he says.
‘Just don't call me Mister’.
WELCOME TO Meridian — the birthplace of country music, and slap bang in the middle of the region that brought you jazz, the blues and rock'n'roll.
It looks just like smalltown America — the kind of place where you could set Twin Peaks or Back To The Future 4 — but it's bigger.
It doesn't just have Peavey — it has freight yards, shopping malls and medical research.
In the big chief's private office Hartley informs me casually that what I'd taken to be a ping pong ball-firing toy gun on the table behind me was actually an automatic 12-bore shotgun capable of delivering a dozen lethal rounds in quick succession.
‘I had to get one,’ he explained, ‘because they're about to be made illegal.’
Yes — competitors please note — one of Hartley's hobbies is collecting firearms.
Another is expressing controversial opinions, so we obligingly lined up a few that focus on guitars and amps….
Peavey currently make between 150,000 and 160,000 amplifiers a year.
The pro audio and MIDI fields represent their biggest areas of expansion.
Their guitar production facility is back-ordered seven months — which is one reason you don't see as many Peavey guitars in British shops, and in players' hands, as their combined quality and value deserve.
VALUE FOR MONEY
‘There is a common belief that you get what you pay for.
I submit that this is only true if all other things are equal, and that's the catch.
Some people will charge you £600 for a guitar with £50-worth of materials in it.
Not me.’
HANDCRAFTING VERSUS AUTOMATION
‘Handcraftmanship sounds good, but what is it?
In the past, people were using conventional hand tools, and in essence you were dealing with tolerances that were pretty damn big by modern standards.
So what is hand labour?
It's actually fitting all those tolerances and then making up for the slop in the system.
‘When we decided to go into guitar manufacturer, we found that one well-known company on the West Coast was actually making its necks with a sander.
So the thickness of the neck you got was likely to depend on whether José had a hangover that day or not.
Over in the Mid-West, another famous company was using some very minimalist machines.
‘To run any kind of quality operation, the name of the game is consistency.
I said that if I was going to get into the guitar business, I'd got to make a highly precision piece — I couldn't live with a 32nd or 16th of an inch tolerance and then have some old violin maker filling up the gap with plastic wood, or just leaving a huge crack around the joint as some people do, I had to find a way of making precision wood parts.
‘I found the answer was a machine called a copy lathe.
Amazingly enough, in the guitar industry, nobody had ever used a copy lathe to make a guitar neck.
Absolute total insanity!
So I came in with an American-made guitar (the T-60) in a case that retailed for 350 dollars at a time when a Les Paul was 1,000 dollars and a Stratocaster over 800.
Everybody said it couldn't be done.
A very famous person in the guitar industry said you can't build guitars with machines.
And of course he was basically right — but he missed the point.
You can't build guitars with machines, but you can make very precise guitar parts.
We simply eliminated the slop on the front end.
‘In 1975, when we started doing this, all my competition were saying it couldn't be done.
So it's more than a little interesting to note that today, they're all doing it that way.
Even for the so-called custom-made guitars are made.
We've never got credit for it, but we did it.
Automation is the key to making not only a good product but the best product.
‘MAGIC’ INGREDIENTS
‘There's really nothing magic about guitars.
Certain people will tell you ‘We soak all our pick-ups in beeswax and that makes 'em sweeter-sounding’.
That's horse-shit.
Or ‘We make all our bridges from bell brass’.
That's horse-shit.
There's a raging controversy right now about which guitars sustain better — a glued-on neck, a neck through body or a bolt-on — when in my opinion it doesn't make a damn bit of difference.
As long as the neck is attached firmly to the body, it doesn't matter if it's bubblegum that holds it on there!
THE BLACK ART OF VALVE AMPS
‘In the early '60's, valve-making was a refined art.
Sadly today, the making of valves is a dying art.
There are people going around claiming they make ‘special’ vacuum tubes…
Well that's all bullshit.
All the vacuum tubes that I know of that are made today — every single one of them — come from countries that were behind either the Iron or Bamboo curtain — Russia, China, Yugoslavia to be specific.
I am not aware of anybody in the West making vacuum tubes like we used in guitar amplification.
‘To make a valve work properly, there's a lot of nasties in there — a lot of production processes that are rather unsanitary.
And it's a kind of black art anyway — everyone did a bit differently.
Sadly the valves that everybody is selling today — including us — are just a shadow of the quality that they were even ten years ago.
We've concluded that the only way to keep our valves alive and well is to put a fan on 'em.
MATCHED vs UNMATCHED VALVES
‘You have to be careful of all these claims about matched valves.
You can have two good tubes that are matched, or two shitty tubes that are matched, and if you happen to get the shitty ones, that's tough shit.
They may be matched but then all you got is two turds instead of one!
Again, they might be matched when you get 'em, but after a month of use, they won't be matched any more.
And besides, that matching doesn't buy you anything anyway except lower distortion — which, in a tube amplifier, is not what you're looking for.
THE WORST WAY TO AMPLIFY A GUITAR
‘Technically, valves are the worst way to do it, because they are in essence microphonic.
People want extremely high gains — at least three stages of amplification.
If each stage has a gain of a hundred, that's a total gain of a million.
So you can see how just a little bird-fart at the front end can be a typhoon at the speaker.
And frankly the tubes were never designed for that kind of service.’
Ironically, since Hartley seems to be no great lover of what Japanese companies have done to the instrument industry, he concedes various parallels in th Peavey set-up with the oriental approach to business.
There's even, he admits, a company uniform — sneakers and blue jeans.
‘As anyone around here will tell you’ he explains in that considered, Jimmy Stewart drawl of his, ‘I hate wearin' suits.’
How much does Peavey produce in a year?
The answer is revealed at the Customer Service Center.
A thousand products a month come through the repair area.
Sounds like a lot until you're told that Peavey produces fifty thousand units in the same period.
That's 600,000 cardboard boxes a year.
They also have an anechoic chamber for acoustic research into speaker design etc.
The chamber has played host to many British-made speakers and enclosures, and one of the results is Peavey's new Sheffield range of guitar speakers.
They wanted to call them the Milton Keynes or the Ipswich, but this was thought too cheeky a dig at Marshall and Celestion.
Though many assembly jobs are unavoidably labour intensive, computers and automation are a vital part of the Peavey philosophy.
One plant houses the company's IBM mainframe computer — one of the biggest in the state — and a CAD (computer-aided design) department has been fully operational for the last year.
In the guitar plants, there's an own-design computerised fret-insertion machine plus a robot which holds and twists guitar necks so that every part gets buffed equally — a job it can perform far more accurately than any luthier.
Peavey's newest plant looks like a supermarket, that's because it used to be a supermarket.
Mixers, DSPs (digital signal processors) and the new DPM3 keyboards are made here in bright, spacious surroundings.
One person assembles one product from beginning to end; the workers say it's more satisfying that way and Peavey say they get better quality work, as well as being able to respond quicker to market demands.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
The Cockney Rejects
THE COCKNEY Rejects were Morrissey's worst nightmare brought to life.
Nurtured from their East End up bringing under the patronage of Punk revolutionary Jimmy Pursey, producer of their debut ‘Flares & Slippers’ EP, they fast became the sort of blokes you'd avoid in the kebab shop come chucking out time.
A deal with EMI beckoned, and 15-year-old singer Stinky Turner was soon going on stage in his pyjamas and bawling, ‘You insult my intelligence but I a not a fool!’ to the band's legion of admirers (affectionately known as ‘The Rubber Glove Firm’).
Chart successes loomed from the other side of the terraces, and the bands were now able to wallpaper their bedrooms with Sounds front covers.
Seminal mid-'80s releases included ‘The Greatest Cockney Rip-Off' and the Hammers FA Cup win cash-in, ‘Bubbles’.
Unfortunately their dreams faded and died soon after under a cloud of seemingly endless gig violence — not helped by their own rallying call of ‘Are You Ready to Ruck?’
Perhaps it was the shock, but the band turned heavy metal not long after.
Probably inspired by a long term association with UFO's Phil Mogg, the subsequent ‘Back On The Streets Again’ album was a turgid affair.
The band were last seen flogging their wares around Europe, with no less than ex-Angelic Upstarts drummer ‘Stix’ behind the kit, former drummer Nigel having scarpered when the going got rough.
Rumours that the will return to former glories to support Camden pretenders Flowered Up on their forthcoming tour remain unconfirmed.
CEREBRAL FIX
WIN!
WIN!
WIN!
20 side-splitting Ben Elton videos to be won
Yes indeed, my goodness.
What have we got for you if we haven't got a hug stack of Ben Elton videos in our sweaty little hands?
Why, nothing is the answer to that one, ladies and gentlemen, although that doesn't mean we've got nothing to give away this week, no sir.
What we're trying to say is that: if you can get your head round this week's Prize X-Word, it'll probably take you so long to finish that al you're friends will have married and moved away by the time you've finished it.
So to while away those lonely winter nights, we've arranged (with Virgin Vision) for 90-minute videos of red Ben live in action to go to the senders of the first 20 correct entries.
To be in with a chance, all you have to do is settle down with a great big book of pop facts and figures and fill in the empty squares.
When you're done, pop it in an envelope and send the whole caboodle to Ben's Thumping Hard Prize X-Word, Sounds, Ludgate House, 245 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 9UZ to arrive no later than November 13.
PAUL PRINGLE; LUST FOR GLORY
YES, THE winner of our fantastic Hamer/Living Colour competition is Paul Pringle, Paul who lives in Bathgate, jewel of the north, in West Lothian, Scotland, gets a fabulous Hamer Centaura guitar worth £889 plus a long-sleeved Hamer T- shirt and a CD of Living Colour's ‘Time's Up’.
The answers Paul got right were Vernon Reid, Corey Glover and ‘Vivid’.
And the following 15 runners-up, who will each receive a Hamer T-shirt and ‘Time's Up CD’, did the same: Dale Bowen, Robert J Tuck, Damian Patrick Sullivan, AJ Rowles, Robert Walker, Robert Sturman, Donald Young, Craig Enderby, Colin Davis, Scott Reardon, Mick Stephens, Robert Savidge, Steve Parter, D Sumnner and Marc Arundale.
Watch out for the postman, who'll be delivering the goodies soon!
TRIVIA QUIZ
SHAKESPEARE'S GOT nothing to worry about when it comes to finding a bit of competition in the prose states.
‘I should be so lucky/Lucky, lucky lucky’ isn't going to win any Booker prizes for literature.
Still, it's not all bad so join THE LYRIC ROUND…20 lyrics culled from 20 songs and see if you can name those tunes!
Wordplay by Sue Buckley
1.
‘You put me one step clear of a chain gang, two miles over the line.’
2.
‘You know me, evil eye — you know me, prepared to die!’
3.
‘But shoot it in the right direction, you're making it your intention/Live those dreams, scheme those schemes.’
4.
‘I was working as a waitress in a cocktail bar…that much is true.’
5.
‘Sometimes it's not so easy to be the teacher's pet!’
6.
‘Well I stand up next to a mountain and I chop it down with the edge of my hand.’
7.
‘I left alone, my mind was blank.
I needed time to get the memories from my mind.’
8.
‘Everyone has been burned before — everybody knows the pain.’
9.
‘What have you got to take away? /A bottle of whiskey and a new set of lies?’
10.
‘With a thrill in my head and a pill on my tongue, dissolve the nerves that have just begun.’
11.
‘Out on the strip, out on the tiles, same old greed behind the PR smiles.’
12.
‘How fine your life used to be, runnin' around banging' your drum like it's
1973.
’
13.
‘Well, I feel lying and waiting is a poor man's deal, and I feel hopelessly weighed down by your eyes of steel!’
14.
‘You can run and you can hide, but I'm not leaving 'less you come with me.’
15.
‘Tonight why don't we just skip all the 4 play mama, and just get down on the floor!’
16.
‘From Harley D to Lenny Bruce, Harry Dean to Betty Blue.’
17.
‘But Jesus made me, so Jesus save me from pity, sympathy, and people discussing me.’
18.
‘From the park I hear rhythms…
Marley's hot on the box.’
19.
‘Here they come — a lonely boy and a lonely girl.
They can't say where they're going.
Lonely with no money to spend.’
20.
‘When I was a little girl I had a rag doll…the only doll I ever owned.’
TRIVIA QUIZ ANSWERS
1.
Stone Roses —‘One Love’.
2.
Motorhead —‘Iron Fist’
3.
Frankie Goes To Hollywood —‘Relax’
4.
Human League —‘Don't You Want Me’
5.
The Police —‘Don't Stand So Close To Me’
6.
Jimi Hendrix —‘Voodoo Chile’
7.
Iron Maiden —‘Number Of The Beast’
8.
The Charlatans —‘The Only One I Know’
9.
Dire Straits —‘Private Investigations’
10.
Spandau Ballet —‘True’
11.
Bruce Dickinson —‘Tattooed Millionaire’
12.
Waterboys —‘This Is The Sea’
13.
Tears for Fears —‘Woman In Chains’
14.
Phil Collins —‘Something Happened On The Way to Heaven’
15.
Prince —‘Scandalous’
16.
Transvision Vamp —‘Born To Be Sold’
17.
Morrissey —‘November Spawned A Monster’
18.
Stevie Wonder —‘Masterblaster’
19.
Kane Gang —‘Closest Thing To Heaven’
20.
Ike & Tina Turner —‘River Deep Mountain High’
AEROSMITH WINNERS
A rocking ‘things That Go Pump In The Night’ video by those rock dudes Aerosmith to:
SOUND OFF!
THE READERS WRITE TO REPLY
ALBUM WINNER
Dan Rhodes of Tunbridge Wells!
Give us a call on 071 921 5900 and let us know your choice of album.
Readers who write to Sound Off! should include their chosen LP when writing.
Either chart published in Sounds — the big one or the indies — is acceptable.
BUDDY REYNOLDS (Sound Off), October 27) it must have taken a real strike of genius to suggest that The Levellers' manager bar their so called‘crusties’ from their gigs.
In the future, I suppose, these ‘social rejects’ can remain outside the venue while, inside, the band sing such lyrics as ‘There's only one way of life, and that's your own.’
To suggest that venues should impose restrictions on admission depending on the lifestyle of the individual is ridiculous.
If the venue which staged the Dickies gig which he moaned about had imposed such a bigoted, snobbish door policy then, if his account is anything to go by, the audience would have considered one of intolerant wanker and a small number of his friends.
A promoter's (and band's) paradise, surely.
If Reynolds finds the atmosphere of these gigs so offensive, he should simply stay away from them, rather than inflict his Points Of View mentality on the thousands of people who may not pass his muster, but have just as much right to see live music as anyone.
Or he could start his own venue, impose his own narrow-minded door policy and see how few people turn up and how few bands agree to play.
Can you imagine: ‘Yo, Rollins!
How about playing at my venue?
Be sure to remember to wear your smart trousers — and I'm not having you taking your shirt off!’??
Just in case Reynolds' letter has had any influence on venue managers or promoters, on my next trip up to London to see Blyth Power at the Robey, I'd better be prepared to wear a tie.
JUST THOUGHT I'd write to say how surprised and disappointed I am that the 10,000 Maniacs have decided (at the time of writing) to play only three live dates in the UK this year, all of which are in London.
What makes it worse is the fact that this could be their most significant tour, with the (temporary) return of John Lombardo.
I can't understand how they can neglect their many fans who don't live in London.
The gigs will probably be great but this doesn't always outweigh the high cost of attending them.
I am unemployed, but even if I was working I don't think I would lay out all the expense to travel to London.
10,000 Maniacs toured the UK extensively last year and got great responses.
Why not now?
If anyone from 10,000 Maniacs' hierarchy can tell me, please do.
I'm sure a lot of other people would like to know too.
BEST LETTER of the week wins a chart album of your choice.
So engage your brains and get scribbling to: Sound Off!
Sounds, Ludgate House, 245 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 9UZ
And the crusty controversy continues…
WHO THE  fuck does Buddy Reynolds think he is?
What right has he to comment on the ‘quality of fans’ at the Levellers gigs?
He is the kind of snobby arsehole that is not needed at gigs.
I accept that you do get the usual beer casualties at most gigs — but to sum up such a wide range of fans as parasites is ridiculous.
Oh, but I forgot, Buddy is a ‘genuine fan’(ha, ha) who probably just stands at the back, looking at everybody else wondering whom he can slag.
Piss off, Buddy.
HAVING TRAVELLED over 150 miles each way to see Nirvana at the London Astoria last Wednesday, I was interested to see what the event would be like regarding ‘crusties’, T-shirt prices and security at the ‘notorious’ Astoria.
I arrived at the theatre at about 6pm and sure enough, at about 7pm, the crusties appeared.
A few of the young ones ingeniously took advantage of the fact that the Astoria is on a busy junction, and every time a car stopped, they would hassle the driver for cash.
What did irritate me was the old crusty-type who went through the motions of standing in front of everyone and asking them if they ‘had any spare change for an old dosser’.
Talk about giving the game away! if these people didn't make it so obvious that they'd pissed their lives away with drink and weren't prepared to do anything about it they'd get a bit more sympathy.
OK, maybe it seems harsh, but I don't think I'm the only one who gets slightly bugged by dropouts trying to make me feel like I'm insensitive and uncaring if I don't pay for their drink.
The inside was crusty-free and the T-shirts were £7, which seems quite reasonable.
My Nirvana shirt seems to be well enough made.
The security actually did a great job.
I don't know which firm they were from, but as well as stopping people from hurting each other, they helped the more diminutive among the crowd on to the stage if they had problems getting free of the moshpit so that they could take a dive.
No violence, and a good understanding of the crowd, and thus a good time was had by all.
And to put an end of the Hendrix debate, his spirit is alive and working to equal, if not greater effect in Kurdt Kobain.
BUDDY REYNOLDS, who are you calling lowlifes?
For your information, the ‘scum’ whom you'd like to ban from Levellers gigs to let the ‘genuine’fans in are more than likely friends of the band and were going to the gigs before you.
So you'd also like to ban the bass player as well, would you?
That would be a great gig, wouldn't it?!
Wise up Buddy, and — sorry to use a cliché here — don't tar everybody with the same brush.
You'd probably be the first person to respond if someone wrote in and said ‘everybody with short hair and who conforms should be banned from gigs’ which is basically what you wrote, only vice versa.
So excuse us while we laugh, because that's the only reaction you deserve.
CANNABIS should be legalised.
It's safer, less violent and more pleasant than booze — and jailing people is one hell of a way of  fucking up their lives.
Cannabis may not lead to crime, but jailing people for drug offences does.
So what are you smokers out there doing about it?
The Legalise Cannabis Campaign should be revived and not abandoned, until our goal is reached.
They are coming for us and our only way to stop them is a public campaign.
Getting busted can lose you your job and wreck chances of future work — yet most of us know plenty of people staggering into work pissed and no mention is made.
The American government are clamping down on drugs and they're getting Maggie's full support.
Keep smokin'…
Ian Cheek — twat or what?
WHO IS ‘Ian Cheek’ and what's all this crap he is writing about All (Sounds October 27)?
Yes, All do tour a lot and still manage to put out records regularly, but what does he mean when he says that they ‘have just two songs: a fast one and a slightly slower one’?
All have songs ranging from fast to slow, and also songs that incorporate both ends of this range.
To me, they are highly underrated — they are a band who write tuneful songs and have a very good line-up, despite what Ian Cheek thinks of ‘Scott Reynolds' hapless inability to sing in anything other than a monotone shout’.
I saw All in Bristol and, despite a small crowd (most of whom had come to see the support bands) and an incompetent sound engineer, they were powerful and intense.
In fact, almost as good as last year in Newport.
All I can say is that All will probably never be as popular as other bands, both British and American, but they will always be one of the best in my opinion.
So go on Sounds readers, give All a listen.
PS How come Sounds did not cover the Dickies at all when they were over?
I know — they're not from Manchester!!
IAN CHEEK is a twat.
Your so-called reporter, who thinks Scott Reynolds can't sing, must be deaf as well as unbelievably  fucking stupid.
All are the best band there will ever be.
Please sack this utter knob-end.
THE COUCH POTATOES, Tonbridge
PS: You can stick all that Manchester stuff up your arse.
PPS: Ian Cheek is a twat
JUST WHAT does your so-called correspondent Ian Cheek think he's on?
He's obviously the kind of guy who spends more time snogging at the bar than watching the band.
His review of All was the most inept piece of ‘journalism’ I have ever read in my life.
So Scott Reynolds can't sing?
Well, can Ian Cheek??
Let's give this dicksplash a yodelling match with Reynolds, who is probably the finest vocalist in the world, and see how he gets on.
Why doesn't this poor excuse for a human being stick his head back in his colostomy bag for a good feed and give us real music fans a bit of a rest?
Sack this tadger immediately — or I'll be cancelling my order for Sounds.