

Henley, described last year as a ‘doyen of general management education’ by the Economist Guide, is very much in touch with the real world of business, industry, commerce and, in particular, the needs of our clients.
We have been in the business of developing managers since 1945.
Our approach is practical, interactive and challenging.
We aim to ensure that managers will be more effective, achieve personal growth and contribute to corporate development.
Working in the United Kingdom and throughout the world, we bring the ‘Henley Experience’ to more than 10,000 individuals a year.
We have too many clients to list, but we can introduce you to some of them, confident that they can testify to the quality and effectiveness of what we do.
We work in partnership with managers and organisations to achieve what is, after all, the main purpose of management development, ‘building people — building business.’
Principal   
BUILDING PEOPLE — BUILDING BUSINESS
Most organisations rely on people, especially managers, to build their business.
At Henley our business is people, and our role is management development.
Our philosophy is based on partnership and participation, working with people and with organisations to create and manage activities through which managers acquire skills and understanding, confidence and capability.
Our programmes are run at Henley, around the UK and, working with Associate Institutions, we also run our programmes in 16 countries worldwide.
We have separate brochures which describe in detail all of the programmes, plus open information seminars, road shows, corporate presentations or individual counselling to help you make the right choice.
Our range of programmes comprise three broad categories, although these are interrelated, and there is considerable flexibility.
Qualification Programmes
Executive Programmes
Corporate Programmes
QUALIFICATION PROGRAMMES
In conjunction with Brunel University, Henley runs a range of qualification programmes MBA, MSc, DBA, MPhil and PhD.
Additionally, the College offers certificate and diploma programmes.
Innovation in the modes of study, teaching methods and a flexible approach, enable us to offer a qualification to suit most managers' needs.
At the same time as maintaining high academic standards, the College firmly grounds its courses in practical applications.
Employers will gain from students' increased effectiveness in making decisions, their ability to analyse situations and plan strategically
A major strength of Henley is that students are drawn from all over the world and bring with them knowledge of many different cultures.
From whatever cultural or employment background they come, our students are helped to gain the commitment and motivation to meet the challenges of gaining qualifications in management.
EXECUTIVE PROGRAMMES
These programmes have been designed for general managers at all levels who wish to enhance their career progression.
The common objective of each programme is to help managers acquire skills, knowledge and perspective.
The experience of working in syndicate groups with participants from a wide range of international organisations enables members to develop and expand their portfolio of managerial competences and interpersonal skills.
Under the guidance of a skilled Development Adviser who works closely with the syndicate throughout the programme, effective group process is ensured and personal support, feedback and academic guidance is given.
CORPORATE PROGRAMMES
Corporate Programmes offers major companies and organisations a complete tailored management development service.
Programmes are designed to meet the specific needs of organisations whether a senior management programme or a company MBA or Diploma.
The Corporate route enables the organisation to influence the design and delivery of the programme.
An established team work in partnership with clients developing innovative programmes which add to the human resource and organisation capability.
Company MBAs are for organisations wishing to sponsor 15 or more people.
The style is flexible and designed with the organisation to include company-specific workshops and case material, study days and consultancy projects.
A consortium MBA programme enables groups of organisations each to sponsor smaller numbers of students on an Intercompany MBA, thus facilitating interaction between industries and sectors.
A company Diploma or Certificate programme can be managed in a similar way to the MBA but can also include the competences approach, learning contracts and mentoring.
Those wishing to complete the programme including MCI competences assessment can also proceed to the award of NVQ in Management.
QUALIFICATION PROGRAMMES
GRADUATE STUDIES
The Henley MBA combines study and practical application in the key management disciplines with challenging work on Strategy, Managing Strategic Change and Managing Strategic Information.
It is designed for the International Manager, and, throughout, focuses on learning in the workplace.
Project work and its practical application forms a key part of the programme.
The Masters in Business Administration Degree is offered through four different modes of study.
THE ACTIVE MBA (MODULAR)
Course Duration
18 months — 2 years commencing in June
Learning through Action is the key to this modular style of study.
The programme covers both the theory and practice of management.
A range of learning methods is used for the taught modules, including case studies, seminars, lectures, tutorials, simulations, presentations and projects.
The experience of members, tutors and visiting faculty from business is an important learning resource for all course participants.
European language training is part of the course curriculum and there is an overseas study tour included in the programme.
The course combines three modules of College-based study (of six, six and four weeks).
There are two periods of practical project work within the member's, or a nominated, organisation.
The core programme for the College-based modules requires the study of key managerial disciplines including Managing Resources, People, Operations, Markets, Information Skills, Strategic Change, Strategic Information and Strategy.
The consultancy projects are agreed and supervised by managers in the organisation and Henley tutors.
Members will also study distance learning materials before starting the course to consolidate the College study and to prepare them for subsequent modules.
Each member is assigned a programme tutor from the College staff.
The tutor is responsible for the member's development whilst at Henley, and works closely with the member to ensure that maximum benefit is achieved from the programme.
Each year, a number of self-sponsored members take part in the course and the College can assist in finding project work for consultancy periods.
The design and content of the Active MBA at Henley remains flexible in order to respond to the changing needs and aspirations of the members and their organisations, as well as more general developments in managerial thinking.
THE FULL-TIME MBA
Course Duration
12 months commencing in September/October
This programme is based at Brunel University in West London and draws participants from a wide range of national and professional backgrounds, which gives this course an international perspective.
Over the three academic terms, there is a programme of lectures, seminars, skills' development workshops and group activities, providing input to the core areas of management studies.
The skills' development workshops include cross-cultural skills, team building and careers workshops.
Completion of a major piece of project work ensures that the student's learning is grounded in practical application.
Group work continues on simulations and case studies during a residential weekend at Henley.
The course includes a week's study tour within Europe, visiting business and political organisations.
The cost of the visit is included within the programme fee.
The course is mainly intended for people without employer sponsorship.
Core areas covered are Managing Resources, People, Markets, Operations, Strategic Change, Strategic Information and Strategy.
Additionally, one elective subject is chosen.
Participants may choose a language as their optional subject.
Brunel has computing and library facilities plus extensive sports facilities.
THE PART-TIME MBA
Course Duration
2 years, commencing in October
This programme is based at Brunel University and is designed for those in employment with several years of business experience who wish to extend their career and personal development without leaving their jobs.
Participants are drawn from a wide range of public and private sector organisations and an emphasis on group-based learning activities enables members to learn through shared experience.
The curriculum provides many opportunities to look at current work and organisational problems.
Students attend once a week at the Uxbridge campus of Brunel University, supplemented by two residential weekends concentrating on group working and case studies at Henley.
There is a programme of lectures, seminars, skills' development workshops and group projects, providing input to the core areas of management studies.
The main subject areas and project work are the same as for the full-time programme.
THE DISTANCE LEARNING MBA
Course Duration
Completion can take between two and four years
Specially developed video/audio materials and workbooks, together with regular workshops for each subject, form the base of this mode of study.
Currently, over 6,000 students worldwide have registered for the Distance Learning MBA, either by dealing with Henley direct or through a Network of Associate Institutions in countries around the world.
See pages 18 and 19 for a full list.
An international modular version of the Distance Learning MBA integrates workshops and larger multinational residential workshops.
The programme contains a foundation course, which can be started at any time and is then divided into three stages.
Stage One comprises Managing Resources, People, Operations, Markets, and a self-assessed subject Information Skills, and may be started four times a year.
Stage Two comprises Managing Strategic Change, Strategic Information and Strategy.
Stage Three comprises an elective (from a choice of 5) and a Dissertation.
The Dissertation includes an initial project on an actual company-based issue.
This is separately assessed and then incorporated into the total Dissertation.
The programme is time-tabled over three years, with the option of an accelerated 2-year programme for those who are able to devote more time to their studies.
Regular contact with, and support from, Henley is a vital aspect of a distance learning course.
Workshops are an ideal opportunity to meet tutors and exchange ideas with fellow students.
A one-day workshop is offered on commencing the programme, focusing on how to study.
Subsequent workshops are held on each subject area, prior to examinations or assessment.
Attendance is not compulsory but these are a useful part of the study programme.
UK students attend at Henley and other tutorial centres, overseas students are offered local workshops in countries where we have an Associate Institution.
Students also have contact from the College through the Newslink magazine which regularly informs distance learners about the programme and associated College activities.
Students are encouraged to meet locally in informal groups.
The College maintains a 24-hour telephone helpline for students who have queries or problems with their studies.
An important service for distance learning students is the Henley Extended Learning Programme (HELP) which allows students to connect with a central database to retrieve details about the course, workshops, examinations and administration.
They can also exchange electronic mail messages and take part in, or initiate, electronic conferences.
HELP also gives access to the College's library services and to external on-line databases for research purposes.
Information seminars are organised regularly for those wishing to visit the College and attend a presentation on the MBA through Distance Learning Programme.
All Henley postgraduate students are registered at Brunel University which also confers the degree.
Henley MBA tutors are all approved by the University.
For further information about MBA Programmes contact MBA Admissions Office.
A range of higher academic qualifications (DBA, PhD, MPhil) is offered by the College.
THE DBA
The Doctor of Business Administration focuses on the skills needed for senior levels of management, management consultancy, management development and education.
Over a period of at least three years, participants complete a range of activities closely related to their own development needs.
The DBA Programme Encompasses:
Advanced study in key areas of management.
The enhancement of consultancy skills.
Skills in developing others as a senior executive, trainer or educator
The understanding of Research Methodology.
Research Skills.
To be eligible for the DBA programme candidates must have completed an MBA or a similar degree-level qualification in management.
Candidates must also have a good career record and present a career plan that demonstrates the relevance of the DBA.
Assessment for the DBA is based on a mix of competence assessment and research output.
Evidence to show competence is agreed in the personal learning contract.
The quality of research is assessed by a thesis of publishable standard, working papers, seminar presentations and by viva voce.
There is an opportunity to carry out research with a strong international content.
This is encouraged and made possible through an international network.
Participants have the choice of studying at either Henley, in the Netherlands, in France or at the Singapore Institute of Management.
THE PhD/ MPhil PROGRAMME
Henley began registering research students in the early 1970's and at any one time has over sixty people working towards an MPhil or PhD with the College.
The Brunel Degree Congregation, held at the College, awards around twelve PhD and MPhil degrees annually.
The Research Programme has always been considered vital at Henley as a means of training people for academic appointments.
The research contributes in developing ideas and reviewing developments which give insights into new  aspects of management.
The PhD and MPhil programmes give training for those whose careers are likely to involve a high level of research.
Students attend a programme of research seminars and workshops as a preparation for the research investigation.
They use computer mediated communication via The Henley Extended Learning Programme — HELP — as part of the learning/ research process.
Candidates from both the UK and overseas are accepted on to the full-time programme.
A good first degree or equivalent in a relevant discipline is required as well as experience in the chosen field of research.
The period of study depends upon entry qualifications, but for the MPhil a minimum of 12 months full-time study is required.
PhD candidates with a Masters qualification have to complete a minimum of two years' full-time study
Assessment of the PhD/MPhil is by thesis and viva voce In addition candidates are expected to have published a review or preliminary research findings and contributed to research seminars.
THE I.T.
HYBRID MANAGER
An MBA and a Diploma programme aimed at maximising the real benefits to be gained from investment in Information Technology.
These programmes are offered on a consortium basis from the Corporate Programmes Division — see page 13.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT QUALIFICATIONS
An MBA in Project Management is offered on a modular or distance learning basis.
It is designed to suit general managers in all organisations who are involved in achieving corporate strategy by managing through projects.
General managers in project-based organisations, ie consultancy, contracting firms will find this programme attractive.
An MSc in Project Management aimed primarily at managers of engineering projects and technical managers in project based organisations.
This can be achieved through modular or distance learning study.
A five day course is available through the Executive Short Courses — see page 10.
THE DIPLOMA IN MANAGEMENT
The Diploma in Management from Henley is both a self-contained qualification and a basis for entry to the MBA stage two for those without the academic qualifications to meet direct access requirements.
Intended for middle managers with at least two years' relevant experience it is based on distance learning course and assessment materials which can be integrated with the individual's work-place activities, thereby minimising career disruptions and maximising the benefits to employee and employer alike.
To consolidate the learning process, workshops are held at Henley to provide a forum for interaction with tutors and other programme members.
In addition, computer mediated conferencing and other software facilities are available to improve Information Technology skills, together with a further optional learning module.
Specially developed computer based material can also be used as part of the assessment process.
There is also a diploma programme which specialises in project management.
NVQ'S
Henley Management College is an accredited awarding body of the award of National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ's) in Management.
The award covers levels 4 and 5 (certificate and diploma level) based on the Management Charter Initiative management standards.
MCI accredited programmes leading to these qualifications are offered through Henley's Corporate Programmes Division and a number of Approved Centres.
EXECUTIVE PROGRAMMES
HENLEY EXECUTIVE PROGRAMMES
Executive education is the keystone of Henley's activities.
The portfolio of programmes, carefully structured to meet differing personal development needs, has brought Henley a world-wide reputation for excellence.
The programmes have been designed for general managers at all levels who wish to enhance their career progression No matter how complex your needs, Henley will work with you to provide outstanding management development education with clear and tangible outcomes.
The common objective of each programme is to help managers acquire skills, knowledge and perspective.
Henley's unique adaptation of The Syndicate Method enables course members to meet the key challenges of building and leading effective teams and emphasises the benefits of group work.
The experience of working with participants from a wide range of international companies, also enables members to develop and expand their portfolio managerial techniques and interpersonal skills.
Henley prides itself on the accessibility of its Faculty whose services extend well beyond the formal classroom environment.
Our subject tutors are augmented by the services of Henley Development Advisers.
The Development Adviser is a skilled resource unique to Henley, who works closely with a syndicate throughout the programme and has regular one-to-one meetings with each member of the syndicate.
The Development Adviser seeks to
Ensure effective group process
Bring out the lessons of teamwork
Give personal support, feedback, and academic guidance to the individual participant.
In addition to the contribution of the Development Adviser, there are five areas of activity which contribute to the fulfilment of a member's personal development needs.
Pre-Course advice — nominators or candidates are helped to choose the most appropriate course, so that they make the best possible investment.
Development Needs — many managers have only a general idea of how they want to improve.
By working closely with each individual member to assess managerial competences, Henley will help to compile a clear set of development needs.
In-Company Mentor — the role of the mentor is to help the course member set direction for the learning experience, as it relates to individual and company needs, and then implement Action Plans following a programme.
Learning/Action Plans — members are encouraged to create learning plans relating to personal and organisational development.
These progressively translate into post-course Action Plans as the course proceeds.
These may be followed up by agreement between members and the College some time after the programme.
Follow-ups — Henley can provide a range of follow-up services depending on the needs of the individual and the nominating organisation.
These range from three-way discussions with Development Advisers through repeat competences to action learning sets.
Review workshops will be held 5–6 months after the programme to evaluate progress in the workplace, offering individual consultancy and assistance with implementation of Personal Action Plans.
Overseas members will be invited to participate in reviews at strategic centres in our worldwide network.
PROGRAMME PORTFOLIO
As we are committed to the idea of providing general managers with a progression of learning opportunities, we have designed our programmes to match these needs.
Our Executive Programmes are therefore appropriate for the range of challenges which different levels of managers are currently facing.
Each programme has a different mix of Cross-Functional Knowledge, Behavioural Skills and Strategic Integration.
The two Programmes are outlined below.
Management Learning Needs
THE GENERAL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME
Course Duration
4 weeks (Continuous version)
4 separate residential weeks supported by distance learning (Modular version)
Dates for 1993:
Continuous 18 Jan-12 Feb, 17 May-11 June, 13 Sept-8 Oct
Price £8, 750
Modular: 31 Jan-5 Feb, 18–23 April, 4–9 July, 24–29 Oct (Module I start dates)
Price £8,850
Membership Profile:
This programme is aimed at the experienced manager who now needs to develop the knowledge, perspective and skills required in a general management position.
The personal decision horizon is likely to extend to around two years.
In addition the manager is probably required to contribute effectively to longer term strategy and to manage the changes involved in its implementation.
Objectives:
As a result of participating in the programme members would be able to
Take a holistic view of the business and manage operations effectively across the key functions (e.g. Finance, Human Resources, Information Systems and Marketing)
Recognise the constraints and opportunities of the business environment and initiate appropriate change
Understand and contribute effectively to strategy and manage the resulting change
Both versions of the programme are fully residential.
Which format a participant should choose will depend upon his or her career stage, work situation and individual learning style.
The General Management Programme also offers a valuable opportunity to gain formal qualifications — members can progress in a series of stages towards the Diploma in Management and the Henley MBA.
THE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME
Course Duration
4 residential weeks
Dates for 1993: 15 Feb-12 Mar, 14 June-9 July, 11 Oct-5 Nov
Price: £8,850
Membership Profile:
Managers with at least ten years' senior management experience who are initiating and leading strategic change.
Their decision horizon is likely to be five years and beyond.
Objectives:
To develop the skills required to lead and manage strategic change.
The programme will allow members to
Gain experience in the development of business strategy
Identify key strategic issues in changing organisations
Prepare to lead the processes of implementation and change
The programme will show how these elements may be integrated into a coherent strategic leadership, strategic analysis and the creation of international competitive strategy.
Members will increase their skills of managing people at the most senior levels and increase their expertise in corporate strategy concepts and processes.
The core programme is enhanced by a series of specialist talks and seminars where assumptions and judgements can be challenged and shared with managers from a wide range of countries.
THE INTERNATIONAL STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT CONSORTIUM PROGRAMME
We intend to offer an international Strategic Programme in 1993 for a consortium of companies who could nominate up to five candidates each.
This programme would be aimed at senior managers operating at a strategic level across national boundaries, either in the UK or overseas.
The design and content of the programme will be developed in conjunction with nominating companies working closely with the College.
THE EXTENDED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Here a participant can complete the General Management Programme and then immediately follow this with the Strategic Management Programme.
This may be particularly beneficial for those making a major career move within an organisation.
This 8-week option may also have particular appeal for overseas managers.
For further information contact , Business Development Manager.
EXECUTIVE SHORT COURSES
Henley offers a range of short residential courses and seminars designed to develop specific management competences.
Their coverage is tightly focused in order to achieve rapid but lasting impact on managers' effectiveness.
Durations are short and learning intensive for maximum benefit/cost advantage.
Accounting for Managers — an intensive five-day residential course designed specifically for functional, general and senior managers who wish to improve dialogue with their financial colleagues.
Business Strategies for Financial Services — a five-day residential seminar developed jointly by the College and The Chartered Institute of Bankers to enable senior management in financial institutions to formulate corporate strategy in the financial services sector.
Business-to-Business Marketing — an intensive five-day course designed specifically for marketers in organisations which sell not to consumers but to other firms, government bodies and not-for-profit organisations, where the buyer is generally a professional and purchasing is frequently a group decision.
Developing Managerial Effectiveness — this highly successful five-day residential conference provides the opportunity for people to explore and develop their own managerial skills in work which requires leadership, communication, motivation and the use of one's own authority.
Effective Project Management — an intensive five-day residential course for executives needing professional management skills to enable them to meet their objectives successfully.
Information Technology Summer School — this unique five-day residential course has been specifically designed to enable senior executives to explore and develop flexible IT strategies, which will actively support their business objectives.
Managing Corporate Affairs and Public Relations — a five-day residential course, for senior executives wishing to update and improve their understanding of the strategic role of Public Relations, and for senior PR Managers wishing to maximise their effectiveness within their organisations.
Marketing for Managers — an intensive three-day residential course specifically designed for managers who seek a greater understanding of the use and practice of marketing, and who wish to maximise the effectiveness of the working relationship between themselves, their marketing colleagues and their customers.
Negotiating Skills — an intensive two-day residential seminar for executives irrespective of seniority or function — to explore and develop the skills of successful negotiation.
Presentation and Communication Skills — an intensive two-day residential course specifically designed to provide directors and senior executives with thorough training in handling business presentations in a professional and successful manner.
Services Marketing Strategy — for marketers of products that cannot be touched or seen and which are highly dependent on people for the quality of output.
A five-day, interactive programme for managers in services and service-intensive organisations, covering key strategic issues such as service quality, retention strategies, internal marketing and service guarantees.
Strategic Planning in Practice — Europe's leading course for strategic planners and senior executives and directors involved in strategic planning.
BUSINESS IN THE ARTS
The College is involved in the sponsorship scheme which is part of The Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
Through bursary awards managers can attend relevant management training programmes.
Several candidates have already attended Henley Executive Short Course programmes.
Henley is keen to consult nominating organisations to determine how candidates may most usefully develop themselves and benefit their organisations.
We welcome visits to the College to discuss individual nominations and to identify personal development needs related to business objectives.
DIRECTORS' PROGRAMMES
These programmes are aimed at managers who are operating at Board level, allowing those with the greatest responsibility for strategy and policy the opportunity to refresh their skills, to bring themselves fully up-to-date professionally and to focus on the implications of changes in the commercial and public sector environment for the benefit of their own organisation
Strategic Management for the Board — a two-day action based briefing for experienced board members requiring the opportunity for their strategic plans to be challenged by both their peers and leading authorities in strategic leadership.
The Directors' Workshop — a three-day business review workshop for directors of medium size companies run in conjunction with the Institute of Directors.
Company Human Resource Policies — a two-and-a-half-day programme for those directors concerned with human resources and with responsibility for leading strategic change.
Marketing for Directors — a two-day programme specifically designed for managing directors, CEOs and executive board members to enable them to set marketing in its corporate perspective.
Finance for Directors — an intensive two-day programme for non-financial directors wishing to improve their dialogue with financial specialists and their understanding of what constitutes competent financial management.
Managing Corporate Affairs and Public Relations — a five-day programme for senior executives wishing to update and improve their understanding of the strategic role of public relations.
Strategic Planning in Practice — a five-day programme for senior executives and directors involved in strategic planning.
Individual brochures and further information on all the programmes listed above can be obtained from , Short Course Administrator.
CORPORATE PROGRAMMES
CORPORATE PROGRAMMES
COMPANY PROGRAMMES
Company Programmes at Henley aim to ensure that every programme developed is unique to the needs of the client organisation and tailored accordingly.
In this way each programme is both highly focused and innovative.
A partnership is created in which ownership and control of the programme is vested in the client organisation and in which Henley's role is to facilitate definition, design and implementation.
Since its establishment in 1977 the department has advanced significantly and is now viewed as a leader in the field of international management development.
As well as continuing to work with companies on an individual basis work has commenced to develop a consortium programme involving major organisations from around the world.
MANAGING AND DEVELOPING THE PROGRAMME
A distinguishing feature of Company Programmes is the team of client directors who not only have a wide experience in industry but represent the main functions of the business.
It is their role to develop the partnership and ensure the quality of each part of the relationship.
In addition they have a shared philosophy about the contribution of management development to business success.
Great care is taken to match the organisation with the most appropriate Client Director.
THE PARTNERSHIP
In building the partnership with Company Programmes several tangible benefits may be expected.
Integrated Programmes — we pride ourselves on developing programmes which integrate management development with the achievement of business objectives as well as achieving an integrated design within the programme itself.
Company Involvement — we believe the presence of senior members of the organisation is essential to the success of the process.
Internationalisation — Company Programmes have developed an understanding of working with multicultural groups and the differing managerial styles and practice around the world.
The Henley Faculty — in developing the Programme the Client Director will call upon members of the Henley Faculty and will ensure that those selected to work with you have the necessary blend of subject and industry expertise.
In addition Board and senior managers from other organisations are often called upon to bring their valuable experiences to the Programme.
BUSINESS SOLUTIONS THROUGH COMPANY PROGRAMMES
Company Programmes have worked with a wide range of clients to develop their managers to solve a range of business issues which include
Developing commercial awareness and broader functional experience.
Creating an understanding of the challenges of management in implementing business strategies within a changing environment.
Helping to change business culture.
Creating an international management resource.
Company Programmes have built up particular expertise in a number of industry sectors which include retailing, construction, brewing, manufacturing, banking, computing, the public sector and the recently privatised companies.
CORPORATE QUALIFICATION PROGRAMMES
THE COMPANY MBA
Opportunities to study for recognised qualifications through sponsored schemes are becoming an indispensable part of organisations' management development programmes and an invaluable means of recruiting and retaining highly-qualified and motivated staff.
Henley can fulfil these needs with a Company MBA tailored to suit an organisation sponsoring fifteen or more people.
The Henley Company MBA is a flexible system of management education which is integrated into work activities.
The programme first ran in 1986 and current sponsoring organisations include many multinationals, each with their own distinctive features and corporate identity In addition, managers have the opportunity to become part of an international network linked through computer conferencing and meeting at selected workshops.
Features of the Programme include:
The close relationship between the programme and its relevance to business
Development of a strategic awareness of the organisation.
Flexibility and transportability.
Cohesive approach to management development at different levels.
Opportunity for participants to reach their career potential
The fertilisation of ideas across corporate functional boundaries.
INTERCOMPANY MBA
The Intercompany MBA Programme adopts a consortium approach made up of five organisations with five managers from each.
This model will appeal not only to organisations who would like to develop small groups of their managers at regular intervals, but also to those who would like interaction with people from other industries and sectors.
These MBA programmes have been developed on an open learning concept built around Henley's successful distance learning materials.
THE I.T.
HYBRID MANAGER MBA
This innovative new programme is designed to help instil the abilities, competences and attitudes needed to prepare for a management role where understanding information systems and their integration into the business is an essential requirement.
Built round a consortium approach the MBA facilitates the opportunity for interaction between managers from the I.T function and from elsewhere in the organisation as well as with their counterparts in other organisations.
It is anticipated that most students will reach MBA level within two to three years.
The programme is structured around periods of residential study supported by distance learning material.
Mentoring and project work within the sponsoring organisation is a key feature in the development of the individual.
COMPANY DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES
Diploma programmes can be managed in similar ways to the Corporate MBA but can be designed to include the competences approach, learning contracts and mentoring.
Several assessment options are available including MCI endorsement and NVQ in Management.
Managers can progress from the Diploma to MBA which, together with the Henley Certificate in Management, gives organisations the advantage of a fully integrated management development programme at all levels.
For further information about Corporate Programmes contact .
SPECIALIST CENTRES
THE HENLEY RESEARCH CENTRE
Since its establishment in 1945 the College has had a strong commitment to research aimed at improving management and the development of managers.
The Henley Research Centre acts as a focus for research at Henley and offers both organisations and individual managers the opportunity to carry out interdisciplinary research into issues of strategic importance.
Henley Research Centre Strengths
Sharp client focus.
Access to a wide range of academic skills.
Expertise in a range of research methods.
Experience in a partnership approach.
Development of clients' personnel
Skilled project management
A Research Community
By bringing together the academic faculty, researchers and practising managers the College has created a research community capable of undertaking well-founded and practical research.
As well as assignments commissioned by organisations, the Centre carries out research sponsored by national and international agencies.
For individuals the centre offers the opportunity to develop personal skills and the possibility of submitting work for a higher degree or DBA of Brunel University, based on either full-time or part-time study and PhD or MPhil by full-time study.
Researchers can complete part or all of the DBA programme at Henley, in the Netherlands, in France or at the Singapore Institute of Management.
Recent initiatives include the creation of the Future Work Forum, research for the ‘IT Partnership’ and international surveys into business, environmental issues and management competences.
Publication of Research
An important feature of the College's activity is publication of research.
The College is closely associated with a number of journals including The International Journal of Strategic Management (Long Range Planning) and the Journal of General Management.
There is also a Working Paper Series to enable early publication of reviews and propositions to promote debate.
Contacts: and .
CENTRE FOR EMPLOYMENT POLICY STUDIES
Established in 1979, it is concerned with the planning and implementation of organisational human resource policies in both the public and private sectors.
It aims to make a practical, continuing contribution to the knowledge of employment issues in the light of social, political and population changes.
Recent work has led to a report on creating international managers; organization cultures; clerical and secretarial labour markets and skill formation in the supply chain.
Contact:.
THE CENTRE FOR BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
A Centre for the study of high-growth medium-size companies.
Recently published research includes Strategy and Leadership in Growth Companies (Anglo-German Foundation), and International Strategies of Growing Companies (Price Waterhouse).
Contacts: and .
HENLEY EXECUTIVE ENGLISH LANGUAGE PROGRAMME
Given the growing importance of English as the language of international business, Henley now offers a prestigious programme through which senior executives can perfect their English language skills.
The course is aimed at Directors and Managers, who, while competent in English, need further practice and development of business English as an aid to their international commercial activities.
Contact:.
THE HENLEY CENTRE FOR AUTOMOTIVE RESEARCH
HCAR specialises in research and consultancy in the automotive industries which include vehicle fleet management, dealer operations, contract hire and leasing, daily rental management and vehicles disposal.
The Centre operates in the UK and Europe.
Contact .
PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT
This Unit is involved in teaching and research.
The Unit runs the College's qualification programmes in project management, including open and company based programmes.
Recent research has studied the information needs of programme directors, project organization structures and performance, and the motivation of project based personnel.
Contact:.
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SERVICES
The Centre will study the development of international business in services.
It aims to create a world-wide network of contacts with leading academics and consultants who will contribute to regular international conferences and working parties.
The Centre will develop scenarios on emerging international markets in services, establish a database and produce company cases recording best practice.
Contacts: and .
COLLEGE RESOURCES
ACADEMIC FACILITIES
The College has seven conference rooms ranging in capacity from thirty to one hundred persons.
Each is equipped with a range of audio visual aids, together with personal computers which are networked within the College environment.
The seventeen syndicate rooms each have networked computers, OHPs, CCTV and photocopying facilities.
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEPARTMENT
Located in purpose built accommodation, the department is responsible for the administration and support of Information Technology within the College.
Its activities cover programming installation and maintenance, staff training, desktop publishing as well as graphic art and video production.
The computer teaching facilities, syndicate and conference rooms all have Wang personal computers linked by a Local Area Network (LAN), giving access to a variety of software packages and Computer Based Training, as well as electronic mail.
Programme members are able to communicate with tutors and administrators using the network of over two hundred and twenty PCs in the College.
The College Library and the Henley Extended Learning Programme (HELP) can be accessed through the LAN.
Access to external services and to Brunel University are accessed via a communications processor.
The College links with the International Business Schools Computer Users Group whose aims include making the use of IT more effective in business.
HELP
The Henley Extended Learning Programme was originally developed to support the distance learning MBA students worldwide, as a computer communications and conferencing system.
It is now used extensively by members from a range of courses as a means of contact both whilst at the College and subsequently on their return to their organisations.
PC users can access the system using PSS, Dialplus or a modem line to retrieve details about workshops, courses, examinations etc.
They can also use the electronic mail facility, exchange files and join a range of interactive discussions and conferences.
Gateways are available to online databases such as Profile and Kompass to support project work and research.
A new initiative is the running of electronic surveys.
THE LIBRARY
The stock of books, corporate information and government publications are carefully selected and reviewed regularly.
Subscriptions are held to over four hundred journals.
There are special collections of country information, newspaper cuttings, market research reports and theses.
The Library also houses the papers of , one of the pioneers of British management education.
‘On-line’ and CD-ROM searches are available as well as microfiche, microfilm and video facilities.
The Computer Integrated Library System and CD-ROM products are available via the Local Area Network.
Close contacts are maintained with other British and European Business Schools and the Library participates in the production of Selective Cooperative Index of Periodicals (SCIMP).
JOURNALS EDITED BY HENLEY FACULTY
THE HENLEY ENVIRONMENT
The College is situated in the Thames Valley midway between Henley-on-Thames and Marlow.
Set in 30 acres of attractive parkland on the banks of the river, it offers the ideal environment in which to study.
Greenlands was once the family home of W H Smith of newsagent and bookshop fame.
The gardens at Greenlands owe much to his direction and planning and are enjoyed today by course members and staff alike.
Balancing busy work schedules with exercise and relaxation is an important aspect of our approach at Henley.
The College has a continuing programme of upgrading and expanding the sports and recreational facilities.
On site, we have tennis, squash, badminton, boating, croquet, snooker, putting, a Trim Trail, outdoor chess board and a heated swimming pool (available in season).
Nearby, a local golf course offers special rates to course members.
‘Henley in the Arts’ features regular art and craft exhibitions in the Gallery as well as musical evenings for staff and members.
A new feature, in the grounds, is a series of sculptures exhibited in association with The Royal British Society of Sculptures.
Accommodation for residential programmes comprises 107 study bedrooms, each with its own telephone, clock-radio, tea/coffee making facilities and private wc and shower.
The College's own catering staff provide a high standard of cuisine and a choice of menus.
The main dining room, which overlooks the river, offers salad bar, hot dishes and a vegetarian selection plus a range of desserts, fresh fruit and cheeseboard.
The Magnolia dining room caters for the smaller appetite, with a selection of filled rolls and home-made soups.
The bar and adjacent lounge is a relaxed meeting place for course members and staff.
The College shop stocks essential requisites for those away from home plus a range of Henley merchandise from sweatshirts to teddy-bears.
THE HENLEY INTERNATIONAL ALUMNI NETWORK
Everyone who joins the Henley Management College community by completing one of Henley's courses, automatically becomes a member of the Henley International Alumni Network (HIAN).
HIAN's purpose is to encourage contact between members, former members, and between them and the College.
It fosters these links and contacts throughout the world.
Through Alumni support staff based at Henley, the Network encourages the development of National Associations in countries where there are Henley students/members.
Each National Association is autonomous and run by its members, but co-ordination and liaison is maintained through HIAN.
National Associations provide opportunities for social activity, professional development and networking within each country and provide a welcome point of contact for visiting alumni from other countries.
National Associations are encouraged in every country where Henley has a presence.
Currently National Associations are active in Denmark, Hong Kong, Norway, Singapore, South Africa, The Netherlands and are in the process of being established in Germany, Kenya, Malta, Australia and Ireland.
All members of HIAN receive the College's Journal ‘Henley Newslink’, which contains information and news about Henley's world-wide activities as well as articles by and about leading members of the international business community and Alumni.
The key advantage of membership of HIAN is the opportunity it provides for international networking.
Information is available about members of National Associations, where they are, what they do and how to get in touch with them during the course of business travels.
The National Association for the United Kingdom, is the Henley Greenlands Association.
Amongst its other activities it hosts Members Days at Henley each summer, when the College is pleased to welcome members and their families from all countries to Greenlands.
Further services and facilities for Alumni are being added to the range provided by HIAN and by each National Association.
For further information contact  at the HIAN office.
HENLEY WORLDWIDE
Henley is a major international centre for the training and development of managers.
It is also the hub of a worldwide management development network.
Henley is proud of its achievement of working closely for over forty years with educational, business and government organisations throughout the world.
Each year, participants from over fifty countries come and enjoy ‘The Henley Experience’ with its unique opportunities for personal and team development founded on sophisticated selection and evaluation processes.
Henley is also one of the largest graduate business schools in the world, with around 6,000 students registered on MBA and Diploma programmes from over sixty-six countries.
Students are supported by a network of International Associate Institutions who provide workshops, counselling and fellowship to graduate students.
Henley continues to maintain links with those Management Colleges it helped to establish in Australia, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Ghana and the Philippines as well as advising colleges in Eastern and Central Europe.
Henley will continue to have a major influence on management development worldwide in the 1990s.
HENLEY-NEDERLAND
Henley-Nederland is an independent, private institution and a recognised educational establishment.
It offers multilingual and interdisciplinary curriculum at University degree level.
It works closely with Henley Management College to operate the Henley MBA and DBA programmes as well as DL BBA (a Dutch qualification incorporating Henley materials).
A programme of seminars, workshops and exchanges as well as European funded research projects are planned.
The Chairman of the Academic board and Dean of Henley-Nederland is a member of the Henley faculty.
Henley-Nederland is located at Zeist near Utrecht in Holland.
Managing Director: Programme Administrator:
HENLEY MANAGEMENT COLLEGE — HONG KONG OFFICE
A new office offering workshops, tutorials and administration for over 500 registered MBA and Diploma students.
Information about the full range of Henley programmes is available from this office.
Programme Administrator 
THE INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE OF ST PETERSBURG
Henley Management College has a 5% share in IMISP, MBA students regularly visit St Petersburg for study and project work.
The College provides staff training for the Russian academics and administrators.
Director 
BRUNEL
THE UNIVERSITY OF WEST LONDON
Brunel received its Royal Charter in 1966 and is a fully accredited British University.
It has become well known for its close working relationships with industry, commerce and the public sector.
Henley, while maintaining its independence, has been associated with Brunel for over twenty years in the development and administration of post graduate management degrees.
Degree programme members are registered at Brunel University which also confers the degree.
HENLEY DISTANCE LEARNING LIMITED
Henley Distance Learning Limited (HDLL) was established in 1985 to produce, market and support a wide range of distance learning programmes for management development.
Managing Director          
GENERAL INFORMATION
KNOWLEDGE OF ENGLISH
All courses, except where specifically arranged, are conducted in English and participants are expected to have a command of English as a working language.
FEES
Fees are payable before the commencement of the course, either in full or in stage payments for distance learning programmes.
All Executive Programmes and the Modular MBA Programme fees include accommodation, meals, course materials and tuition.
Corporate Programme terms of business are agreed separately as part of the total contract with the company concerned.
All College programmes are subject to VAT, with the exception of the degree programmes.
PROGRAMME DESCRIPTIONS
Programmes are regularly reviewed and updated.
The information given is intended as a guide to prospective participants and organisations.
CANCELLATIONS AND TRANSFER OF BOOKINGS
Executive Programmes
All cancellations, postponements or transfers must be received in writing (including telex or fax).
Competence questionnaires, Distance Learning packs, joining arrangements and invoices will be sent out when a person has been accepted onto a programme.
It is in the member's interest that these materials are received at least 6 weeks before the programme begins.
Consequently:
If a confirmed booking is cancelled 3–6 weeks before the starting date a 50% forfeit fee will be charged.
If a candidate transfers to another course date 3–6 weeks before the starting date, a 30% transfer fee will be charged.
If a confirmed booking is cancelled within 3 weeks of the course starting date or if the nominee fails to attend the course, the total fee becomes forfeit.
If a candidate postpones or transfers to another date within 3 weeks of the starting date a 50% transfer fee will be charged.
Short Courses (1 week or less)
If a confirmed reservation is cancelled less than 4 weeks before the course starts, the fee is forfeited.
However, if an appropriate substitute can be found by the organisation concerned or from the College's waiting list, the claim to a forfeited fee would be waived.
All cancellations and transfers must be received in writing.
Graduate Studies
Cancellation and transfer arrangements for Graduate Studies courses are available from the Graduate Studies Admissions Office.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT: