

SCOTVEC General SVQs UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 25 APRIL 1992
INTRODUCING GENERAL SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
What are general SVQs?
SCOTVEC is about to launch a new type of qualification — general Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
The first of these new awards have just been accredited, and centres wishing to pilot them will be able to do so from August 1992.
Why do we need them?
Over the last year, SCOTVEC has been working hard at introducing Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs) that are relevant to the needs of particular occupational sectors.
Over 200 SVQs have now been accredited, and more are in the pipeline.
So why are general SVQs being introduced as well?
Many young people want to keep their options open.
They may not be sure exactly what career they want, or whether to go on to higher education.
For these students, taking an SVQ which is specific to a particular occupation may not be appropriate.
In summer 1991 the Government invited SCOTVEC to develop general SVQs to meet the need for broadly-based qualifications which are relevant to employment in a range of related occupations, and also for entry to higher education and further training.
The new awards were to be made available from August 1992.
Another reason for introducing the new qualifications is that occupational SVQs must be assessed in the conditions of the workplace, which means that they are sometimes only available to people in employment.
General SVQs are designed to be open to those who are not in work.
They are equally suitable for 16 to 19-year olds in school and further education, and adult learners, including returners to the workplace and those who wish to prepare for a major career change.
The new qualifications have been developed in consultation with industry and educationalists (see page 4).
SCOTVEC is also working closely with the National Council for Vocational Qualifications, which is developing general National Vocational Qualifications for use south of the border.
General SVQs are a logical extension of Scotland's successful unit-based system of vocational education.
They are based on SCOTVEC's very popular modular provision, so they will not require a major shift of emphasis in centres.
And of course, the current flexible National Certificate system is still fully available to centres.
As well as allowing students to progress to employment or to higher education, general SVQs will be clearly linked to SVQs in particular occupational areas.
Taken together, SVQs and general SVQs will provide a coherent framework of vocational awards, with clear routes of progression, and at the same time establish parity of esteem between vocational and academic awards.
What do they look like?
General SVQs have recently been accredited in the following broad occupational areas:
business administration
care
hospitality
technology
leisure and tourism
Like occupational SVQs, the new general SVQs are available at different levels.
The higher the level, the greater the degree of competence required.
General SVQs at levels II and III are available in each of the five occupational areas listed above.
In addition, one very broadly-based general SVQ is being introduced at level I. We are also introducing two preliminary awards at a more basic level than level I. All these awards have been accredited for two years in the first instance.
The following lists some key features of the new qualifications.
Each is covered in detail elsewhere in this issue of Update.
The new qualifications:
are based on credits (see page 2)
allow students to progress to occupational SVQs and other vocational qualifications (see page 2)
include core skills (see page 3)
recognise merit (see page 3)
support the recommendations of the Howie Committee (see page 4)
Piloting the new qualifications
An invitation to pilot the new awards from August 1992, and full award specifications, have recently been sent to heads of centres.
Further information and advice is available from SCOTVEC — please see page 8 for details.
A credit-based system
Unlike occupational SVQs, general SVQs are intended to provide a broad preparation for employment in a range of occupations.
Consequently, the National Certificate Modules which make up a general SVQ may not relate directly to functions performed in employment, although they are relevant to the needs of employment.
This means that when we designed general SVQs we could give them all a similar number of module credits — whereas different occupational SVQs often have widely varying numbers of modules.
This is of considerable help to centres in planning and timetabling courses.
The qualifications that are being introduced, and the credit values that have been assigned to each qualification are as follows:
An important target audience for the new qualifications is people who have not yet decided what occupational area they wish to enter.
For this reason, the preliminary awards, and the general SVQ at level I, are not linked to any particular occupational area, but can include training relating to one or more vocational areas.
General SVQs at levels II and III, on the other hand, are available in each of the five occupational areas decided on for initial development (see page 1).
It is important to remember that in defining the number of credits for each new qualification, SCOTVEC is not specifying the nature or duration of the programme of learning that needs to be undertaken.
However, in broad terms, one credit is assigned to one 40-hour module; two credits are assigned to an 80-hour module, etc.
Although all the new awards are based on a system of mandatory and optional modules, the balance between mandatory and optional varies from one occupational area to another.
Finally it is worth remembering that general SVQs can be taken alongside other ‘extra’ modules, such as foreign languages, or modules requiring a higher level of competence.
This allows individuals to enhance either their core skills, or their occupational specialisms.
Progression within the SVQ framework
An essential feature of general SVQs is that they preserve the main characteristics of occupational SVQs.
Like them, general SVQs are available at different levels, with clear routes of progression between the levels.
The new awards will also have clear links with occupational SVQs in the same broad occupational area, and with other vocational qualifications.
Taken together, the framework of occupational SVQs and the new structure of general SVQs, plus the new preliminary awards, provide an interlinking system of vocational qualifications which:
encourages participation at all levels
allows for credit transfer
lets candidates build up credits over an extended period
enables progression from lower to higher levels
As well as general SVQs at levels I, II and III, we are also introducing two preliminary awards at a more basic level.
This means that, for the first time, the whole SVQ framework has been opened up to slower learners and those without formal qualifications.
Someone with moderate learning difficulties, for instance, can step onto the lowest rung of the framework by taking National Certificate (Skillstart 1).
This consists of six credits (see specification on page 5).
On successfully completing this award, the student can go on to take National Certificate (Skillstart 2).
Although this consists of nine credits (see page 5), three are common to both preliminary awards, so the student would need to take just a further six credits to gain the more advanced award.
Alternatively, this student could go straight on to take an occupational SVQs at level I.
National Certificate (Skillstart 2) would be an appropriate starting point for an adult returner to the labour market with few formal qualifications and low self-confidence.
On gaining this award, he or she could go on to the National Certificate (level I).
This consists of 12 credits (see page 6), six of which can be common to the National Certificate (Skillstart 2).
So again, credit transfer would allow this student to gain the higher award on the completion of six more credits.
Alternatively, this student, too, could go straight on to take an occupational SVQ, at level I, or perhaps at level II.
Similarly clear routes of progression are available for students who have gained the National Certificate (level I): they can progress to either general SVQs or occupational SVQs at higher levels.
Core skills
The inclusion of core skills in general SVQs and the new preliminary awards is firmly in line with current thinking about how vocational education and training should be designed.
Government, employers, trade unionists and educationalists are virtually unanimous in calling for the inclusion of these fundamental skills in all training and education.
Core skills are those which are basic to all vocational and academic achievement.
Five core skills are included as a compulsory part of all the general SVQs:
communication
The ability to write and talk appropriately for a particular purpose and audience, and to understand and interpret information through reading and listening.
numeracy
The ability to use a range of arithmetical and basic statistical techniques to reach conclusions in practical situations.
information technology
The ability to use computers to sort, process and retrieve information and to present information in forms appropriate to a particular purpose and audience.
personal and interpersonal skills
The ability to work independently and co-operatively with others and to use self-awareness and social awareness to guide action.
problem solving
The ability to identify and evaluate problems and to devise approaches to address them; to plan, implement and evaluate the effectiveness of problem-solving approaches.
SCOTVEC has developed a statement defining each of the core skills at four ‘stages’ of increasing difficulty from 1 to 4.
Each general SVQ at levels I to III must include all five core skills at at least stage 1.
In fact, general SVQs at levels II and III incorporate core skills at a stage appropriate to the broad occupational area concerned.
So, for example, National Certificate (level III) Care requires higher levels of communication and personal and interpersonal skills than it does of numeracy (see specification on page 7).
In many instances, core skills can be delivered and assessed as part of the delivery of particular vocational modules.
So, for instance, some general SVQs include problem solving and personal and interpersonal skills by specifying appropriate vocational modules.
However, to help centres, students and employers it has been decided that communication, numeracy and information technology should be assessed through modules which have been specifically designed to deliver these core skills.
Core skills have also been developed at a stage suitable for the new National Certificate (Skillstart 1) and National Certificate (Skillstart 2) awards.
The former specifies three core skills at a level more basic than stage 1, while the latter includes four core skills at stage 1 or the more basic level (see specifications on page 5).
Recognising merit
One new feature of general SVQs is that they recognise performance which is significantly better than that required to prove competence.
Students taking general SVQs at levels II and III will be able to gain a ‘merit’ grading which indicates significant achievement in the general SVQ programme as a whole.
General SVQs are designed to assist selection of candidates for higher education and employment.
Of course, one way of distinguishing between students' performance will be by examining their Records of Education and Training.
These will list each of the modules taken as part of a general SVQ, plus any extra modules they have achieved in addition.
However, the ‘merit’ grading will provide employers and admissions staff with a further way of differentiating students' performance.
Candidates will be awarded a ‘pass’ or a ‘merit’grading on the basis of a compulsory additional assessment.
The assessment will be integrative — that is, it will require candidates to demonstrate that they can draw together the vocational and the core skills strands of the whole programme for that general SVQ.
One possibility under consideration is that this assessment may take the form of a project or assignment to be completed by the candidate.
It is important to emphasise that, although students will be able to gain a ‘merit’ award for the general SVQ as a whole, individual National Certificate modules making up the programme will not be graded.
In order to be awarded the general SVQ, a student must pass the additional assessment as well as achieving the required number of credits.
The additional assessment will normally take place towards the end of a general SVQ programme, so that the candidate is best placed to show his or her ability across the whole programme.
Because SCOTVEC's system of vocational qualifications is based on outcomes, the ‘merit’ grade will be awarded only to students who achieve a pre-set level of performance.
We will not specify that a certain number or percentage of candidates are to be awarded merit.
It has been decided not to grade the National Certificate (level I), at least to begin with.
However, a student with this award who has achieved better performance by taking additional, more demanding modules can be distinguished by looking at this or her Record of Education and Training.
The Howie Committee — how general SVQs fit in
The concept of general SVQs was firmly endorsed in the wide-ranging review of Scottish secondary school education recently completed by the Howie Committee.
The Committee's final report, which was released in March, recommends the replacement of Highers and the Certificate of Sixth Form Studies with two new qualifications: the Scottish Certificate (SCOTCERT) and the Scottish Baccalaureate (SCOTBAC).
The report emphasises the compatibility of SCOTCERTs and general SVQs.
Both qualifications:
embrace general and vocational education
can be taken by both 15–18 year olds and adults
employ a framework of core skills
prepare for entry both to employment and higher education
use a structure of mandatory and optional modules
will be offered in further education colleges as well as schools and other centres
employ criterion-referenced assessment
allow for differentiation of student performance, and
lead to group awards.
The Howie Committee proposes, therefore, that in the future general SVQs at levels II and III should be amalgamated with SCOTCERT.
In order to gain a SCOTCERT Part 1, it was suggested that students would normally be required to complete 16 National Certificate Modules in their first year of upper secondary education.
Achieving a further 16 modules in their second year will allow them to gain SCOTCERT Part 2.
The Committee envisages that the SCOTCERT should be available at both ‘pass’ and ‘merit’gradings.
It also recommends that the future development of general SVQs should be guided by the broad principles set out in the Howie report.
Finally, and in line with SCOTVEC's moves to develop preliminary awards which encourage entry to the general SVQ framework, the Howie Committee recommends the continuing development of arrangements for students with special needs.
Who and how we consulted
In developing general SVQs, SCOTVEC has consulted widely with industry and with educationalists.
Initial consultation took place through SCOTVEC's network of sector boards.
Each board is made up of experts in a particular occupational sector, drawn from both education and industry.
Then, in autumn 1991, proposals for the new qualifications were put out for consultation with a very wide range of organisations, including Scottish colleges, central institutions, universities, secondary schools, industry lead bodies, professional bodies, Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and Local Enterprise Companies.
Amongst the wide range of issues on which comment was invited, the following were particularly important:
Are the proposed general SVQs sufficiently distinctive?
In particular, are they clearly different from occupationally-specific SVQs?
Should general SVQs specify a certain number of credits?
If so, have we specified the right number?
Do the proposed SVQs get the balance right between mandatory and optional credits?
Is it appropriate to include core skills?
Should general SVQs be able to differentiate students who have performed significantly better than required?
More than 150 responses were received, and SCOTVEC set about incorporating the comments and suggestions into the new awards.
This work has been co-ordinated by a steering group of representatives from industry, commerce, education and training.
Overall, we found very strong support for the idea of basing the new qualifications on existing modular provision in Scotland, in order to maintain the coherence of our national qualifications framework.
We received broad endorsement, too, of the rationale for these new qualifications, with most respondents feeling confident that they were clearly distinguishable from occupationally-specific SVQs.
There was also wide support for the idea that each qualification should have a clearly-specified number of credits.
However, in the light of strong recommendations received, our initial proposal to set both level II and level III general SVQs at 12 credits was revised.
Instead, we adopted the new that level III should be made up of 18 credits.
All our respondents agreed that the new qualifications should be based on a structure of mandatory and optional units, though the strong view was expressed that this should be done in a way that allowed plenty of flexibility.
There was virtually universal acceptance of the proposal to include core skills in the new qualifications, although we found a wide diversity of views as to how they should be incorporated.
Many of those consulted expressed considerable interest in the issue of grading students' performance.
Though some pointed out the inherent difficulties in doing this, several respondents made constructive suggestions for possible approaches.
In the end, it was decided that candidates must undertake an extra assessment in addition to their modules, which will be used to distinguish between two levels of achievement: pass and merit.
Finally, the consultation process induced us to broaden our proposed provision quite considerably.
Our initial proposals had embraced general SVQs at levels II and III.
During the consultation process, we discovered considerable support for a general SVQ at level I. There is also a clear demand for awards at a preliminary level which will open up the SVQ and general SVQ frameworks to those for whom mainstream training is not appropriate, including those with special needs.
It is in response to this demand that qualifications at these levels have bee produced.
A foot on the ladder — preliminary awards
On this page you will find an outline of the two preliminary awards designed to facilitate entry to the general SVQ and SVQ frameworks.
The specifications include a number of new modules which we are currently developing.
Some of the modules are being specially designed to take an activity approach.
They provide a very general introduction to particular occupational areas.
Field testing of these modules is already underway.
These outline specifications have been included to provide a summary of the new awards.
Complete specifications have recently been sent to centres.
Descriptors for new modules are not yet available, but will be sent out to centres shortly.
The level I general SVQ
Below we have given an outline specification for the general SVQ at level I.
This outline specification is included to give you a summary of this new award.
Complete specifications have recently been sent to centres.
Descriptors for new modules are not yet available, but will be sent out to centres shortly.
Sample specifications — general SVQs at higher levels
We have chosen the National Certificate (level II) Business Administration and the National Certificate (level III) Care to provide examples of what general SVQs at level II and III look like.
Full specifications for all general SVQs have recently been sent to centres.
Descriptors for new modules in the specifications are not yet available, but will be sent out to centres shortly.
Piloting the new qualifications
An invitation to pilot the new qualifications has recently been sent to heads of centres.
General SVQs will be available for piloting from August 1992, and the preliminary awards will be introduced soon after that.
Development and consultation time has been short, and there are a number of features which will require close scrutiny during the early stages of piloting, so that adjustments can be made at an appropriate time.
In order to monitor and evaluate the introduction of the new awards, a specially-appointed member of SCOTVEC's staff will visit centres to collect feedback.
There are a number of issues which we will be particularly interested in discussing with those piloting the qualifications.
These are:
Core skills
The mandatory inclusion of core skills is new to programmes based on National Certificate modules.
So we will be monitoring issues concerning their delivery and assessment.
Routes of progression
The framework of new general SVQs is designed to allow progression from lower to higher levels.
It is also intended to support the occupational SVQs.
We will therefore want to gain information from those delivering the new qualifications on the relationship between general SVQs at different levels, and between general SVQs and occupational SVQs.
Recognising merit
Distinguishing between pass and merit will be a novel feature of the new awards.
SCOTVEC will need carefully to consider the validity and ease of operation of the new system, and whether it meets the needs of higher education and employers.
Programme content
Over the last few years, centres have built up programmes using the flexibility of the National Certificate.
The introduction of awards based on groups of modules may be a source of  unforeseen constraints.
We will wish to minimise these, and to monitor the success of the new system, with future developments in mind.
Although amendments to the published general SVQ specifications will not be possible during the first year, we will be consulting on whether the specifications should be added to for the second year.
Credit transfer
We expect that many issues will arise regarding the possible transfer of credit from other course such as Standard Grades and Highers.
We will wish to introduce clear guidance and operational systems to expedite this as soon as possible.
Links between centres
Because of some of the new aspects of general SVQs, some schools and colleges may find it helpful to co-operate with other, for example by forming consortia to deliver the new awards.
SCOTVEC will be interested in seeing how well such consortia can function, and in disseminating good practice.
Future developments
The general SVQs which we are introducing from August 1992 are just the first of a proposed series of new general SVQs.
The next batch of new qualifications is planned for August 1993.
We are only just beginning to plan these new general SVQs.
However, our very early thinking has indicated some possible areas for future development.
From 1993, we hope to be able to introduce further general SVQs at levels II and III.
The new awards, like the current series of general SVQs, will be broadly-based, designed to enable candidates to enter a range of occupations, or to progress to higher education.
The Howie Committee has recommended that a number of occupational areas should be developed under its proposals for the new SCOTCERT award (see page 4).
It is likely that general SVQs will be developed in a number of these areas for implementation in 1993.
We will also be looking at the potential for ‘converting’ existing national awards into general SVQs, and at ways of fitting Higher National Certificates and Higher National Diplomas into the general SVQ framework.
We would stress that all these possible developments are at a very early stage of thinking.
Firmer proposals should be available by early autumn this year, and more information will be sent to centres at that time.
More help and information
To help centres wanting to introduce the new qualifications, and also students and employers, we are planning a series of support materials and publications.
Full specifications for each award have already been sent to centres.
The following publications will be available from our Marketing/PR Unit () later this year:
In addition, we are planning a series of workshops on general SVQs for centres, and a consultative forum for those who are pilot centres.
Full details of these will be sent out in April or May 1992.
For more information about general SVQs please contact:.
SCOTVEC
General SVQs — the pilot
UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 32 NOVEMBER 1992
120 centres take up general SVQs and Skillstart
Over 120 colleges, schools and training centres will be offering general SVQs and the new Skillstart awards to their students and trainees this academic year.
These pilot centres will help SCOTVEC to monitor the introduction of the new broadly-based vocational qualifications throughout Scotland.
Three months after they were launched, the new awards are already generating a tremendous amount of interest.
Over 350 teachers, lecturers and training staff have now attended seminars in Glasgow, Dundee, Aberdeen and Dunfermline to hear more about general SVQs and Skillstart.
Further seminars are planned for later this year.
SCOTVEC hopes to work co-operatively with centres during the two-year pilot.
We will be offering advice and support, and listening carefully to feedback from centres on their experience of implementing the new awards.
As well as a series of seminars, we have already published a comprehensive range of support materials designed for staff at all levels (see page 4 for further details).
And in August, the pilot really got under way when our new Evaluation Officer,, began her first visits to centres.
will be offering advice and help, and getting initial reactions to the new qualifications.
In addition, all centres were sent a questionnaire in early October, asking for their views.
This, and other feedback gathered throughout the pilot, will be used to guide and future development of general SVQs and Skillstart.
First impressions indicate that the new awards are being warmly welcomed by centre staff.
Some centres are already devising innovative ways of responding to the opportunities offered by general SVQs, and we will be ensuring a wider audience for this kind of good practice throughout the pilot.
Some early issues of concern to piloting centres are also emerging.
Naturally, questions of funding are high on this list.
Other issues include the possibility of securing recognised equivalences between general SVQs and other qualifications; external verification; and the design and implementation of the additional assessment required for general SVQs at levels II and III.
SCOTVEC is tackling these questions on a number of fronts, and some early progress reports are given inside this Update.
Further development work is going on even as the pilot progresses.
We are hoping to accredit new general SVQs in the following areas by January 1993:
arts and design
arts and social sciences
information technology
land-based industries
science
SCOTVEC is also starting to look at the possibility of developing general SVQs at level IV in the longer term, building on HNCs and HNDs.
Throughout the piloting phase, we hope that there will be a constant two-way communication between centres and SCOTVEC.
For our part, we intend to produce a third Update on general SVQs in February 1993, as well as more informal news and information between now and then.
For your part, we very mich hope that piloting centres will use all available channels to provide us with feedback — whether this is at a seminar or centre visit, via the piloting questionnaire, or through informal contacts with the piloting team at SCOTVEC.
Even if your centre is not taking part in the pilot, we should be glad to know your views (for a contact name and telephone number see page 4).
Together, we can ensure that general SVQs and Skillstart are as responsive as possible to the needs of our customers — relevant, coherent, and practicable.
The piloting team
The two-year general SVQ evaluation exercise is being directed by SCOTVEC's Accreditation Unit.
Assistant Director  heads the team of seven which has responsibility for taking an overview of how the new qualifications are received, and providing help and advice to centres.
, our recently-appointed Evaluation Officer, has now begun her programme of visits to schools, colleges, and training centres.
Previously a Field Officer for SCOTVEC, has extensive experience of working with centres throughout Scotland.
Her role is to provide a channel of communication between centres and SCOTVEC, and to assist in the evaluation of evidence gathered during the pilot.
Back in our Glasgow office, the work of collecting feedback and disseminating information and good practice is being undertaken by .
is the Administrative Officer with responsibility for SCOTVEC input to the SAMI Database which contains SVQ and general SVQ information.
Our very popular Helpline — designed as a ‘one-stop shop’ for all enquiries about SVQs, general SVQs and Skillstart — is operated by .
The piloting team can be contacted via the Helpline number:.
SCOTVEC's Product Development Unit is also playing an active role in the piloting process.
This unit is responsible for the continuing development of general SVQs, and contributes subject-specific expertise to the piloting exercise.
The following list indicates the subject areas covered by each of the five Product Development Assistant Directors:
Report back from the seminars
SCOTVEC is organising a series of seminars providing information about general SVQs and Skillstart, and giving centre staff a chance to ask questions and air their views.
The first seminars were held in Glasgow and Dundee in June, and attended by 300 teachers, lecturers, trainers, and others.
They provided an introduction to the new qualifications, with workshops covering general SVQs in each vocational area.
Delegates were able to discuss the design of each qualification with SCOTVEC staff involved in its development.
In September, three further seminars were run for centres which had decided to participate in the pilot.
Held in Dunfermline, Aberdeen, and Glasgow, they attracted 60 members of staff from 50 piloting centres.
Discussions focused on the core skills included in each new qualification, on the additional assessment which is a compulsory part of general SVQs at levels II and III, and on the issue of merit.
The opportunity to meet staff in other piloting centres, and the possibility of forming general SVQ partnerships, were the major benefits of these seminars, according to those attending.
Delegates also used the occasion to raise matters of concern, including the role of the external verifier, the development of general SVQs at level IV, progression issues, and questions of resources and funding.
While some of these questions were answered by SCOTVEC staff on the day, others required further thought, and consultation with other bodies.
As a result, an informal bulletin, containing answers to many of the questions raised, was sent to piloting centres in October.
Of course, some issues will require longer-term work; items on the page opposite indicate SCOTVEC's progress on these issues to date.
Finally, in September, the first in a proposed series of seminars for centres piloting particular general SVQs was held.
Designed for those offering general SVQs in technology, this initial seminar addressed the issues of access and progression, the additional assessment, and how to ensure effective course management.
Delegates to this seminar are now planning a further meeting in November.
Visits to centres
Between the beginning of August and the end of October, visited around 20 piloting colleges, schools and private training centres.
She met each centre's general SVQ co-ordinator and members of the course teams delivering general SVQ and Skillstart programmes.
Further visits to centres are being planned.
As well as providing help and advice, and gathering the views of centre staff, 's role is to identify good practice in the development of general SVQ and Skillstart programmes.
Even at this early stage, she has found some centres which have developed very innovative and imaginative ways of using the opportunities offered by these new qualifications.
Examples could be given from many of the centres visited so far.
The brief case study of Langside College, Glasgow provided here illustrates both the innovative approach being taken by this college, and the opportunities opened up by general SVQs for the development of partnerships.
In particular, the case study shows how the college is working closely with two local schools, St Ninian's High School and Woodfarm High School.
Case study — Langside College, Glasgow
Langside's programme for the general SVQ in technology at level II has been developed for pupils at two local schools, St Ninian's High School and Woodfarm High School.
Pupils attend school in the mornings to cover the core skills elements of the programme, and college in the afternoon to develop their vocational skills.
Co-ordinating the teaching and assessment of this general SVQ involves a good deal of co-operation, and frequent meetings between course team members from different centres.
A second programme, in care, is designed to deliver general SVQs at both level II and level III.
Designed for adult returners from Castlemilk, Glasgow, this programme is run by the college's Glenwood Centre, and funded by Urban Aid.
The programme uses very flexible learning methods, and an integrated approach to assessment.
Finally, the college is seeking funding for general SVQ programmes in business administration, care, and technology for unemployed workers.
It is also seeking funding from the European Social Fund.
Contacts with other bodies
In introducing general SVQs and Skillstart — two completely new kinds of qualification — SCOTVEC is aware that it is vitally important to integrate the new awards into the existing system of vocational education and training in Scotland.
Over the next two years, SCOTVEC will be taking part in extensive discussions with many other educational bodies, to ensure that general SVQs and Skillstart take their place as a recognised part of this system.
We have already initiated contacts with Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools, education authorities, Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and the Scottish Further Education Unit, which will be closely involved with us during the pilot.
Credit transfer between general SVQs and other qualifications is clearly an important issue, and we shall be considering the implications of this matter.
SCOTVEC also intends to take part in talks with the Scottish Universities Council on Entrance and appropriate degree-awarding institutions regarding recognition of general SVQs.
The questionnaire
All piloting centres were sent a questionnaire in early October, as part of our initial feedback gathering exercise.
Divided into two parts, the questionnaire asked for first reactions to both the general SVQs accredited in April, and the new Skillstart awards accredited at the same time.
Centres' replies to the questionnaire, which will be treated in the strictest confidence, will be used to inform our thinking about the future development of these qualifications.
Funding issues
For many centres, securing funding for the new qualifications is a pressing need.
SCOTVEC is taking an active role in discussions with a variety of funding bodies to try to secure their commitment to general SVQs and Skillstart.
We have initiated talks with individual local authorities regarding their funding of student bursaries and grants for general SVQs.
Discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regarding a nationwide funding policy are also under way.
Scottish Enterprise, and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have announced that both Skillstart awards have been recognised for Output Related Funding at a rate of .5 of a point.
New developments
SCOTVEC hopes to accredit 10 new general SVQs by January 1993.
These awards will augment the existing general SVQs and Skillstart awards currently being piloted, and should be available for introduction in centres later in the session.
General SVQs at levels II and III are planned in each of the following vocational areas:
art and design
arts and social sciences
information technology
land-based industries
science.
The design of each of the new qualifications is currently being subjected to intensive scrutiny and consultation.
Draft specifications for the new science qualifications have recently been sent to schools, colleges, employers, lead bodies, professional organisations, and others, with a questionnaire to gather feedback on the proposed design.
A series of seminars was held in October to discuss the design of this qualification, which includes modules covering biological, chemical, and physical sciences.
Work is also underway on the design of the new land-based industries qualifications.
The proposal is to have a very broadly-based qualification at level II, while the general SVQ at level III will encourage more specialisation by including modules in agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and environmental conservation.
The shape of the new general SVQs in information technology is currently being widely discussed, and a one-day seminar was held recently to consider their design.
The proposed specification for the level II qualification is based on core skill and other mandatory modules.
Current thinking on the general SVQ at level III is that the candidate should select two options from the following:.
General SVQs in art and design are under preliminary investigation.
They are being developed in parallel with SVQs and National Certificate Clusters in design.
The final area currently being developed — arts and social sciences — was, of course, one of the vocational areas highlighted in the report of the Howie Committee earlier this year.
Draft specifications for general SVQs in this area have been sent out for consultation, and a seminar was held to discuss them at the end of October.
The proposed qualifications at both level II and level III consist of compulsory modules in languages, literature, and communications, plus a range of social science module options from which candidates can choose.
In addition to these developments, SCOTVEC will shortly be undertaking further work on the design of core skills.
We are also looking at the possibility of introducing general SVQs at level IV in the longer term.
There are, of course, a number of important questions that have to be answered about the design of such qualifications, before any level IV general SVQs can be developed.
In particular, an investigation is proposed to establish how HNCs and HNDs might be incorporated into the general SVQ framework at level IV.
Publications to help you
The following support materials have now been published:
Copies of all these publications, plus a range of leaflets, have been distributed to centres.
Extra copies are available from the Publications Unit, tel:.
Forthcoming events
Piloting centres will be invited to attend the following seminars over the next few months:
Stop press…stop press…stop press…
Information on general SVQs and Skillstart is now available on the SAMI Database.
For further information, please contact  .
Staff development workshops for those delivering general SVQs have been developed by the Scottish Further Education Unit.
For further information, please contact  .
SCOTVEC has received a number of enquiries regarding the cost of registering candidates for general SVQs.
The fee for each candidate is £3.35 per module plus £5.00 for the additional assessment.
SCOTVEC is currently preparing a guide to procedures for centres offering general SVQs and Skillstart awards.
This guide will cover approval and verification programmes.
More help and information
If you would like further information about general SVQs, or about the pilot, please contact  on our Helpline, tel:.
SCOTVEC
General SVQs — the second phase
UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 35 FEBRUARY 1993
Introducing 10 new general SVQs
This month, SCOTVEC announced the introduction of 10 new general SVQs.
The new qualifications, which will join the 11 general SVQs currently being piloted throughout Scotland, are in the following areas:
art and design
arts and social sciences
information technology
land-based industries
science.
In each area, one general SVQ at level II and one at level III is being introduced.
A fuller description of each of the new awards, which were accredited at the end of January, is given on page 5.
Complete specifications for each of the new general SVQs were being printed as this issue of Update went to press.
The new general SVQs will be available for implementation later in the year, and a letter will be sent to all centres in March regarding piloting in the second phase.
The initial phase of 11 general SVQs, plus the two Skillstart awards, have now been available in schools, colleges, and other centres for six months.
In this issue, you will find a number of reports from centres describing their own experience of offering the new awards.
On the basis of the pilot, we are starting to build up a clear picture of how general SVQs are working in practice.
Our questionnaire survey of centres involved in the pilot is now complete, and shows that the majority welcome the design of the new awards.
An analysis of the survey results, including centres' responses to the additional assessment, and to the integration of core skills into the awards, is given on page 2.
In this, the third issue of Update devoted to general SVQs, we also report back on the seminars held recently for external verifiers and for centre co-ordinators from new piloting centres.
The external verifiers will each be responsible for general SVQs in a particular vocational area.
One of their main responsibilities will be to verify the additional assessment, and to approve additional assessments which have been designed by individual centres.
Reports from these seminars are given on page 3.
Over the past six months, SCOTVEC has also held a number of seminars for subject specialists delivering the general SVQs.
These seminars, reported on page 4, have been designed to allow centres to provide feedback on the new qualifications, as well as receiving up-to-date information on the awards.
As a result of this feedback, we are now considering adding extra modules to the original specifications for some of the first phase of general SVQs.
We are also now considering whether to develop a third tranche of general SVQs for accreditation in 1994.
Several factors are likely to influence this decision, including, of course, the likely long-term results of the Howie Committee's inquiry into secondary school education.
The piloting of general SVQs still has 18 months to run, and SCOTVEC continues to plan more events and written guidance to help centres offering both the first and second batches of general SVQs.
Details of forthcoming seminars and new publications are given on page 6.
And, of course, we hope that piloting centres will continue to provide us with vital feedback.
Through our joint efforts, we hope to ensure that the new qualifications are relevant to the needs of the thousands of students and trainees now embarked on general SVQ programmes across the country.
Results of the survey
In October 1992, the SCOTVEC piloting team sent a specially-designed questionnaire to all centres offering the first batch of general SVQs.
The questionnaire asked for first reactions to both the general SVQs and the new Skillstart awards.
Individual replies have, of course, been treated in the strictest confidence, but some of the aggregated results of the survey are summarised below.
We received an encouraging 50% response to the questionnaire, with 63 of the 129 initial pilot centres sending us their replies.
Altogether, these 63 centres expect to register over 2,400 students and trainees for the general SVQs, with the largest numbers being for the awards in care (over 900) and hospitality (around 800).
In addition, over 700 students and trainees in these centres are likely to be registered for the Skillstart awards.
Around one fifth of those replying to one question said that they are offering the general SVQs in partnership with another organisation, while one third are seeking partnership for the Skillstart awards.
In general, the design of the awards is welcomed by those replying to our survey.
The majority of those replying felt that the size of the awards — that is, the number of modules taken by candidates — is satisfactory.
Again, for most of the awards, centres feel that the balance of mandatory and optional modules in each award specification is appropriate, though many made suggestions for additions to optional groupings.
The survey has also found that the majority of respondents are looking at ways of integrating the delivery and assessment of core skills with vocational aspects of general SVQ and Skillstart programmes.
Another area addressed by the survey was the additional assessment, which is a feature of all general SVQs at levels II and III, and this is clearly an issue of concern to some centres.
Although many commented that it was too early in the session to form definite views, nearly two-thirds of respondents said they thought the additional assessment was an appropriate assessment method.
However, around half had some concerns about awarding merit on the basis of the additional assessment.
Follow up interviews have indicated that many of these lacked the confidence to award merit largely because this was a new feature of National Certificate programmes.
Along with feedback gained from interviews with centres and students, from seminars, and from correspondence, the results of this survey will be used to inform our thinking about the future development of general SVQ.
Dumfries and Galloway: linking up with SVQs
Centre: Dumfries and Galloway College of Technology
General SVQs offered:
‘Our one-year business administration programme, which was introduced last year, is run for a mixed age group.
The majority of our 21 students are adult returners.
Some of the group are aiming for further education in business administration, or in other areas such as leisure and tourism.
But others are hoping to go straight into employment.
For this reason, our one-year programme is designed to allow students to take the occupational SVQ at level II in either administration or finance at the same time as the general SVQ at level II in business administration.
Because students are taking two qualifications at one, it is very important to provide them with easily-understood information at appropriate stages of the programme.
All the students are undertaking work placements in local businesses one day a week for 12 weeks.
Assessment of the placement, which counts towards the Work Experience 2 module, focuses on students’ planning for the placement, a log book kept during the experience, and a final discussion between the student and a member of staff.
The student's supervisor on the placement is also interviewed as part of the assessment of the student's performance.
The general SVQ provides a good breadth of understanding.
Overall, we are pleased with the way the course is going.’
Report back from the seminars
A seminar for the external verifiers involved in the general SVQ pilot was held last November.
The nine verifiers, each of whom is responsible for general SVQs in a particular vocational area, met to look at issues concerning the additional assessment.
As well as verifying general SVQ programmes, the team of external verifiers provides approval of centre-designed project specifications for the additional assessment.
This approval is required both for entirely new project specifications, and for amendments, however minor, to SCOTVEC-devised specifications.
During the seminar some examples of specifications put forward by centres were discussed and reviewed.
The seminar also provided an opportunity to discuss the guidelines for the additional assessment outlined in the SCOTVEC document, Implementing general SVQs: the additional assessment.
It is planned to hold a follow-up meeting for external verifiers later this year, in order to exchange views and share some of the lessons learned during the general SVQ pilot.
To help both centres and the external verifiers themselves, the verifiers will make initial visits to centres to discuss general SVQs before undertaking a formal verification visit.
Seminars for new piloting centres
Three seminars were recently held for general SVQ co-ordinators from schools, colleges, and other centres offering the awards for the first time in August 1993.
These seminars provided a general introduction to the qualifications, and outlined the results of the pilot to date.
A speaker from a piloting centre gave an account from first-hand experience, and two workshop sessions examined issues of particular interest to delegates, including the question of assessment and centre management issues.
These seminars were part of a series of events designed for all those involved in general SVQs, including teachers, lecturers, trainers, centre co-ordinators, and verifiers.
Previous events were described in Update number 32.
News of forthcoming events in the series is provided on page 6.
Thurso takes a high-tech approach
Centre: Thurso College
General SVQs offered:
‘Recently, we have been developing a consortium approach to a whole range of qualifications.
We now offer delivery and assessment help to four schools in our area.
Because the schools are up to 65 miles away, we have had to give a lot of thought to the development of distance learning materials.
As well as offering general SVQs to our own students, we are helping Golspie High School to offer the general SVQ in business administration by delivering one mandatory module, The Scottish Legal Framework, to its pupils through open learning.
We have set up a computer link through the NSA network, and are now able to send texts, questions, and supporting information direct to the school.
We hope to be able to extend this approach to other modules and other qualifications.
We have recently completed an audit of provision at the college and in the four schools in our consortium, in order to help us plan these further developments.’
Integration is the key for YMCA
Centre: Scottish National Council for YMCA
General SVQs offered: care (level II)
‘We are currently providing a one-year general SVQ programme to seven groups of ET trainees throughout Scotland.
Each group has around 15 trainees.
The majority of our trainees are hoping for a career in care, and we hope that many will be going on to further education at the end of the year.
Our one-year programme is designed to enable trainees to gain an occupational SVQ in care at level II as well as the general SVQ in care.
The two awards complement each other well, with the underpinning knowledge and skills required for the general SVQ being delivered in our training centres, while the practical skills demanded by the occupational SVQ are developed on work placement.
Work placement is an important feature of our programmes, with trainees spending three days a week in a variety of settings, including homes for the elderly and day care centres.
While on placement, they are supervised by a member of staff in the particular setting, with the support of our own training officers and general SVQ tutors.
Each trainee is encouraged to take optional modules relevant to his or her placement.
We are concerned to emphasise the vocational relevance of the general SVQ throughout all the modules.
For instance, in teaching the communication module, we focus on communication with people with disabilities.
To support this, we have produced fairly extensive guidance and support materials for our assessors, and for the trainees.
Our trainees are very keen on the idea of being able to gain a nationally-recognised award — or even two — at the end of their year's training.’
Seminars on the first phase of general SVQs
Over the last six months, a number of seminars have been held for those delivering general SVQs in particular vocational areas.
The seminars are an important part of the piloting of the new qualifications, offering centres the chance to give feedback on the design and implementation of general SVQs.
Here we describe some of the issues raised at each of the seminars.
Business administration
A seminar was held in December last year for 19 representatives from piloting centres.
The seminar began with an introduction to the thinking behind the general SVQs in business administration, and an update on the feedback received on these awards so far.
Discussion of the design of the awards focused on the core skills modules, especially in the areas of numeracy and information technology.
Suggestions were also made for the future development of the qualifications.
The timetabling implications of the additional assessment, and of cross-module assessments generally were discussed.
The seminar also examined ways of developing centre-designed additional assessments.
Care
A seminar was held in January for around 40 representatives from centres piloting the new awards in care.
The seminar examined assessment issues in some depth, and provided an opportunity for delegates to give feedback on issues such as the design of the awards, and the additional assessment.
There was concern amongst delegates that the information technology requirement of the level III award was too demanding for many students.
SCOTVEC is investigating this area as a matter of urgency.
Another area of concern was the additional assessment.
Many attending the seminar argued that SCOTVEC's project specifications for care were pitched at too high a level, and felt that further, alternative specifications should be devised.
Hospitality
Twenty-three representatives from piloting centres met in November last year.
Four main areas were discussed in workshop groups:
the additional assessment
staff development needs
integrated delivery and assessment
the design of the general SVQs.
The groups discussed the need to timetable work required for the additional assessment, difficulties in applying merit criteria, and the need for considerable staff development in the area of integrated delivery and assessment.
Delegates emphasised the importance of enuring that their managers understood the resource and time implications of the general SVQ, particularly the additional assessment.
Leisure and tourism
A small group of representatives from piloting centres met in December last year.
The main issues discussed were the same as those for the hospitality seminar described above.
In a wide-ranging discussion, the groups emphasised the importance of cross-departmental liaison in integrating delivery and assessment, and the time and resources required for the additional assessment.
The design of the qualification was also discussed at some length.
Technology
Seminars for subject heads from centres offering the general SVQ in technology were held in September and November last year.
Around 12 to 15 people attended each of the seminars.
The seminars were designed to address both practical implementation issues and the question of the awards.
After a general introduction to the qualifications, three workshop groups looked in more detail at each of the four optional areas included in the general SVQs:.
Areas of particular interest to the delegates at these seminars were the issues of cross-module assessment and the additional assessment.
At the November seminar, delegates considered one centre-devised project specification for the additional assessment, providing advice and feedback to the centre concerned.
New developments in the first phase
One of the major issues being addressed by the general SVQ pilot is the design of each qualification and its suitability for its target groups.
The questionnaire survey, seminars, and interviews that have been carried out as part of the evaluation and monitoring exercise have all focused on this area.
As a result of the feedback received, a number of additions to certain general SVQ specifications are now being considered.
In the area of technology, feedback has suggested that both general SVQs should be extended to include a fifth option, in building services.
In response, SCOTVEC recently set up a small group to consider how to extend the construction option to cover building services, by the addition of extra modules.
These proposals have recently been sent to centres and other interested parties for comment.
Another group is looking at the development of new modules to add to the current specifications for the general SVQs in care.
The new modules, in areas such as equal opportunities, may be particularly appropriate to the level III award.
The group is due to make its recommendations in March.
Consideration is being given to the addition of extra modules to the general SVQs in business administration, hospitality, and leisure and tourism.
In hospitality, new modules may be written to add to the existing specification.
If accepted, these proposals will form the basis of revised specifications for the qualifications from the beginning of session 1993–94.
However, centres will be able to continue to offer any programmes which were developed from the 1992
93 specifications.
The second phase of general SVQs
From August 1993, general SVQs at levels II and III in five new areas will be available to students and trainees in Scotland.
On this page, we provide an outline of each of the new awards.
Arts and social sciences
The new general SVQ in arts and social sciences at level II is a very broadly-based qualification.
Candidates must take five mandatory core skills modules, with the module covering personal and interpersonal skills being chosen from a choice of five.
Four further mandatory modules cover learning and information skills, and provide an introduction to literature and social sciences.
Four further modules must be chosen from a wide range of optional modules.
The design of the qualification allows candidates to select groups of modules which are equivalent to Standard Grades for the purposes of entry to further education.
The general SVQ in arts and social sciences at level III has been specially designed to allow for progression to higher education.
The mandatory core skills modules and other modules have a similar structure to the level II qualification.
Nine optional modules must be taken, candidates choosing three modules from each of three optional groupings, out of a total of nine such groupings.
The qualification has been designed to make it possible for candidates to select modules which will give them the equivalent of at least three Highers in arts or social science areas.
Design
Both the general SVQs in Design incorporate new National Certificate Clusters in this area.
At level II, candidates will take four mandatory core skills modules, plus three modules making up a new National Certificate Cluster in design.
(The SCCC is about to start work on a support package for this cluster.)
These three modules have been designed to assess the final core skill: problem solving.
Candidates will also take three mandatory modules dealing with design skills, and a choice of two modules from an extensive list of optional modules.
These options include drawing and painting skills, two-dimensional design, ceramics, fabric crafts, and fashion.
Similarly, the general SVQ at level III involves four mandatory core skills modules, plus the three modules making up a more advanced National Certificate Cluster.
Candidates will also undertake two module credits from a list of ‘basic options’, including history of art and design studies, plus a further nine credits from selected ‘themed options’ including drawing, fine art, letterforms, jewellery design, and engineering design.
Candidates must choose three module credits from each of three themed option groups.
Information technology
The new awards in information technology are broadly based at level II, and provide a variety of options at level III.
Candidates for the level II award will take four mandatory core skills modules, plus one personal and interpersonal skills module from a choice of six.
Four further mandatory modules must be taken.
Candidates will choose three further modules from a list of options covering databases, spreadsheets, word processing, and programmable systems.
At level III, the mandatory core skills modules follow a similar pattern to the level II award.
Candidates must also take seven further mandatory modules.
The other mandatory modules cover hardware, software and information systems.
Finally, level III candidates will also take a further three credits from each of two selected optional groups.
The seven optional groups available include financial and business systems, software production, and mathematics.
Land-based industries
The general SVQ at level II is a very broadly-based qualification.
Candidates must take a total of five mandatory core skills modules, although the personal and interpersonal skills module may be chosen from a choice of two.
Three further mandatory module credits must be taken.
These modules cover accident and emergency procedures, the anatomy and physiology of animals, an introduction to plants, and a new module in sustainable resource utilisation.
Finally, four more credits must be gained from an extensive list of options across the range of agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and the environment and conservation.
At level III, candidates specialise in one of these four areas.
Students and trainees will take five mandatory core skills modules plus three other mandatory modules covering science in context, health and safety at work, and a more advanced new module in sustainable resource utilisation.
When it comes to optional modules, candidates will take a total of nine module credits from one of four optional groups covering agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and the environment and conservation.
Science
Both of the general SVQs in science are designed to provide students and trainees with a broad grounding in science, while allowing them to develop higher levels of competence in their chosen areas.
At level II, candidates will take mandatory core skills modules totalling four module credits, plus a further personal and interpersonal skills module chosen from two options.
A further module in mathematics is also mandatory.
Four optional module groupings are included in this award, covering , and other areas including modules in .
Candidates must take three credits from one of the biology, chemistry, and physics groupings, plus two credits from another.
A sixth credit can be chosen from any of the four optional groups.
At level III, all candidates take three mandatory core skills modules, plus two problem solving and interpersonal skills modules chosen from a selection.
Two further mandatory modules are taken, covering mathematics and experimental procedures.
The optional selection of the qualification has been structured into routes, one for each of the main science disciplines, biology, chemistry, and physics.
Within each route, candidates must take at least four credits from the appropriate science discipline, plus two credits from another.
Five further credits will be chosen from any of the biology, chemistry, physics, or specialist option groups.
Both qualifications include groupings of modules which have been recognised as providing alternatives to SCE Standard Grade and Higher awards for particular purposes.
Some of these groupings have been recognised by the Scottish Universities Council on Entrance.
Tackling the additional assessment at West Lothian
Centre: West Lothian College
General SVQ offered: care (level II).
‘We introduced this programme in August last year, enrolling 14 students, both young people and adult returners.
The course is offered on a full-time basis.
Students who successfully complete an agreed ‘profile’ are guaranteed access to a range of further courses in the college, including the general SVQ at level III, the new HNC in Social Care, social studies, childcare, and our access to nursing programme.
To achieve this profile, students have to complete the general SVQ at level II, and undertake a period of work placement monitored by college staff.
We had initial difficulties in integrating aspects of course delivery and assessment, largely due to the timing of the new qualification.
But we can now see the strengths of this approach.
By forming course teams across different disciplines for the general SVQ we have improved dialogue, and this is certainly welcome.
For instance, we are well-used to integrating vocational assessments in care, but for the general SVQ we have for the first time found it necessary to set up meetings with colleagues delivering modules in numeracy, information technology and budget financing.
It has been vital to let these colleagues know what will be required of students in the additional assessment, so that they can plan their course work accordingly.
We believe that this aspect of general SVQs makes for a better programme, because it emphasises the vocational relevance of skills like numeracy and information technology.
Our students carry out their additional assessments at the end of the course, as part of their work placement in nurseries, centres for adolescents, homes for the elderly, day hospitals, and community projects.
The additional assessment is clearly a lot of work for students.
But we have found that with support, especially in information technology and communication, they are able to complete it with success.’
Forthcoming seminars
A number of seminars introducing the second phase of general SVQs are planned for May and June.
The seminars, designed for teachers, lecturers, trainers, and others involved in implementing the new awards, will include workshops focusing on general SVQs in each new vocational area.
Delegates will be able to discuss the design of each qualification with SCOTVEC staff involved in its development.
An invitation to these seminars will be sent to new piloting centres later this year.
Further information about the seminars is available from  .
In addition, three seminars for general SVQ co-ordinators from schools, colleges, and other centres involved in piloting the first batch of awards have been arranged for March.
The seminars will outline the results of the pilot so far, and speakers from different centres will describe their own experience of implementing general SVQs.
First-hand experience of the way the additional assessment is working in centres will also be offered.
Workshop sessions will examine centre management issues, assessment, and quality assurance.
It is hoped to hold these seminars in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and Glasgow.
For further details, please contact  .
New publications
Guidance material for the new batch of general SVQs is in preparation and will be distributed to all centres in the spring.
The guidance will be similar to that already produced for the first phase of general SVQs.
However, material on the additional assessment will this time be incorporated into the subject-specific material, rather than being produced as a separate document.
Five publications are in production:.
Work is also underway on further guidance material on core skills.
This will discuss various ways of using candidates' course work for English, maths, and computing Standard Grades as evidence for achievement in communication, numeracy, and information technology modules.
The aim of this guidance, which will be available in the summer, is to enable candidates who are working towards Standard Grades to achieve general SVQs without duplication of effort.
It will also encourage teachers and lecturers to help candidates to take core skills modules at a higher level than that required for a general SVQ, where this is appropriate.
SCOTVEC
General SVQs — One Year On
UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 37 June 1993
News from the pilot
It's a year now since SCOTVEC announced the introduction of general SVQs.
And the first students and trainees are now coming through the system with the new qualifications.
In this Update, we hear from some of those who have been involved in the first year of the general SVQ pilot: students, teachers, lecturers, and trainers, as well as senior staff in colleges, schools, and training centres.
We also report on initiatives being developed in the regions in support of general SVQs.
Inside, you will also find first-hand advice from teaching staff on ways of ensuring the success of a general SVQ programme, on potential pitfalls, and on issues to bear in mind when planning general SVQs.
We also profile views and insights from senior staff in schools and colleges on the impact of general SVQs on the vocational education scene, and on their hopes for future development.
Meanwhile, further development work continues in SCOTVEC.
Last month, we circulated revised specifications for the first batch of general SVQs.
These revisions, which have been made in response to requests from centres piloting the qualifications, will come into effect from the beginning of next session.
Further information is provided on page 7.
SCOTVEC has also been working on a catalogue of extra additional assessments for the first phase of general SVQs, in order to provide candidates with a wider choice of assessments.
The catalogue will be sent to all piloting centres shortly.
Page 7 of this Update provides more details.
In May, centres also received copies of new support materials for the second phase of general SVQs.
These provide advice on access to and progression from each of the new awards, and on designing and running cross-module assessment.
Each handbook also includes a number of additional assessments.
Further information is given on page 7.
Our programme of seminars continues, with recent events designed for centres currently piloting the first batch of general SVQs, and those interested in joining the pilot next session.
We have also run awareness-raising events for university careers staff and for policy makers in higher education.
Reports on these seminars, and news of forthcoming events, can be found on page 8.
As we move towards the second year of the pilot, and the implementation of the second batch of new qualifications, it will be increasingly important to gather information from general SVQ candidates who have completed their courses.
A questionnaire was recently sent to all students and trainees, asking for their views on the qualifications.
This information, along with the results of interviews with over 100 students, will be used to inform general SVQ policy and future development.
Further information is provided on page 8.
A further questionnaire is also in preparation for piloting centres, and will be sent out before the end of the session.
We shall also be asking centre co-ordinators to help us in collecting important information about candidates' first destinations after taking general SVQs.
As we near the end of this fist piloting year, we at SCOTVEC would like to extend our congratulations and thanks to all those who have contributed to its success: the teachers, lecturers, and trainers, the pupils, students, and trainees, and all those who have been involved in planning and implementing the new awards.
We should also especially like to thank those who have provided essential feedback, through participation in seminars, questionnaires, and interviews, which will enable us to ensure that general SVQs are a truly relevant and worthwhile qualification.
We hope that you will continue to provide us with this vital information as we embark together on the second piloting year.
A qualification for the '90s
Tom Burness gives a personal view of the first year of general SVQs
Tom Burness is Principal of Glenrothes College.
He is a member of the new SCOTVEC Board, and has been appointed Chairman of the new Qualifications and Marketing Committee, and is presently a member of the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum.
Tom Burness has also been a member of the Scottish Community Education Council and the Scottish Council for Educational Technology.
In 1992 he was awarded an OBE.
‘Although the name is new, many of the ideas forming general SVQs have been exercising us for years.
The issues that these new qualifications address are the really big ones: bridging the academic-vocational divide, the need for a coherent curriculum, building in core skills, and, finally, rewarding merit.
I think many people would agree that the status quo is no longer an option.
There must be change — and perhaps especially where the upper secondary system overlaps with further education.
Highers were designed to meet the needs of less than thirty percent of our school population, and that leaves the majority who stay on less than well-served.
This is why general SVQs are so important.
Like the Howie Committee's proposed SCOTCERT qualification, to which they bear a close resemblance, general SVQs offer a broadly-based general education with a vocational thrust.
One of the issues that has been rather distorted in the debate over Howie is the need to look beyond crude distinctions between ‘academic’ and ‘vocational’qualifications.
One of the most admired features of the educational systems in France, Germany, and Denmark is the way they integrate a substantial proportion of what we would call ‘general education’ into their vocational programmes.
General SVQs offer the chance to provide such a range of programmes in Scotland: a good case in point is the new general SVQ in arts and social sciences, which is entirely consistent with the proposals for SCOTCERT.
General SVQs are not meant to be narrowly vocational — although I think the name may not be entirely helpful here.
In the years after Action Plan was published, a great deal was achieved.
But when the old, rigid course frameworks were broken up, we paid the price in lack of curriculum coherence.
Some colleges, including my own, developed their own curriculum frameworks to impose some order on the ‘cafeteria’ of modules available.
But there was a real need for this to be done nationally.
General SVQs are a major step in this direction.
Another significant feature is that general SVQs incorporate core skills.
I think that as employers gradually become aware of this, general SVQs will be increasingly valued in the marketplace.
This brings us to the question of ‘competence plus’— or merit.
Arguments about merit have never really gone away, and many people have felt that the extra effort put in by the best students need to be recognised.
The Howie Committee also highlighted this issue.
The additional assessment is a sensible and welcome attempt to differentiate students' performance by assessing higher-order skills.
I don't underestimate the difficulty of the attempt, but I do believe that it can work.
Of course, integrated programmes are less suitable for part-time attendees and those who want to do parts of a modular programme.
There has to be some trade-off between the benefits of open access and the value of integrated programmes, and I think the balance of advantage lies with the integrative approach.
However, the growing flexibility in our delivery systems should mean that no-one is disadvantaged.
Glenrothes College has been part of the general SVQ programme from the start, and, like many piloting centres, we are learning as we go.
We have some concerns — especially the need for articulation between general SVQs and HNCs, HNDs, and occupational SVQs.
But overall, I am convinced that general SVQs — or something very like them — are the way forward.’
A chance to achieve parity of esteem
‘We were keen to join the general SVQ pilot from the start.
By participating at an early stage, we hoped to have some influence on the national agenda.
We were very alive to the fact that the Howie review was raising issues of integration and articulation that Further Education couldn't afford to ignore.
General SVQs seemed well suited to our needs.
Designed for all learners, they fit well with the college's ‘learn for life’ mission.
We run a general SVQ programme in technology for pupils at two local schools, and one in care for adult returners from Castlemilk, Glasgow.
The general SVQ in technology was particularly attractive to us, as our construction section was suffering, at least temporarily, from the economic downturn, and whilst there was little training activity in the building sector, it was being predicted that this was not likely to be a long-term situation.
Planning was crucial from the start.
Our first technology course team meeting was held in August 1992 to work out the logistics of travel and timetabling between the college and the schools.
It was decided that students would attend college five afternoons a week.
The schools would deliver core skills modules in the morning, and the college would deliver the other modules.
A very important part of this and subsequent course team meetings was planning the integration of teaching and assessment.
In preparing for the forthcoming session, we will be emphasising the importance of planning even more.
We shall be running a parents' night, to explain issues of parity of esteem and articulation.
We will also plan the additional assessment earlier, introducing it to students in October.
The care programme, funded through Urban Aid and run in our Glenwood Campus, also required a good deal of planning.
As the planning team was made up mainly of part-time members, we quickly realised that communication was an important issue.
We also issued all students and staff with a briefing pack which mapped out the course, and included progress charts.
The pilot has not been cheap, and resourcing implications are a serious consideration for us, as for many colleges.
However, we feel that it has been a worthwhile investment, and one which we plan to extend next year.
General SVQs offer the opportunity for a major shift in vocational education in this country, and a real chance to achieve parity of esteem between vocational and academic awards.’
A real alternative to Highers
Sanquhar Academy, a small school in Dumfries and Galloway, is offering a two-year, level I general SVQ programme to S5 and S6 pupils.
James Craik, Depute Rector, says,
‘General SVQs are a real alternative to Highers, offering progression to HNCs, and then on to HNDs and degrees.
We're hoping to extend our general SVQ provision next year.’
Scott Gallacher and Lorraine McCaldin are two students who are currently on the general SVQ programme.
‘The course has a good variety of subjects, and is giving me a taste of different job areas like computing, and office and information studies, as well as numeracy and communication.
I like the way the modules build up to give me a more valuable qualification.
I'd already done some modules in S3 and S4, and two of them counted towards the general SVQ.
Next year, I want to carry on with the course, and do my Highers as well.’
Scott Gallacher
‘The best thing about the course is that I can work at my own pace.
I like communication skills best, but it's nice to have a wide choice of subjects.
We get a certificate which is updated each year, showing what we've actually achieved.
I much prefer being assessed as I go along, rather than having big exams at the end of the year.
Next year, I'm coming back to finish the general SVQ, and I want to do Highers too.’
Lorraine McCaldin
I want for merit!
Nancy Douglas recently received the general SVQ at level II in care with merit after attending a course at West Lothian College of Further Education
‘I originally applied to do the college's one-year National Certificate programme in Health Care, but the college wrote back saying the course was over-subscribed.
They said they were offering a new short introductory course called the general SVQ in care.
I thought it sounded like a good idea as it would give me a taster.
If I liked it, I could re-apply for the one-year programme, and if I didn't, I would only have wasted five months.
I left school at 16 without much in the way of qualifications.
For the last 14 years, I've worked in shops and offices, but I've always thought I'd like to do community work, which would suit my personality a lot more.
I think being a bit older has helped me with the course.
I find it easier than some of the younger ones to express myself.
But I had to make a bigger adjustment to studying.
I thoroughly enjoyed the course.
For my health education project I did a puppet show promoting dental care to under-5s, with puppets called Mickey Molar, Susie Shiner, Tony Toothbrush, and Peter Plaque!
I did a two-week placement at Epicraft, a local centre for people with epilepsy, helping them with their crafts.
The main things I learned were not to panic, and how to be diplomatic with people, but not to give in to them.
For my additional assessment I had to plan a facility for a chosen client group.
Although we weren't set any price limits, I decided to be realistic, and set myself a budget.
I spoke to lots of different people, and got plenty of information.
I told everyone I was going for a merit, but it made me feel really good when I got it!
Next year, I'd like to go straight into the HNC in Health Care.
I'm doing an open learning course in Communication 4 at the moment, which may help.
I'd always thought I'd like to work in an old people's home.
But on the course they told us to keep our options open.
I'm not sure now whether I want to work with adults, or children, or mentally or physically handicapped people.
I don't just want to be a ‘cleaner-up’.
I want to get involved in rehabilitation and education.
What I'm really interested in is drama and art — there must be rehabilitation possibilities there.
I've found out that Glasgow University does a course on art therapy.
At the moment, that's really ‘up there’, out of my reach: you need to have a degree already before you can do it.
But you never know!’
Coming up to the additional assessment
‘We have 13 students coming up to the end of the general SVQs in business administration at level III.
Originally, we had planned a National Certificate programme in Accounting and Information Studies, but when the general SVQ was announced, we decided to combine the two, so our students will get both awards.
Because it is a mixed group, we taught some introductory modules at the beginning of the course — around seven in all.
This sounds like more work than it was, because we integrated these introductory modules with each other, and with general SVQ modules, which made it easier.
We had a head start as far as integration is concerned, because last year we offered a business administration ‘fast track’ access course which involved a lot of integrated teaching and assessment.
This showed us that integration saves time and duplication, and makes the programme more interesting for the students.
Integration is starting to become second nature for us.
Lecturers will now come to me to check what modules the students are doing with other staff, and we're taking much more of a team approach.
We're also starting to use flexible learning, through the college's new Business Administration Flexible Learning Unit, and open learning packs are now available for some of the general SVQ modules.
The students are coming to the end of their additional assessments now: they've been working on their projects since December.
We decided to schedule an hour and a half each week for work on the additional assessment, and this seems to have been a successful approach.
We're expecting some students to get merit.
But even those who don't pass the additional assessment will get a SCOTVEC Record of Education and Training listing all the modules they've achieved.
In fact, we'd much rather spend any extra time available for getting these students through their modules than in trying for the additional assessment.
After all, if they've got some of the modules, they can always go for the full general SVQ later.’
Teamwork pays off!
‘We wanted to offer our Employment Training trainees an occupational SVQ in care at level II.
But when we looked at the SVQ in more detail, we found that the underpinning skills and knowledge required would need some extra attention.
The general SVQ in care at level II has allowed us to plug this gap.
We went carefully through the Workplace Assessor's Manual for the SVQ, matching the knowledge evidence required to the modules making up the general SVQ.
We found that they matched quite closely.
For instance, we found that the underpinning knowledge required for the ‘value base unit’ in the SVQ can be provided my the following modules:.
We decided to offer our trainees two days a week in our training centre, working towards the general SVQ, plus three days' practical training in a work placement, where they could be assessed for the SVQ.
It's very important for the five tutors offering these awards to work closely together.
We all set Fridays aside for preparation, which means that we can collaborate closely on course work.
Each of us teaches our group of trainees all the modules making up the general SVQ — with the exception of Information Technology 2, which is taught by local college staff.
This makes it much easier to integrate teaching and assessment, as well as helping us to build up a rapport with our trainees.
Teamwork has been very important.
All the general SVQ tutors, and the SVQ co-ordinator went away for a three-day residential to develop the programme.
We went through each of the modules making up the general SVQ, and allocated responsibility for developing candidate support materials.
Then we all came together again to go through the material before we started to teach it.
We have found it particularly important to develop candidate materials to explain the additional assessment in language suitable for our trainees.
In designing the programme, we have tried to emphasise the vocational aspects of the core skills modules wherever possible.
We have also developed standardised assignments, to help assessors in the placements to gather evidence of knowledge required for the SVQ.
Because we work in far-flung locations, it is very important for all the tutors to come together to discuss the programme every so often.
We will meet formally five times over the course of the first pilot year, and this month we are planning a two-day meeting to evaluate the teaching of each module.
The main difficulty in combining the two awards is timing.
It is not always possible to deliver a module just at the time a trainee needs it for the purposes of SVQ assessment.
To get over this problem, we have developed a resource pack for each placement site, which acts as a source of reference for trainees.
This year has been hard work for us, and for our trainees, some of whom have been away from formal education for some time.
But a high proportion have been offered jobs in their first placement, and we fully intend to offer the programme again next year.’
News from the regions
The regional authorities have a major role in resource and curriculum planning for the school and community education sectors.
SCOTVEC is holding discussions with a number of authorities to identify ways of working together to support general SVQs.
Below, we report on a number of initiatives currently taking place in the regions.
Dumfries and Galloway
, Assistant Director of Education, recently wrote to schools in the Region, asking them to indicate their interest in piloting general SVQs next session.
The Authority is offering funding for certain models of delivery, including the following:
partnerships of schools
partnerships between schools and colleges
partnerships between schools and community education
partnerships between schools and industry
schools working on their own.
The Region is also encouraging schools to come forward with proposals for particular curriculum models.
A number of schools have now indicated their interest in piloting from next session, and a meeting has been arranged between the headteachers of these schools, the Regional education department, and SCOTVEC.
A major seminar on general SVQs was held in March for headteachers and advisors in the Region.
Arranged with Dumfries and Galloway LEC as part of its Education Business Partnership initiative, the seminar attracted over 40 delegates.
Further staff development for piloting centres is also under consideration.
Highland
The Authority is encouraging schools to pilot general SVQs from next session.
TVEI funding has already enabled the Region to undertake a curriculum audit in schools, and allowed individual schools to carry out some development work.
The audit aimed to establish a comprehensive list of the modules being offered throughout the Region, and to identify the gaps in provision.
John Ritchie, Staff Development TVEI Co-ordinator, has now followed up the audit by inviting all schools in identify developments that should be undertaken centrally to allow these gaps to be filled.
TVEI funding is available for central development and local allocation of support material, which will ‘flesh out’ individual modules, providing assessment advice, suggested assessment instruments, and teaching materials.
The aim is to achieve co-ordinated curriculum development across the Region, to encourage school-college partnerships, and to avoid duplication of effort.
The Region recognises the importance of developing management structures and systems to support general SVQs, and TVEI funding may also be used to enable centres to free up staff time for planning, monitoring, and evaluating the introduction of general SVQs.
A conference was held in April for schools wanting to introduce general SVQs.
The workshop-based event examined a range of practical management, guidance, deportment, and classroom concerns, and issues of continuity and progression.
The Regional audit of modules was also discussed.
Lothian
In this, the final year of its TVEI Extension, Lothian has a substantial budget for general SVQ development work in the following areas:
awareness and understanding of the qualifications
management issues
research and development into timetabling
staff development and support materials
the additional assessment and integration
information to parents.
At present, eight schools in the Region have responded to an invitation to submit proposals under these headings, and all are likely to receive funding.
Several of the schools are proposing to undertake joint development work with local colleges.
The Region also recently sponsored a parents' evening at Broughton High School, which provided information to around 150 parents on provision including general SVQs and National Certificate Module Clusters.
A subsequent event was also held at St Thomas of Aquin's High School.
Filling gaps in provision
‘Like many secondary schools, we're seeing an enormous change in the upper school population — both in the sheer numbers of those staying on, and in the type of students we have.
So general SVQs have arrived at a good time.
This year, we have been running the general SVQ at level I for around 36 students in S5 — and we're very pleased with the way it's gone.
It's certainly popular with the students.
In the past, students who didn't go for Highers tended to get a ‘pick and mix’ of modules and short courses.
Now, they can work towards a qualification which has greater value when it comes to looking for a job or a place in further education.
The level I is fairly demanding for these students.
In particular, it requires a good attendance record at school.
Our students have realised that if they miss an assessment for just one learning outcome, they won't get a module, and will jeopardise their chances of getting the general SVQ.
This year, we've not had time to integrate teaching and assessment of core skills into vocational areas.
But next year, we are planning to integrate communication skills with work experience and job seeking modules, and numeracy with problem solving.
For instance, when students are writing a letter as part of their job-seeking assessment, it could also be assessed for the communication module.
One member of staff will have responsibility for teaching each of these ‘packages’ of modules.
The learning outcomes in these modules have so much in common that it seems inappropriate to have three teachers teaching them in three separate classrooms.
We're realised that integration will also make timetabling much easier.
Next year, we will cover all of the core skills in two option columns, rather than three.
The general SVQ as a whole will be timetabled over four columns, leaving one column free.
This will allow students to combine the general SVQ with other qualifications — a PE short course, for instance, or even a Higher.
The vocational modules will also be available to all students.
Next year, we're planning to move up to level II.
We'll certainly be offering business administration, and may offer the care award, too, in conjunction with the College of Nautical Studies.
These programmes will be offered to those who completed the general SVQ at level I this year.
But they will also be suitable for students who have just finished Standard Grades, but are not ready to go on to Highers.
We believe that allowing these students to go straight from S4 to a level II general SVQ will give them a real sense of progression.
While there are some aspects of general SVQs that will require further consideration, such as articulation with Standard Grade, accreditation of prior learning, and flexibility in the vocational options, we do feel that the curriculum now on offer in the upper school is better geared to the needs of the students.’
New developments…new developments…new developments…
First phase developments
Over the past year, SCOTVEC has actively sought feedback from centres on the design of the first phase of general SVQs.
As a result, a number of changes have been made to the following general SVQs:
Full information about the amendments, and revised specifications for all the awards were sent to centres in May.
In the main, the amendments relate to the optional modules within the qualifications.
Some of the changes have been suggested because individual modules are thought to be at an appropriate level.
In other cases, the addition of extra modules is designed to improve the flexibility of optional groupings.
For some of the awards, changes have been made to allow progression to other qualifications.
The amendments will take effect from the beginning of next session.
However, centres will be able to continue to offer programmes which have been developed from the original specifications.
Also in May, centres were sent a letter regarding the current review of Information Technology core skills.
Some modest amendments to these modules are likely over the next few months, as a result of full consultation with centres.
Extra additional assessments
Over the last few months, SCOTVEC has been working on a series of extra additional assessments for the first batch of general SVQs, that is, for the awards in:
At least one extra additional assessment for each general SVQ has been developed, and these will be published in the form of a catalogue.
As well as the new, SCOTVEC-devised assessments, the catalogue will contain existing SCOTVEC-devised additional assessments, and may also contain approved centre-devised additional assessments.
The new catalogue will be sent to all piloting centres before the end of this session.
Further information about the catalogue is available from  .
Second phase developments
Comprehensive support materials for the second batch of general SVQs were sent to centres in May.
One handbook has been produced for general SVQs in each of the following areas:
As well as information on access and progression, and on cross-module assessments, the handbooks also contain SCOTVEC-devised additional assessments for each general SVQ.
Extra copies of the handbooks, price £10.00 each, are available from our Publications Section,.
SFEU
The staff development workshops run by the Scottish Further Education Unit have now been updated to include the second phase of general SVQs.
SFEU will also be holding a two-day seminar on 3–4 June for college principals, and a further seminar on 10–11 June for depute and assistant principals.
The seminars will examine curriculum issues, with a special focus on general SVQs and their relationship to the Howie Committee's proposals.
Further information is available from  .
Gaining recognition
SCOTVEC is taking an active role in discussions with other bodies, to ensure that general SVQs take their place as a recognised part of the vocational education and training system.
The UK Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting has recently approved general SVQs and occupational SVQs at level III as fully satisfying the educational entry requirements for pre-registration nursing preparation.
Discussions are continuing with the Scottish Universities' Council on Entrance regarding possible future recognition of the new general SVQ in science at level III for purposes of entry to higher education.
Finally, the Scottish Office has recently agreed that Highlands and Islands Enterprise can fund Skillstart 1 and Skillstart 2 — the preliminary awards introduced at the same time as the first general SVQs — to two points for Output Related Funding purposes.
Highlands and Islands Enterprise already allocates three points to the general SVQ at level I.
Checklist for piloting centres
The checklist below was compiled by delegates at a March conference for piloting centres.
It summarises their advice to centres planning to offer general SVQs for the first time.
commitment from senior management
a general SVQ co-ordinator
a course team
time for curriculum development
staff development for the whole team.
look at resource implications
plan up to a year ahead
schedule assessments, especially the additional assessment
work across departments
have regular meetings of the course team
integrate delivery and assessment
allow time for remediation
establish responsibility for the additional assessment
establish responsibility for links with other centres
provide information and guidance to students and parents
establish rules of progression with other centres
provide candidate support
consider flexible delivery
evaluate.
It is essential to have:
It is vital to:
Report back from the seminars
In January and February, three seminars were held for centres that will be piloting general SVQs for the first time from next session.
In all, nearly 80 delegates attended.
In March, seminars were held in Inverness, Fife, and Glasgow for co-ordinators from centres involved in the first year of the pilot.
The delegates exchanged views on their experiences of the first six months of the pilot and considered the problems of offering general SVQs in a remote area, school-college partnerships, and the additional assessment, and produced a checklist of advice for new piloting centres (see opposite).
March also saw a Seminar at Hanover House for careers staff in universities.
It focused on articulation and credit transfer for the SCOTVEC system, including general SVQs.
In April, SCOTVEC also hosted an event for policy makers in higher education.
This seminar covered the design and purpose of general SVQs, their relationship with other awards, assessment, and quality assurance.
The 22 delegates discussed access to higher education, the admissions system and non-traditional qualifications.
Forthcoming seminars
Seminars for new and existing piloting centres are planned for 14 and 16 June.
The seminars, which will be held in Dundee and Glasgow, will focus on the second phase of general SVQs, though they may also include workshops for centres wanting to pilot the first batch of awards for the first time.
Information sessions will cover the first year of the pilot and one college's experience of offering the additional assessment.
In the afternoon, workshop groups will cover each of the new general SVQ areas in more detail.
Invitations to these seminars have been sent to centres intending to participate in the pilot next session.
Evaluating the pilot
A questionnaire was recently sent to all piloting centres for distribution to general SVQ candidates.
The survey covers the following:
entry qualifications held by candidates
appropriateness of core skills modules
other awards being studied
reasons for taking the general SVQ
whether the course meets candidates' expectations
candidates' plans for progression
experience of the additional assessment
views on the award of merit
The results of this survey will be analysed along with data gathered from interviews carried out with over 100 candidates by SCOTVEC staff.
A further questionnaire will shortly be sent out to piloting centres.
Designed for centre co-ordinators, the survey is a follow-up to the questionnaire sent out in September/October 1992.
This survey covers:
general SVQs offered
number of candidates
partnership arrangements
issues to be addressed
quality assurance
design of general SVQs
core skills
merit
the additional assessment.
Before the end of the session, we shall also be contacting centre co-ordinators, asking for information about first destinations of candidates who have completed a general SVQ.
We shall be hoping to collate this information as early as possible in the next session