

The Performance of Students with Non-traditional Qualifications In Higher Education
Introduction
The growing emphasis at both a national and institutional level on policies designed to widen and increase access to higher education has led to increased interest in recent years in the relative performance of students with non-traditional qualifications in higher education.
A number of research projects have now examined this question, and a number of conclusions have begun to emerge.
However, the limited extent of this research, combined with the different questions explored by different methods, leave a substantial number of issues on which it is difficult to make definitive statements.
Furthermore there has been little research which has dealt specifically with Scotland.
In this report we provide a summary of the major research undertaken in recent years in Britain, and draw conclusions, insofar as this can be done.
2 Definitions
An initial problem in investigating this issue is that there is no generally agreed definition of the terms ‘non-standard’ or ‘non-traditional’student.
 Indeed in recent years the CNAA have suggested that the term ‘non-standard’ should no longer be used, since this implies a standard from which other students are deviating; instead we should be considering a range of qualifications, all of which may be suitable as preparations for entry to higher education.
A number of definitions have been used both by the institutions and by researchers.
In the polytechnic and college sector Bourner and Hamed(1987) have followed Evans (1984) in defining non-standard entry as ‘referring to students not holding the normal minimum entry qualifications for admission to a first degree or DipHE course set out in regulation 8.13 of CNAA's Principles and Regulations (1979) or equivalent qualifications’.
On this basis ‘non-standard entrants’ are operationally defined by Bourner and Hamed as those entering on the basis of: City and Guilds or REB equivalent; O-levels or one A-level; ‘exceptional admissions’.
Molloy and Carroll (1992) adopt an approach which is designed to assist comparison with Bourner and Hamed's study, although their operational definition is somewhat different in that they include the following categories: no formal qualifications; other non standard entrants (this is a range of qualifications which includes professional, nursing, technical and secretarial); O-levels or one A-level; one OU credit; Access.
In the university sector a number of definitions have been used.
The Scottish Universities Council for Entry (SUCE) has defined non-standard qualifications as UK qualifications other than SCE/GCE (but excluding graduates).
Roderick et al(1982) have studied ‘unqualified mature entrants’, defined as those who do not have 2 A-levels or similar qualifications.
Smithers and Griffin (1986) have concentrated on mature students entering through the Joint Matriculation Board (JMB) special entry scheme.
Under these arrangements most students take special mature matriculation examinations, although a few are admitted on the basis of long experience in their field or professional qualifications.
Walker's study of students at the University of Warwick is concerned with all mature students, however within this he distinguishes two groups, one in which the students did meet the university's General Entrance Requirements (GER) and the second in which they did not (Walker 1975).
An additional factor in considering the question of definition is that by far the majority of non-traditional entrants are also mature entrants.
Indeed in one of the few Scottish studies McDonald (1991) defines ‘non-traditional’ students as all those who are 21 or over at the time of entry to their higher education course.
These students differ from traditional students in that they are not entering straight from school.
It is clear that the vast majority of full-time students entering higher education in the UK do so on the basis of Highers or A-levels (91% in the universities, 71% in the polytechnics, Smithers and Robinson, 1989).
In this report we will therefore, following the CNAA's criticism of the term ‘non-standard’, use the term ‘non-traditional’ student as a general term to refer to students entering on the basis of qualifications other than the minimum prescribed Highers or A-levels or equivalent formal qualifications, although we will refer where appropriate to findings for specified groups within this general category.
3 Summary of the main findings from research
3.1 Measures of achievement
Two major quantitative measures of achievement can be identified.
a
Completion rates — this is a measure of the ‘quantity’ of degrees obtained, and is based on the percentage of each student cohort which completes the course of study on which they have set
b
Degree performance — this is a measure of the ‘quality’ of degrees obtained by those who graduate.
It is usually based on the percentage of those graduating with ‘good’ degrees, ie those who obtain first or upper second class degrees.
While some studies have concentrated on only one of these measures others have endeavoured to draw conclusions with regard to them both, and it seems important to consider both in any comprehensive review of this issue.
It is also important to note that these are quantitative measures of success within the higher education institutions, and other more qualitative measures regarding intellectual or personal development, or vocational preparation could also be used, and are clearly  important in measuring the success of educational experiences.
However it is the quantitative measures which have so far dominated research in this field, and which will provide the basis for this review.
A further issue which we may also wish to consider is the one of ‘value added’.
This can be seen as referring to the relationship between ‘inputs’ and ‘outputs’when comparing the achievements of different groups of students and different institutions.
In this context it may be argued that if the ‘inputs’ are high in conventional terms it may reasonably be expected that the ‘outputs’will also be high.
However an important index of ‘value added’ would be the extent to which relatively high levels of ‘output’can be achieved in contexts where the ‘input’is lower in traditional terms.
This may be seen as a measure of the extent to which opportunities for successful study are being provided for students who would traditionally not have been considered to be capable of achieving this success.
While this is an issue which has been referred to in the literature (Bourner and Hamed, 1987), it is not one which has been extensively explored with regard to the achievements of non-traditional students, but it is a potentially important measure which requires further investigation.
3.2 Completion rates
While there is an absence of any major national study comparing completion rates of non-traditional students with those entering on the basis of traditional academic qualifications there does seem to be some evidence that completion rates for non-traditional students are somewhat lower.
In a recent study of twenty-five degree courses in five institutions Molloy and Carroll (1992) reported slightly lower completion rates for what they defined as ‘non-standard’ entry (NSE) students when compared with those with standard entry (SEs).
(Table 1) Degree obtained within conventional Period Still proceeding–
It can be noted from Table 1 that the differences between the NSEs and SEs are relatively small, and Molloy and Carroll describe this as a relationship of ‘virtual parity’.
In considering these figures it must be noted is that while the completion rates recorded for SEs in the 25 degree courses in the 5 institutions studied may well reflect overall completion rates for all SEs in these institutions, there is no evidence on this point, and Johnes and Taylor (1989) report considerably higher completion rates for the two universities involved in their study of the 1980 entry cohort (Bradford 84% and Leeds 89.1 %).
The sample of courses chosen by Molloy and Carroll was designed to include a relatively high proportion of NSE students and it provides very useful material about the relative performance of SE and NSE students on these courses.
Whether it provides the basis for more general statements about the relative performance of SE and NSE students is difficult to tell without more extensive research.
This issue has also been addressed by other researchers, but the results do not provide us with a comprehensive national picture based on systematic analysis of the performance of non-traditional students.
Smithers and Robinson (1989) have quoted figures which indicate that on ‘selected university degree courses 1982–87’, 17.1 % of those entering on the basis of what they describe as ‘vocational qualifications’ dropped out while only 7% of ‘A’Level entrants dropped out.
However it has not proved possible to obtain further details of this study.
Roderick et al(1982) in their study of unqualified mature entrants in British universities suggest that drop-out rates are high, but are unable to provide clear figures providing national comparisons of qualified and unqualified students.
Woodley et al(1992) in their study of non-completion rates in Scottish universities, based on an analysis of the University Statistical Record data, provide evidence of a 19.2% non-completion rate for those with ‘other entry qualifications’(viz. non-school-type qualifications) compared with 15.2%  for students with ‘standard’ entry.
However since this study was not designed to provide a detailed study of the performance of non-traditional students it provides only limited analysis of their relative achievements.
It also shows non-completion rates varying between universities, with the highest rate for entrants with ‘other qualifications’ being 27.2% while the lowest rate is 15%.
The overall rate for these students in non-Scottish universities, at 23.4%, was also higher than the overall Scottish figure.
While this study would confirm that overall non-completion rates for non-traditional students are somewhat higher, it also indicates the need for more systematic analysis of the factors associated with the differential performance of these students within different institutions.
Molloy and Carroll go on to provide more detailed figures for completion rates within their category of NSE students.
(Table 2)
It is  notable that students with no qualifications or who enter only on the basis of O-levels have relatively high non-completion rates, while students entering on the basis of one A-level or Access courses have completion rates which are marginally better than A-level entrants.
The relatively high completion rates for the ‘Other NSEs’ reflects the fact that this includes students with ‘professional, nursing, technical or secretarial qualifications’The pattern which emerges is that students who have  been selected on the basis of success in some form of study which prepares them for the demands which will be placed on them in higher education respond as least as well if not better than the traditionally qualified A-level entrants, while those with less evidence of success of this kind find the transition to higher education difficult and are more likely to drop-out.
A number of other studies have also shown that non-traditional students who have been carefully selected on the basis of criteria which relate to the ability to meet the demands of higher education, or have been prepared for higher education, have relatively high completion rates when compared with all students.
Walker (1975) in his study of mature students at Warwick University reports that students who did not meet the General Entrance Requirements (GER) had completion rates similar to those for all students, and somewhat better than those for mature students who met the GER.
However it is clear that these students who did not meet the GER had passed through a rigorous process of selection, and a number of them already had two A-level at the time of entry.
Similarly Smithers and Griff in (1986), in their study of mature students entering five English universities through the the Joint Matriculation Board (JMB) special entry scheme, report completion rates of 90% while for other under-graduates the figure was 88%.
These students had also undergone a careful process of scrutiny, and most of them had been required to sit special matriculation examinations.
Evidence for the importance of preparation for entry to higher education also comes from Yates and Davies (1987) study of former Access students.
They report that 21% withdrew before completing their higher education course, but only 12.5% withdrew because of failure in assessed work.
Tutors also reported that they felt that Access students compared well with other students.
The comparison between traditionally qualified and non-traditional students is also further complicated by the growing body of research which has shown clear relationships between Highers/A-level scores and non-completion rates.
In this research the grades achieved by students in their Highers/A-levels are used to establish scores for entrants with these qualifications.
In Scotland Woodley et al(1992) have shown that students entering with lower Highers scores are more likely to fail examinations and drop-out for that reason, while Johnes and Taylor (1989) have shown that non-completion rates in universities throughout the UK are related to the mean A-level score of  students on entry.
Smithers and Robinson (1989) have also produced evidence that while only one or two per cent of students with high A-level scores (12 or above) fail to complete, this rises to around 15% for those with low scores (6 or below).
However it is interesting to note that Johnes (1990), in her study of student wastage in the University of Lancaster, while emphasising the importance of A-level results, also points to the importance of other factors associated with non-completion.
For example, students who have had a full-time job prior to coming to university are less likely to withdraw or fail, while conversely, students whose homes are close to university are more likely to become non-graduates.
She also points out that A-level score is not an important predictor of success for females.
This leads Johnes to question whether raising academic standards for entry, in terms of A-level scores, could be justified as a satisfactory way of substantially reducing wastage rates, given the complex range of factors which are involved in predicting success in higher education, and that raising entry standards in this way would almost certainly bar students capable of obtaining a degree.
She also points to the importance of performance in first year examinations as a means of identifying potential non-graduates, who may need further support if they are to be successful.
The implications of these findings for comparisons with non-traditional students have not really been systematically explored, and a number of factors make direct comparison difficult.
First, it is likely that many of the courses and institutions where the points scores of Highers/A-level students are highest will admit relatively few non-traditionally qualified students.
This not merely makes direct comparison difficult, but it may also mean that such comparisons would be of questionable value given that they would not relate to the actual situation in which traditional and non-traditional students are competing for places, and in which their work and achievement can be meaningfully compared.
Second, in courses which are organised around the expectation that most students are young and well qualified in a traditional sense, older students who have entered through different routes may find it more difficult to succeed than in courses where there is more support, both at an institutional level and from other students with similar backgrounds and experiences.
This also raises the issue of ‘value added’ which we have referred to above.
Given that it seems clear  that we may expect students who are well qualified in traditional terms to achieve relatively high levels of academic achievement, an important measure of success may be the extent to which institutions are able to take students who are not well qualified traditionally and achieve relatively high success rates with these students.
3.3 Degree performance
Most of the research which has been undertaken indicates that, with regard to final degree performance, mature students with non-traditional qualifications perform at least as well as traditionally qualified students with whom they have been compared.
However while there is one national study (Bourner and Hamed 1987) which compares the performance of graduates who had entered with non-traditional qualifications with those who were traditionally qualified, this deals only with those obtaining CNM first degrees.
There is therefore no national study which also looks at students in the traditional university sector, and further comparative studies would be useful to help strengthen the conclusions which can be drawn.
Bourner and Hamed (1987) conclude that 39.5% of those graduating from CNAA full-time or sandwich degrees in 1983 who had non-standard entry qualifications obtained ‘good’ degrees (firsts or upper seconds), while only 34.9% of  graduates who were A-level entrants achieved ‘good’degrees, and the figure for all entrants was 35.8%.
Brennan and McGeevor's (1985) study of CNAA graduates also showed non-standard entrants achieved more ‘good’ degrees than standard entrants.
In Walker's (1975) study of students at Warwick University, among those graduating 46.8% of mature students who did not satisfy the GER achieved ‘good’ degrees, while only 35.2% of all students achieved this standard.
Similarly Smithers and Griffin (1986) report that mature students entering through the JMB special entry scheme are more likely to obtain a ‘good’ degree than other students.
While Roderick et al(1982) in their study of English universities report that only 25.9% of unqualified mature students obtain a ‘good’ degree, this is a percentage of all entrants rather than graduates, and is therefore not directly comparable with Bourner and Hamed and Walker's figures.
It also represents returns from only 17 of the 34 institutions contacted, and although Roderick et al suggest that these unqualified  mature students do not  perform as well as qualified students, no comparative data is produced to substantiate this suggestion.
Bourner and Hamed (1987) also provide more detailed information about the relative performance of students with different types of entry qualifications (Table 3).
It is  notable that all of the groups defined as ‘non-standard’, and a number of those entering on the basis of other qualifications, perform better than the average level of achievement for A-level entrants.
However there is evidence that degree performance is related to A-level score; thus among students entering on the basis of A-levels, the percentage of those with scores of 6 and above who graduated with ‘good’ degrees was considerably above the average for all A-level entrants.
This issue will be discussed further below.
Bourner and Hamed comment on the fact that the three qualifications which head the ranking are usually obtained as a result of part-time study, while the others are usually obtained through full-time study.
In this context it is noted that there tend to be high rates of drop-out associated with part-time study, and those who have been successful will have displayed the commitment and capabilities necessary for success in higher education.
It is also suggested that experiential learning associated with employment may have been of value to these students.
Molloy and Carroll's (1992) more recent study while being more limited in scale does have some transbinary material, and confirms that a number of the NSE students perform better than A-level students when degree results are considered (Table 4).
It must be noted that these figures refer to the degrees obtained by all entrants in each category, and not just those graduating, as in Bourner and Hamed's study.
Groups with high non-completion rates, as discussed above, will also therefore be likely to have lower percentages achieving ‘good’ degrees.
While Molloy and Carroll use groupings which are slightly different from those used by Bourner and Hamed, the overall picture is clear in that a substantial number of those student groups entering with qualifications other than A-levels perform at least as well, and in some cases better, than those with A level entry.
The relatively good performances of those with an OU credit or one A-level would  reinforce Smithers and Griffin's and Walker's evidence that non-traditional students selected on the basis of some evidence of academic achievement can be expected to perform well when compared with traditional students.
Whether this is because their earlier success is an indicator that  they have the appropriate capabilities, or because their earlier study has been important in preparing them for entry, or some combination of these, is difficult to say definitively without further research.
It is also difficult to comment on the relative success of former part-time students in this study, in the way that Bourner and Hamed do, since the authors do not distinguish between HNC and HND and ONC and OND students; however the relative success of former OU students is  notable .
As we have indicated above there is now considerable evidence that degree performance for traditionally qualified students is related to performance in examinations before entry, although most of the research relates to England and A-level entry (Sear, 1983; Bourner and Hamed, 1987; Johnes and Taylor, 1987).
This has led to an interest in relating the performance of non-traditional students to that of students with differing levels of A-level scores.
Bourner and Hamed used their data to calculate an A-level equivalent score for students entering with qualifications other than A-levels.
The results of this are presented in Table 5.
This table indicates that graduates who entered their degree courses with an HNC, on average, performed as well as those who entered on the basis of 10 A-level points, and so on for the other qualifications listed.
Given that the average score for all A-level entrants was 5.4, it can be seen that all non-standard entry groups, apart from those entering on the basis of 1–4 O-levels, performed at least as well or better than the average A-level entrants.
Molloy and Carroll (1992) report similar findings in their study and report that only A-level entrants with 13–15 points perform better than non-standard entrants with one A-level or one OU credit.
A further issue raised in these comparisons is that the A-level points scores of students entering universities is on average considerably higher than that of students entering polytechnics; Boumer and Hamed report that in 1983 the average A-level scores for CNM graduates was 5.4 while for university graduates it was 9.5.
This has raised the question of whether a study such as Bourner and Hamed's gives a favourable impression of non-standard entrants which would not be replicated in a similar study in the university sector.
Molloy and Carroll address this issue on the basis of their transbinary data and conclude that NSE students in the universities not only out-performed SE students in these institutions, but also out-performed NSE students in the polytechnics and colleges.
While the success of the NSE students in the universities would confirm the findings of Walker, and Smithers and Griffin, care must be taken in drawing wider conclusions, given the very small numbers of NSE students in the universities in Molloy and Carroll's study (only 35 in total).
Furthermore, as we have shown, there are wide variations in performance between different categories of NSE students, and it seems likely that the universities may pursue more conservative entrance policies with regard to non-traditional students than those pursued in the former polytechnic sector.
Further research would therefore be helpful which examined differences in institutional policies as well as differences in performance.
However what does seem clear is that non-traditional students are capable of performing at least as well and in some cases better than traditionally qualified students throughout British higher education.
The impact of factors other than entry qualifications will now be considered.
3.4 Age
It is clear that the majority of students entering higher education on the basis of non-traditional qualifications are mature students, and the research which we have been discussing deals almost exclusively with students who are not just non-traditional entrants but also mature.
This therefore raises the question of the extent to which the age of non-traditional students is an important factor in influencing their performance in higher education.
There is an absence of any clear research evidence which enables us to distinguish age as an independent factor affecting the performance of non-traditional students.
Woodley et al(1992), in their study of non-completion rates in Scottish universities based on the University Statistical Record, provide evidence that non-completion rates for ‘mature entrants’, at 20.9%, are higher than those for all students (15.4%).
However this study also reported considerable variations in the performance of mature students between universities, with non-completion rates ranging between 15.3% and 26.7%, but it was not designed to gather data on mature students which would enable systematic analyse of factors associated with differential performance within and between institutions.
Walker (1975) has noted that mature students who did not satisfy the GER obtained significantly better degree results than all students while mature students who satisfied the GER did not differ significantly from the norm, and in seeking an explanation for this he points to the fact that those who did not satisfy the GER are on average somewhat older and can be seen as genuine returners, rather than students who have taken longer to meet the traditional qualifications.
Some further light can be thrown on the importance of age by looking briefly at the differential performance of students with traditional qualifications in different age groups.
Woodley (1984) in his study of university students reported that while mature students are slightly more likely to leave university  without a degree, they are just as likely to obtain a ‘good’ degree.
Bourner and Hamed (1987) in their study of CNM graduates have reported that degree performance improves with age until students reach the age of about 40 and then declines back towards that of younger students.
There is also considerable evidence that age related performance differs between subject areas.
While Sears (1983) study of university students reported that mature students are less likely to be more successful than their younger counterparts in the areas of science, engineering and medicine, Brennan and McGeevor (1985), in their study of CNAA graduates, report that mature students do better than younger students in all areas of study except those relating to engineering subjects.
Bourner and Hamed (1987) and Woodley (1984) also report subject related differences.
While there are some differences between these various studies, the broad conclusion which emerges is that while in the areas of arts, social sciences, education and business studies mature students perform better than their younger counterparts, in areas such as science, engineering, health related studies and medicine there is some evidence that they are less likely to perform as well.
Sear suggests that these differences may be because in these areas the effects of recent study may outweigh any compensating advantages of maturity.
Overall then it seems likely that the motivation and commitment which is found among many mature students is a major factor in the success of many students with non-traditional qualifications.
Given also the evidence of the weak performance of younger students with more marginal traditional qualifications, it seems likely that if these students gained entry to higher education on the basis of non-traditional qualifications that their success rates might be expected to be more limited.
3.5 Subjects
Little systematic research has so far been undertaken into the relationship between subject studied and success for non-traditionally qualified students.
However on the basis of the evidence from the research on the relationship between age and subjects which we have discussed above, it seems likely that non-traditionally qualified students in areas such as science and engineering might be expected to achieve lower levels of success than those in areas such as arts or social sciences.
Further support for this would also come from studies of former Access course students in higher education.
Yates and Davies (1987) report that only 45% of former Access students who had entered higher education courses in science, technology and engineering were progressing satisfactorily, while Osborne and Woodrow (1989) in their study of mathematics, science and technology Access courses report success rates of between 56% and 78% for students who had entered higher education.
However they caution that the relatively small numbers of students in both studies makes it difficult to draw any firm generalisable conclusions.
Brennan and McGeevor (1985) have also reported that while non-standard entrants do particularly well in the humanities and social sciences, they are less successful in mathematics and psychology.
Note however Bourner and Hamed's (1987) evidence of the strong performance of students with part-time BTEC and City and Guilds types of qualifications, and it would appear that most of these students took degrees in engineering and technology.
It would appear then that there is some evidence that even in these areas, if students are able to draw on relevant work experience and have been suitably prepared for their degree studies, that relatively high levels of success can be achieved.
There is clearly need for further research on this topic, and to look more carefully at how students can best be prepared to enter these areas of study.
3.6 Gender
The question of whether there are differences in the experiences and success of female and male students with non-traditional qualifications in higher education is not one which has been extensively investigated.
However there are indications that gender may be a factor of some importance.
While Walker (1975) reports relatively few female mature students in his sample, and no significant differences in completion rates or degree performance between male and female students, Yates and Davies report that there were almost three times as many women as men among their sample of former Access students in higher education (this was no doubt associated with the range of subjects studied; about three-quarters were studying education, social sciences or social work).
They also report that only 13.5%of women but 28%of men had withdrawn from their course.
They are however unable to provide any satisfactory data on differences in degree performance  associated with gender.
We have also noted above that Johnes (1990) in her study of student wastage notes that while A-level scores are important predictors for men they are not for women.
It seems likely that there may be important gender related differences in experience and performance of non-traditional students in higher education, and that further research on this issue would be useful.
4 Conclusions
a Definition — There is no generally agreed definition of ‘non-traditional’ student.
However the vast majority of students entering higher education do so on the basis of Highers or A-levels, and a definition of non-traditional which refers to students entering on the basis of qualifications other than the minimum prescribed Highers or A-levels or equivalent qualifications seems to be the most useful one.
b Completion rates — While there is some evidence that completion rates for non-traditional students are overall somewhat lower than for traditionally qualified students, there is also evidence that completion rates for these students vary considerably depending on their qualifications and previous experience.
Students selected on the basis of success in some form of study which has placed similar demands on them to the ones which they will experience in higher education have been shown to respond as least as well as, it not better than, the traditionally qualified entrants.
However it also appears that those with less evidence of success of this kind find the transition to higher education difficult and are more likely to drop-out.
Further research is required to examine the extent of non-completion among different categories of non-traditional students and the reasons for this.
c Degree Performance — Most research has indicated that non-traditionally qualified students perform at least as well as, and in some cases considerably better than, traditionally qualified students when degree performance (measured by percentages achieving ‘good’ degrees) is considered.
Among the categories of non-traditional entrants who have been particularly  successful are students who have previously studied part-time for HNCs, ONCs, City and Guilds, or OU credits.
There is also some evidence that students who have passed at least one A-level or a similar examination are likely to perform well in higher education.
However a number of these studies have been based on percentages of graduates, rather than all those who had originally entered the degree programmes.
If figures are based on the total cohort of entrants to degree programmes then it appears that among some categories of non-traditional students the percentages achieving ‘good’ degrees are somewhat lower.
It is not altogether clear to what extent these figures reflect high non-completion rates, particularly in the first year, or whether they reflect continuing problems which some groups of students experience throughout their careers in higher education.
Further research will be required to investigate the factors associated with the differential levels of degree performance between categories of non-traditional entrants, and between these students and traditionally qualified entrants.
d Age and subject — It is clear that the majority of non-traditional students are also mature students, and when the issue of the relative performance of non-traditional students is being explored, the age of the students is an important factor.
It would appear that older students do better than younger students (under the age of 21 at entry) in arts and social sciences, whereas this is less likely in disciplines such as science, engineering, health studies and medicine.
It has been suggested that the high levels of motivation found among successful mature students more than compensate for lower levels of formal qualifications which many have.
However it has also been suggested that in areas such as science, engineering and medicine, the linearity of knowledge between school and higher education poses particular difficulties for mature students if their levels of preparedness in appropriate subjects compares unfavourably with traditionally qualified school leavers.
It is therefore important that steps are taken to ensure  that mature entrants to these discipline areas are adequately prepared for their studies.
e Traditional and non-traditional students and ‘value added’— Many admissions tutors in institutions of higher education have traditionally used scores in Highers and A-levels as a principal means of rationing and allocating places.
It is clear that there is some justification for this, on the basis of the established relationships between Highers and A-level scores and success in higher education for traditionally qualified students.
However it can be argued, on the basis of the evidence reviewed above, that admissions tutors can offer places to many categories of non-traditionally qualified students, confident that they will perform at least as well as and often better than the traditionally qualified students, particularly those with only average or below average qualifications.
This is particularly important when the issue of ‘value added’ is considered as a performance indicator for higher education.
This would lead us to look not just at the ‘outputs’ from institutions, but at the ‘inputs’, and at the achievements of students who would traditionally not have been considered to be capable of achieving success, as well as those who could be expected to perform well on the basis of their previous academic achievements.
This would also raise important questions regarding the policies and practices of institutions with regard to: selecting students, and ensuring that the selection procedures are appropriate in identifying students with the potential for success; ensuring that they are adequately prepared for their course of study, and providing assistance where necessary through appropriate pre-entry provision; supporting students during the time that they are in the institution, including ensuring that approaches to teaching and learning are appropriate as well as providing the study skills and counselling support required.
f Further research — While certain clear patterns have begun to emerge regarding the performance of students with non-traditional qualifications in higher education, there is a need for further research to investigate these issues, particularly in the Scottish context.
Among the  issues requiring further investigation are:
(1) the policies and practices of institutions of higher education with regard to the admission and support of students with non-traditional qualifications;
(2) the extent of non-completion within different categories of non-traditional students and the reasons for this;
(3) the factors contributing to differential degree performance between different groups of non-traditional students;
APPENDIX
Bibliography and Summaries of Research
Bourner T and Hamed M (1987) Entry qualifications and degree performance 77 pp., tables, bibliogr.
London: CNM CNAA Development Services 10.
Report of a research project on the relationship between entry qualifications and degree performance on CNAA first degree courses.
It is based on an analysis of the records of those who graduated from CNAA full-time or sandwich degree courses in 1983.
The number involved here was 24,032.
(The data sources are described in chapter 3).
The aim of the enquiry was to examine the relationship between degree results and GCE performance at A-level, and the relationship between degree results and non A- level entry routes.
The impact of other factors on degree performance is also examined, and transbinary comparisons are made in relation to the question of ‘value added’ in higher education.
Chapters 4,5,6 and 7 contain the substantive analysis of this project.
The main findings show that the degree results of those accepted on the basis of entry qualification other than A-levels were marginally higher than for those accepted on the basis of A-levels.
Those with non A-level entry qualifications obtained by part-time study obtained the highest degree results on average.
Students within the non-standard entry categories did as well, if not better, than other groups of entrants.
As for the A-level entrants, those with higher A-level point scores obtained a higher proportion of good degrees.
In general the degree results of older students were better than those of younger students, however, the relationship is neither straightforward nor independent of the field of study.
In the last chapter dealing with transbinary comparisons the authors show that the proportion of CNAA honours degree students receiving good degrees is on average lower than for their university counterparts.
Consequently they argue that if entry qualifications are ignored the universities produce a significantly higher proportion of good honours graduates.
However they demonstrate that overall there is a greater diversity in the range of entry qualifications held by graduates of CNAA full-time degree courses relative to their university counterparts.
90% of university honours graduates enter their courses on the basis of GCE A- levels.
The corresponding figure for CNAA honours graduates was under 74% ie significantly lower.
Also, of those students who entered degree courses on the basis at least 2 A-levels, 53% of CNAA students graduates held 2 A-levels, whereas 88% of university graduates held 3 or more A-levels.
As a result the A-level scores of the university graduates were in general substantially above those of the CNAA graduates.
When these entry qualifications are taken into account a different picture emerges.
The proportion of good degrees remains larger for the universities in relation to students in the highest A-level score range, but is larger for the CNAA graduates in the other A-level score ranges.
(This obviously has important implications for the concept of value-added).
Brennan, J (1986) Student learning an the ‘capacity to benefit’: the performance of non-traditional students in public sector higher education.
Journal of Access, Studies Vol 1 Part 2 pp 23–32
This article is a modified version of a paper originally presented to a conference on ‘Providing for the Learning Needs of Non-Traditional Students in Higher Education’ at the Polytechnic of North London on 1st December 1984.
Its main concern is to explore the consequences of CNAA policies for people within higher education institutions who have responsibilities for teaching course design and student admissions.
This is done by referring to two pieces of research commissioned by the CNAA Development Services Unit and a number of works on student learning.
Brennan argues that while non-traditional students will continue to fit into conventional higher  education via Access Courses or other means, more should be done to change higher education to meet the needs of non-traditional students and make it more attractive to them.
He suggests breaking the school-higher education continuum in some parts of the systems and following the model of the German Fachochschulen and focusing on the nature of student learning and the conditions necessary for its achievement.
The article only deals in passing with the particular issue of non-standard entry students and degree performances but argues that evidence shows that these students, and mature students in general, achieve better results than traditional students in most fields of study.
The evidence to substantiate this claim is drawn from the work of Brennan and McGeevor (1985,.
The author also argues that the correlation between A-level grades and degree performance is either weak or non-existent in many subject fields.
To justify this claim he cites the work of Entwistle and Wilson (1977) Degrees of Excellence: The Academic Achievement Game.
(London).
Admissions tutors are criticised for failing to use CNAA regulations more flexibly and allowing A-levels to continue to play a dominant role in regulating entry to higher education.
Brennan, J L and McGeevor, P A. (1985) CNAA graduates: their experiences and values twelve months after graduation. 18pp., tables, bibliogr.
London CNAA CNAA Development Services.
This research work was sponsored by the CNAA.
It is based on a survey involving 2,642 CNAA graduates from 1982.
The project concentrates on the employment experiences of the graduates in question and examines the extent to which their degree courses prepared them for employment.
However information from this survey is used to assess the capacity to benefit of various groups of students, including those who entered first degree courses on the basis of non-standard entry qualifications.
Results show that non-standard entrants achieved more good degrees than other students.
The  latter includes both young and mature students with normal entry qualifications.
Non-standard entrants do particularly well in the Humanities and Social Sciences but are less successful in Mathematics and Psychology.
Evidence also shows that mature students in general do better than younger students in all areas of study except those relating to Engineering subjects.
These findings support the contention that ‘capacity to benefit’ certainly extends to non-standard entry students.
The survey also found that benefits in the developing of critical thinking, in organising work and applying skills of knowledge were greater for non-traditional students.
Bruce, B Cooper, A and Doherty, G(1989) The DipHE Experience 33 pp., tables, references, London: CNAA The Summary Report of a CNAA Development Fund Project
The report is a ‘summary’ of a major project undertaken on behalf of CNAA between 1983–1987.
It contains important findings from a longitudinal questionnaire survey of the 1983 cohort of students registered on the CNAA's DipHE courses.
These cover the relationship between the curriculum and the organisational structures of institutions and courses and educational experiences of students.
The key areas examined include credits and experience of transfer student attitudes, client satisfaction, the effectiveness of DipHE as a vehicle for organisational change, and opportunities for mature students with a background of educational disadvantage.
The work tends to be geared towards managers in higher education institutions.
Results show that the majority of students involved in the DipHE courses progressed to a degree course of some kind, and that no less than 75% of mature students achieved a degree, and 85% of the ‘under-qualified’ on entry achieved either a degree or a DipHE.
Those respondents who started out on free standing DipHE courses achieved very good academic results comparing very favourably with the linked DipHE/BA and DipHE/BSc students as did the mature students (over 25 years old), and the under qualified students.
These two groups were well represented among the postgraduate  registration.
The report provides considerable evidence that the traditional performance indicators of higher education success are quite inadequate.
Unfortunately at the time of the survey no Access course entrants were identified.
Given the outstanding success and commitment of the students with fewer than two A levels there was very little in the report to suggest that ‘standard’ entry requirements were needed for success.
Evans N (1984) Access to Higher Education; non-standard entry to CNAA first degree and DipHE courses.
20pp, tables, London: CNAA CNAA Development Services Publications 6
The project describes and appraises the policies and practices of institutions associated with the CNAA concerning the admission to first degree and DipHE programmes of applicants not holding standard entry qualifications and, where possible, to investigate arrangements made for the admission of such students with advanced standing.
Non-standard entry is defined as referring to students not holding the minimum entry qualifications for admission to a first degree or DipHE course set out in Regulation 8.13 of CNAA's Principles and Regulations (1979) or equivalent qualifications.
Findings show that A-levels continue to play a dominant role in regulating entry to Higher Education.
Although CNAA Regulations permit the use of other criteria these are not widely used.
The registration statistics revealed only 4.5% as non-standard entrants, and this may be a slightly exaggerated figure.
Horobin J C Branscombe M E and Evetts R D A (1986) Mature Students in Higher Education.
36 pp., annotated bibliogr.
Edinburgh University of St Andrews Department of Adult Education and Extra Mural Studies.
This short monograph reviews and summarises both current and past research on mature students in Higher Education.
The period covered spans 1975–1986.
Attention is focused on Scotland but evidence from the rest of Britain is also included.
Mature Student was defined as someone who has been away from continuous education for more than one year.
Higher Education is defined so as to include Universities, Central Institutions, Colleges of Education and advanced Further Education.
The review deals with undergraduate courses and manages to condense a great deal of material into a concise and readable form.
The main sections cover theoretical studies, comprehensive surveys, mature students in institutions of higher education, and mature students as a group within the wider student body.
The concluding section emphasises that there is little published research on mature students in higher education in Scotland.
Work based in England sometimes includes Scotland but because of the different degree structures anomalous conclusions may be reached when comparisons are suggested.
The ad hoc nature of much of the Scottish research is highlighted, and a call is made for further research on the present participation of adults in Scottish higher education.
The little information that is given on the performance of mature students is not very useful.
Johnes J (1990) Determinants of Student Wastage in Higher Education Studies in Higher Education vol 15, No 1, pp 87–99
This paper investigates the possibility of identifying potential non-graduates, using information obtained before entry to university.
Statistical analysis of a sample of the 1979 entry cohort to Lancaster University indicates that the likelihood of non-completion is determined by various  characteristics the main ones being the students academic ability reflected by A-level results, work experience prior to coming to university, school background and the location of home in relation to the university.
When males and females were analysed separately it was found that different characteristics were associated with non-completion and that these differences were quite striking.
The principle difference was that characteristics relating to academic background particularly A-level results were not important predictors of non-completion among females at all, but were extremely important predictors of non-completion among males.
Further in relation to females, wastage is considerably more difficult to explain when using student characteristics, than it is for males.
Johnes investigated further the influence of academic ability on student wastage, by comparing the importance of school examination results with the examination results obtained by students in the early stages at university.
This indicated that first year examination results were a far superior predictor of wastage than the A-level scores of entrants.
This finding makes it possible to identify with some degree of certainty those students who are unlikely to graduate, and thereby allow the necessary resources to be targeted on these potential non-graduates.
Johnes' main conclusion was that raising the academic requirements for entry into university may not be the most appropriate method for reducing wastage rates, since the academic ability required to succeed at university is clearly imperfectly reflected by the results of school examinations.
Further there are several non-academic characteristics which are also highly significant determinants of wastage, and even when all academic and non-academic characteristics are taken into account, the degree of certainty with which potential non-graduates can be predicted is still small 
Johnes J and Taylor J (1989) Undergraduate non-completion rates: Differences between UK universities Higher Education 18 pp 209–225
This paper is concerned with the non-completion rate of undergraduate entrants into UK universities.
The non-completion rate of university students differs substantially between UK universities.
Johnes and Taylor provide estimates of non-completion rates for the 1979 and 1980 entry cohorts into each university and suggest a number of reasons which may have contributed to these inter-university differences.
Statistical analysis indicates that a large proportion of the inter-university variation in the non-completion rate can be explained by three main factors: the scholastic ability of each university's new entrants as reflected by A-level score; the subject mix of each university; and the proportion of each university's students accommodated in a hall of residence.
(In relation to the last point the authors demonstrate that universities which have a large proportion of their students in halls of residence tend to have lower non-completion rates, and that this finding is common for both sexes.
However, they also suggest that while this study can be used to support the view that university residence tends to reduce the probability of non-completion, the possibility that the residence factor may be acting as a proxy for other university characteristics, cannot be dismissed).
Johnes and Taylor concluded that inter-university comparisons in the non-completion rate are of little value unless account is taken of differences in the scholastic ability of each university's intake of students.
(Many of the findings in this study are broadly similar to those of Johnes 1990).
MacDonald 1.
(1991) Non-Traditional Students in Higher Education.
(How effective are institutions of Higher Education in Scotland in meeting the needs of full-time nontraditional students?) 264 pp., Abstract tables, appendices.
bibliogr.
Glasgow Unpublished M. Phil Dissertation Glasgow University.
(Department of Adult and Continuing Education).
This dissertation examined the challenge posed for higher education by the presence of non-traditional students.
It considered how institutions could meet the special needs of students who entered higher education with different backgrounds, learning experiences, and a generally less highly specialised knowledge of particular subjects than traditional entrants from school.
MacDonald defines non-traditional students as those who are 21 years or over at the commencement of their degree course on the 1st of October.
This assumes a gap of some years after full time schooling.
Most of the students investigated in this study were non-traditional in that they either  possessed qualifications which met the general entrance requirements of the institution but had been gained them in non-traditional ways (i.e. by other than full time attendance at secondary school), or they did not meet the requirement but had other qualifications or evidence of attainment acceptable to the institution in question.
The methodology employed has three basic elements: a literature review to establish the necessary conceptual framework; the collection of existing data from relevant sources; an empirical study of Glasgow University, Glasgow Polytechnic and Paisley College of Technology, with some comparison of their treatment of non-traditional students.
MacDonald claims that the only located source of systematic collection of data on the progress of non-traditional students over a period of years was at Glasgow Polytechnic for the BA Social Science course.
This course has been experiencing a rising age profile in entrants and a particularly sharp  increase in the over 35 age group.
Statistics indicating the success of students by age and qualifications in percentage terms from 1986–1989 suggested that older students are slightly more successful than younger students for a given level of regular qualifications.
Also that the higher the pointage of entry qualifications the more likely the student was to be successful.
The BASS course board found that the older non-traditional students were high risk especially in the over 35 age group.
Nevertheless tabular evidence demonstrates that non-traditional students and mature student entrants as a category perform well enough to support a policy of providing opportunities for adults previously unable to enter higher education.
For example between 1982–89, 75% of the MSE intake progressed to year 2 and 52% of MSE students who graduated received Honours.
Unfortunately figures for Honours Classification for the whole student cohort over the same period could not be obtained.
Nor could breakdowns of these awards in terms of age bands and entry qualifications be supplied.
On the basis of the limited knowledge acquired from examining the 3 Institutions of higher education it would appear that there is a higher dropout in the first year of a course among non-traditional students than among the general student body.
However those who survive the first year perform at least as well as traditional students and in some cases slightly better.
The first year of higher education is therefore crucial for non-traditional students.
In each of the institutions examined MacDonald suggests that students who enter with qualifications gained through the SCOTVEC modular system were particularly at risk.
This he claimed was due to the way in which the modular certificates are gained.
The modular system is less likely to  encourage the development of cumulative subject knowledge and does not involve assessment through summatative exams.
It is suggested that learning outcomes within modules are often assessed sequentially and that this does not test for ability to retain knowledge, an ability which is crucial for success in higher education.
Since higher education is currently exam oriented and likely to remain so even under SCOTCATS it is recommended that SCOTVEC and institutions of higher education jointly undertake an urgent review of modular certificates in order to discover ways in which  these could be made to relate more effectively to the demands of full time higher education.
MacDonald concludes with the view that non-traditional students are an advantage to higher education although they present it with a challenge.
Institutions should therefore make changes both academic and non-academic to help meet the needs of non-traditional students and capitalise on their special strengths.
General recommendations are given on how this could be done.
Molloy S. and Carroll V. (1992).
Progress and Performance in Higher Education.
A report on performance monitoring of ‘standard’ and ‘non-standard’entrants to undergraduate courses.
42 pp., tables, Appendixes.
London: CNAA CNAA Project Report 34.
DSR 169.
This project was funded by the CNAA in 1988 and was based on a study of all entrants to 25 degree programmes who had originally begun their undergraduate courses in either 1984 (4 year degrees) or 1985 (3 year degrees).
All entrants had envisaged graduating in 1988.
The number of under graduates in Molloy and Carroll's sample of courses from two universities, two Polytechnics, and one college of higher education was 1,533.
Almost every one of the 276 non-standard entrants in this sample were 21 years of age or over.
The analysis carried out concentrated mainly on the relationships between undergraduates' academic performance and their entry qualifications.
The issue of undergraduates' progress and performance was initially addressed through the conventional performance criteria of completion rates and degree classifications.
For the purposes of the research the authors originally defined ‘non-standard entrants’(NSE s) as those entrants to degree courses with less than the normal minimum of 2 GCE A'level passes or the equivalent.
Those students who had entered their degree course through an Access course qualification or by passing a specific matriculation examination were recognised as ‘access entrants’(AEs) but were also included within  the NSE category.
The report itself is in three parts.
Part 1 focuses on the methodological issues concerning the information needs and systems for monitoring the academic progress of entrants to first degree programmes in relation to their entry qualifications.
It also presents an analysis of these relationships based on an undergraduate sample and examined variations between institutions and courses and of the educational milieux specific to particular institutions and courses.
Part 2 reports on the substance of the investigation of non-standard entrants and standard entrants on degree courses at five institutions of higher education.
Part 3 examines in slightly more detail the variations related to nonstandard entrants and standard entrant performance on particular courses in particular institutions.
Part 2 is the most important and interesting part of the study.
The working hypothesis examined here was the proposition that NSEs would perform at least as well as standard entrants (SEs) In this part of the study the authors considered AEs both as part of the NSE category and as a  separate group.
Molloy and Carroll show that 77.7% of SEs obtained a degree compared to a percentage figure of 74.3% for NSEs.
This indicates a difference of 3.4%.
However for AEs the figures were virtually identical with those of standard entrants.
2% more SEs gained good degrees than NSEs.
The variation here is accounted for by the differences in the very small number of entrants gaining firsts.
First class honours were obtained by 51 (4.1%) of the 1,241 SEs as compared with six (2.2%) of the 276 NSEs.
However the proportions of SEs and NSEs gaining upper seconds were virtually identical at 28% and 27.9% respectively.
The author suggest that for the courses sampled their existed a ‘virtual parity’ between the performance of NSEs and SEs.
In every group of 100 NSEs and 100 SEs between 2 and 4 SEs are more likely to graduate and obtain good degrees than the SEs in four of the five institutions.
It is suggested that this finding of ‘virtual parity’ represents qualified support for the ALAW hypothesis.
However the study shows that the degree quality of the AEs is relatively weak.
Only 25.4% gained a  good degree compared with 32.1% of the SEs and 30.1% of the NSEs as a whole.
Access entrants appeared to be something of an anomaly in this study, given their combination of relatively high graduation rates with relatively low measure of degree quality.
Molloy and Carroll suggest that while Access courses equip students with whatever is necessary for the completion of a degree course they may be less successful in preparing them for the higher levels of academic performance.
They further suggest that given the generally high degree performance of NSEs with 1 A-level, Access course students may benefit from taking an A-level course of study.
The evidence from this study suggests that a very strong case can be made for widening access to higher education for mature students who do not possess standard entry qualifications.
The common practice of allocating degree places to standard entrants on the basis of their point scores, but to treat non-standard entrants as a more problematic group appears to be both unjust and academically wasteful.
Osborne, M. and Woodrow, M. (1989) Access to Mathematics, Science and Technology.
Further Education Unit
This was a national study of Access courses in mathematics, science and technology.
Part of this study involved 2 number of case-studies of Access courses, and within these data was gathered on the performance of former Access students in higher education.
It was emphasised that only limited information was available about the performance of Access students in higher education, and that the vast majority of students who had completed their higher education course came from one Access course.
The data from the other three course involved was restricted to progression beyond first year.
The success rates for students from these four course varied between 56–78%.
It was also reported that lack of success in higher education was largely due to non-completion rather than failure.
It was also suggested that lower success rates among Access students appear to be associated with higher education courses which have relatively low success rates for all students.
These problems may  indicate a need to review academic and personal counselling systems in higher education.
However the limited numbers of Access students who had completed higher education courses makes it difficult to draw any strong generalisable conclusions.
Roderick.
R. Bell.
J. and Hamilton.
S. (1982).
Unqualified mature students in British universities.
Studies in Adult Education Vol.14, pp, 59–68.
This study examines the numbers of unqualified mature students accepted at English universities, the policies and attitudes adopted by the universities towards such students and their academic performance.
The data used was taken from two  separate surveys carried out in 1977 and 1981.
The authors show that unqualified mature students in their study had some educational or professional qualification and just over half (51%) met the General Entrance Requirement of their particular university.
Roderick et al report that both the study of the Joint  Matriculation Board (JMB) candidates who entered Sheffield University in the three years between 1975 to 1977, and the study involving 17 English Universities, demonstrate that there is an exceptionally high dropout rate and failure rate in relation to unqualified mature students.
Further those who managed to survive the first university term did reasonably well but did not excel.
The overall performance of unqualified mature students was poor.
46 unqualified mature students were involved in the first study at the University of Sheffield.
19% of these failed to finish their course.
The 37 who completed the course performed well enough but not outstandingly.
Over this 3 year period 7 students achieved good degrees and 20 achieved lower seconds.
Only one student failed.
These results suggest that unqualified mature students do not perform as well in their final examinations as qualified mature students or for that matter standard entry students.
In order to test the above conclusion Roderick et al attempted a survey of all unqualified mature students who entered universities in England in October 1976.
Of the 34 universities contacted only  17 were able to supply the appropriate information requested.
However because of the different practices involved in defining mature student in relation to age the findings of this survey do not correspond to a body of mature students above a specific age, but only of mature students who were accepted in October 1976 as unqualified adults.
65% of the 359 unqualified mature students involved in the 17 universities completed their course.
The proportion obtaining good degrees (i.e. first or upper second) was 26%.
However just less than 53% achieved either a moderate or good degree and the proportion obtaining a poor degree was 13%.
A further 35% of the students either failed at the final examination, failed at some stage of the course or withdrew for some reason.
Therefore it appears that one in every three students either failed or dropped-out.
Although direct comparisons between these results and similar results for mature students who satisfied the General Entrance Requirement and conventional students entering universities in England in October 1976 was not possible Roderick et al suggest that mature students without standard entry qualifications do not perform as well as qualified mature students or conventional students.
The authors also briefly review some of the earlier research and suggest that the conclusions appears to be conflicting.
Many of the studies have been concerned with specific and small samples and consequently there is the possibility that this could have distorted the findings.
However they point out that most of the recent studies in Britain indicate that when linked to pre-course qualifications maturity is likely to be an advantage in Arts and Social Science subjects.
This advantage though is much less obvious in medicine science and technology subjects.
Roderick et al argue that the high rate of withdrawal and dropout and the generally modest degree results of those who completed their course suggests that unqualified mature entrants require special attention.
Sear, K (1983) The correlation between A Level grades and degree results in England and Wales, Higher Education, 12: pp 609–619.
This paper analyses the relationship between A-level grades and degree results in Britain.
It also explores the possibility that systematic differences exist between young and mature students and that these could distort the analysis.
The data used by Sear was provided by the Universities Statistical Record and covered the 1979 graduates from universities in Britain, broken down by degree class, age, and A-level points score (this being measured on the conventional UCCA scale).
The results for all subjects taken together were examined as were those for broad subject groups and some individual subjects.
Unfortunately information on non-completion rates was unavailable as was the data for the non-university sector of higher education.
Sear focused on the question of the extent to which degree results are correlated with A-level results.
His study is not an attempt to provide a general explanation of achievement by students in the university sector of higher education.
When all students regardless of age were examined a correlation was found between A-level grades and degree results which although statistically significant was always weak.
However, this relationship concealed some significant differences between subjects, being stronger for science subjects.
For mature students (those 21 years of age and over at the time of entry) the relationship was particularly weak.
The correlation coefficient was always positive and overall it was statistically significant.
However as regards 40% of the subjects examined the correlations were not significant and in the remaining subjects they were significant but low.
The lower entrance qualifications held by mature students (on average 2 points lower) did not always lead to poorer degree results.
While these students did less well in subject groups such as science, engineering.
and medicine they actually did slightly better in social studies, arts and language subjects.
Finally the presence of mature students did not distort Sears overall analysis.
The correlations for the young students only (those under 24 years of age at graduation) were higher than those for all students but not dramatically so.
Smithers, A. and Griffin, A. (1986) Mature Students at University: entry experience and outcomes.
Studies in Higher Education Vol. 11 No 3 pp 257–268
This paper examined a scheme of mature entry for those lacking recognised qualifications operated by the Joint Matriculation Board on behalf of its five constituent universities, Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool.
Applications for the period 1975–80 were analysed in order to describe the people coming forward and trace their progress.
The various outcomes were enumerated and examined in relation to entry characteristics.
Attempts were made to contact all those writing for information about the scheme in 1980 and then follow them up in detail.
Eventually a one in five sub sample was interviewed.
It was found that only 37% of those applying gained admission.
Those obtaining a place tended to do well.
The study showed that at the Honours level the non-standard entrants did somewhat better than other students, and the difference was more marked in ordinary and general degree courses.
The authors conclude that universities can have confidence in admitting carefully selected mature students even if they lack formal entry qualifications.
Smithers, A. and Griffin, A. (1986) The Progress of Mature Students.
177 pp., tables bibliogr.
Manchester: Joint Matriculation Board.
This piece of research studied a scheme of entry to degree courses for candidates aged twenty one years and over who were without formal matriculation qualifications.
The scheme has operated since  1920 and allows successful candidates into the five universities of the Joint Matriculation Board (JMB).
The enquiry looked at 1208 people who, in the application year ending 31 March 1980, enquired, submitted application forms or dropped out at the various stages of the process of seeking to be matriculated, as well as those who matriculated and graduated.
Application forms completed by these students were analysed and a one-in-five sub-sample was interviewed.
Additionally application forms received between 1975–1980 were also analysed.
More than half the applicants were male.
Most applicants lived close to the university of their choice.
Most applied for BA or BSc degrees.
Relatively few had any A-level passes and only one in seven were skilled manual workers.
Although nearly three-fifths had no sixth form experience, the vast majority had some further education experience, half of them full-time.
Chapter 10 looks at outcomes considering the degree results, and analysing them in comparison with other students in the same course by type of degree, university and age.
It also examines their career destination in comparison with those of other applicants.
On honours degree courses, mature students are shown to do no worse than school leaver entrants, being more likely to get a good degree and less likely to drop out.
Employment prospects were also at least as good and in some cases slightly better than for school leaver entrants.
All of these students however were rigorously selected through interviews and examinations designed to ascertain their academic abilities.
Less than two out of five applicants actually gained entry.
Smithers A and Robinson P (1989) Increasing Participation in Higher Education.
42pp, tables, graphs, annotation: Manchester BP Educational Service.
This study is a review of issues associated with increasing participation in higher education.
Within it there is some discussion of the relative performance of students with traditional and non-traditional qualifications.
The argument that A-level performance is unrelated to degree success is  rejected.Drawing on statistical evidence they show a ‘strong association’ between A-level scores and degree performance.
They also argue that the performance of students who entered universities and polytechnics with vocational qualifications tended to be somewhat below that of A level entrants.
However reference is also made to the Smithers and Griffin (1986) study which indicated that nonstandard mature students obtained results that were either as good or better than A level entrants on the same courses and were less likely to fail to complete their courses.
Nevertheless the authors claim that A levels are not an artificial barrier to access to higher education, given the relative performance of students entering via the three routes and the association between A-level scores and degree performance.
In practise admissions staff use A-levels as a rationing mechanism to allocate students to oversubscribed courses and this in turn explains why it is usually the institutions that are least in demand that have the most ‘liberal’ admissions policies.
Walker P (1975) The university performance of mature students.
Research in Education No14 pp 1–13.
This paper concerns an investigation of mature students at the University of Warwick between the years 1963–1971.
The number of students involved was 240.
The percentage of mature students in relation to the total undergraduate intake was just over 6%.
The 240 students were involved in first degree courses.
Nine of these students had not at the time of writing completed their course of study.
These were therefore omitted from the analysis.
Most of the 231 students were concentrated in social science and arts courses.
They were classified into two distinct groups, those who gained entry through traditional methods and those who had not.
Walker found that there was no statistically significant difference between the degree results of these two groups.
The former scored 52.3 and the latter scored 57.9.
However, he found that mature students as a whole obtained better degree results than non mature students.
The average score for  the degree classes of all mature students was 55.6.
This was significantly higher (P 0.01) than the average score of the total student population which was 50.
Further the average score of 57.9 for the degree results of the non-standard entry mature students was significantly greater than the average score of 50 for all students.
The non completion rate of non-standard entry mature students was found to be 15.2% which was lower than the corresponding figure for mature students who satisfied the general entry requirement which was 21.7%.
There was no statistical difference between these two groups of mature students.
Nor did either of these proportions differ significantly from the non completion rate of all students.
While this study is limited to one university and deals with a relatively small intake of mature students over a period of six years it does demonstrate that non-standard entry mature students can do particularly well when compared with other students.
Mature students below thirty years of age obtained significantly better degree results than the student population as a whole.
As regards the degree results of the over thirty year group there was no significant difference with the latter.
The 26 to 30 age group was found to have performed best of all and their degree results were significantly better than all other mature students.
Walker suggests that if there is an optimum age for mature students it is likely to be in the late twenties.
Wood B (1983).
Mature students in Higher Education.
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education Vol.8 n3. pp 211 -217.
This paper examines the performance of students in the two major courses of the two year DipHE at Doncaster Metropolitan Institute.
This allowed a comparison to be made between matriculated and non matriculated students and between those students with and without recent previous study  experience.
Two separate entry cohorts for the years 1980 and 1981 were examined.
The number of students involved in these samples was 41 and 39 respectively.
(In the 1980 cohort there was 13 matriculated and 28 non matriculated students.
The corresponding figures for the 1981 cohort were 12 and 27).
In the first entry cohort (1980) a statistically significant difference was found between the performance of matriculated and non matriculated students, with the matriculated group scoring higher.
The difference between the two groups however was less obvious in the second year of the course.
In response to this tuition in examination techniques was introduced for the 1981 cohort and the statistical difference between matriculated and non matriculated students was eliminated.
The performance of students was also examined with regard to whether or not they had been involved in some type of formal study during the two years prior to entry to the DipHE.
This allowed an evaluation to be made of the possible effect pre-entry study on performance.
The findings were drawn from the study of both cohorts but relate only to the first year of the course.
41 students were involved in the 1980 cohort of which 16 had no experience of recent study.
Of the 39 students involved in the 1981 cohort the corresponding figure was 17.
No statistically significant difference in performance was discovered between those with and those without recent study experience.
Further a detailed investigation dealing specifically with the non-matriculated students revealed that there was no statistically significant difference in performance between those with and those without recent study experience.
On the basis of this limited experience of one institution Wood concludes that paper qualifications may not be a reliable guide to likely DipHE performance and that experience of recent pre-entry study does not affect the performance of students.
Woodley, A. (1984) The older the better?
A study of mature student performance in British universities.
Research in Education n.32, pp 35–50.
Woodley studied the performance of mature students (those 21 years of age and over) at all UK Universities.
The data used was based on the 1972, 1973 and 1974 intakes of all UK Universities and was provided by The Universities Statistical Record.
183,743 students were involved in the sample, of which 18,343 were mature students and 165,400 were students under 21 years of age.
All of these students were full time or sandwich undergraduates aiming for a first degree and  enrolled on a course of three or more years duration.
Performance was measured in two ways: overall progress and degree performance.
Since differences of less than 1% can be shown to be statistically significant when working with large sample numbers, Woodley chose to comment on differences and trends that appear to meaningful rather than merely statistically significant.
The study found that mature students had a slightly higher non-completion rare compared to the younger students.
The figure for the former was 17% and for the latter 13%.
This difference was explained largely by the higher rate of withdrawal for non academic reasons for mature entrants.
However when graduates were examined it was found that mature students do as well as their younger counterparts.
Approximately one third of each group achieved a good degree ie a first or upper second.
A more detailed age profile of all students in relation to overall progress revealed that there was relatively little difference between the age groups although those aged between 18 and 19 years were most likely to graduate while those under 18 and over 40 years of age were least successful.
However in relation to degree performance variation was much more noticeable.
Generally the pattern found for overall progress was repeated with a peak in performance among the 18/19 year old group and a decline with increasing age.
A major deviation from this pattern was found in the 26 to 30 year old group.
This group emerged as the most likely to obtain a good degree.
This consistent with the findings of the study by Walker (1975)(Unfortunately Woodley was not able to test Walkers  findings that mature students with non-standard entry qualifications tend to obtain better degrees than other students).
When each of the three subject areas (Art, Social Sciences and Science) were examined it was found that mature students in arts and social sciences gained better degrees than the younger students however the opposite was found for science subjects.
Degree performance in arts and social sciences appears to increase with age, peaks in the 26–30 age group, and subsequently declines.
This suggests that extra life experience can be translated into greater academic success.
However beyond the age of 30 extra life experience is cancelled out by increased learning difficulties.
As regards those studying science subjects the most successful group was the 18 to 19 year olds followed by those aged 20 and under 18.
Among mature students the proportions gaining good degrees did not vary much however the 26 to 30 age group again came top.
Woodley concludes that the relationship between age and performance is a complex one which needs further analysis.
However, on the basis of the findings of this study Universities need not fear increasing their mature student intake.
Woodley A (1991) Access to What?— A Study of Mature Graduate Outcomes.
Higher Education Quarterly Vol, 45 No 1 pp.91 -108.
Woodley argues that there is now considerable evidence that higher education has little to fear from an influx of mature students in terms of standards.
He refers in passing to several studies (Walker; 1975, Smithers and Griffin; 1986A and Smithers and Robinson; 1989) which show that older entrants even those with non-standard qualifications perform at least as well as their younger counterparts.
However this study is really concerned with an analysis of what happens to mature students when they enter higher education and more importantly what happens to them after they leave.
Woodley, A, Thompson, M and Cowan J Factors affecting non-completion in Scottish universities pp112, Appendices, References.
Walton Hall, Institute of Educational  Technology , Open University Student Research Centre Report No 69
The aim of this study was to provide a rigorous statistical analysis of non-completion rates at all universities in the UK, but with particular attention being paid to Scotland.
The University Statistical Record (USR) provided computer files on three entry cohorts (1981, 1982, and 1983) and three leaver cohorts (1987,1988 and 1989) for all universities in the UK.
The USR also provided analyses on the non-completion rates of all leaver cohorts from 1981–1989.
This enabled investigation of possible changes over time.
While this was a study of all entrants to universities, mature students and those with ‘other qualifications’(Viz. not UK schooltype exams), were identified within the typology often possible entry routes into Scottish universities.
Both of these groups had non-completion rates which were higher than the average for all students.
The group entering with ‘other qualifications’ was a heterogeneous one which included graduates, those with other UK qualifications, and those with overseas qualifications.
However it was broken down into sub-categories and these revealed non-completion rates of around 25% for those entering with ONC/OND or with no qualifications compared with a 15% non-completion rate for those with ‘standard’ qualifications.
The research also showed that those with high scores, measured on the basis of grades achieved in Highers, were more likely to graduate than those with low scores.
There was also a relationship between subject studied and non-completion, with those students in engineering and science having considerably higher non-completion rates than those in social sciences or arts, and medicine  have the lowest rates of all.
Considerable variations between institutions were also revealed for all categories of students.
Yates, J. and Davies, P. (1987) The Progress and Performance of Former Access Students in Higher Education.1984–1986 31 pp, tables, Bibliogr,: Roehampton.
Centre for Access Studies Roehampton Institute of Higher Education.
This work demonstrates that there are considerable grounds for optimism regarding the performance of students with non-standard entry qualifications who have been prepared for higher education through special Access Courses.
The report was based on the study of 619 non-standard students in twelve higher education institutions who had formally participated in Access course in sixteen further education institutions.
These students began their studies in higher education between 1979–1984.
Over three quarters (76.6%) followed three and four year degree courses while the remaining students took a variety of two year diploma courses.
The majority of students (61.7%) studied courses with education or social sciences.
Good results were obtained by those who completed their courses and at least 74.3% had at the time progressed satisfactorily (460 students).
1.6% of students had transferred to courses beyond the scope of the project and information was incomplete for 4.4%.
As a result the authors concluded that the final proportion of students obtaining good results would almost certainly be higher.
Only 21% (132) withdrew before completing their course, and of this figure only 12.5% (77) withdrew due to failure on assessed work.
The proportion of students satisfactorily completing or proceeding was highest for those studying vocation subjects (mainly social work 81.6%) and social studies (80.6%).
It was lowest for those taking technology, engineering and science subjects (44.9%).
It was also found that the proportion of students withdrawing was highest in technology, engineering and science subjects and lowest in vocational subjects.
The figures here being 44.9% and 5.1% respectively.
The tutors contacted felt that the Access students compared favourably to other groups of students and believed that the Access courses were a good preparation for their course.