

Training, recruitment, management, development and catering education
Catering for the future
Over the next two years, familiar City and Guilds examinations and scheme numbers, such as 706/1 and 706/2 will begin to disappear and, by 1994, will be replaced with new City and Guilds qualifications accredited as National Vocational Qualifications, with different numbers — City and Guilds 7241, 7242, 7243 and 7244.
In the next few years, the whole structure of training in the industry will have changed, with new methods of acquiring qualifications and new methods of assessment.
examines the effect of this major development on education and training in the industry.
For the last 50 years or so, the hotel and catering industry has grown up with City and Guilds qualifications.
Programmes in cookery, waiting, house-keeping, reception have for long been the recognised route by which the industry's craftsmen and supervisors have acquired their qualifications at all levels.
The familiar scheme numbers for food preparation and food service — originally City and Guilds 147, 151 and 152 in cookery and now City and Guilds 706 and 707 part 1 and 2 — have been the easily understood shorthand for hotel and catering qualifications acquired by a combination of on the job training and college tuition.
With the introduction of National Vocational Qualifications, people undertaking training in the industry will have to become accustomed to new programmes of training and assessment, new City and Guilds numbers and new methods of assessment and testing as an essential part of their career pattern.
Change is noticeable not only in the craft/supervisory area.
recent Government White Papers are bringing about fundamental changes in many areas of further education, the most obvious being the upgrading of polytechnics to university status, together with the disbandment of the Council for National Academic Awards through which polytechnics awarded their degrees.
Now, the polytechnics-cum-universities will be able to award their own degrees.
The reason for these changes is the government's determination to encourage more people to gain qualifications based on industry's precise needs.
As their name implies, National Vocational Qualifications are intended to provide a national framework of qualifications which are easily understood by trainees and employers.
In the hotel and catering industry, NVQ qualifications will become a commonplace within the next year.
What are they?
NVQs [SVQ in Scotland but, for convenience, referred to here as NVQ]are qualifications based on work-based standards of competence established by the industry's Lead Body, the Hotel and Catering Training Company.
They differ fundamentally from traditional qualifications in a number of ways:
They recognise what people actually achieve at work, rather than merely testing an ability to learn, which is the primary feature of a written or oral examination.
In other words, NVQs give recognition to people for putting what they have learnt into practice at work.
The standards of competence, on which the qualifications are based, are nationally accepted and are not peculiar to an individual examining body.
The methods of assessment are far more flexible, so that trainees can acquire qualifications whenever they wish and not, solely, at a formal end of term examination.
Each NVQ [there are 24 City and Guilds NVQs in the hotel, catering and hospitality industry]is made up of a number of units; each unit sets out the standard that must be reached.
One unit is like a mini-qualification and an NVQ credit in the form of a Record of Achievements is awarded for each unit completed.
In this industry NVQs can be gained at four levels from basic craft to management.
NVQ Level 1 in Catering and Hospitality [City and Guilds scheme 7241].
Level 1 indicates the ability to perform basic or routine activities which provide the broad foundations for progression.
Reception and Portering, Housekeeping, Guest Services, Serving Food and Drink [Bar], Serving Food and Drink [Counter], Serving Food and Drink [Table/tray], Food Preparation and Cooking [General], Food Preparation and Cooking [Quick Service].
NVQ Level II in Catering and Hospitality [City and Guilds scheme 7242].
Level II recognises competence in a more demanding range of activities which require a degree of individual responsibility.
General reception, Serving Food and Drink [Restaurant], Serving Food and Drink [Bar], Food Preparation and Cooking.
NVQ Level III in Catering Hospitality Supervisory Management [City and Guilds scheme 7243].
Level III denotes skilled work of a complex nature and the ability to undertake a supervisory role:
Reception, Housekeeping, Food and Drink Service, Food Preparation and Cooking.
NVQ Level IV in Catering and Hospitality Management in conjunction with Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association [City and Guilds scheme 7244].
Level IV demands specialist or technical expertise and the ability to undertake professional work:
Reception, Food and Drink Service, Housekeeping, food Preparation and Cooking.
In addition, there is a Level III NVQ in On-Licensed Premises Supervisory Management and a Level IV NVQ in On-Licensed Premises Management.
HCIMA jointly awards the Level IV NVQ but has also pledged its support for the qualifications at Levels I-III.
The fundamental difference between the traditional City and Guilds awards and the new NVQ award is that the former were awarded by City and Guilds  to students who had attended an approved course of study in a college which led to the student successfully passing the relevant City and Guilds examination.
In contrast to this, an NVQ is not tied to any one route of learning and students can be assessed whenever they wish.
A trainee can amass as many credits as he or she likes.
The important point to remember is that each unit within an NVQ has to be individually assessed at work or in a realistic work environment [a college restaurant, for example]so that the trainee proves he or she can do the job.
Thus, courses, which, in the past, have started in September and finished in the following June, during which all students moved along at exactly the same speed of learning, will become a feature of the past.
With NVQs a trainee can trigger a demand for assessment whenever he or she reaches competence.
The advantage of such a system to trainees building a career lies in the complete flexibility with which they can gain qualifications.
they are no longer bound by college curricula, timetables or, even, college teaching.
NVQs can be obtained at different centres, at different workplaces, in different realistic work environments at any time of the year.
The one proviso here is that assessment centres, whether based in college or at work, have to be approved by City and Guilds as an Awarding Body.
Advantage of the new system
The advantage of the new system from the employer's point of view is that it provides a completely flexible framework of qualifications based on nationally accepted standards.
A key factor in the new arrangements is the method of assessment and the role of the assessor.
Unlike previous qualifications, NVQs will not be acquired by means of set examinations, which are then marked by college lecturers and then verified by a visiting assessor.
NVQs will be assessed in the actual workplace or in a realistic work situation.
The trainee will carry out his or her normal job and the manner and competence with which the work is undertaken will be assessed by a departmental head or supervisor [in a bigger company]or, in a smaller establishment, perhaps by a visiting college lecturer acting as an assessor.
Assessments will be recorded in the trainee's log book which will provide a record of achievement to date.
Whether the assessor is company-based or comes from outside the company, he or she will need to have an NVQ qualification in training, assessment and verification awarded by City and Guilds to standards established by the Training and Development Lead Body.
The method of assessment will rest on observing the trainee's performance at work with questions supplementing underpinning knowledge where necessary.
The assessor will observe the trainee performing a unit of competence in the work environment, ask any relevant questions and then decided whether the candidate is competent by judging the performance against the recognised criteria laid down in the NVQ standards.
To gain the complete NVQ, all units in the qualification will have to be assessed.
Major role to play
Although colleges do not award an NVQ themselves, they still have a major role to play in providing the means whereby trainees can gain competence and be assessed in their job.
Through their programmes, designed to accommodate a range of NVQ qualifications, colleges will remain a significant provider of full-time and part-time education.
However, assessment throughout the training/learning process will replace the neat and tidy end of term examinations.
Many colleges were already moving towards continuous assessment in their existing courses, so regular assessment for NVQ credits is unlikely to cause a major problem.
Full-time college programmes will still be available at all levels but instead of a trainee attending a course leading to an examination set by the college or by one of the existing examination bodies, the programme will comprise training and NVQ assessment, with the award of an NVQ qualification at the appropriate level if the trainee is successful.
Depending on the length of the course, colleges will concentrate on providing training and tuition for trainees to gain hotel and catering NVQs, but other, broader, subjects may be introduced at the discretion of the college.
As with every system of national qualifications, it is the quality assurance and control of assessment of NVQs which is vitally important.
A trainee can obtain an NVQ from any Awarding Body recognised by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications though it is likely that most employers and colleges will choose to offer NVQs from only one body if only to simplify the assessment procedures and reduce costs.
But the whole structure of NVQs depends on the ability of assessors to undertake the assessment procedures against the required criteria.
To ensure a quality system, this common approach is essential yet it can be difficult to introduce and maintain.
Fortunately, City and Guilds has had considerable experience in this area which will be invaluable in ensuring that the NVQs which it awards represent a national standard of competence, wherever they are gained.
To achieve this, and to ensure that the quality of assessment is embedded in the system from the outset, a system of quality assurance and control has been established.
This includes the appointment of two full-time National Chief Verifiers who will co-ordinate and oversee the whole NVQ operation within centres.
A panel of External Verifiers has also been appointed to undertake the approval and inspection of the assessment centres and to carry out regular monitoring.
A User Group and a Quality Assurance and Verification committee have been established to obtain feedback on the operation of the new programmes and to make recommendations on their implementation.
NVQs represent the most fundamental change ever to the industry's education and training system.
Their benefit lies in the national standard which they set, the flexibility with which NVQ qualifications can be obtained, and the accurate assessment which is made of the trainee's ability and competence in the work situation.
NVQs provide trainees with recognised qualifications which can be recorded in log book form, enabling them to move with confidence throughout the industry and to acquire new skills and competence whenever they wish.
Employers, too, will find NVQs highly beneficial for they provide a recognised and progressive pattern of proficiency and competence.
This is something which the industry has always needed.
Its introduction will greatly assist staff recruitment and selection for, in the long-term, all members of staff will have a log book which shows the skills they have acquired.
Even more important, the NVQ awards they have gained will prove that those skills can be performed in the work situation.
Catering careers with a difference
A catering career in the Royal Navy or the Royal Marines offers you the chance to train as either a Royal Navy Cook, Royal Marines Chef or Royal Navy Steward.
Catering careers in to-day's Royal Navy and Royal Marines really do offer you something different.
The challenge and excitement of doing a professional job in an elite organisation, the chance to travel, and access to unrivalled sporting and leisure pursuits are all yours for the taking.
Add to that the benefits of our career structure, pay and benefits package and you will see just how much you can gain from us.
Also you don't have to join up for life, although you will be surprised how many do choose to stay with us.
As well as first-rate training and the chance to gain nationally recognised qualifications in your chosen field, you will also train as a seaman or commando, adding skills and self-discipline to your professional achievements.
A combination that will put you very much in demand if and when you return to civilian life.
Royal Navy Cooks
Preparing food for an entire ship's company in the confines of a small galley requires the very best in training, particularly as the quality of food is so important to morale at sea.
Royal Navy Cooks need to supply well-balanced, well-prepared, nourishing good — three meals a day, every day of the year.
If you join us you will be trained to City & Guilds standards, the same as in the hotel and catering industry, so that after initial training you will be as highly qualified as a quality commis chef in civilian life.
You will learn about:
The principles of nutrition
Food preparation and preservation, and
Hygiene standards
You will also gain the skills that back up the actual cooking, such as catering accountancy, stock control, planning your menus and the care of food in storage.
A lot of these jobs mean that you will have computer work to master as well.
You can train to be a Navy Cook without any particular previous formal qualifications, although any knowledge you bring from a technical college will give you an advantage.
What you do need is a basic ability in English and maths, a pride in your work, and most important of all an interest in cookery.
Training
All Navy Cooks undergo basic training as sailors.
Your first seven weeks are spent at HMS Raleigh , at Torpoint in Cornwall.
This course covers your basic military training and prepares you to join the Navy team.
After initial training you will take an eight-week course at the Royal Naval Cookery School, Aldershot.
Here you will cook some 290 different dishes, including soup, fish, meat and vegetables and the sauces to go with them, hot and cold desserts, salads and bread.
By the end of the course you will have prepared every kind of dish from sandwiches to a full-scale dinner.
The final phase of your initial training takes you back to HMS Raleigh where you will learn things that only the Navy can teach you, such as field cookery in areas of natural disaster and practical experience of bulk cookery in our large galleys.
Then you spend four more weeks learning the computer-based side of your job, mastering how to store, issue and account for food, how to plan menus and make sure that ships carry enough stocks of food on board.
You will continue to train during your first posting [normally to a shore-based establishment]when you will gain your City & Guilds 706/1.
After that you will be off to sea as one of the most important members of the crew.
And remember, you will have a wider role to play in the working of your ship, as one of a first aid party, or a member of a gun crew, for instance.
Entry requirements
No formal qualifications required
You can apply to enter at any time from your sixteenth birthday.
the upper age limit is your thirty-third birthday.
Entry is open to both male and female applicants
Career progression
We offer good promotion prospects and you will be given every opportunity to make your career progress.
You can earn advancement to leading cook and then to petty officer cook or caterer.
Royal Marines Chefs
From the Artic Circle to the jungles of Brunei, Royal Marines Chefs are commandos first and foremost.
As members of one of the world's elite fighting forces, they have to gain the coveted green beret and undergo the same rigorous  selection and training exercises as all other Royal Marines.
If you join the Royal Marines you will be trained to cook in a variety of conditions and climates.
On the job training can lead to City & Guilds qualifications, as well as to more advanced courses and professional qualifications.
Training
Commando training takes place at the Commando Training Centre, Royal Marines, Lympstone.
It lasts eight months in all, which longer than for any NATO force.
It is designed to push you to your limits, both physically and mentally, but the sense of personal satisfaction you will feel at the end of it will make it all worth while.
And of course, you will gain your green beret — the mark of a Royal Marines commando.
This is followed by a seven week course at the Royal Naval Cookery School at Aldershot.
You will learn all the basic cookery skills needed to turn out good meals in the barracks, and successful completion of training can lead to the award of a City & Guilds certificate.
Next you go back to Lympstone to learn from RM instructors how to cook in field conditions.
These could include having to work in extremes of temperature.
You will then be ready to join a commando unit.
In a commando unit you will have a very active time.
You will be out on exercise, sometimes in the UK, and sometimes as far afield as Norway, Cyprus or the Falkland Islands where you will learn what cooking in rugged conditions really means.
Entry requirements
No formal qualifications required, although you will have to sit a selection test [reasoning, English language, numeracy and mechanical comprehension].
You can apply to join from the date of your sixteenth birthday, up to and including the date of your twenty-eighth birthday.
Entry is currently open to male applicants only.
Career progression
Promotion prospects for Royal Marines chefs are excellent.
You will have the chance to qualify for the highest civilian cookery qualifications available in Great Britain.
Royal Navy Stewards
Royal Navy Stewards are trained in hotel services and management and use their skills to look after officers' accommodation ashore and afloat.
Senior Officers and Flag Officers have considerable official entertaining responsibilities and stewards play a key role at such functions.
If you join the Royal Navy as a steward you will be trained to a professional standard in bar work, valeting, tableware and table service, cooking and service of food.
But as well as gaining the skills of a steward, you will also receive the general training which all members of the Navy teams need, whether they are serving at sea or on shore.
Training
You will start your naval life at HMS Raleigh , at Torpoint in Cornwall.
Together with recruits to all the other Navy branches you will undergo seven weeks basic training which will teach you how to look, think and behave like a member of the Royal Navy.
Your professional training will also take place at HMS Raleigh , in the Royal Navy Supply School.
This course lasts five weeks and covers everything from preparing and serving cocktails, to learning how to lay a table for everything from a simple breakfast to a royal banquet.
During this time you will also continue with your Naval general training, and spend time gaining practical experience in the wardroom and on assignment to an officer's cabin.
Continuation training can last between four and eight months.
You will move from HMS Raleigh to another shore establishment where you will work under a senior steward.
You will be given a task book to complete in order to qualify for advancement to able rate.
Successful completion of this phase of training can lead to the award of the City & Guilds Certificate 707/1.
As your career develops you may also have the opportunity to gain the Certificate in Supervisory Studies for Stewarding Management, and to work towards membership of Cookery and Food Associations.
After completing your continuation training you will be drafted to a seagoing vessel for up to two and a half years.
Here you will carry out all of the tasks you have been trained for including general ship's duties.
This will be followed by a posting ashore which will set the pattern of your career with sea and shore appointments alternating.
Entry requirements
No formal qualifications required
You can apply to enter any time from the date of your sixteenth birthday.
The upper age limit is your thirty-third birthday.
entry is open to male and female applicants.
The Royal Navy takes great care to make sure that job and training details are explained fully to everyone.
For some branches it may not be possible to offer vacancies in the immediate future but the enquiry process will include advice about suitable Navy career options and timescales.
We are equal opportunities employers under the Race Relations act and welcome enquiries and applications from all ethnic groups.
For further information on catering careers in the Royal Navy and Royal Marines contact your local Royal Navy and Royal Marines Careers Information Office or write to:
Join the Navy and see the world…differently.
Bread for success
In the past decade, supermarkets have developed flourishing bakery operations largely in response to customer demand.
resourcing manager [Retail]at J Sainsbury plc, outlines the implications this process has had for Sainsbury's management training practices.
Many years ago, supermarket bread acquired a reputation which has proved almost impossible to shake off; any colour you like as long as it is white, and probably thin sliced and steamed to boot.
In truth, this image was never entirely fair, but it is a testament to our ability to respond to customer demand that, today, a visit to any supermarket bakery is likely to offer you the choice and quality to rival that of any traditional bakers.
This, it has to be said, has been in no small part due to the advent of the in-store bakery; a concept which has really taken off over the last 10 years.
In common with the best of our competitors, Sainsbury's have made it their policy to incorporate on-site bakeries into every new store opening, as well as adding them into many existing locations.
With our new store opening programme running to around 20 locations a year, it has taken relatively little time for the idea of the supermarket bakery not just to gain credence, but to become remarkably successful.
But as in every such growth area, there will always be another side.
Of course, we can in theory expand the business as fast as we like, but even a major player like Sainsbury's hasn't got an infinite supply of skilled bakers and bakery managers on hand.
therefore, the rate we can grow is to a large extent governed by the rate we can either attract or develop the specialised management staff we need.
Given this scenario, it became increasingly obvious that what we needed to adopt was a twofold approach to recruitment and training.
Firstly, to attract bright and enthusiastic people into our operation who we could then train up from scratch, and secondly, to provide a channel for individuals who already have some bakery or catering experience, and for whom our kind of operation could offer the opportunities for management development denied them elsewhere.
Of course, such an initiative as this needs to be flexible as not everyone will have the same background of experience, and individual needs will vary greatly.
So while school or college-leavers can benefit from a relatively standardised approach, there are others whose training programme needs to be structured closely around their specific backgrounds and individual requirements, otherwise a large element of everyone's input is going to be little more than an wasteful duplication of effort.
Because of this, we devised a modular training package, sufficiently adaptable to cater for the vast majority of individual circumstances.
Common to all though, is an initial induction of maybe four to six weeks, during which all trainees spend time getting to grips with the nuts and bolts of every aspect of branch operations, which they can then discuss with their peer group at an induction day at the Area Office.
We believe it is valuable to give our trainees a rounded appreciation of our business from the outset, not least because so much of what we do depends upon high levels of teamwork.
After this comes 26 weeks of real training, which starts with basic counter operation and then extends to cover the entire range of bread and confectionery manufacturing processes, as well as the necessities of system management which is an area of growing importance with the increasing computerisation of our operations.
At the same time, we will be paying special attention to the acquisition of management skills, providing specific training courses to develop in our trainees the confidence and resourcefulness needed to take on the responsibilities of running a busy section.
To a point, the onus for acquiring these skills depends on the self-discipline and initiative of the trainees themselves.
Personal study kits and work books are an integral part of the course, and it is in part up to each individual to ensure that his or her course work is up to date.
That said, we never just leave people to get on with it.
Throughout the course, on the spot assessment and advice both from personnel officers and from senior bakery specialists in a regular occurrence.
This approach, far from just offering a comfortable sense of hand-holding, serves as an excellent safety net, as it helps us to identify at an early stage where a trainee's progress may be for some reason deficient, and to take whatever steps may be needed to rectify the situation.
This becomes increasingly valuable during the final 16 weeks of the course, when our  trainees will be getting closer and closer to the point where they become capable of managing the section, initially for the odd late shift, but very definitely with a view to being able to run the department outright by their final two weeks.
Of course, a lot of the information on the course may be old ground to an applicant with experience.
In this case, the modular nature of its construction enables us to tailor the course exactly to fit.
As opposed to the set 12 month scheme, management courses of nine or even six months are perfectly possible.
It all depends on the background of the individual.
What we are trying to do is to provide good people who have an enthusiasm for this kind of catering with a fast route towards management responsibility, and that is a route which, for those who want it, can lead right up into store management and beyond.
One of the advantages of our business is that the opportunities to progress are remarkably many and varied — there is no one set path which you have to adhere to.
And the way that food retailing is developing, the range and quality of those opportunities can only increase.
For this situation, the consumer must take much of the credit.
It is the response of the supermarket business as a whole to the demand for a healthier and more natural product, freshly produced to a high standard, which has led to the advent of the in-store bakery, and in turn created the need, at any rate within Sainsbury's, for structured, high quality management training, geared much more towards how we plan the business to grow over the next five to ten years than it is to simply manning the pumps.
Ultimately, this state of affairs can only work to the advantage of our trainees, who will come out at the end of their programme with an eminently marketable collection of skills.
Of course, with the level and intensity of training that we are prepared to put into our trainees' future, we do run the risk that a percentage of that investment will end up benefiting our competitors.
But, because the scope for personal development within Sainsbury's is on a par with the very best, the risk factor comes nowhere close to cancelling out the enormous and lasting advantages.
Using recruitment companies
Recruitment companies can provide an important service for the catering trade.
There are benefits for both the prospective employee and spin-offs to be enjoyed by clients.
of The Catering Recruitment Company discusses ways to get the best out of recruitment companies while warning of the pitfalls which can occur if the proper communication channels are not established.
Why is there a need for staff recruitment companies?
There are several answers to this question, but the most common one is that sooner or later all caterers run into a staffing problem which requires an immediate solution, and a staff recruitment company is only a phone call away.
However, recruitment companies should provide far more than an emergency relief service and should be able to deal with all problematical staff-finding jobs in a diplomatic and professional manner.
For example, who do you turn to when you need to find a chef with experience in the Far East, and skilled in the preparation of both fish and pastry?
Who do you turn to when you know you have to replace a member of staff who has to be kept in ignorance of the situation for the next few weeks?
Who do you turn to when you take over your first pub with a busy passing trade and you really do not know how many staff to employ or in what capacity to employ them?
These should be run-of-the-mill problems to the experienced recruitment specialist, but they could cause you a deal of anxiety and frustration, as well as cost you a lost of wasted time and effort.
Relationship
Employees like to register with a recruitment company.
They know that the recruitment specialist will look after their interests, advise them if they are flying too high, encourage them if they are ready for advancement and indeed assist them in planning their careers over a period of time.
As a result of the rapport which exists in this relationship the client benefits enormously.
For when he seeks a particular type of person to assist him in a particular way, he can be assured that the recruitment professional will not waste his time or energy in introducing unsuitable candidates for consideration, but that he will be given details of only the right sort of person for the required position.
Now what should you, the client, do in order to obtain the best results from a recruitment company.
First of all find a company with whom you feel at ease.
Facilities
It is most important that comfortable relationships exist in people orientated businesses, and you will profit in more ways than one if you feel happy to return and use the facilities over and over again.
You have an important part to play in achieving this relationship with your chosen recruitment specialist.
Please be prepared to tell him, or her, exactly the type of person you are looking for, and give a full and detailed specification of the job that this person will be expected to do.
If the so-called specialist does not ask for this information then retreat rapidly and find someone else who does.
Let me describe a possible scenario.
You are the proprietor of a 20 room country hotel, set in six acres of wooded grounds with spectacular views, eight miles from the nearest town.
Your current occupancy rate is 50 per cent and you have a restaurant for 60 which always appears to be empty.
Image change
You obviously need to change your image and you have decided to upgrade your restaurant in order to attract the local high spenders, and to develop a function trade in the under utilised grounds, using a marquee to house wedding receptions, birthday parties and anniversary celebrations.
The first problem is to find a chef capable of translating your ideas into practice, and also capable of coping with all the various demands to be made of him.
First of all you advertise in a trade magazine, and your current chef, reliable, but limited in ability, sees the advertisement and leaves the kitchen never to return.
You then have to call an agency in order to obtain emergency relief, and they not only provide you with a temporary chef, but promise to send you details of all their head chefs currently seeking employment.
They come flooding in.
You are delighted.
You read CVs relating to head chefs who have only ever worked in pubs; CVs of head chefs well experienced in take-aways; you read the CV of the head chef of a 350 room hotel in an inner city who is seeking employment overseas; and you have a CV which looks quite familiar.
It relates to the chef who has just left you.
Eventually you select three possibilities and ask the agency to arrange interviews with them.
They arrive.
You interview each one but to no avail.
All three of them are looking for work in large towns.
No one has told them that your hotel is eight miles from the nearest town, which in fact is only an overgrown village.
Specialist
A little luck then comes your way.
A specialist catering recruitment company is recommended to you.
After a lengthy conversation with the experienced caterer at the other end of the line you arrange to show him your establishment.
Within a few days of his visit you receive details of two sous-chefs, both well versed in haute cuisine , both having trained with chefs of international repute, and both now ready to manage their own kitchen.
What is more, both of them have stated that they prefer to work in a rural setting.
You feel quite confident in interviewing both of them, but as it turns out only one of them has the imagination to emphasise with your ideas and within three weeks he is in situ .
To sum up; your professional consultant offers you a wide range of services which includes the provision of temporary staff and the search for and provision of permanent personnel, tailored to your specific requirements.
The planning and costing of staffing levels, advertising, and detailed information on current catering trends are at the experienced specialist's fingertips.
Discretion and confidentiality should always be assured.
In a perfect world your staff would all be happy and proficient, contentedly working for and with you.
You would never need to know of recruitment companies.
In this world you might well need us.
Career development and the chance to succeed
Determination and commitment are greatly encouraged within Whitbread.
human resources director for Whitbread's restaurants & Leisure division, discusses the training and job opportunities available for all their employees and relates some of their success stories.
The leisure and hospitality industry can offer a wide range of careers which can develop individuals and give them qualities which can be applied to many different business disciplines.
Determination to succeed in a highly competitive market place, self-motivation and high standards of customer service are just three.
For an industry that is one of the biggest single employers in this country though, times have been hard during 1991/92 and businesses country-wide have found it increasingly difficult to continue the level of graduate recruitment.
However, this has not meant that job opportunities do not exist.
With retail businesses accounting for over 60 per cent of Whitbread's turnover, the company can offer a number of opportunities for career development within the Restaurants & Leisure Division.
The Restaurants & Leisure division of Whitbread plc employs approximately 40000 people and has five UK businesses, including the Thresher drinks retailing chain with 1660 shops nationwide, 250 Beefeater family restaurants, TGI Friday's the American Bistro and 282 Pizza Hut restaurants.
The Whitbread Group of Hotels incorporates three different types of hotel — Travel Inn in the budget category, Lansbury Hotels which are mainly targeted at the business user, and Country Club Hotels, the leader in leisure-based conference venues.
With a portfolio such as this, Whitbread offers great scope for career development.
It has always been Whitbread's aim to try and promote from within.
The company believes that there is no better way of maintaining the high standards of service than through its investment in existing employees.
Each part of the restaurants & Leisure Division has a programme to assist employees in developing their careers.
People are encouraged to set themselves high standards in order for Whitbread, in turn, to offer its customers a high standard of service.
After all, if the employees succeed then the company succeeds.
The Thresher drinks retailing chain employs over 10000 people in the UK with a portfolio of brands such as Wine Rack and Bottoms Up.
It is Thresher's aim to become ‘Britain's favoured drinks retailer’ and it realises that its people are the key to achieving this success.
Thresher has a commitment to training and invests over £1 million a year in the direct cost of training its staff and managers.
Whether employed as a part-time sales assistant or as a manager, all staff are offered the opportunity to develop their careers within Thresher.
These opportunities start with the Staff Progression Scheme where all employees are encouraged to sit three levels of exams.
The first level is the bronze award which employees take after three months of joining the company.
This moves on to the silver award after six months and the gold award after a year.
At each stage, if they pass, the employees name badge moves up a colour and their pay increases accordingly.
Thresher also offers in-house and open learning course-based activities to all its managers in order that they can study for the Wine and Spirit Education Trust Higher Certificate, which is a product knowledge-based certificate.
Recently Thresher has also been involved in the development of a national vocational qualification at levels 1–4 through the retail Certificate and it has been one of the first of three British companies to offer an opportunity for staff to  obtain NVQ recognition through all stages.
Although initiatives such as these are great for the individual managers and staff, they also provide Whitbread with a skilled and knowledgeable workforce which can offer customers a high level of service and product advice.
It give managers and staff the confidence they need to do their job more effectively.
Thresher's Operations Director for Wine Retailing, is a shining example of the value Whitbread places on its existing employees who show ambition and take an active role in furthering their careers.
He started as a part-time sales assistant, and in the space of just nine years worked his way up through store management to area and regional management and finally to his present position.
At Beefeater's 250 restaurants employees are also encouraged to develop their own career route.
Everyone is trained through an induction programme and training modules in service quality.
All levels of managers, from trainee to house manager, are given regular appraisals.
It is through these that people, with the qualities for success, are recognised and encouraged to work their way up the management route from trainee to assistant and deputy to house manager.
After reaching this stage there are still opportunities for movement from small houses to large houses and on to Travel Inns which are often attached to a Beefeater Restaurant.
The training process is supported by a work tool known as a Personal Development Manager.
This works like an individual Filofax where copies of appraisals and checklists of personal targets set by the employee are included.
It also acts as a vehicle for the Beefeater manager to structure career development.
TGI Friday's is one of the best examples of how individuals can further their careers.
TGI Friday's provides opportunities for people to progress up the career ladder and it is the individual characteristics, such as personality and drive, that could enable them to move from, for example, bartender to general manager over a period of time.
TGI Friday's currently employs about 900 people and there are numerous roles within the restaurant ranging from busers who clear the tables, to general managers.
An example of this is the general manager of the Cardiff store, who started out as a cook just five years ago.
He is now responsible for the general management of the restaurant with 47 employees.
As with the rest of Whitbread it is seen as natural for people to want top develop their careers within TGI Friday's and they are encouraged to do so.
In the Whitbread Group of Hotels, Lansbury Hotels employs around 1700 people with an average of 35–40 staff in each outlet.
There are numerous positions within each hotel, ranging from waiters and bar staff through to heads of departments, deputy managers and general managers.
All employees at Lansbury Hotels are involved in a quality service programme called ‘caring always makes a difference’.
This consists of fortnightly meetings within each department of the hotel which offer all staff a chance to discuss the way their hotel is run and allows them an opportunity to make suggestions for ways to improve the service they provide.
There is plenty of scope for progression within Lansbury and it is initiatives such as these which provide individuals with a chance to flourish.
It is not only qualifications that matter within Whitbread, the company also looks for individuals with a determination to succeed, are bright and have appropriate team skills.
An example from Lansbury Hotels is operations manager, now in his thirties, who began his career at Lansbury washing dishes at the age of 15 and is now responsible for the operations side of the business.
In summary, Whitbread plc recognises the value of retaining its employees and therefore the company aims to develop from within.
Employees can transfer from one part of the organisation to another for career development.
The wheels are put in motion to enable employees to progress, realising all the time that the keys to success are individual characteristics, determination and commitment to achieve in an exciting and dynamic environment.
People: our greatest asset
The Catering guild achieve their high standards and premium service through their commitment to recruitment selection and continued training.
‘Staff work as a team to achieve customer satisfaction’, says  marketing manager.
The Catering Guild, a Division of the TM Group, Europe's largest independent refreshment vending company, was formed four years ago with a view to providing a professional catering service combined with a fresh approach to the provision of staff meals.
The company provides a complete service, controlling and managing every aspect of the client's staff restaurant, from equipment supply, installation and design, to staff recruitment, daily management and special function catering.
‘Contract catering is a highly competitive business’, says  marketing manager of The Catering Guild.
‘Four years ago, we recognised a gap in the marketplace for the provision of a highly personalised catering service that ensured catering facilities were totally integrated with the clients’ objectives.
Also, that they were run within agreed cost parameters and provided a quality service by means of a professional employee base.
The result, the creation of an atmosphere in which both client and caterer can gain — our aim was, and still is, to create a highly personal business partnership between the client and ourselves.’
This is a philosophy that has certainly worked for The Catering Guild.
The company has created a niche market for itself within the catering industry and continues to make huge inroads with specifically targeted blue chip companies.
As  says, ‘We are firm in our belief that people are our greatest asset.
All members of staff work as a team to achieve customer satisfaction and each client has easy access to key decision-makers within the company, as well as day-to-day contact with their own catering team.
All staff at The Catering Guild are carefully chosen for heir potential and attitude, as well as experience and ability.
Throughout their career within the company, continued training courses and the provision of quality working conditions ensure that only people of the highest calibre are employed — an asset we believe essential for the provision of our premium service.’
As a professional service organisation, customer satisfaction is the highest priority of all staff.
Each client site is encouraged to achieve this through teamwork and mutual support and an absolute belief in the value of the individual.
‘We recruit people who can identify with our high standards, all staff are recruited with the specific client in mind and continue to work for that client only.
Our growth over the years is in part due to the company's commitment to recruitment selection and continued training, both in recessional times as well as in good.
Even in the very early days of the company, we were aware of the importance of recruitment selection and training and we would not have been able to grow as successfully as we have without it’, says 
The company take great pride in their recruitment techniques which, for catering site managers, include psychometric personality testing, matching character assessment, aptitude and intelligence with a predetermined profile.
All successful applicants attend an initial induction day with the company at their Ewell headquarters, where a series of assessments are carried out to ensure the right people are recruited for the right job.
On employment, all staff are medically screened, a process that continues on a regular basis at their Medical Centre using a system devised by their parent's Chief Medical Officer.
This is a strict requirement, since quality control managers, skilled in bacteriology and food technology, make random tests at all sites and submit the results to local and Head Office management.
The importance placed on health and hygiene at all levels of The catering Guild cannot be overstated.
With the introduction of the 1990 Health and Safety Act, four new training courses have been added to the company's training calendar, which are attended by all members of staff.
Basic food hygiene, advanced food hygiene, Health and safety, and First aid, are all courses organised by the company and attended by staff on a regular basis throughout each calendar year.
Over the four years that The Catering Guild has been in existence, staff numbers have grown to 490, spread nationally.
The company's belief in growth from within ensures that, once the right calibre of personnel has been recruited, the opportunities for personal development within the company are enormous.
As a service organisation, The Catering Guild depends entirely on the quality of its staff to maintain its own high ideals and, to help them recruit the very best people, it offers attractive terms and conditions — higher than the average rates of pay, Christmas bonuses, paid holiday from year one and superb training.
Motivation runs high amongst its employees, which is just one of the reasons why The catering Guild can offer such high levels of service on a consistent basis.
‘We regard the provision of a catering service as a team effort.
Under our catering services managers, the service is provided every day to consistently high standards to all our clients.
Built-in job flexibility ensures that these standards are always met by on-site staff, irrespective of job titles and responsibilities.
Staff are, therefore, always alert, aware and prepared to ensure that clients’ requirements are met.’
All operational managers are skilled in training staff to approved HCTB standards.
The Catering guild's training procedures provide catering services managers with programmes for local on-site staff training and the company aim to improve the expertise at all levels, culminating in their own Certificate of Excellence.
All senior managers are professional caters and hold an MHCIMA, the industry's highest management qualification.
Throughout the year, the company operate a stringent training calendar for all levels of staff.
These courses are held on a regular basis, either on site or at the company's headquarters in Ewell, Surrey.
These courses cover such topics as team building, time management, client management, pricing strategies, food hygiene, health and safety, and marketing and merchandising.
A specially developed Outward Bound course has also proved to be not only popular amongst staff, but most beneficial.
The course has been designed to provide an insight into mutual support and team-building and is attended by both junior and senior levels of the company.
Operations staff do the same course, together with sales staff, sometimes competing against each other and sometimes working together.
Staff get to know each other at every level and learn how to support each other.
We all have strengths and weaknesses and the understanding of each staff member's levels of strengths and weaknesses transfers into the work situation and is, therefore, highly constructive.
‘The Catering Guild's organisation is structured to ensure effective and speedy communications.
Senior management are always available to our catering services managers and clients, providing valuable backup support and advice at all times.
‘On-site staff discuss the catering service at daily briefings and on a monthly basis carry out a more formal team briefing.
This review covers not only the individual site needs but also items of group interest and company policy reviews.
It is vital that all members of staff, again at every level, are aware of the company's progress and the company's policies towards new development and regulations within the industry.
‘Personal development is, we believe of key importance to ensure that motivation is always running at a high level.
Development via responsibility, and development in different areas of business gained through other divisions of the TM Group, all areas in which staff can develop different skills.’
Career opportunities in the Middle East
Tourism is a major growth area in the Middle East and more and more people attracted by the prospects of an enhanced salary, hotter climate and better lifestyle, are eager to become part of this development.
Spinnys examine the job opportunities that actually exist and the benefits they have to offer.
Countries in the Middle East are at different stages of development, with the more developed economies now diversifying away from oil and gas related industries to commerce and tourism.
In the catering field, main areas of activity are contract and inflight catering, hotels and a rapidly expanding fast food industry.
Most leading hotel chains are represented throughout the region, managing the numerous hotels developed as a response to the economic boom of the 1970s and the 1980s.
Tourism is an increasingly obvious development of Middle East service economies and will no doubt fuel the expansion of greater bed capacity in the years ahead.
Traditional industrial catering is very much a specialist business focused on the oil and gas sector of the economy which, due to the remote location of its installations, requires full turnkey support services.
Operations also exist within the institutional sector encompassing hospitals, schools and universities.
Employing organisations within this sector are a mixture of local and international companies competing within a relatively static market.
Fast food is certainly a growth market with some of the main names developing their brands with great success.
The fast food pizza chains have rapidly developed and alongside traditional Arabic, fast food concepts are actively competing to secure prime retail space.
Professionally qualified caterers can in fact spend much of their career abroad if they so wish.
A typical career path might be a young European starting in the hotel industry as a management trainee, gaining experience in a variety of establishments in the far East and Europe, then progressing from, say, a major hotel chain through the food and beverage side to a management position at the top end of the leisure market.
Another good example in the industrial sector would be a qualified chef, progressing from hotels or restaurants to contract catering, becoming a camp supervisor on a major contract, catering manager, project manager and eventually a national contract services manager.
Terms and conditions of expatriate packages vary considerably.
A manager of a five-star hotel will enjoy the same benefits in a major Middle Eastern city as in any part of the world.
Senior managers could expect to receive all or some of the following benefits: food on duty, accommodation, a car for business and private use plus running costs, one month; s annual leave or more with at least one return air ticket to his country of origin for himself and his family, full medical and life cover, and possibly even school fees for his children either in the country of origin or that in which he is based.
A senior manager with major responsibilities in a large contract catering company would receive similar benefits, if based in a large city.
Those responsible for running major contracts in more remote locations may be on a bachelor status with more frequent air tickets.
Three months duty, followed by 2–3 weeks leave, is fairly standard in such cases.
Competition is fierce for the top jobs.
Such positions are frequently advertised in the major trade magazines in the West and employers will receive applications from professionally qualified caterers from around the world.
Main contenders are likely to have had previous experience in the country concerned and in the type of contract on offer, for example, starting up a new hotel from scratch or establishing catering facilities to feed thousands of workers of various nationalities on a new construction contract.
At the lower end of the job market, in the middle management to senior supervisory positions, employers are however more likely to consider with favour candidates with good track records in their own countries seeking to make the transition to working oversees.
Job opportunities for expatriates vary from country to country in that in countries where the native population is high, every effort is naturally made to employ local nationals rather than expatriates.
It is however true to say that in most countries the hotel and leisure industry remains staffed by expatriates, as do the more senior positions in the contract services sector.
This situation will change in due course as the younger generation becomes less and less involved in traditional family businesses and educational standards continue to improve, but for the foreseeable future job opportunities will exist for most nationalities in those parts of the Middle East where local populations are insufficient to meet the labour requirements of commerce and industry.
At this juncture, it is important to note that whilst there are interesting positions on offer in all fields at all levels, terms and conditions for non-executive jobs tend to be based on market rates relative to the country of origin for those nationalities usually recruited to perform the tasks in question.
The majority of the workforces in the Middle East remain multinational and the vast labour forces of the Subcontinent and far East are readily available and accessible to companies operating in the Middle East.
Companies take full advantage of the cheaper labour available from such countries and easily attract Asian workers to the Middle East by paying salaries which are in general higher than the worker could hope to earn in his own country but, of course, much lower than would pertain in, say, Western Europe.
One must also mention the limitations that still exist for employment of females in the catering industry in the Middle East.
Senior positions considered suitable tend to be in the hotel industry in public relations, personnel, training and front of house.
Certain specialists such as female dieticians and nutritional experts may be employed in the health sector but in general positions in the contract catering field remain exclusively male.
This is due to a variety of circumstances ranging from accessibility and remoteness of locations and their suitability for women to local legislation in some countries which prohibits the employment of women either completely or in certain types of jobs.
Whilst this situation has changed in recent years, it will only be when local female populations attain the same educational standard as their male counter-parts and take a key role in management decisions that substantial progress will be made.
It is interesting to analyze why individuals choose to make their careers in the Middle East.
One receives a whole gamut of responses to the general run of questions: why, how and when and for how long.
Generally, however, those who work in the challenging environment of the Middle East tend to be looking for a change, an enhanced salary, a more favourable climate and a better lifestyle.
What they find in reality is that working in the Middle East presents a different range of management problems of multinational workforces, and the range of contract locations, anywhere from a city base to remote desert or off-shore.
Those who succeed generally possess a proven track record, a pragmatic approach to management problems and proactive style, with the resilience to cope in certain instances with extreme hardship, unfavourable climate, long hours of work and sometimes prolonged separation from loved ones.
Notwithstanding this, if one has a taste for adventure and no fear of hard work, the rewards are ample not only in terms of a tax-free salary but in the satisfaction of a job well done in a challenging and interesting environment.
Career opportunities aboard cruise ships
The cruise line industry is one of the fastest growing sectors of the world's leisure industry.
of Carnival Cruise Lines describes the training processes and attractive personal prospects on offer.
Carnival Cruise Lines conceived the image of The fun Ships in 1974 with their first ship Mardi Gras .
To-day the company has nine cruise ships and also owns Holland America Line, Windstar Cruises, Westours and the Crystal Palace Resort and Casino in the Bahamas.
The Fun Ships provide a reasonably priced, all inclusive, holiday where fun and enjoyment are coupled with the excitement of sea travel in the Caribbean.
This type of holiday attracts a much younger and more adventurous type of person than is usually associated with the cruising industry.
This revitalised industry which is now centred in the USA has resulted in a new type of cruise ship which has evolved from the special requirements of the newer cruise companies and their clientele and is epitomised by the Ectasy which entered service in June 1991.
The Ectasy is the latest addition to the Carnival fleet of Fun ships, carrying up to 2600 passenger on seven day cruises from Miami.
She has over 900 staff of whom 650 are involved in hotel services and leisure orientated activities.
The cruise line industry is multinational in terms of career opportunities, and therefore the growth of the industry in the USA is of direct concern to all those setting out in a hotel, catering or leisure-orientated career.
As a cruise ship is primarily a hotel and leisure complex over half the staff are employed in these areas of specialisation.
The two main areas of employment are the food and bar department and the purser; s department.
Each cruise line company has its own management structure — at Carnival Cruise Lines the two departments are separately administered and both have their own career development.
Food and beverage management
The food and bar department is managed by the food and beverage manager with the head chef, senior maître d'hôte and provision master reporting to him.
To assist the food and beverage manager run the department, there are between four and six assistant managers who are involved in the many and varied aspects of management — from running a food expediting line in the galley through which 1200 entrées will pass in 30 minutes, to being responsible for a small reception for some VIPs.
Assistant food and beverage managers must first complete our 10-month on board training scheme during which time they will work in all areas of the kitchens, bars, restaurants and storerooms.
We also recruit some assistant food and beverage managers with experience directly into middle management positions.
The kitchen brigade
The galley [kitchen]is headed by the working head chef who is assisted by up to three sous-chefs.
On the larger ships where we have two main restaurants, we also have two hot kitchens.
Within each hot kitchen there is a first cook with the cooks and assistant cooks working in each of the four corners where they are responsible for the production of lunch and dinner.
We also employ breakfast cooks, pastrymen, bakers, buffetmen, butchers and pantrymen.
Although we occasionally recruit sous-chefs who already have marine catering experience, we prefer recruiting at the junior levels of assistant cook or cook.
On board training is given to enable us to promote staff who show ability and aptitude.
For those considering a career as either a food and beverage manager or a chef it must be remembered that at Carnival Cruise Lines we are involved in mass catering.
For example on our larger ships we are catering for 1900 passengers and 600 crew which means that about 7500 meals a day are consumed, excluding snacks and buffets.
At dinner we serve 900 entrées in 30 minutes, whilst on our largest ships we cater for 2600 and 950 crew.
To enable us to meet such a challenge with a continually high standard, and within our budgetary constraints, we have standard menus which are backed up with standard recipes and preparation systems.
Storerooms and administration
We carry at least eight days of supplies on each ship, with as much fresh food as possible, though a proportion is frozen.
All storing is performed in the base port once a week with most meats being proportioned.
The stores department is headed by the provision master who is assisted by a team of storekeepers.
The yeoman is the administrative assistant to the food manager and is responsible for the keeping of all records and producing all reports of the department  the majority of which are carried out with the help of a computer.
Restaurants
On the larger ships there are two restaurants which both serve the same meal at the same time.
On our new ship Ecstasy , each restaurant seats 650 passengers and we two sittings of each meal at set meal times.
Both restaurants are managed by the senior maître d'hôtel who has a maître d'hôtel and a team of section head waiters reporting to him.
Each section is staffed by waiters and busboys who serve the plated meals to the passengers.
At dinner each night we have a different theme, which includes American Night, French Night, International Night, Captain's Gala Dinner and Polynesian night.
Each evening the menu reflects the theme with waiters wearing uniforms to suit the occasion and make each dinner a special experience.
As well as room service, midnight and late buffets, food is also served alfresco on the lido deck at breakfast and lunch.
This is a self service concept to allow those who do not want to leave their fresh air pursuits to indulge in a light health-conscious choice of foods.
Recruitment in food service starts at the bottom with entry as a snack steward who will work in the self-service areas and assist in the smooth running of the lido deck service.
There is also an entry level as trainee busboy where the trainee will work in the staff dining room under the supervision of a head waiter, when considered competent they will be transferred to the restaurant.
For those with ability it is possible to rise through the ranks to senior maître d'hôtel s.
Bar department
It must be remembered that a cruise ship is a complete holiday experience and therefore has to satisfy the tastes of our clientele on a 24-hour basis in a holiday atmosphere.
Each ship has about 10 different bars catering for our guests day and night.
Some are large public bars while others are service bars to enable table service to different areas.
Waiters and waitresses provide the service to the guests and work under a bartender.
The bars specialise in serving cocktails with beer being among the least favourite drinks.
Our policy is to recruit at the lower levels and train those staff who show aptitude for managerial responsibility.
We occasionally have vacancies for bartenders who must have at least two years' experience of working a cocktail bar.
Service department training
We have instituted special on board training programmes for staff who wish to work in the restaurant or bars.
A group of about 28 trainees join a ship extra to the working requirements of that ship.
They then spend three weeks undergoing classroom and practical instruction in the art of service on a Fun ship.
On successful completion of the training they then transfer to another ship in the fleet and work as a waiter or waitress.
Purser's department
The purser's Department is responsible for the accommodation aboard ship, passenger comfort and the ship's administration.
We recruit junior pursers who undergo a three month training programme aboard one of our cruise ships.
The trainee works in all areas of the department.
This includes manning the front desk to answer passengers queries and complaints, change travellers cheques, and sell shore excursions, stamps and postcards.
The pursers office is also responsible for all Immigration and Customs formalities.
It is also the banking centre of the ship and carries out all administrative work required to allow the passengers to enjoy their holiday.
The pursers are the public face of the company and have to deal with many unforeseen situations that might occur to the passengers.
Such a position requires trainees who have a diploma or degree in Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management and have post-college experience of working in reception in a four or five-star hotel.
On completion of training the trainee becomes a third assistant purser and has the possibility for promotion up to head purser level but always dependent on the individual's ability.
We also recruit assistant stewardesses to work as telephone liaison between the passengers and the ship's staff.
We assess our assistant stewardesses for promotion to other areas of work aboard the cruise ship which makes this job a very good entry level for those who wish to make a career in the industry and we also run a training scheme for our housekeeping department.
This department is responsible for all cabins and public areas and is headed by the chief steward.
Recruits commence as trainee third steward where they spend three months on the job training before being confirmed as third steward.
Casino department
All our ships have casinos and our new ships Fantasy and Ecstasy have some of the largest casinos afloat.
We are continually recruiting gaming staff and we run our own training scheme whereby the recruit starts work as a slot cashier and if found to be suitable for casino work is then trained as a black-jack dealer.
Promotion in this department is by ability and it is quite possible for a slot cashier to eventually reach the level of casino manager.
We also have vacancies in specialist departments such as medicine and child care where the appropriate qualifications and experience are essential.
At Carnival Cruise Lines we do not have any minimum age limits as we judge each person on his or her ability and personality.
It is important that recruits have experience of living away from their home area and that they are independent people capable of making their own decisions.
Life on a cruise ship is not easy with the majority of staff living in two berth cabins, having limited leisure activities and being in a confined environment.
We employ people from up to 40 different countries and so everyone must be adaptable and able to work in a multi-national team.
We look for staff who can be part of our Fun Ship image and work in a team that ensures that our guests have a vacation that lives up to our high standard.
In all departments staff who show added ability will be given training and promotion.
Can we whet your appetite?
Hungry, driving people are what roadside restaurants are all about, and no one knows that better than Forte, the undisputed leaders in the field, serving millions of customers a year at hundreds of roadside locations nationwide.
The opportunities for experienced catering people are enormous.
With the continued proliferation of the private car, the consequent development of road building schemes, and the increased expectation of mobility among the public at large, the roadside is the place to be if you are in the restaurant business.
And, thanks to their uncompromising commitment to the highest quality and service standards, Forte's famous roadside names are growing fast.
Little Chef, for example, already Britain's largest table service restaurants chain, has over 350 outlets nationwide, and has ambitious plans for further growth, while Happy Eater provides an attractive alternative for families and business travellers alike at 88 locations throughout the UK.
Add to that our rapidly expanding Forte Travelodge chain, and you have all the strength and solidity of a long established, internationally recognised concern, as well as the pioneering spirit and excitement of a thriving new business.
And it is not just the customers who have a lot on their plate here, the scope for experienced catering people with an HCIMA qualification is enormous, with real responsibility early on, rewards to match, and genuine opportunities to consolidate your management skills and progress at a startling pace.
The strength of any restaurant business lies in its reputation — you are only as good as the last meal you have served — and in order to preserve the high standards that have brought this business so very far, Forte need people who can match the best in the industry: people with some supervisory level experience under their belts; with a real commitment to customer service, lots of enthusiasm and driving ambition.
But despite the fact that it is a major national organisation, Forte never loses sight of another equally important fact, that this is a people business, run by people for people.
So you will not find old fashioned cattle market style training programmes here.
Instead there are carefully constructed individual development programmes incorporating standard elements, but always sufficiently flexible to adjust to each individual's particular development needs and to build sound business and commercial skills.
So you can seize your career with both hands and retain a rare degree of control over your own direction.
Of course, being so intimately concerned with the notion of travel, a degree of mobility may bring more rapid promotion opportunities but unlike other organisations of a similar size, there is no pressure here to relocate — should you decline a move because you are not ready to be uprooted, you will find that your reasons are respected and your prospects unaffected.
A policy of promotion from within ensures that potential is always recognised and put to use.
In fact, every Forte Roadside establishment is a vital part of our mainstream success.
There are no career backwaters here!
If your appetite has been whetted and all this sounds more dynamic than your present position, you might just be wondering where is the catch?
There is no catch.
Just one proviso and it is one that everyone in our industry knows…this business is no soft option.
The hours can be long and sometimes unsociable, and the responsibilities testing.
As a restaurant manager you will have total control of a sizeable business, and that means much more than overseeing the day to day running of the restaurant [which is quite a challenge in itself].
You will take charge of the recruitment and training of staff as well as planning rosters, purchasing and stock taking.
It is in many ways, a retail management role, broadening your horizons far beyond the traditional catering disciplines and of course, enhancing your future prospects.
But no one is asking you to conform to a preordained career timetable or a specific direction.
The way this business is moving, you really never know what exciting new opportunities are just around the corner.
Little Chef, Happy Eater and Forte Travelodge already have plans to extend across continental Europe bringing even more alluring management opportunities to the fore.
Take a closer look at Forte Roadside Restaurants and Accommodation, where the pace is fast, furious and a lot of fun, where the opportunity is only limited by your ambition and where there really is never a dull moment.
Top rank training
Rank restaurants Ltd, a company within The Rank Organisation, operates two main brands, Pizza Piazza and Prima Pasta, and a small number of independent restaurants.
All its managers undergo an extensive training programme, and their career development is greatly encouraged.
The Pizza Piazza operation is based largely in the Home Counties.
It operates from sites which have been selected for their character and serves mainly pizza dishes.
The restaurants are designed so that the chefs area provides the focus of the operation for diners.
The Prima Pasta operation is based largely within the radius of the M25.
Their menu is authentically Italian based on pizza and pasta dishes and all main course dishes are homemade at each unit.
The brand's executive chef is responsible for maintaining food quality across the estate and developing the menu.
In all Rank Restaurants head chefs, in consultation with their management teams, are encouraged to actively contribute to the profitability of their operations by active use of their specials boards.
Branch general managers report to area managers who each have a responsibility for 10-12 restaurants.
These area managers meet as a team monthly, and general managers meet with their own management teams [comprising typically of an assistant manager and a head chef]weekly.
Rank restaurants has its own computerised accounts department which centrally administers payroll, food and beverage controls, auditing and cashiering.
In addition, there are small specialist teams to assist branch management with training, personnel, marketing and purchasing.
As The Rank Organisation has a fairly flat management structure, Rank Restaurants executives are responsible for their own policy and strategy.
Similarly, restaurant management have wider responsibilities for building their own branch's business than would the managers of most branded operations.
Career structure
Branch management are recruited either internally or externally.
In either case, an individual's initial training period will be closely supervised as outlined below.
As the company encourages internal promotion, the prospects for successful recruits are excellent.
Indeed, 12 promising assistant managers are being selected annually for a development programme designed to prepare them for promotion to general managers.
Most jobs out of branches require that at least six months has previously been spent as a branch general manager.
Training programme
All new members of management will receive a formal company induction, generally during their first week of employment.
This will take place at their branch and be delivered by a member of the training department.
The induction programme includes a full history of The Rank Organisation and of the restaurant or restaurant chain for whom the individual will work.
Training, ensuring staff and customers safety, relating to fire, food hygiene, and health and safety, will also be covered on induction, as well as an introduction to company policy with regard to these.
the training executive will also agree the training programme to be undertaken with the new manager.
Most training will be delivered on branch.
This will begin by allowing four to eight weeks for a new manager to become fully conversant with all aspects of staff functions.
This time is supported by the new manager formally meeting with his or her general manager on a weekly basis to discuss their progress.
Every four to six weeks a training executive will visit to monitor their training and agree future objectives.
Monitoring will be by means of written records, discussion and testing, and achievement of practical objectives.
On branch training is supported by a number of theoretical training days run on a modular basis.
Modules include:
IEHO Basic Food Hygiene Certificate
Introduction to man management skills
Introduction to personnel procedures
Finance and financial statements
Hazard spotting and legislation
Craft Trainer Award [2 days]
Once the training executive considers, in consultation with the person's general manager, that all the training which is required for the person to be an effective assistant manager has been delivered, a performance review will be arranged.
Present at the performance review will be the individual concerned, the general manager, area manager and training executive.
Present performance will be analyzed, feedback given, and future objectives set.
A performance review will generally take place three to six months after the start date.
Development
Rank Restaurants are committed to a positive annual appraisal system for all members of management.
General managers are appraised by their area managers and appraise their assistants.
At appraisals, career plans are discussed and appropriate development agreed wherever possible.
As the company believes that home grown talent is often the most successful, internal promotion is encouraged.
Job availability
We operate an equal opportunities policy for both recruitment and internal promotion.
Rank Restaurants profits increased threefold in 1990-1991: Driven by this profitability new branches and new posts are regularly being created.
Training for results in retail management
What makes one organisation more successful than another?
Why do some companies thrive on change while others struggle to survive?
The answers to these questions will have important consequences for anyone who is about to choose a career or a potential employer.
McDonald's believe that they owe their success to their management training programme.
At a time when the recession continues to take its toll on the profitability and performance of most high street retailers, one sector stands out for its growing success: The quick-service restaurant sector.
Already a £4.1 billion industry, quick-service restaurants continue to expand as quickly as ever, despite the economic trend.
What is more, they are increasingly seen as the training ground for management professionals who want to develop state of the art business, organisational and leadership skills.
This was not always so.
Until the 1980s, the retail industry as a whole suffered from a poor image.
Lacking a clear career structure, and appearing to offer the somewhat unattractive prospect of long hours and low pay, retail was hardly a first choice career option for most young people.
So what changed? firstly, the 1980s witnessed the rapid development of customer needs and expectations.
Quality became paramount, not just in terms of products and service, but in the physical environment, too.
A renewed emphasis on good design led to the transformation of store layouts, for example.
This was backed by developments in selling techniques, the growing use of computer equipment to improve efficiency, and the willingness to explore new business opportunities.
The general drive towards improving standards and putting the customer first became the subject of best selling books with inspiring titles like In Search of Excellence and The Winning Streak .
But perhaps the most important aspect of this revolution was the growing realisation that a company's only real source of competitive advantage was its own people.
The result was a massive investment in staff training and development.
The urgency of this investment was reinforced by demographic figures which showed that there were fewer and fewer young people entering the marketplace.
Companies therefore began to compete strongly for the best staff, wooing them with better salaries, conditions of work and career development opportunities.
From Marks and Spencer to Sainsbury, from Trust House Forte, as it was then known, to Grand Metropolitan, a new era of professionalism took root.
And nowhere was this professionalism more evident than in the quick-service food sector.
Tale McDonald's, for example.
One look at the quality and depth of its management training programme is enough to explain why it has a £2.7 billion share of its market, and why it continues to thrive in the midst of an economic recession.
McDonald's takes enormous care in the selection of its management trainees.
Applicants, who must be at least 21 and have a minimum of four GCSEs, are put through two rigorous interviews.
They also undertake two days of on the job experience in a restaurant, giving them an insight into what is involved, and allowing McDonald's to assess their suitability.
Those who succeed are taken on as business management trainees.
This is followed by 12–16 weeks work experience under the supervision of a manager in a restaurant.
Next comes a basic operations course covering all aspects of the business and, once this is mastered, trainees become second assistant managers.
After approximately 15 more weeks of course work and practical experience, the trainees have a further week of intensive tuition at the management training centre.
Another 10 weeks of practical experience, combined with courses in first aid and the applied use of equipment, will take some high-flying trainees to the rank of first assistant manager.
This is then followed by the Business  Management Course and advanced business management.
By this stage, the young manager is equipped to handle a tremendous variety of responsibilities and tasks.
These include sales, profit, product quality, stock control, customer service, recruitment and personnel policies, and health and hygiene.
They also include the broader strategic activities of PR, marketing and forward planning.
Clearly, this is very much a hands on training programme.
Only by gaining practical experience in every single area of restaurant operations will managers be able to relate to the responsibilities of their staff.
No special allowances are made for graduates, either.
All trainee managers follow the same route; how fast and how far they develop depends entirely on their individual performance.
It is certainly possible for trainees to become fully-fledged restaurant managers within two years.
After that, the way is open for promotion into area and regional management.
Yet the training provides more than just technical skill.
It instils into managers the values that drive the company, above all the values of Quality, Service and Cleanliness.
These values are expressed, not only in words, but in actions — most notably in that scrupulous attention to detail that has set McDonald's apart from its competitors ever since the early 1950s.
The operating philosophy set them by founder  is as potent today as it was then: ‘You must perfect every fundamental of your business if you expect it to perform well.’
To achieve this, managers have to lead by example.
Indeed, at McDonald's, every manager is also a teacher — someone who can influence, persuade, guide and support staff to set consistent standards of business performance.
For this reason, management is not so much the exercise of power as the empowerment of others.
It calls for excellent team-building skills; the ability to identify individual strengths and weaknesses; the power to generate commitment to shared values; and the willingness to encourage and harness the ideas and creativity of all.
Not surprisingly, McDonald's always promotes from within.
Some 50 per cent of trainee managers joined McDonald's as crew members.
Ability, performance and commitment are the only criteria for promotion.
The evolution of management training at McDonald's has clearly reached new levels of sophistication and effectiveness.
We are witnessing the emergence of a new generation of managers who can create and sustain successful business environments; who can set directions and define roles and authority; who can nurture the skills of their team; and who can maintain a balance between strict controls and the flexibility needed to respond to market conditions and opportunities.
It is an approach to management training and development that has certainly helped McDonald's become a global success story.
With more than 12500 restaurants in 60 countries, a new Mcdonald's restaurant is opened in some part of the world every 14.5 hours.
In the UK alone, Mcdonald's has over 430 restaurants and employs some 26,000 staff.
And the company plans to open 50 new restaurants every year at an investment of between £500000 and £1 million each.
The McDonald's approach to business and training has been widely copied in the retail industry.
But the form of its success means nothing without the spirit that makes it work, and that is an altogether harder thing to copy.
For it is in its spirit and outlook that McDonald's has really shown the way forward.
It is a spirit that has three key components.
the first is the idea that productivity and profit only come from making the most of the people in the organisation.
The result, as we have seen, is a massive investment in formal and informal training at very level, and a fundamental respect for every member of the team.
This respect is summed up by a quote in In Search of Excellence by Tom Peters and Robert Waterman: ‘You know, one of the things that strikes me most about McDonald's is their people orientation.
During the seven years I was at McKinsey, I never saw a client that seemed to care so much about its people.’
The second component is the powerful sense of mission that underpins everything McDonald's does — a mission to set the industry standard for quality, service and cleanliness through an unrelenting attention to detail.
The third component is an openness to change.
By understanding and interacting closely with its market, McDonald's maintains a constant process of innovation.
In fact, it offers more experimental menu items and store formats than any of its competitors.
So, while McDonald's is powerfully committed to its core values, it is constantly looking beyond the practices that made it successful in order to explore new opportunities.
The fact that other quick-service restaurants are increasingly adopting the McDonald's approach to business and training goes some way towards explaining why the sector is growing rapidly even in the midst of recession.
It also explains why the sector is now able to offer some of the best management training in the country, not to mention a structured career path, good rewards, and the chance to develop your potential as a business leader of tomorrow.
Isn't it time you discovered more?
Training the chefs of the future
This year sees the fifth annual Toque d'Or Award competition in the UK.
The Award is progressively becoming recognised as the catering industry's most prestigious and demanding competition for young professionals entering the business, as  marketing and sales manager for Nestlé Foodservice Ltd, explains.
The Toque d'Or Award is an international competition sponsored by the Nestlé Company in 18 countries worldwide.
The important central thread, common to every country in which the competition is held, is the emphasis on quality, whether it be in terms of talent, professionalism or creativity.
Winning the award is a symbol of the excellence that can be attained in catering, and the list of previous winners testifies to this, including many internationally renowned chefs, such as Anton Mosimann and Willi Elsener.
With the ability to style the award to each country's particular needs, Nestlé Foodservice in the UK recognised the opportunity to establish a competition here specially designed to encourage high standards for catering students training to enter the industry.
Willi Elsener, a member of the 1992 Grand Final judging panel, believes that competitions such as Toque d'Or are an excellent way for students to both learn to stand on their own two feet and also work as a team.
‘The work involved in the competition is a vital part of their training, so each student wins in terms of experience gained,’ he says.
The competition is open to final year catering students in full-time education in the UK.
It is designed to test the breadth of the student's knowledge in as wide a range of skills as possible, as they will shortly be facing the even greater demands of the real world outside college.
Craft, theoretical and practical organisational ability — all culminating in a menu that in both visual appeal and taste would rival many top restaurants — are put to the test.
Many catering colleges consider the award to be an ideal opportunity to evaluate their students' progress against other catering colleges.
Tutors regard entry into the competition as a serious part of the students' general training and there is a growing trend to make it a set part of the final year's curriculum.
senior lecturer at Thanet Technical College in Kent, whose team won first prize in the 1992 competition, says that he has used Toque d'Or as a classroom exercise involving the whole group, not just the team who entered.
‘It has been a good and very practical learning experience for the class.’
The competition gives the young chefs of the future an opportunity to demonstrate their abilities before experienced professionals from the industry, who along with judging the competition, provide practical comment on how these young people entering the business can develop.
Recent members of the judging team have included such industry personalities as Prue Leith, chairman of the Restaurateurs Association of Great Britain and Willi Bauer, chief executive of the Wentworth Group.
Although the competition in the UK is for students, the tasks set for the competitors are not any easier than in other countries.
Not only are students asked to demonstrate their craft by selecting, preparing and presenting the best possible three course meal for four to a fixed budget, but equally high standards are demanded in the question paper stages of the competition.
Commenting on the standards of the competition, Willi Bauer, chairman of the 1992 judging panel, said that the young people were the future of our industry.
‘I have been greatly encouraged by our home grown talents who are joining our industry and will be the stars of tomorrow.’
Endorsement of the award has come from many sectors of industry, including Stirling Gallacher, chairman of Sutcliffe Services Group Limited, who says that people are the key to our current and future success as leading contract caterers.
‘To meet the significant rate of our growth we need new people with a firm foundation of catering knowledge and culinary skills.
Personally, I feel that the competition helps strengthen the bridge of practical experience that is so necessary between the classroom and the workplace.
‘It shows that students can reach standards of excellence that are capable of impressing the most critical judges.
By maintaining these standards in a professional career, these students will help build a sound base for the future of the country's catering industry.
What does the Award mean to the winning team?
Each student entering, gains experience and confidence and for the winners, many doors open to them due to the kudos of the event and the talent they have demonstrated.
Winning also brings more tangible rewards.
Nestlé Foodservice awards the significant prize of £5000 worth of catering equipment to the winning college and the individuals in the winning team are each presented with a £300 cheque at a special presentation ceremony and an all expenses paid study trip to Switzerland.
The study trip adds invaluable unique aspects to the students’ culinary knowledge.
Highlights include staying at the famous Hôtel du Lac at Vevey, visiting the Ecole Hôteliere in Lausanne with lunch at the Nestlé headquarters, tours of the Alimentarium Food Museum and the Centre de Dégustation des vins, a visit to the Nestlé chocolate factory at Broc and also a cheese factory at Gruyères.
it can not be claimed that the competition is easy, but the experience is incomparable and the rewards worth fighting for.
Competing in the Grand Final for the 1992 Award were teams from Scarborough, Cumbernauld, Thanet and Birmingham.
Thanet college won the award, but the excitement of the event and the experience gained was rewarding in itself.
Entry forms are distributed each September and, if your college has not received a form, apply now.
Colleges can enter as many teams of two students as they wish, providing they meet all the entry requirements.
At this stage, a menu is submitted, along with a completed multiple choice questionnaire designed to test the wide range of the students' skills.
Students are selected to take part in the four regional finals which involve preparing the menu in cook-offs, and from each regional final a student team is selected for the grand final.
‘It has been very hard work, but I have loved every moment of it,’ was  comment after winning the 1992 Award.
‘I cannot believe it, I have already had so many job offers as a result of taking part in.
It has been very good experience for my future career.’
Training and education
The changes in training and educational provision which were already well on the way in 1991, gained further momentum as the Government's White Papers and legislations concerning both training and education were implemented.
Scottish and National Vocational Qualifications
On 6 January 1992 the Standards of Work Based Competence for the hospitality and catering industry were agreed by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications.
The resulting framework of vocational qualification, s from levels I to IV, is now available to our industry and awarding bodies are working to ensure industry is made aware of the way in which the system will work.
Throughout 1992 meetings were held across the country for representatives of industry and colleges to discuss the implications of the new framework.
Each NVQ [SVQs in Scotland]is a qualification about work, based on standards of competence set by the industry through its lead body.
They differ fundamentally from traditional qualifications, because they give recognition for what people actually achieve at work, rather than merely testing the ability to learn.
NVQs give recognition for putting learning into practice.
The Government has set an objective of having a structure of NVQs which, by the end of 1992, covers 80 per cent of the working population of the UK.
Ranging, at present, from the most basic craft [level I]to junior/first line management [level IV]and with level V standards for more senior management already planned, this is a formidable task for British industry.
It reinforces the Government's aim of a better qualified workforce for the UK.
HCIMA/CGLI liaison as an awarding body for NVQs
HCIMA and CGLi have entered into a partnership to become an awarding body offering NVQs for the hospitality and catering industry.
For catering and hospitality management NVQ level IV there will be joint certification of qualifications and HCIMA will have a key role to play in determining relevant assessment structures for the awards.
At levels I, II and III HCIMA will be involved in agreeing and developing the quality assurance and control procedures for the NVQs awarded by C & g .
A statement of support from HCIMA will be included on the NVQs issued by C & g at these levels.
Following widespread consultations with representatives from industry, C & g and HCIMA will ensure that companies will be able to offer their own training programmes leading to NVQs and will receive full support from C & G and HCIMA staff.
For smaller firms there will be exciting new opportunities to liaise with colleges whose training facilities are being restructured as realistic working environments for the purpose of assessment of competence.
Increasingly it will be possible to develop very flexible delivery arrangements for NVQs, including a mix of assessment in the workplace and in a college environment.
The Further and Higher Education Bill
The second fork of the Government's policy is to vastly expand the opportunities for young people to continue into further/higher education.
The Further and Higher Education Bill implements policies set out in the two White Papers: Education and training for the twenty-first century and Higher education: A new framework.
Thus the division between polytechnics and universities will disappear as both come under common funding councils,[one each for England, Wales and Scotland], for example: Higher Education Funding Councils for universities and polytechnics and further Education Funding Councils for further education colleges.
Polytechnics will be able to call themselves universities and to award degrees and diplomas.
It is the intention that gradually academic and vocational qualifications will be recognised as of equal status and barriers in perception will be removed.
The CNAA, the body which has for many years awarded degrees in polytechnics, will cease operation in September 1992 and will be dissolved in March 1993.
Far more of our 18 and over population will have access to degrees.
Within the further education sector, the FEFCs [Further Education Funding Councils]will take over many of the duties at present the responsibility of local authorities.
Local authorities will continue to be responsible for adult education provision, both vocational and leisure/cultural activities, but all courses for 16–19 years will be the responsibility of FEFCs through the colleges.
Further education colleges will gain new independence from April 1993, and will be responsible for their own budgets.
This will mean that, in order to survive, colleges will have to compete to attract students.
They will have to meet the needs of both students and industry.
The Government's aim is to increase flexibility of delivery and make college education more cost effective.
General National Vocational Qualifications and GSVQs
These are yet another new approach to education and training.
These qualifications, awarded as a result of school studies, will give an introduction to the working world, without having the practical aspects and applications of NVQs.
In England GNVQs in Leisure and Tourism will be the introduction to a very wide span of vocations, including hotel and catering.
HCIMA expressed doubts at the consultative stage about the lack of hotel and catering GNVQs, but little further information is yet available.
GSVQs are mentioned further in the section on developments in Scotland.
Effects on catering education and training
There is more need than ever for employers and colleges to work together to meet the needs of providing sufficient well qualified operatives, supervisors and managers for the industry.
The S/NVQ framework provides a challenging new route whereby those working in the industry can gain a qualification which recognises competence in the workplace.
Large organisations will be able to implement the NVQ system in-house and most already have internal assessors and verifiers trained.
Smaller employers will need to liaise very closely with colleges in working out the balance of training, college and work based assessment that will help employees to achieve vocational qualifications.
At supervisory/management level, the industry still lacks trained personnel; it is important that the hotel and catering courses attract their fair share of the extra young people who will be gaining qualifications, that the programmes of study meet industry needs and that once these qualified people come into the industry they stay and are not lost in the first two or three years.
It should be noted in all these changes that an underlying Government objective is to pass on much of the cost of training to the industry.
The extent of these costs is not yet clear, but if a more efficient and motivated workforce and reduction in staff turnover is the result, industry should see tangible benefits.
The demand for HCIMA's two programmes of study continues to grow, with more centres approved to offer courses.
The Association will carefully monitor the take up of Vocational Qualifications by the industry and the country-wide acceptance of NVQs as nationally recognised qualifications: in the meantime it is apparent that there is a well defined need for flexible and modular provision of learning support and underpinning knowledge for those who are working towards competences, which can be assessed for award of Vocational Qualifications.
The HCIMA programmes provide an excellent route for practitioners seeking to gain Vocational Qualifications.
NCVQ has approved that the HCIMA Certificate study material provides learning support for S/NVQs level III, whilst the Diploma material provides learning support for S/NVQs level IV.
From April 1992, there has been a tax concession on both college fees and the cost of study material which leads to Vocational Qualifications, consequently those financing themselves on HCIMA programmes do not have to pay the tax element of their fees in the first place.
The tax is claimed back from the Tax Office by either the college or the Association, or both.
This can considerably reduce the cost of studying for HCIMA programmes.
Whilst colleges continue to offer HCIMA courses by part-time, block release and in special cases full-time study, by far the greatest development has been in more flexible study modes using the distance learning, self-study packs.
These packs are being used by both industry, colleges and individuals to provide the underpinning learning support for S/NVQs, or as a route to an HCIMA qualification.
As well as colleges who offer a distance learning route, with college support, there are colleges who are offering more structured combinations of self-study and college support to meet individual and industry demand.
Colleges have also recognised the potential of HCIMA Certificate programmes as a means of helping the short term unemployed.
Three centres are providing full-time Certificate programmes for the unemployed with substantial work experience in the industry, who have the opportunity to gain a supervisory qualification.
Another group of supervisors from light manufacturing industry are undertaking a conversion course to catering supervisor.
HCIMA welcomes such initiative and is pleased that the modular structure of the course makes it appropriate to these various study routes.
HCIMA Distance Learning
HCIMA has now developed a full range of distance learning material which can be used in a variety of ways for those seeking supervisory or management qualifications without full or even part-time attendance at college.
The Professional Certificate packages provide all the necessary underpinning learning support for the N/SVQ level III framework of qualifications, whilst the Diploma range covers level IV and beyond.
The material can be used, therefore, by those in work seeking to enhance and broaden their knowledge whilst working towards membership of the professional body and the new vocational qualifications.
The thrust of the Government initiatives in education is to open up access to all of those in employment, and preparing for employment, to gain qualifications.
The professional qualifications material provides stimulating learning support for anyone in the hotel and catering industry.
Accreditation of Prior Learning
In 1990 HCIMA launched its Accreditation of Prior Learning for those seeking recognition of their work-based learning to help them gain full membership.
A national network of Fellows, acting as mentors, has been established and has helped many senior people into full membership on the basis of their proven competence in the workplace.
A handbook for those interested in taking advantage of the scheme has been produced and gives information on the mentors, method of assessment, procedures, portfolio of evidence required and cost.
The handbook is available from the Education Services Department.
HCIMA accreditation of UK first degrees and higher awards
In recent times polytechnics have had greater powers to develop and validate degree programmes internally.
From 1992 the Council for National Academic Awards [CNAA]will cease to have a validating role.
In the past HCIMA's accreditation policy had taken into account the role played by CNAA in ensuring the quality of programmes.
Such areas as staffing and physical resources were monitored by CNAA and, thus, it was considered unnecessary duplication to seek to do this again.
As from 1992, therefore, HCIMA have changed the procedure for the accreditation of new first degree and higher awards.
Accreditation will follow more closely the procedure used by a number of other professional institutes.
HCIMA would wish to form a partnership with an institution seeking accreditation.
In this way the Association is able to help and advise on broad issues relating to the industry and also on current practice in awards made nationally in the hospitality field.
The HCIMA will request that the institution allows us to nominate a member to represent the HCIMA on the Programme Validation Panel.
Where the degree is already validated, the HCIMA will request membership of the Course Monitoring/Review Panel for an agreed period.
The Association will nominate and brief an HCIMA member, selected for their experience both in the industry and in recent higher level education.
The prime objective of the HCIMA representatives in supporting the accreditation of a particular programme is to ensure that it contains all the components essential to the development of enthusiastic and resourceful hospitality managers who are required to make decisions on a broad spectrum of activities.
Issues to be addressed include:
i
Overall quality of the programme
ii
Relevance to the hospitality industry
iii
Programme delivery appropriate to the level of the award
iv
Overall coherence and integration
v
Resources to support the programme.
Where a programme is validated before accreditation is applied for, conditional accreditation will be granted, provided an HCIMA representative is nominated onto the Course Monitoring/Review Panel.
The HCIMA hopes this will provide a positive step in the further development of ties between the professional body of the hotel and catering industry and the institutes of higher education.
Initiatives in Europe
HCIMA has for many years been active in accrediting hotel and catering programmes, both in Europe and around the world.
In response to requests from industry for more information about the nature and level of qualifications awarded throughout the EC, HCIMA raised the question of accreditation with the European Commission.
At a meeting of the Intergroup for Tourism in Strasbourg in November 1992, attended by many senior HCIMA industry members, the issue of taking this task on board was raised.
At about that time a number of hotel-schools who had been involved in looking at accreditation with EURHODIP [a group which has developed a European  hotel diploma]had formed the European Foundation for the Accreditation of Hotelschool Programmes [EFAH].
Their objective is to develop clearly recognisable levels and quality norms for hotelschools in Europe and to accredit programmes.
EFAH's Board of Governors comprisers representatives of industry and the three levels of hotelschools identified.
Given the commonality of objectives with EFAH and encouraged by the Commission, HCIMA has accepted a place on the Board of Governors of the Foundation and has begun work on the development of a pan-European accreditation system.
the European Corpus of Knowledge
Determining the role and scope of managers within the industry is an exercise which the Association first undertook in the 1970s.
The Corpus of Knowledge was developed from the findings of wide ranging research and has provided a basis for all of HCIMA's education initiatives, such as programmes of study for professional qualifications and the national Accreditation of Prior Learning network and the introduction of an Industrial Experience Scheme for teachers.
It has also underpinned the development of many hotel and catering programmes throughout the world.
The Corpus of Knowledge has been updated in the intervening period, but it was clear that the insertion of the UK into Europe with free movement of labour, required a much broader view to be taken of the hospitality manager.
A number of institutions were invited to tender for the contract to carry out research into the needs of the European manager.
The Surrey European Management School and the Department of Management Studies for the Tourism and Hotel Industries at the University of Surrey were successful in their bid.
The University, which has worked previously for the European Commission, are carrying out the research with partners in other member states.
The work will take into account the findings of the Employment Department's functional analysis-based work already undertaken, which resulted in the Occupational Standards published January 1992.
The context of this current research is, however, much broader and will attempt to point to future needs in a pan-European context.
The project is due to be completed in 1993.
In Scotland
Most vocational courses in Scotland fall under the aegis of SCOTVEC [the Scottish Vocational Education Council]which will be responsible for implementing of the Government's recent initiatives on training.
The new vocational qualifications in Scotland will be based on exactly the same lead body standards as the English NVQs.
However, the qualifications awarded in Scotland will be SVQs [Scottish Vocational Qualifications].
During the last year SCOTVEC has entered into partnership with HCIMA, HCTC and BII [The British Institute of Innkeepers — who are only involved in qualifications at levels III and IV]for the award of SVQs.
It will be possible, however, in Scotland to gain an NVQ.
Scotland has also forged ahead in the development of General Vocational Qualifications.
Unlike England [where at present GNVQs in Tourism and Leisure also encompass Hotel and Catering and are therefore very broadly based].,
SCOTVEC has introduced separate GSVQs in catering: these will be made up of existing SCOTVEC modules.
The GSVQs will be offered from August 1992 as pre-vocational courses at levels II and III to full-time students in colleges.