

CHRISTIAN AID SCOTTISH NATIONAL CONFERENCE EVALUATION SHEET
It would help us to plan for the future if you would be so kind as to take a few minutes to fill in this questionnaire.
If possible, please hand the completed questionnaire to the staff before you leave the conference, otherwise please post it to the National Office in Edinburgh.
1.
Timing of Conference
(a)
Is early March a good time of year to hold the conference?
(b)
If another month suits you better please state.
(c)
How often should we hold such a conference?(in years)
(d)
Is Friday evening till Sunday lunchtime too long/short/just right
(e)
Please state preferred day(s) /length
2.
Cost of Conference
(a)
How expensive did you find the conference?
(b)
Would you prefer a shorter conference if it meant paying less?
3.
Content
(a) Was the conference content as much as you expected?
(b) Have we left out anything you expected to be included?
If so, please state
In the following sections please rate 1–5 where applicable, using a circle for enjoyment and a cross for how useful you found it.
(c)
How comfortable were you with methods used?
(d)
Worship throughout Conference
(e)
Friday
If a house-to-house or Street Collection takes place this form must be completed and returned to us as soon as possible.
This is a legal requirement.
Please complete the appropriate columns.
Please send completed form to Christian Aid,
THE BRITISH COUNCIL OF CHURCHES CHRISTIAN AID PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL VOLUNTEER APPLICATION (To be filled in by Area Secretary)
THE BRITISH COUNCIL OF CHURCHES CHRISTIAN AID CHRISTIAN VOLUNTEER To whom it may concern
This is to state that is an accredited volunteer with Christian Aid and has agreed with the appropriate Department at Head Office a specific work arrangement.
Part of our volunteers work is to commend to schools our range of written and audio-visual materials.
We hope you find this a useful resource.
S/he is responsible directly to Christian Aid's area secretary who may be contacted first if any queries arise.
Your local area secretary is:
Any work done by our staff or volunteers in schools is wholly educational, enabling pupils to understand and find creative responses to world justice.
Sometimes schools may choose to raise money for the overseas work we support and we are happy if they do, but this is in no way our purpose in contacting schools.
We would also be grateful for any feed-back on the educational materials we produce for supporting the curriculum, either through our volunteer or direct to Head Office.
Signed  
APPRAISAL REPORT
This report form is available on disc from Personnel.
Name of job holder
Job title
Name of job reporter
Job title
Job holder's Group/Sector
Date
Date of last appraisal
Please refer to the interview preparation notes for job holders and appraisers for details of points to be considered under each of these  headings 
LAST YEAR
Job description
Priorities 
Targets
Standards of Performance (if appropriate)
Standards of Performance (if appropriate)
Achievements
Strengths
How can the job holder build on these strengths to improve his/her performance overall?
Poor performance
Weaknesses
Communications
Interpersonal Skills 
Organisational Skills
Working Conditions
Next year
Priorities
Targets
Standards of Performance (if appropriate)
Training and support
Please list the training the job holder has undertaken during the assessment period.
What training or support can Christian Aid offer the job holder?
Please prioritise these training needs according to the following table:
1.
Important, central to the job holder's current post and urgent.
To take place within three months .
2.
Important, would improve the job holder's performance in his/her current post, should take place within six months .
3.
Not directly related to current post but may improve performance.
May be chiefly important for self development reasons.
Should take place within 12 months .
4.
Not related to the job holder's current post or to CA's work.
Important for self development reasons.
Should be considered for future career development .
Please list here all the action points agreed during the interview and attribute the action to the appropriate party.
AUTHORITY FOR PAYMENT
Christian Aid
To The Finance Department
Please pay to Mercury Communications Ltd the sum of £8.81
In respect of:
Item Code
Amount
Descrip. /Reason (max. 15 chars.)
Another Page?
Date
Signed
FINANCE OFFICE USE ONLY
Supplier A/c No.
Cheque No.
Checked
Date
Batch No.
Sector/Group Head 
FLEXITIME — SCOTTISH AREA STAFF
NAME:
MONTH: WEEK:
Monday Morning Afternoon Evening
Tuesday Morning Afternoon Evening
Wednesday Morning Afternoon Evening
Thursday Morning Afternoon Evening
Friday Morning Afternoon Evening
Saturday Morning Afternoon Evening
Sunday Morning Afternoon Evening
Start
Finish
Hours Worked
Total 
CHRISTIAN AID SELF-CERTIFICATE — SICK LEAVE
1 PERSONAL DETAILS
Name
Address
Date of birth
National Insurance number (If you know it)
2 GIVE DETAILS OF YOUR SICKNESS.
Please say briefly why you are unfit to work.
Words like ‘illness’ or ‘unwell’are not enough.
* Is your sickness due to an accident which happened while you were working for an employer?
Tick one box YES NO
* Is your sickness due to a prescribed industrial disease caused by conditions at work, while you were working for an employer?
Tick one box YES
3 PERIOD OF SICKNESS
Date you became unfit for work
Date you last worked
Time you finished work
Do you expect to be unfit for work for more than 7 days?
YES NO If you ticked ‘YES’, to part 5
4 RETURNING TO WORK
Last day of sickness before starting or seeking work
Date you intend to start work
5 Sign below, and send this form to the Personnel Department.
Remember, if you are sick for a second week, we shall require a medical certificate.
Signature
Date