

INTER-OFFICE CORRESPONDENCE
Subject: Theology & Development Course students.
I enclose a ticket which Mr. Rwaje brought in today.
He, like Samuel Cyuma is slightly concerned that it is only valid up until 23rd September.
I think it is most likely that the Course will be completed by then but because they have to have their final papers in, the week or two before, it may be that they will be staying on to around that time.
Could you perhaps see if it can be adjusted in the same way as Samuel Cyuma's, perhaps to a date in October?
All good wishes.
Subject: Six questions in search of a Manifesto: Scottish Staff Observations
1) The document was considered at our staff meeting in April and was warmly received.
To have a paper laying out clearly what our priorities over the next few years are to be would help to provide the firm direction that an organisation like ours needs to have.
2) Some concern was expressed at the choice of the word ‘Manifesto’.
So far as the staff is concerned the word presented no particular problem, but it was felt that many in the churches would see the matter differently since the term has long-established political association.
No doubt a more acceptable title could be found.
3) The question was asked do we really need such a statement when our ‘creed’ is already explained in the earlier leaflet ‘The Task of Christian Aid’.
While acknowledging the value of this leaflet, it was agreed that a clear statement of our convictions and intentions would be welcomed by the majority of our supporters.
It was further suggested that the principal value of the new statement might be for reference purposes rather than for wide circulation.
A plea was made that it be written in a style which would enable the non-theologically trained to make sense of it.
4) In several places it was felt that the paper provided further evidence of the gap that exists between how we perceive things and how our constituents see them who, for the most part see themselves as the ‘money raisers’— a role they also fulfil for several other organisations as well.
The perceptions about the ‘poor’ and ‘development’as mentioned on page 2, might come as something of a surprise to them!
5) What we mean about campaigning needs to be teased out.
If by it we mean a support system to strengthen and assist those who wish to engage in political lobbying, well and good, but if we are to take on a proper campaigning role as Oxfam has done, then this would require additional staff with the necessary experience and specialisation.
And, once more, would we get away with it?
6) Some of our constituents may be alarmed at the implications of page 3 para 3, not so much on the question of ‘equality’ but of accountability, and the suggestion that Christian Aid should be required to be accountable to our partners would take a lot of explaining.
Further evidence of the ‘gap’ mentioned in 4 above.
7) Page 4 para 4.
It was felt that however frustrating or exasperating our relationships with the churches may be at times, our ‘bias to the churches’ must continue but not at the cost of excluding other ‘efficient’partners who  are non-church.
And isn't there just the possibility of helping our church partners to become more efficient?
8) It was decided to circulate the paper to members of the Scottish Churches Christian Aid Committee for comment at their meeting on June 9.
Their observations will be forwarded soon afterwards.
9) We are grateful to Michael for raising many of the questions and fears about the more ‘enlightened’ of our supporters have occasionally spoken about.
To have our position explained and clearly stated in the form of a manifesto would be very good indeed.
Regards 
Subject: Bristol Festival
Just to say that the trip worked out slightly cheaper than I anticipated at first and have pleasure in returning a little bit from your cheque.
I think it was very worthwhile and certainly on the road home, Densen Mafinyani had an opportunity to engage in considerable debate over the future of Africa!
All good wishes.
Yours 
It seems likely that documents that have hitherto been limited largely to Board discussions will shortly be made more widely available to staff.
Of course they are for internal consideration only, but because there is the intention of some discussion at June CED Conference on Government Joint Funding and on Resource Sharing, I thought these two papers might profitably be circulated as background material.
Subject Scottish National Conference
Thanks for the invitation.
I'd be very pleased to take part.
Subject: Scottish National Conference — 8–9th March 1991
At the meeting of the Planning Group for the National Conference, we decided to have to thematic workshops in the afternoon — one on the Philippines and one on Africa.
I am hoping that we will be able to use two of the students from the Course to be facilitators of these.
As you will see from the enclosed letter, it would be good if you were able to be in touch with Mawe de la Fuent.
He works for a development agency and two of his brothers were killed by Marcos so although he claims to be the least revolutionary of the family, he is fairly well into the issues.
Subject: Christian Aid Scottish National Conference
Just a quick memo to express my thanks for all that you did on Friday/Saturday.
I was very happy about the way things went although extremely apprehensive before the Conference took place since we had so many jigsaw pieces to slot in.
In the last day or two, I have had some very positive comments about it and am most grateful for the amount of work done by all concerned.
I hope to reflect this properly in the next-but-one report that goes to Ken.
All good wishes 
I am pleased we are to meet at 5p.m. or thereabouts at Waterloo on Wednesday, 8th February when I'm down for the Co-ordinators, to take a close look at the programme for our Scottish National Conference on 10–12 March at the Scottish Churches House, Dunblane, in which you, Ingrid Keith and Mauricio Laborde, Chile, are to share.
It will be great to have you.
A draft copy of the conference programme is enclosed and what we are attempting to do is:
1) Under the theme ‘It's time to right wrongs’ we hope to ‘unpack’the ‘Statement of Commitment’, to help the local organisers attending the conference to get a more up-to-date and accurate picture of the role Christian Aid seeks to fulfil.
During the weekend we will be examining some of the key concerns of the statement.
2) We hope that you, Ingrid and Mauricio will play a full part in the conference, but we would specifically ask you to be responsible for
a)
FRIDAY, first session 7.35–9.00 p.m.
This session ‘To strengthen the poor’ is important and sets the tone for the rest of the weekend.
We would like you to spell-out what the words mean for all of us, especially for those in the  local situation where people see their primary role as fundraisers.
Feel free to make your presentation in whatever way is most agreeable to you, using visuals if you so prefer.
Immediately before your ‘slot’ Isabel and Karen will get us all going in a non-threatening way — game, etc. which will gently lead into your section.
b)
As part of your slot we would like you to include an interview/chatshow with Mauricio providing him with an opportunity to say something about his work with S.E.R.
As well as the above, John Wylie would like you to be available to share with him two sections on Saturday, 11.20–12.45: ‘Ending sufferings’ page 3, and 7.00–9.00: ‘Welcoming diversity’page 6.
John will be in touch with you by ‘phone about this.
On Sunday morning 9.15–10.30 ‘Acting Strategically’ will take the form of a forum in which we can all share and no special preparation is needed.
There are one or two other items we can  discuss when we meet on Wednesday, 8th.
Best wishes 
We are glad that you are coming to share in our National Conference on 10–12 March at the Scottish Churches House, Dunblane.
It's a lovely spot and I'm sure you'll enjoy it.
The programme is likely to be as per attached.
We are using as our theme the CAW theme ‘It's time to right wrongs’, which provides an opportunity to ‘unpack’ the Statement of Commitment ‘To Strengthen the Poor’.
On the Saturday 4.30–5.45 we would like you to ‘do’ a session.
The subtitle could be ‘Solidarity’ and could take the form of a game (Star Power) or an activity of some sort.
Could you advise me about this.
Your guidance would be helpful.
Perhaps we could have a chat on the ‘phone about it.
I'll be out of the office till the afternoon on Monday.
Could you give me a call after that, please.
Yours sincerely 
Scottish National Conference, Dunblane
It was such a pleasure to have you share in our National Conference at Dunblane at the weekend.
As you now from your own experience, such events take a long time to plan, and the hope is that it will all come together on the day!
The consensus so far is that the expectations which people came with were fulfilled and that the weekend was most worthwhile providing a lot of new ideas and giving support and encouragement as well.
All of us, conference members and colleagues alike, would like you to know how deeply we appreciated the very full part you took in the conference programme.
Your pleasant and informed approach was welcomed by all, and your willingness to share in the service in the Cathedral gave particular pleasure to the congregation there.
Quite apart from the contribution you made to the weekend programme, it was good to have you with us for your own sake.
We enjoyed your company and hope you will return ere long.
Very many thanks and good wishes
Yours sincerely 
Scottish National Conference, Dunblane
I would like you to know how greatly we valued the very full part you took in our National Conference at Dunblane at the weekend.
The presentation of the Statement of Commitment to any group of people isn't the easiest of tasks to perform, but the gentle and personal way you handled it in the sections for which you had a responsibility was very well done, as we knew it would be.
And your readiness to assume additional tasks like the service in St. Blane's, further helped to make the weekend event worthwhile and enjoyable.
We are very indebted to you, and on behalf of all of us, conference members and colleagues, I send you our warm appreciation.
Quite apart from the contribution you made, it was specially nice to have you for your own sake.
Your companionship and friendship we much enjoyed.
Come again!
Gratefully yours 
Dear Carole
Many thanks for your presence and help with our National Conference at Dunblane at the weekend.
It was great to have you — and, as always, you put on an attractive and generous display of what is on offer from Traidcraft.
It was good to meet your supportive and patient! husband again.
His involvement in Traidcraft does not go unnoticed.
With thanks from us all.
Yours sincerely 
Subject: Training Opportunities
According to last  year's appraisal sheet I should have undergone training in:
(1)
Database
(2)
Assertiveness
(3)
Racism Awareness
My sick leave has obviously interrupted this process and I have missed out on all three.
I am now wondering what possibilities are available to pick up on these again at this stage or in the future.
It also occurred to me today that perhaps one of us in the Glasgow Office ought to be trained in First Aid.
I have not discussed that with the others yet but perhaps it is something to put on the agenda for the future.
Do we have a policy on First Aid?
As you know, I see all appraisal training requests so that I can follow them up as appropriate.
I see from your appraisal report of 13 December that you have asked for training in two areas, as follows:
Further computer training : I have to confess to feeling a bit stumped by this.
As you probably know, after the recent initiative, we don't plan to do any more training for area staff in the near future.
One possibility is for you to set aside time to train yourself (as you've probably done in the past), with structured guidelines from us here.
Perhaps you'd call me so that we can discuss this.
Issues of Development : I see that you and Ian (and someone mysteriously called AS) are planning to work on this together, which is great.
Let me know if there's anything else I can help with.
Looking forward to hearing from you.
Subject: Training
Thanks for your memo of 20/2 re.
above.
I will proceed on the basis of local training in most items, as you suggest.
However it might be a good idea to put my name down for the ‘Understanding Racism’ Course.
I can always remove it later if something better comes up in the interim.
Subject: Matrix list update
We seem to have a number of people in Scotland who have dropped off the bottom of the matrix list.
At the moment, of our ten staff in Scotland, only 7 are showing!
Eleanor Carlin is our part-time Administrative Assistant in the Glasgow office.
Cath George is also part-time Admin.
Assistant in the Perth Office.
In addition, Maggie Lunan is not featured anywhere; she should be down as our Education Secretary — again part-time.
Could you please make these adjustments for the next matrix list which I realise will not be for some time and, in fact, by that time Karen will be off on maternity leave but I leave it to you whether you want to slot in Joan and Jane for that period.
All good wishes 
Subject: Contract Volunteers
I think we have probably been trying to reach each other several times in the last week or two unsuccessfully.
I ought to have brought you a bit more up-to-date with the current situation as far as CVs are concerned here.
Kevin Kenny has come to the end of his time and wishes to be relinquished from the ‘Home & Away’ project.
I am afraid that it has not been a success and that has certainly not been for want of effort from him but I think we just have to write that one off.
At the same time, I am concerned to get Euan Gordon operating.
We have had a lot of delay getting suitable material from John Ranford and Chris Roles regarding Will Aid but I gather that this is now to be ready by the end of the month and hopefully Euan will be starting at the beginning of July if we can plan accordingly.
You will no doubt be hearing from Tony Ashcroft about a new Contract Volunteer that he has recruited — Denise Francis.
Her initial task will be to try and regularise for us all the amount of information that we have about what is sent to which categories of all the Christian Aid materials and then go on to hopefully ‘plug the gaps’ in church contacts.
With every good wish.
Subject: Monthly Report
With December seeing only 2 full weeks activity and with Scotland enjoying its holiday over the New Year I trust Scottish colleagues enter 1991 appropriately refreshed and renewed.
Rather little to respond to I think which doesn't mean that good work has not been done.
I note in particular the first meeting of the National Committee which I was glad to see made a good start.
I am also aware of the work put in to securing a new Glasgow Office — thanks to you and your colleagues for all that you have done at local level.
I am interested that Henk Naber is a useful Contract Volunteer.
If Isabel can include in the time she spends with him developing his skills for a propensity for being slightly more economic in his travel and hospitality arrangements, I guess we'd be even more pleased.
Overall the activities of you and your colleagues show a sure touch for covering a good balance of Scottish initiatives and overall Christian Aid initiatives.
In particular, I wish you well for the National Conference in March to which you will be rushing immediately after our meeting with the SMT on March 8th.
Regards 
Subject: Flexitime
I'm surprised I've had so few reactions but its holiday time and I guess a lot of people have smiled anyway and remembered its the ‘silly season’!
However, to be serious, while flexitime, certainly in the way it is put forward, is what most of us would describe as a ‘complete nonsense’ for area staff, it does embody a legitimate concern.
My belief is that at Co-ordinators Meeting we should examine that concern and discover a workable and economic way of expressing it.
Hence, I give notice of the item for Co-ordinators and hope people may give some preliminary thought about it.
We won't come up with the answer first time at Co-ordinators, but…second time I hope.
Regards 
Subject: Sickness
The monitoring of staff who take time-off due to sickness does not appear to be working well.
Personnel is rarely told if someone has been off sick.
We now are setting into motion a new system, whereby the PAs to the Head of Groups/Sectors keep copies of the Christian Aid self-certificate form and should ensure that as soon as a member of staff returns from their sick leave they fill it in.
A copy should then be sent to Personnel for our files so we can keep an accurate record of the time taken for sickness.
If a member of staff is sick for more than 7 days they must provide a medical certificate.
I have sent out a memo to all staff reminding them of the procedure for sickness.
Please find attached copies of the self-certificate form, more are available from Personnel should you run out.
I hope this new system works and is helpful to all of us.
Subject: Sickness
Jean Margaret's memo 17.1.89 re sickness, you need to make clear that Area Staff inform you of any days sickness they have and to ask you for a form.
From the memo it looks as though you ask me for the form as P.A. to Head of Group.
This is not so.
Subject: Partner in Residence paper
This was discussed at our Staff Meeting on 27th March 1991.
There was general appreciation of the paper as a good and positive summary and no detailed comments were made.
It is perhaps worth mentioning and passing on through SMT that the Partnership Sub Committee of the National Committee discussed this at their first meeting and made the following points (reflected in the Minute of SCAC 19th March 1991).
1) The  desirability to have a Partner in Residence in Scotland has a way of enabling meaningful contact to be made between supporters here and Partners overseas.
2) The need for someone to work within our community as a challenge to attitudes and reflecting perceptions of those overseas rather than making us feel comfortable.
3) Considerable interest is being shown by the Church of Scotland in a joint venture with Christian Aid.
It is hoped that someone might be found from Africa.
Yours 
Subject: Partner in Residence paper
I forgot to add a covering note in sending Jenny's paper to you a day or two ago.
Would you note that the subject will come back to SMT on April 12th.
(SMT Meeting minutes 22.2.91)
This should mean you will have time to make any observations you wish from your staff meetings.
I would like to have your comments please in time for that SMT — you can bring them with you on April 10th. at our next (first) Area Staff Management Team ASMT Meeting!
Dear Colleagues,
Many thanks to all those who made suggestions about the draft paper ‘The Task of Area Staff’.
You will see that almost without exception they have been included in this final document.
I hope you feel as I do, that it now provides a useful description of the contribution Area Staff make to Christian Aid's overall task — I thought you might wish to retain a copy.
Regards 
NEWS RELEASE PRESS OFFICE 
DUMMY PRESS RELEASE
HAITIAN CANE CUTTERS BENEFIT FROM HORNEBOROUGH'S LABOURS
Haitian sugar-cane cutters in the Dominican Republic, who suffer bleak working conditions will be able to improve their quality of life, helped by the efforts of Christian Aid supporters in Horneborough.
Thousands of Haitians are forced, through unemployment, to migrate to the neighbouring Dominican Republic to cut sugar for as little as 90 pence a day.
Protected prices for beet sugar produced in Europe ensure that the international market price for sugar is low, forcing down the wages of the Haitian workers.
With the help of Christian Aid supporters in the UK, the cane cutters have dug wells, built schools and improved living conditions in their communities.
This year, Horneborough's Christian Aid committee hopes to help more Third World communities when they launch Christian Aid Week at the shopping complex in the High Street, on Saturday May 15.
Events kick off at 10.30am and include children's games, sponsored walks, bric-a-brac stalls and live music, as well as the usual tin rattling.
Mayor Martin Greene and Sophie Sullivan of Radio Horneborough will launch the week (photographers please note: photo-call at 10.15 am in The Mall).
Last year Horneborough Christian Aid committee raised £1,012 for projects in over 70 countries.
Local committee organiser Angela Jones said: ‘Thanks to the generosity of the people of Horneborough we raised £1,012 for the poor.
This is the biggest amount raised so far but this year we hope to raise even more’.
For more information concerning the launch or other events in Horneborough contact Mrs Marjorie Cottingham on  evenings.
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST
Burkina Faso and Ghana
Abiy Hailu, Project Officer for West Africa, and Jacky Repila, Project Assistant, will be travelling to Burkina Faso from May 8 to 29.
They will visit projects funded jointly by Christian Aid and the British government.
In Ghana they will meet and the British government.
In Ghana they will meet representatives of the Evangelical Presbyterian Church.
James Oporia-Ekwaro, Head of the Africa and Middle East Group, will visit Ghana from June 9 to 25 to attend the Council of Churches of Ghana's Round Table meeting.
He will also meet representatives of the Committee for Churches' Participation in Development.
Ethiopia and Eritrea
The Rev Michael Taylor, Christian Aid's Director, and Sarah Hughes, Project Officer for the Horn of Africa, will visit Eritrea and Ethiopia from June 3 to 18.
They will see the work of Christian Aid-funded projects in Eritrea and attend the final meeting of the Emergency Relief Desk, a cross-border consortium which is now closing down in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Ama Annan, Journalist for the Africa/Middle East Group, will visit Eritrea and Ethiopia from April 9 to 18.
She will report on preparations for Eritrea's national referendum on April 23.
Mozambique
Angela Cunningham, Project Officer for Southern Africa, and Gillian Peace, Assistant Project Officer for Southern Africa, will be visiting Mozambique from April 19 to 25 to attend a meeting of the Council of Churches of Mozambique (CCM).
Gill will be going on to the Namarroi area to take part in an evaluation with the CCM.
Namibia
Cindy Berman, Assistant Project Officer for Southern Africa, will visit Namibia from May 15 to 31 to meet staff of the Namibia Development Trust, the Council of Churches of Namibia and the Nyae Nyae Development Foundation, an organisation which works with Bushmen's communities.
Sierra Leone and Senegal
James Oporia-Ekwaro is to visit the Council of Churches of Sierra Leone's Refugee Programme.
Sudan
Sarah Hughes, Project Officer for the Horn of Africa, will attend a general meeting of the Sudan Emergency Operations Consortium (SEOC) in April.
The Consortium is to review its work of delivering food into southern Sudan and make plans for the next nine months.
Uganda and Tanzania
Jonathan Nayuguhora, Project Officer for Central and East Africa, returns from a visit to Uganda and Tanzania on May 2.
In Uganda he is visiting the Ugandan National Council of Women, an umbrella organisation which supports  women's groups throughout the country, and the Ugandan Women's Credit and Finance Trust, which finances small businesses.
In Tanzania he is attending an evaluation and annual conference of the Council of Churches of Tanzania (CCT) and visiting projects funded by Christian Aid.
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
Hong Kong and the Philippines
Margaret O'Grady, Project Officer for East Asia and the Pacific, is in Hong Kong and the Philippines until April 24.
She is meeting Christian Aid partners to gauge their views on the future of Hong Kong.
Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia
Kevin McCullough, Youth Education Adviser, and Pauline Ballaman, Area Secretary for South-east London, will take part in a visit to Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia from April 7 to April 29, organised by Coopération Internationale pour le Développement et la Solidarité (CIDSE), an international group of church-related agencies.
Cambodia and Thailand
Fiona Thomas, Project Officer for South-east Asia, will visit Cambodia and Thailand from April 12 to 22.
In Phnom Penh she will have discussions with development workers to assess the situation in the country in the run-up to democratic elections scheduled for May 23 to May 28.
In Thailand she will take part in an ecumenical meeting which the Burma Council of Churches will attend.
Fiji and Hong Kong
Michael Hawkes, Head of the Asia/Pacific Group, will visit Fiji and Hong Kong from April 25 to May 10.
In Fiji he will participate in a meeting of the Pacific Conference of Churches and the Christian Conference of Asia.
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Bolivia
Sophia Tickell, Project Officer for the Andes, will return on April 19 from Bolivia, where she has been researching the impact of structural adjustment and other economic reforms encouraged by the World Bank and IMF.
She is also visiting cotton and sugar workers' unions in the eastern tropical plains, where cholera is widespread.
Brazil
Domingos Armani, Project Officer for Brazil, is visiting the country from March 26 to April 14.
He is going to see  environmental projects which help farmers to use their land in a sustainable way and women's groups working in Brazil nut factories.
Two Brazilians working with the homeless in Sao Paulo, Maria Magdelena Aleves and Adolfo Oliveira e Silva, are coming to Britain from May 20 to June 5.
They work with some of Brazil's estimated eight million street children and with a group of slum dwellers who recycle paper.
The Caribbean
Cecilia Millan, Project Officer for the Caribbean, and Wendy Tyndale, Head of the Latin America and Caribbean Group, are going to Trinidad, Grenada, St Vincent, Dominica, Barbados and Jamaica from April 23 to May 10.
They will go to an agricultural co-operative selling spices, a sugar workers' action centre, a project working with women employed in free trade zones and an agricultural diversification project, among others.
Colombia
Sarah Steward, Journalist for the Latin America and Caribbean Group, returned form Colombia on April 1.
She accompanied a British film crew investigating the killing of street children who are victims of drug-related violence.
Nicaragua
Sara Burns, Fundraiser for the Latin America and Caribbean Group, is going to Nicaragua from April 15 to May 8 to see coffee co-operatives and urban community development centres.
ends  
EMBARGOED FOR 00.01am, TUESDAY, MAY 4
CHRISTIAN AID SLAMS BRUSSELS BEEF CARVE-UP
Christian Aid is launching a campaign to stop cheap European beef being ‘dumped’ in west Africa and destroying the livelihoods of millions of local cattle farmers.
A report, ‘Brussels Beef Carve-Up’(available on request), will be published on Tuesday, May 4.
Author, Peter Madden and British beef farmer, Chris Jones, return to the UK on Friday, April 30 from a fact-finding visit to Burkina Faso, west Africa.
Since 1984 dumping beef in west Africa has cost EC taxpayers £280 million and risked the livelihoods of four million west African farmers.
But exports of cheap beef to west Africa account for less than half of one per cent of total EC beef production.
‘Beef dumping destroys people's livelihoods, prevents long term development and harms the environment’, says Peter Madden.
EC beef exported to west Africa sells for as little as a quarter of the price shoppers in Britain must pay.
‘Since the international dumping started, we are no longer able to sell our animals,’ says Jean-Marie Kabore, a government official in Burkina Faso.
EC dumped beef is up to 50 per cent cheaper than local west African beef.
Christian Aid is joining with other EC agencies to lobby national governments, the European Parliament and the European Commission.
The agency wants an end to EC beef dumping in west Africa and trade protection for cattle farmers there.
end