

The Lower Orders
The "lower orders" made up the bulk of the population.
Describing them in more specific terms is a social historian's nightmare.
The "common people" has been popular but is no less general.
The "labouring poor" covers the majority who did work and who were less than comfortably off, but the truly poor were usually so because they could not work or could not get enough work, while many skilled journeymen earned more than small-holding freeholders.
 "Working class" is anachronistic in implying a stage in class formation and consciousness which had hardly been reached even by 1815.
Its plural, "working classes" , allows for differentiation and even hierarchy among the lower orders but still reflects nineteenth- rather than eighteenth-century usage.
In a book spanning the years 1750 to 1850, the present writer opted for "labouring classes" .
It is still my preference.
For the most part the lower orders depended on selling their labour.
For an artisan elite it was skilled labour power sold at a premium, but for most men and almost all working women it was unskilled labour.
Only a small fraction would elude this category if we accept that, contrary to much contemporary opinion, paupers were largely made up not of a delinquent or a wilfully dependent population but of those who could not work either through incapacity or age, or who could not, in the vagaries of the labour market, find work.
Of the divisions of English society suggested by Defoe in 1709 —
The great, who live profusely The rich, who live plentifully The middle sort, who live well The working trades, who labour hard, but feel no want  The country people, farmers, etc. who fare indifferently The poor who fare hard The miserable, that really pinch and suffer want.
— we are concerned with all but the first three, as he clearly meant poor small-holders by "farmers" in his fifth category.
Defoe provided a further, more useful categorisation in 1728.
Those concerned in the meaner and first employments are called in common, working men or labourers, and the labouring poor such as the mere husbandman, miners, diggers, fishers and in short , all the drudges and labourers in the several productions of nature or of art.
Next to them, are those who, though labouring perhaps equally with the other, have yet some art mingled with their industry, and are to be particularly instructed and taught how to perform their part, and those are called workmen or handicrafts.
Superior to these, are the guides or masters, in such works or employments, and those are called artists, mechanics or craftsmen; and in general all are understood in this one word mechanics; such are clothiers, weavers etc. handicrafts in hardware, brass, iron, steel, copper etc.
 "Mechanic" was not the only term used to describe skilled workmen.
 "Artificer" was then used more widely than in its later application to the royal dockyards and the Navy.
 "Artisan" could embrace many independent craftsmen trading in their own product from their own shops, but it usually covered as well those skilled manufacturers dependent on work put out by merchant capitalists and wage-earning journeymen on employers' premises.
In short, those who claimed possession of a trade.
What proportion of the labouring classes did they comprise?
In 1759 Joseph Massie estimated that 228,000 families were supported by metal, wood and textile manufactures.
He estimated that below them were 462,000 families of labourers and cottagers, 60,000 dependent on the earnings of common seamen and 18,000 on those of common soldiers.
This would suggest that around 30 per cent of the "living-out" labouring classes were to some extent skilled, but if living-in servants of all classes are included the proportion would shrink to a quarter and if unskilled "manufacturers" are removed, we can conclude that at least a fifth of the men of the labouring classes of the eighteenth century were more or less skilled, that is had something other than "common" labour power to  offer on the labour market.
The true fraction is higher, but no eighteenth-century listing distinguished between specialist and general farm labourers.
The number of shepherds, stockmen, etc. is simply not known, but it is still the case that employed artisans made up a significant proportion of the urban male population.
Dr Linebaugh has discovered that around 40 per cent of those hanged at Tyburn in the middle years of the eighteenth century had completed apprenticeships and a further 20 per cent had at least begun one (see pp. 230–1) Even in London, the greatest centre of artisan manufacture, not all apprenticeships led to a skilled trade — the unfortunate climbing chimney boys for example— but it would seem reasonable to suggest that around half of the working men of the capital were to some degree skilled, in the sense of selling specialised labour.
They are the fraction of whom we know most.
They were more literate, more organised, more articulate and more regularly employed.
We know less of common labourers and less again of working-class women.
The fully independent craftsman owning the materials on which he worked and selling the product of his own labour was much in a minority by the middle of the eighteenth century.
There are, however, other degrees of "independence" .
The control of the out-working artisan or small-workshop craftsman over the rhythm and intensity of his working week was one which survived, for the most part, until the factory age.
But by a proud assertion of "independence" , an eighteenth-century artisan more likely would have been referring to his ability to maintain a wife and family at a proper standard without recourse to charity or poor relief.
When, in 1808, the cotton weavers were forced to work a sixteen-hour day for a subsistence wage, they complained bitterly: "there never was a time before the present when the workman could not live by his trade" .
Living by his trade meant more than surviving.
It meant the ability to educate and supervise his own children rather than be driven to place them in the mill, and to preserve a customary life-style.
The compositors put the matter clearly in 1810.
The profession of a man should always be equal to the support of himself and family in a decent way.
They should be supplied with not  merely what will preserve animation, but what custom has rendered necessary for their comfort.
When crisis hit the watch-making trade in 1817, the distressed watch makers looked back on prouder days when, if misfortune did befall one of their number, the "trade" not the poor rate would have taken care of him.
[Around 1800]persons…were enabled by their skill and industry to maintain themselves and families in a state of comfort and respectability; and to keep their own houses and pay taxes, scot and lot, and contribute towards the maintenance of other persons in their profession, who were either sick or in distress, so that it was scarcely known that any person in this trade ever applied for parochial relief.
THE "ARTISAN CULTURE" 
Clearly, any notion of a distinctive "artisan culture" is a conditional one.
As a description of a life-style and material standard it is applicable to times of normal and good earnings but may lose its distinctive characteristics in trades under pressure of falling incomes and growing insecurity.
This was not simply from poverty but also because such times were often associated with longer hours of working, which pressurised leisure.
It was leisure as well as material gain which marked the "golden ages" .
Radcliffe's description of the period 1788–1803 for Lancashire cotton weavers mingles experience and myth but conveys something of the style of the good times: "Their dwellings and small gardens clean and neat — all the family well clad — the men each with a watch in his pocket, and the women dressed to their own fancy — the church crowded to excess every Sunday — every house well furnished." 
Samuel Bamford's father was a muslin weaver at the time.
He was full of book knowledge and interested in mathematics and astronomy.
He could play the flute and compose verse.
Bamford remarks that such talents were "not often possessed by men of his condition in society" at that time and that he stood "far above his rustic  acquaintance in the village" .
Before experiencing a Methodist conversion, Bamford senior had been a noted drinker and wrestler, but even at that time had had a taste for books.
He may have been unusual, but that would lie in the range of his talents rather than in possessing any individual one of them.
During such periods of high earnings weavers could allow their children an education.
It has been suggested that literacy levels in these weaving villages were higher than they were to be in the industrial towns of south Lancashire a generation later.
It is certainly possible to talk of an "artisan culture" characterised by "independence" , by leisure interests which could embrace the "improving" , high levels of literacy, general awareness and a mutuality expressed though trade societies and a variety of clubs.
William Hutton in his account of Birmingham published in 1781 described the "low amusements" of the "humbler class" : the wakes — "completely suited to the lowest of tempers" — bull baiting, skittles and ale.
He also describes "perhaps hundreds" of clubs among the artisans, including building and capital clubs as well as book clubs.
Francis Place described a similar situation among London's artisans.
Such life-styles were, however, fluctuating in two senses.
For any particular trade a period of bad times could change things, and secondly, some trades could experience a permanent decline, leaving members with only a fading memory of better times.
Professor Hobsbawm's argument for an "aristocracy of labour" among nineteenth-century skilled workers depends upon the kind of material and cultural conditions and status assumptions which can certainly be found in the cases of some eighteenth-century crafts, but fluctuations in fortune make the idea less firmly applicable.
If a "respectable" artisan culture was emerging in late eighteenth-century England, was it coming about by a process of separation from a more embracing "culture of poverty" which included the unskilled and casual labourer, the unemployed, the vagrant and the criminal?
The culture of deprivation and poverty, of violence, crime and prostitution was an evident feature of eighteenth-century London, but how far removed from it were the city's artisans?
Some trades were better than others, "honourable" as opposed to "dishonourable" , and within some trades there were differences between a quality and a poorer end.
The West End/East End distinction in  trades like shoe making and tailoring was well established by the end of the eighteenth century.
Francis Place was the very type of the journeyman striver after independence and status, but he held off less reputable associations at only arm's length.
His father had been something of a rough diamond, barely literate and excelling in "drinking, whoring, gaming, fishing and fighting" .
The young Francis had been educated with the sons of the better class of tradesmen.
These youths were the friends and companions of his apprenticeship years.
"The class to which I belonged was by no means the lowest.
The boys with whom I associated would not keep company with Journeymen excepting in their workshops, nor with lads whose fathers were not housekeepers."
They considered themselves above parish apprentices, yet of the fellow members of the cutter club with whom he rowed on the Thames, Place recalled that the stroke was hanged for a murder he did not commit, not being able to provide an alibi as he was committing a burglary at the time, while the cox was transported for a robbery.
Both of these young men had been printers.
Most of the other apprentices robbed either their masters or other persons.
This club was "no better than many others" .
Place's first master had three daughters who were prostitutes, a son who picked pockets and another who was a different sort of thief.
His sister married a butcher who was a member of a family which kept a shop as a front for dealing in stolen goods.
This brother-in-law was eventually hanged for highway robbery.
Place believed that only since his youth in the 1780s had London's artisans begun to improve into a more "respectable" class.
He warned those who read his recollections: The circumstances…
I have mentioned relative to the ignorance, the immorality, the grossness, the obscenity, the drunkenness, the dirtiness, and depravity of the middling and even of a large portion of the better sort of tradesmen, the artisans, and the journeymen tradesmen of London in the days of my youth, may excite a suspicion that the picture I have drawn is a caricature.
Subsequent improvement he attributed to better policing, education, including Sunday schools, stricter moral values and the availability of cotton underwear.
He was sure, too, that drunkenness had declined, remarking of the tailors: I should say, they like all other journeymen, are greatly improved in morals.
Twenty years ago few tailor shops were without a bottle of gin: the men drank as they liked; one kept the score, and the publican came at certain times to replenish the gin bottle.
I suppose there is not a shop in London that has one now.
 "Now" was 1824 and Place was not the only witness before a select committee in that year to make this point.
Print workers too were said to have improved in character: "a printing office was like a public house on a Monday when I was an apprentice, and now we have no drinking at all" .
The engineers were also said to have become better dressed, improved in their conduct and manners and much less given to drink: "they are decidedly better men" .
There was a dissenting opinion on the hatters but, from another source, William Lovett, we learn of a delayed improvement among the cabinet makers.
Place was further of the opinion that what he described for London went for the country as a whole.
While artisans certainly had better opportunities than had most of the lower orders, it is probably unwise to insist that a very wide behavioural gap separated them from the "crowd" , at least until the last years of the eighteenth century.
To write of male artisans is tautologous.
In the eighteenth century working-class women worked.
In the Bedfordshire village of Cardington in 1752 the activity rate among females of age to work was a very high 82 per cent.
But skill was a gendered concept.
The evidence strongly suggests that it had become increasingly so since the seventeenth century.
Campbell's survey of London trades in 1747 lists only a handful of female crafts all paid wages well below male trades.
Two of them, mantua-making and millinery, he explicitly linked with prostitution.
Several new female occupations which emerged in the eighteenth century, such as the hand-decorating of china or hand printing of cottons, demanded great dexterity and control.
They were well paid for women's work, but brought neither the status nor pay of male artisans.
Bridget Hill has headed her chapter on women's work in the eighteenth century: "Ignored, unrecorded and invisible." 
It is a fair enough summary of what we know about the working lives of most women.
Women were important to the economy in general and especially so in manufacturing.
In textiles more women were employed than men.
However the modish concept of "proto-industrialisation" (above pp. 4–5) has led to a dominant image of women's work as having been hidden because in rural cottage manufacturing it, as with the work of children, was subsumed in a family unit of production in which it was neither separately waged nor described.
This pattern has come to be considered as something of a pre-industrial norm.
It was, after all, to be found not only in textile manufacture, but in nailmaking and some branches of the metal smallware trade.
These are the areas of manufacture to which the proto-industrialists have largely confined their researches.
In fact many, almost certainly most, working-class women worked other than in their husband's employment.
They contributed small earnings to supplement the husband's main wage.
They were contributors to a family wage rather than independent earners, but they were not members of a family unit of production.
The vast majority of working-class women worked, but not in an occupation shared by husbands or fathers.
Even when they worked in the same industry they were often employed in quite different processes: in copper mining for example at the surface not underground, and were separately waged.
A study of women's occupations in London for the period 1695 to 1725 has found only 26 from a sample of 256 women who shared the occupation of their spouse and these were usually involved in retailing.
The working-class wives of early eighteenth-century London earned from charring, laundry, nursing, making and mending clothes, hawking, silk-winding and in the catering and victualling services: The great majority of women were unable to work in male trades and, since nearly three quarters of women wanted to or had to work for a living, they necessarily competed intensely for the work which was left, much of it of a casual nature and none of it organised by gilds and livery companies.
Few apart from servants and those running retailing shops would have expected to have been employed the whole year through.
A description of 1678 is so close to the kind of situation which Mayhew would give of London in the mid-nineteenth century, that it must be taken as applying just as much to the eighteenth: a poor woman that goes three days a week to wash or scoure abroad, or  one that is employed in nurse-keeping three or four months in a year, or a poor market-woman who attends three or four mornings in a week with her basket, and all the rest of the time these folks have little or nothing to do.
The problem was almost certainly worse and more rapidly deteriorating in the countryside, for most towns offered a greater range of casual opportunities and some offered special localised employment, such as glove making in Worcester or Ludlow.
The larger households in town and country seem to have had washdays, not weekly, but even monthly, as Parson Woodforde did.
Heating water etc. to cope with large quantities of laundry made for a periodic need to bring in extra labour over that maintained in the household.
The wife of a Sussex shopkeeper paid a woman 18d (7.5p) in 1760 for coming in for two days, while Eden in 1794 reported that Lincolnshire women who went out to wash earned 6d to 8d (2.5 to 3p) a day.
Such women would almost certainly have evaded recording in any listing of "occupations" .
Most commonly young women entered, and so long as they remained unmarried, stayed in domestic service.
They and male servants were "hidden" in a real sense.
Neither Gregory King, Joseph Massie or Patrick Colquhoun listed living-in servants as a group.
They were enumerated in the "families" of those they served from the aristocracy through the gentry and middle class to the farmers and shopkeepers.
In 1767 Jonas Hanway thought that one in thirteen of London's population was a domestic servant.
He revised this to one in eight in 1775, a population of 80,000.
In 1806 Colquhoun thought there were were 910,000 in England and Wales of whom 800,000 were female.
For the young woman it was the obvious choice.
As Sir John Fielding put it in 1758: The infinite variety of professions, trades, and manufactures joined to the army, navy and services, leave few men idle, unless from choice; whilst women have but few trades, and fewer manufactures to employ them.
Hence it is, that the general resource of young women is to go to service.
Increasing demand was largely met by country girls.
The daughters of small farmers were best esteemed, but they were declining and the supply was made up from the cottages of artisans, shopkeepers and labourers.
Servants were of course boarded.
Higher servants  might get £10 a year on top but the lower servant girls only £2.
Over 60 per cent of female servants in a London sample 1750 to 1760 received between £3 and £6.
Rates outside London were lower.
A considerable proportion, perhaps around a quarter in London, stayed in domestic service to rise up the steps of the profession.
The cost, or perhaps the choice, was to stay unmarried.
For most domestic servants though, the occupation was a temporary life-cycle one.
Of a sample of 696 women derived from London settlement examinations 1750 to 1760, almost 60 per cent were between 15 and 29 years old, with only 10 per cent in their forties.
Some married well, but most married back into the working class from which they had come.
Many after all had served in households not much better than their own, for servant-keeping reached well down the social scale.
Two-thirds of the London sample were employed in the homes of artisans, publicans and victuallers.
Most were hired annually, and the employment did give young women a measure of choice and relative economic independence.
Employers were changed regularly.
Those who left service for marriage were as often as not entering an economically less secure situation: rarely one in which they could expect to be "kept" in comfort.
They were advised in 1743: You cannot expect to marry in such a manner as neither of you shall have occasion to work, and none but a fool will take a wife whose bread must be earned solely by his labour and who will contribute nothing towards it herself.
Engels was to remark that since property was not a consideration, only the proletariat could marry for love.
They could and often did, but that does not mean that practical considerations could be ignored: as a line in one of John Clare's poems has it: "Love without money brings winter for life" .
Even small dowries mattered.
A young Cornish shoemaker married at the time he was setting up on his own: "his wife's immediate fortune was ten pounds — a sum to him at that time, of great importance" .
That does not mean he would not otherwise have married a woman, in whom, according to his son, "he found an efficient substitute for his sister's domestic management, and a helpmate ready to second all his exertions" .
This autobiography has nothing to say of courtship, but that, as Dr  Vincent has suggested, could well be because working-class autobiographers did not judge it a subject their readers wanted to know about, and many of them in any case lacked the command of an emotional language to describe their feelings.
Samuel Bamford, the Lancashire weaver, has plenty to say of both serious romance and of dalliance in his youth at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
He wrote love-letters for his less literate friends, as did William Lovett growing up in a fishing village at the other end of England.
Both of these well-known working-class autobiographers wrote of courtship and its rituals.
There is no reason at all to suppose they are unrepresentative in this respect.
There is strong evidence to believe that Bamford was representative in another respect: their first child was present at the wedding.
On the basis of an 8-month marriage to baptism gap in the parish registers, it has been estimated that more than 40 per cent of eighteenth-century brides were pregnant.
Locally levels could be even higher.
The prevalence of sexual intercourse before marriage is clearly indicated.
Historians have not suggested that this implies promiscuity.
Rather it suggests that intercourse was normal once a couple began to "keep company" and considered each other "promised" .
Pregnancy thus determined the timing rather than the fact of marriage.
That is, assuming formal church marriage was intended at all .
Bridget Hill has remarked that what constituted marriage among the eighteenth-century lower orders was "anything but clearly defined" , especially in the first half of the century before the passing of Hardwicke's Marriage Act.
It seems clear that a wide range of liaisons, some permanent, others later resolved one way or the other, existed in both rural and urban areas.
Nor is it clear that increasing sophistication, defined by literacy, or increasing religiosity, as brought for example to some communities by Methodism, made much difference in this respect.
POVERTY AND THE POOR LAW
By later standards and by those of their middle- and upper-class contemporaries, most labouring people were poor.
But how many were unable to exist on their earnings without some degree of supplementation from poor relief?
Obviously this population was not constant.
The price of bread cereals, on which labouring families spent a vast proportion of their wages, fluctuated wildly.
Using the most fundamental measure of poverty, the "breadline" , Professor Hay has estimated that over the years 1760 to 1802 in a normal year around 10 per cent of Staffordshire families would have been unable to buy sufficient bread over the year even if they had spent their whole earnings on it.
In years of high prices 20 per cent would have been in this situation, while in extremely hard years, such as 1801, the proportion would have exceeded 40 per cent.
This takes no account of other basic living costs like housing, clothing and medical care.
Average cereal prices were seriously higher after 1760 than they had been in the early eighteenth century so there was less fluctuation around the breadline in the first half of the century, but the relief-dependent population was even so probably not much below 10 per cent in most parishes in most years and capable of rising much above that from time to time in localities affected by short-term unemployment of the kind that manufacturing slumps could bring even to the pre-industrial economy.
Only a small section of the labouring poor was wholly or permanently dependent on poor relief, predominantly the old, the sick and the orphaned who made up the "impotent" as opposed to the "able-bodied" .
Even quite elderly people, male or female, could often earn something towards their maintenance, while the practice of assisting low-wage earners with large families of young children was widespread.
Gregory King, in his description of the population at the end of the seventeenth century, made a famous distinction between those who "increased" and those who "diminished" the wealth of the kingdom.
Into the latter category, embracing all those groups whose annual expenditure exceeded their earnings, he put more than half of the population.
But the average degree of deficiency was relatively small.
For labouring people and out-servants the average income per head is given as £4 10s (£4.50) against an expenditure of £4. 12s (£4.60), while for cottagers and paupers, whom he considered to make up almost a quarter of the population, the respective figures are £2 and £2 5s (£2.25).
It has recently been suggested that King overstated the numbers of the really poor because he used too large a multiplier for family size, and that perhaps their proportion of the population was nearer to a seventh in most years.
But at least a quarter lived in some kind of poverty, even if the degree of their deprivation stopped short of actual destitution.
Women were more likely than men to be dependent on poor relief.
In 1724 the Vicar of Piddletown in Dorset listed the inhabitants of his village house by house.
As well as noting occupations, he made occasional comments on specific instances of poverty.
In one house lived a "maiden" of seventy along with a "poor and lame widow" and two sisters of sixty-five and fifty-nine.
They were "all poor and maintained by the Parish" .
In another house lived two widows, one with a daughter of twenty-eight and the other with one of nineteen.
This household is described as "very poor" .
In a third house lived a deserted woman — "her husband lives from her" ; she had two children out at service but had five still living at home.
She was described as a "poor woman" .
Her family is described as "infirm" , and this may explain why even with two of her daughters grown women in their twenties the family was able to earn little, although it may also reflect the fact that earning opportunities for women were so poor that even able-bodied spinsters could not wholly maintain themselves.
Old age and infirmity could come to men and women alike.
A household consisting of a seventy-year-old man, his sixty-three-year-old wife and a thirteen-year-old grandson was described as poor, as was that of Thomas Stumey, "an ancient man and a cripple" .
Life-cycle poverty was a condition not confined only to the old.
The first years of marriage with dependent infants and according severe earnings restrictions on wives were commonly difficult until the children were old enough to contribute.
A carpenter and his wife with five children aged from three to fifteen are described as "poor" , as was the family of a miller — an occupation not usually associated with poverty — who had four children in a similar age range.
Seventy years later an even more detailed survey of another  Dorset town was made.
It confirms the pattern of poverty, although its level would seem to have risen significantly.
In Corfe Castle women employed in the local out-work manufacture of knitting stockings could expect to earn only around a shilling or one shilling and sixpence (5-7½p) a week.
This survey made in 1794 reveals that out of a population of 1,239, 370, almost a third, received some form of parish pay.
Women again figure prominently.
In one house three spinsters, all younger than fifty, earned only 4s 6d (22½p) between them, but presumably gained something from the rent paid by their lodger, a clay worker on 10s (50p) a week.
Jane Webber, a sixty-six-year-old spinster, was the keeper of another house; she earned a shilling a week but had eight lodgers.
They can have afforded her little in the way of rent.
They comprised a widowed mason with two daughters, who was himself dying of consumption, and a widow of forty with four daughters aged from two to fourteen.
Their combined earnings were 3s 6d (17½p).
Clearly this entire composite household was dependent on poor relief.
So too was Hannah Trent, who inhabited another cottage.
She was only twenty-eight, but, having been deserted by her husband and left with children of one and two years old, she could earn only 2s 6d (12½p) a week by taking in washing.
As in Puddletown seventy years earlier, large families needed income supplementation.
A clay cutter who earned 10s (50p) a week, to which was added a further 5s 6d (27½p) from his two teenage sons, still needed some supplementation as he had three young daughters to support.
William White was the mole catcher, but he was seventy-three and earned only 3s (15p) a week from his occasional and rather specialised occupation.
He received parish supplementation, even though he lived with a clay worker son, a bachelor on 10s (50p) a week.
Investigations of this kind reveal something of the structure of poverty by indicating those who were kept going by the poor rate, the only eighteenth-century tax which was redistributive.
They do not reveal as much about the value of the relief received, or the degree of willingness with which it was paid.
There is a high level of consensus among historians of the eighteenth-century Poor Law that relief in general was neither ungenerous nor ineffective.
Research has markedly redressed the unfounded and ill-wishing treatment of it dished out by the zealots seeking to bring about the  hardened approach to poverty eventually enacted in the harsh workhouse-based act of 1834.
Before rising population and inflating prices for necessaries began to increase the burden on rate-payers from the last third of the century, the relief of the village and small-town poor seems to have been based on humane assessment of need and sufficient relief.
From its Elizabethan origins, the Poor Law had based responsibility firmly on the parish.
This had one obvious limitation.
It made coping with locally severe unemployment difficult, since only the resources of the rate-paying parishioners could be drawn on.
Slumps in manufacturing brought problems for this reason.
Writers like Defoe were apt to stress the value of manufacturing in bringing extra employment, for women and children as well as for men.
In the manufacturing counties you see the wheel going at almost every door, the wool and the yarn hanging up at every window, the looms, the winders, the combers, the carders, the dyers, the dressers, all busy; and the very children, as well as women constantly employed.
As is the labour so is the living; for where the poor are full of work, they are never empty of wages; they eat while the others starve, and have a tolerable plenty.
But there is another side.
As Lord Townshend recognised in 1730, the availability of poor relief was in fact a subsidy to rural manufacturing which allowed cheap wages.
 "Were it not for what they receive out of the tax…they would not knit or spin for so small wages, as they receive for that work, because they would starve by it." 
But it was not only in this way that the poor rates assisted manufacturing.
The rationale of the putting-out system was that it enabled the merchant capitalist to draw on only as much labour as he needed at any given condition of the market.
Faced with a slump in orders, or with any problems over the supply of raw materials, he simply could not employ many of those he needed in brisker times.
Even the employer operating from his own premises often took it for granted that if his advantage dictated it, the parish must take the strain.
In 1773 when raw silk was difficult to obtain, the owner of a throwing mill in Sherborne wrote:…having discharged many of my hands which are either starving, or are become burdensome to the town, others are incessantly crying for a little work and could they obtain but a morsel of Barley-bread they are happy, they very often go days with little or no nourishment…the continued cries of the poor people complaining for want of the necessaries of life as well for want of employment is shocking indeed…and what is worse the overseers are not so bountiful to the necessitous as I could wish.
Two years later he was again dismissing a third of his hands in a mid-winter lay-off.
Manufacturing workers were aware of this situation, and at times of dispute with their employers sometimes attempted to use it to gain support from the landed rate-payers who, correctly, believed that, compared with land, the assets of manufacturers were significantly under-assessed.
In a petition of 1756 the weavers of the West Country pointed out the consequences of wage reductions being imposed by their employers: "insomuch that weavers cannot get above fourpence for sixteen hours labour…whereby their families are thrown upon and become burthensome to the parishes" .
The cotton weavers of Lancashire made a similar point in 1799 when claiming that piece rates had been more than halved since 1792.
"No wonder the poor rates increase when people are situated in this manner.
A little reflection will show how matters of this kind affect the landed interest."
On the credit side, the local base of the Poor Law meant that it operated in a face-to-face world where people and their problems were known.
National pamphleteers remote from the social relations of the villages might rant on about the idle and undeserving poor, but relief at local level was in the hands of the annually elected parish overseers supervised by the vestry meeting, and they knew their own poor well enough.
Indeed, sickness, ill fortune or even old age could reduce even a former overseer to a needy situation.
In the Corfe Castle listing of 1794, one of the relief recipients, in his seventies and with a large family from a younger wife, is described as a labourer, but a marginal note informs us that he had once been a farmer and overseer of the poor.
It has been suggested by Dr Henriques that parish poor relief in small communities provided"a personal service in which the pauper was relieved in familiar surroundings…
The small parish provided for its poor without frills; but it provided on the basis of personal knowledge of immediate needs."
This generally approving judgement has characterised work on the Poor Law up until about the  time of the American Revolution.
In her pioneering study Dorothy Marshall wrote that the main abuses were to be found in the "crowded and impersonal" urban parishes, a view echoed recently by Professor Malcolmson.
…for all those unfortunate and aged people the institution of the poor law did provide some genuine relief, especially in small communities where the poor were personally known and acknowledged to have a legitimate claim on the assistance of their neighbours.
But he joins others in considering that this happier state of affairs deteriorated well before the end of the century.
Up until then the labouring people may have enjoyed only basic material fare, "but most of them were able to support their families in an average year without having to resort to the parish for relief" .
It has been argued by Dr Snell that the fact that overseers were often of humble stock themselves was crucial for the social order of rural communities in that it "facilitated agreement and mutual respect between the ranks and orders of parish society" .
He argues further that the parish vestry and its officers, the churchwardens, overseers and constables, could cut across divides of wealth and were a means by which the gentry and rural middle class secured positions which would have been more precarious without the respect they received by fulfilling certain customary expectations of relief.
Until about 1780 these expectations were met largely by a relief system which was "generous, flexible and humane" .
The poor's entitlement to relief depended upon their having a settlement in the parish.
If they had, they could view relief as a right to be called upon when necessary.
A claimant had a right of settlement in only one parish, originally in his or her father's place of birth.
But events in one's life history could change this.
Marriage brought a woman on to her husband's settlement.
If a person completed a year's hiring in a parish, or served a full period of apprenticeship, then the right of settlement shifted to that parish.
It also did so if a property was rented for a qualifying period.
Bastards took settlement rights in the parish of their birth.
The problems and abuses connected with the laws of settlement will be discussed below; for the moment we are concerned to stress that persons with a settlement in a parish had a real claim to relief should misfortune or simply age overtake them, or indeed if they could find no work or  even none at wages sufficient for the support of the family.
Snell has suggested that this sense of right was sufficiently marked to make expectations from the Poor Law part of the "moral economy" which Edward Thompson has applied to the poor's expectation that corn would be sold to them at "just" prices.
The readiness of the poor to appeal over the heads of overseers to the magistrates suggests this.
In drawing up his list of inhabitants of Corfe Castle in 1794, the compiler justified his efforts by claiming that it would not only help the overseers keep in touch with actual and potential needs, but would "enable the magistrates to form an opinion on the propriety of applications for parochial relief on the one hand, and of the refusal of it by the parish officers on the other" .
The general regulation of the Poor Law was the responsibility of the justices at quarter sessions, but under an act of 1691 individual justices sitting out of sessions could overrule the overseers on appeal and order relief to be given.
How often did they do so?
It is very hard to know for the simple reason that very few records of justices' out-of-sessions activities survive, and although sometimes these cases were heard by two or more justices at petty sessions, even the records of these hearings are scarce and incomplete.
Complaints from the side of the parish officers suggest it was not uncommon.
George Crabbe in his poem of 1802, "The Parish Register" , writes of the village paupers as "Those who take from our reluctant hands /What Burn advises, or the Bench commands" .
Richard Burn was the author of the standard reference work on the Poor Law.
A Somerset vicar of the time complained in his diary: The law is too lenient to the poor in this Kingdom.
They summon the overseers before the magistrates for not complying with their unreasonable demands and though they do not always gain their ends yet it teases and harasses the overseers and takes up their time which is a great hardship.
They should be subject to punishment if their complaints were found to be vexatious and without foundation.
He recorded again a short time later: The overseers are harassed to death and summoned everyday before a justice, this will never do…
The Justices attend to every complaint, right or wrong, and every scoundrel in the Parish crowd to make their complaints.
Thomas Turner, a shopkeeper, served as overseer in an east Sussex parish in 1757.
In his diary he records several incidents.
 "This day Dame Vinal brought me a summons from Mr Courthope to appear before him, to show cause why we use the poor so hardly." 
Turner attended and convinced the magistrate that "we were not hard on our poor" .
The woman was reprimanded for "a heap of lies" and told she was entitled to nothing unless "we liked to give her daughter's child a pair of shoes" .
A draw perhaps?
On another occasion an out-of-work blacksmith came and said that "if the parish would not find him a shop to work in, he would make his complaint to a justice" .
The smith was invoking the part of the Elizabethan Poor Law which required the parish to assist the able-bodied to work.
A special vestry was called and resolved "to hire a shop as soon as they could" .
Arthur Young in 1795, pointing out in a year of extreme hunger that it was against the law to starve in England, included in his argument: "Parish officers are bound to provide…and if they do not do their duty, there is an appeal to the justice, who will force them to its performance." 
Evidence from the justices is scarce.
Petty sessions throw up a few cases, but not many.
Yet in 1800 a Gloucestershire JP reckoned that he spent the greater part of his mornings dealing with Poor Law disputes.
Probably he was including bastardy and settlement cases, at least as much as complaints against overseers.
That is, he was more often issuing summonses on behalf of than against overseers.
The few surviving justices' diaries give conflicting impressions.
One which has been reprinted, that of Richard Wyatt of Surrey, covers 224 cases between 1767 and 1776 among which are 58 bastardy examinations and many settlement ones, but there is no record of any complaints against overseers.
In contrast, the diary of William Hunt of Wiltshire covering the years 1744 to 1749 records fifteen cases against overseers covering ten parishes.
In all but one he found for the complainant.
Even in that case it was the third complaint from a woman who had had her previous two met.
Whether this justifies the conclusion of Esther Moir that "The most that can be said is that on and off the bench, the Justices interposed between the parish overseer and his helpless victim" is uncertain.
A pamphleteer opposing a "too generous" Poor Law in 1786, noting that paupers were too easily allowed to build cottages on the waste and install themselves to become eventual burdens on the rates, remarked,"Happily the justices of the peace have no legal authority to augment the number of our cottages.
There can be no compulsion in this case".
This leaves no doubt of his feelings about justices' powers in other areas of poor relief.
Among the appellants assisted by Hunt was George Wiltshire, "for to find him labour or to relieve him" .
The parish officers promised to find him work.
Another man appealed against the denial of relief for his sister.
He made the officers on another occasion agree to give a woman 6d (2½p) a week, "touching in particular her being a poor sickly woman, as also her husband having no work to do" .
Another woman was awarded relief for her bastard child, "upon their appearing and not showing why they should not" .
A labourer complained, "touching in particular the said churchwardens and overseers of the poor, not finding a house and providing labour or work for the said William Ashton to do in the parish" .
The officers appeared and agreed to relieve the pauper.
We will turn later to the question of finding work for the unemployed able-bodied.
What must strike the modern reader is the very small amounts of out-relief involved in such cases.
What was the cost of basic subsistence in the first part of the eighteenth century?
In 1697 John Locke, commissioned by the Board of Trade to survey the problem, concluded that a labouring man and his wife could support just two dependent children on the common country wages: "The children of labouring people are an ordinary burden to the parish.
A great number of children giving a poor man a title to an allowance from the parish."
Joseph Hanway in 1766 observed that the "mass of people" lived on less than £5 a year, and considered that when provision prices were "moderate" , husbandmen supported a family of three or four children on 1s to 1s 6d (5-7½p) a day.
Defoe in 1730 had considered a poor man in constant work could earn from 4s to 5s (20-25p) a week, "which will barely purchase bread and cheese and clothes for his family, so that if he falls sick or dies his wife and children infallibly come to the parish for relief, who allow them a small pittance or confine them in a workhouse" .
If a family of, say, five could in years of normal food prices be almost supported on 4s 6d a week, then a payment of 6d  or 1s, either to a single pauper or as a supplement to the earnings of a large family, was indeed significant, especially if it was combined with occasional relief payments for tools, clothing, towards rent or for medicine.
Viewing the accounts of parish overseers with their detailed entries of small payments for a range of needs, some historians have found it possible to write approvingly of a Poor Law which was sensitive to local needs and did not deal in bread alone.
To Dr Porter, "in a multitude of small ways, the poor law served as a thorough-going system of support" which was in the first half of the eigh-teenth century "quite generous in their paternalist supplements to domestic income" .
The examples he provides, of "dribbling payments of a shilling or two" for house repairs, funerals, clothes, tools and medicines and for tiding over occasional hard times, can be multiplied from a number of local studies.
Recipients like the widow of Oswestry who in 1788 got an allowance of 3s (15p) a week for three years supplemented by occasional special payments — 1s to hedge her garden, 3s (15p) for seed potatoes and even £1 for thatching straw — are far from uncommon.
When her children needed clothing she received doles for shoes, stockings and shoe repairs, but at least as grateful was the woman in Leytonstone who in 1740 received one to redeem her stays from pawn.
Dorothy George, after describing the "roastbeef" of old England, retained her rose-coloured spectacles as she went on to an extraordinarily generous view of the Poor Law.
All this made for contentment, and the greater part of the century was a time of content, though a bad harvest invariably meant serious food riots.
Even the poor law, in spite of the inconceivable hardships which it brought to individuals, and its disastrous social consequences in certain directions, gave a sense of security and well being which was new in England.
There was a seventeenth-century ballad now known only by tradition as the name of a tune called "Hang care the parish is bound to save us" .
In sickness and old age, as well as when he had a number of young children, poor relief was the accepted, inevitable and unresented lot of the labouring man.
His settlement he regarded as his birthright or his freehold.
Henry Fielding was one of those who was annoyed by the poor's presumption in this regard.
Noting the same ballad in 1751, he argued that the Elizabethan Poor Law had given: a new turn to the minds of the mobility.
They found themselves no longer obliged to depend on the charity of their neighbours, nor on their own industry for a maintenance.
They now looked upon themselves as joint proprietors in the land, and celebrated their independency in songs of triumph.
The parishioner could expect relief "in sickness, infirmity and in old age, in unemployment or inadequate wages" .
He could expect to be "buried, his children to be apprenticed, his wife to be assisted in childbirth and his daughter helped to recover payments from the putative father of her illegitimate child" .
But, as Dr Henriques has remarked, "he was secure of this only in the parish where he had established a settlement" .
In short, popular expectations ran para-llel, in this case, with the law.
There is little indication that parishioners much opposed the removal from their parish of strangers who might become chargeable or, when the act of 1795 had changed the situation, after they had actually become chargeable.
The harassing of those caught out by need where they had no settlement was the dark side of the eighteenth-century Poor Law with its associated evasive strategies such as hiring for less than a year, pulling down cottages on the wastes, apprenticing pauper children beyond the bounds and hustling unwilling couples into marriage to avoid the maintenance of a bastard.
If the poor asserted a "right" , it was an exclusive one.
The right to be relieved in one's parish, perhaps as much as aversion to the workhouse as an institution, lay behind riots in Suffolk in 1765 where a practice of building large workhouses to serve several parishes had been developing since a private enabling statute had been obtained in 1756.
This transferred overall authority from the parish vestry to a board of directors drawn from substantial land-holders.
A mob of 400 labourers on Nacton Heath told the magistrates that "they came to fight for their liberties" .
They were dispersed by soldiers but reassembled to attack another workhouse at Bulcamp.
There was a drought at the time, and the crowd declared that "God would not suffer it to rain till Bulcamp Hell was pulled down" .
Most opposition was produced, however, by the notion that the purpose of the workhouses was to "imprison" the poor, who "should range at liberty and be their own masters" .
When, ten years later, neighbouring Norfolk set afoot proposals to follow suit, its two MPs  were petitioned by the small-holders and labourers of the hundreds concerned to use their influence to prevent: that imprisonment of our persons, that separation from our children, that destruction of our race, that loss to the kingdom, and that curse from the Almighty which must attend establishing a poor house upon the specious fallacy of providing for our comfort, by the breaking of our hearts.
As Dr Digby has pointed out: "That a freeborn Englishman had the right to be relieved in his own home and should not be imprisoned in a workhouse was to be a recurrent theme in East Anglian popular protest." 
It was certainly the theme of a protest against the building of a workhouse in 1785 which argued that it threatened "our liberty and laws" .
It was an argument which had point.
The Workhouse Act of 1723 had empowered parishes to apply a workhouse test by denying relief to those who refused to enter.
It was not wholly unreasonable for the protesters to view this as "imprisonment" without trial.
Parson Woodforde, visiting a Norfolk warehouse containing 380 poor in 1787, found they did not look "either healthy or cheerful" .
He also commented on the high death rate.
But it is likely that loss of liberty was more often held against the workhouse than the belief that the subsistence provided was lower than that available from out-relief.
Popular opposition was not unimportant among the factors which prevented the workhouse system from becoming general throughout East Anglia, despite the considerable interest shown in that region.
But how important generally were workhouses in the relief of poverty in the eighteenth century?
The answer is not very.
Only one in nine of Oxfordshire's parishes had one in 1777, although one-third did in Essex.
Official figures suggest that there were around 2,000 in 1775, a large number in itself, but then there were 13,000 parishes.
It is also true that there were moments, like the 1720s, the 1780s and to a lesser extent the 1750s, when their establishment was especially noticeable, but even where they existed, large numbers of claimants were still relieved at home.
Sometimes this was easier and cheaper, especially as increasing population could outpace workhouse provision; sometimes it was because the parish officers discriminated in their application of the "test" and did not apply it to all kinds of claimant.
An estimate for 1802 suggests that only a twelfth of relief recipients were inmates.
By then the name "workhouse" was in any case inappropriate.
The original intention that the poor could be put to work for their own support, or even show the country a profit, was one which developed out of the Elizabethan founding idea of the "parish stock" .
It was attractive but fantastic in its assumption that such employment could be provided in an age of widespread rural underemployment heightened by occasionally severe local unemployment.
Run by the parishes or by groups of parishes, workhouses never produced an output which even repaid the purchase of raw materials, nor did they meet the vaunted secondary objective of training the poor in the "habits of industry" .
When let out to private contractors, corruption and harsh treatment of the paupers was too often added to failure.
It is difficult to know how far they were a significant deterrent to claiming relief, but over the long term there is little to suggest that any parish maintained the lowering of its poor rate which sometimes accompanied the initial operation of a workhouse.
Perhaps the majority of the "workhouses" still so called in the last third of the eighteenth century were in no real sense distinguishable from "poorhouses" , that is from places where the impotent poor, through age or infirmity, could be lodged either until death or more temporarily.
Pregnant single women, for example, were often taken in until after the birth.
The more the inmates came to consist of the impotent or temporarily incapacitated, the greater became the gap between intent and reality.
Following the pioneering incorporation of the Bristol workhouse in 1697, these institutions were more readily adopted in urban than in rural parishes.
In part this was a reflection of the great strain on small financial resources which building, maintaining and perhaps in time enlarging workhouses imposed, but it also reflected the greater difficulty in an effective and controlled administration of out-relief in the more anonymous and densely populated towns.
In extreme cases they became simply receiving institutions for classes of paupers with little hope.
Orphaned or abandoned children were especially vulnerable.
The 168 children out of 2,339 received into London workhouses between 1750 and 1755 who survived hardly over-exercised the parish authorities in seeking out apprenticeships on their behalf.
Workhouse building, despite the permitting of parishes to combine for the purpose in 1723, was until 1750 largely an urban phenomenon, for in the countryside out-relief was proving itself a more flexible and still not frighteningly expensive option.
In  fact Gilbert's Act of 1782, remembered mostly as one which permitted parishes to unite for Poor Law purposes without undergoing the expensive process of incorporating through a private act of parliament, was equally significant in its effective sanctioning of the subsidising of wages from the poor rates for the able-bodied who were to be removed from workhouses and found work.
The workhouses could be made more fitted for the accommodation of orphans, the sick and the aged poor.
For a while the increasing national cost of poor relief after mid century did not bring with it harsher attitudes.
Officially collected statistics provide the figures in Table 5.1.
Whether there was a clear trend before the mid 1790s is uncertain.
Bad harvests or trade slumps could still make enormous differences either way between one year and the next, while some parts of the country, notably the South and East, experienced much sharper increases than others.
Recently historians have been reasserting the view that the social consequences of parliamentary enclosures included a local increase in poverty.
Before the 1790s higher spending on poor relief, although it convinced many contemporaries that the incidence of poverty was increasing, probably did not, except in particularly bad years, reflect much other than the increase in population and in food prices.
Since right up until the first census in 1801 the increase in population was not generally perceived, much contemporary comment was not qualified by this relationship.
The sharper increase in relief expenditure once the boom of the early 1790s gave way to the food crises of the mid 1790s, with only brief respite before the hyper-crisis of 1800–1, is unmistakable even if the wartime inflation from 1793 is taken account of.
Expenditure on the eve of the French wars of 1793–1815 had already passed £2,600,000; by 1812 it was almost £8 million.
The failure of the Younger Pitt's Poor Bill of 1797 perhaps marks the end of a period of "sympathetic paternalism" towards the poor.
That proposal would have more generally introduced the system of the wage-allowance scheme to the able-bodied, most famously (or perhaps infamously) associated with the decision taken by Berkshire's justices meeting in 1795 at the Pelican Inn in the Berkshire village of Speenhamland.
Historians of the Poor Law have discerned a more sympathetic attitude towards the settled poor and even in respect of removal proceedings.
As well as kinder practices at parish level there was a more marked emphasis by reformers on finding alternative methods of helping the poor, for example in facilitating the setting up of friendly societies, the most popular vehicle for self-help.
Their funds were given special protection by an act of 1793 and by 1803 their number in England had reached 9,672.
The aggregate membership of 704,350 was 8 per cent of the population, but few of these were recruited from the poorest and most vulnerable class of rural labourers.
It was they whom the justices at Speenhamland had in mind in a year of extreme hunger when they produced their system of allowances in aid of wages determined by the ruling price of bread and by family size.
In some areas the birth of a child might add a shilling or more a week to the wage, leading to some pessimistic projections of runaway demographic increase, notably by followers of Thomas Malthus whose "Essay on Population" of 1798 was the most important ideological underpinning for the views of those who were beginning to urge a much harsher attitude towards the poor as the cost of their relief surged.
The demographic evidence on this matter has been examined above and found wanting as an explanation of population growth.
Its contemporary influence on social policy was nevertheless significant.
The Speenhamland proposals were not wholly novel, but as a response to an extraordinary surge in cereal prices their direct tying of relief to a bread scale was a major factor in a widespread adoption of wage supplementation.
The proponents of the radical reform of the Poor Law which was to result in the workhouse-based act of 1834, with its hated principle of "less-eligibility" , ensured that the wage-allowance system was presented in the worst possible light.
Until Professor Blaug shattered that polemical myth in the early 1960s, historians tended to follow the reformer's selective use of evidence and defective reasoning to argue that out-relief payments to the able-bodied demoralised the labourer into a "dependency culture" , divorcing subsistence from  a direct relationship to labour output.
Thanks to the "parish subsidy" , they argued, farmers could offer lower wages and employ on a casual rather than regular basis.
At the same time the linking of allowances to family size encouraged feckless marriage and carefree breeding which in turn added to rural population and turned the labour market even more strongly against the rural poor.
Much of this adverse criticism also drew attention to the usual association of the allowance system with some form of "make-work" scheme.
Typically this involved rotating the unemployed around the rate-paying farmers.
It was assumed that parishes, very largely the agricultural villages of the southern and eastern cereal regions, who were using Speenhamland-like systems of poor relief, had placed themselves on a vicious spiral of soaring poor rates and were progressively increasing the very poverty they sought to relieve.
The old Poor Law had always provided instances of parishes making allowances to able-bodied parishioners unable to secure work or, more commonly, unable to secure work at adequate wages.
But such supplementary payments were regarded as short-term expedients, payable in extraordinary years of high prices, to relieve temporary unemployment, typically seasonal, or paid to families at difficult points in the life-cycle.
In so far as the situation changed in the 1790s it was to the extent that such payments became systematised both as a regular basis for relieving poverty and in being tied to a scale of bread prices.
To some extent this is not surprising.
High cereal prices were not at all "extraordinary" in the years of the French wars from 1793 to 1815.
There were only three abundant harvests between 1793 and 1818 and fourteen which were deficient to some degree including some which were extraordinarily bad.
The crises of 1795–6 and 1800–1 have been described as "famines" , while that of 1813 was also severe.
There is no doubt either that despite the fact that wartime needs generally produced a slight upward trend in money wages, the usual earnings of rural labourers in the South and East, especially when periods of unemployment are taken into account, fell short of need.
It has been pointed out by Dr Baugh that if rising levels of poor-relief expenditure are expressed in per capita terms and related to wheat prices, the real level of poor-relief spending was fairly constant from the early 1790s to 1814.
He concludes that high relief was essentially a response to  high food prices rather than to perception of a chronic employment problem.
In coming to this conclusion he makes two important observations.
Firstly that, since the trend of relief expenditure follows that of wheat prices, it does not indicate any tendency to lower wages, although it equally clearly denies any strong upward wage trend.
This supports the view expressed, for example, by Professor McCloskey and derived from economic theory that given the constant labour demand of the war period, the poor-relief system could not have resulted both in falling wages and in falling amounts of labour.
The second of Baugh's observations seems to me especially important.
Given the rate of inflation of food prices, all forms of relief expenditure would have become considerably more expensive.
The infirm, the old and the illegitimate or orphaned young, however, as well as the inmates of workhouses, would all have cost more to feed.
Further, a widespread parish response to famine-level prices was to purchase supplies of wheat or substitute foodstuffs and re-sell them at subsidised prices to the poor.
This too would have raised expenditure irrespective of whether or not a Speenhamland system existed.
All this suggests that the allowance system was a response to rather than a cause of the relief burden.
Blaug presented his argument with a rather different emphasis.
Remarking that "Speenhamland counties" is to a great extent another way of describing the agricultural parishes of the wheat-growing regions, he noted that the upward trend in relief expenditure was similar in non-Speenhamland counties.
Levels in the former group were higher because they compounded a greater burden which already existed by 1795.
This leads him to see the growth of the wage-allowance scheme as a response to problems of unemployment and underemployment which, while they became more visible in years of high food prices, were inherent in social and economic changes taking place in the Speenhamland counties.
Among these in some counties was the parliamentary enclosure of open fields and of common lands.
It is true that much of England had already been enclosed by 1760, but in some areas, notably in the south and east Midlands in counties like Northamptonshire, Cambridge and Oxfordshire, more than half of enclosures took place after 1760 under acts of parliament.
Increasing levels of poverty were a likely outcome.
For many years the view of J.D. Chambers in 1953 that earlier historians like the Hammonds had seriously misrepresented the links between enclosure  and poverty became the orthodoxy.
He argued that the evidence from Nottinghamshire suggested that enclosures both increased the total demand for agricultural labour and the regularity of employment.
In recent years this orthodoxy has crumbled.
Better-designed and applied investigations have largely reinstated the views of the Hammonds.
Professor Crafts has shown that in the Midlands, far from retaining labour, recently enclosed parishes experienced considerable out-migration.
Dr Snell has shown that when land was enclosed for arable farming, both male and female employment became less regular, especially the latter, with severe effects on family earnings.
He has also discovered a strong correlation between the extent of enclosure and high per capita levels of poor relief in the first decade of the nineteenth century.
It was not only that enclosures forced some small-holders into the ranks of the landless and into wage-dependency for the first time; it was also the case that many who had been able partly to support themselves from small-holdings supplemented by access to common grazing for a beast or two lost that element of independence.
Up to enclosure, according to Professor Malcolmson, "an economy of self-reliance and an economy of wage dependence could be linked together" .
As the Reverend David Davies put it in 1795, "depriving the peasantry of all landed property has beggared multitudes" .
Enclosure may not have been the only or even the most potent of the forces increasing and impoverishing the rural proletariat in the southern and Midland counties, but it was impor-tant in bringing many to a total wage-dependency.
The loss of access to even a small plot in the open fields affected many, but far more were affected by the loss of common rights.
Perhaps the most widespread loss was fuel.
The huge number of prosecutions for wood stealing supports the views of most commentators on the South and East that scarcity of fuel was a major aspect of the poor living of rural labourers.
A second factor in the South and East was the decline in rural manufacturing employment, in particular the loss of hand spinning in cottage households.
A third was the rapid fall in the numbers of  boarded farm servants, and a fourth the very high seasonal reduction in the demand for labour associated with wheat growing, even where the change to cereal from mixed or pastoral farming was not associated with recent enclosure.
All these factors were intensified by rural population growth, although it was not in itself caused by the family-based allowance scheme.
We can hardly resist the conclusion that the parish officers only had recourse to the policy of subsidizing wages wherever the attraction of urban industry made itself felt too weakly, leaving a pool of surplus manpower and substandard wages.
Without this "attraction" it was hardly to be expected that rural labour markets could clear themselves through falling wages, since they were already so close to the level of subsistence that a further lowering would have reduced the productivity of labour via its depressing effect on the calorific value of workers' diets which would no longer have sustained the same work effort.
As a response to this situation, Blaug concludes, the wage-allowance system was criticised by the reformers on the basis of arguments which would "equally condemn most modern welfare legislation" .
Was the poor relief paid to able-bodied workers over-generous to the extent that it not only created a dependency culture by reducing the incentive to work, but put a premium on early marriage and on childbirth?
There is a suggestion that farmers were inclined to discriminate in favour of married labourers, since they would otherwise have been a greater burden on the parish rate of which the farmers were the main payers.
This may have been so, but it is unlikely to have become significant until the post-war depression in cereal prices, the adverse influence of demobilisation on labour supply and the accumulating impact of the rising birth rate began to exert a combined effect after 1816.
Allowances under the Berkshire scale of 1795 began with a "gallon loaf" at 1s (5p) and increased with each penny rise up to 2s (10p).
A single man was guaranteed 3s (15p) a week, and a married one an extra 1s 6d (7½p) for each dependant.
Thus in cheap years a family with three children were guaranteed 9s (45p), while the doubling of the bread allowance in dearer ones would bring this up to 12s (60p).
In 1795 a single labourer in the Midland and southern arable regions could, with supplements in kind, earn the equivalent of 10s (50p) a week.
If unemployed, the scale would have given him 5s (25p) a week.
A married man and his wife who could between them earn 15s (75p) and had one child would, out of work, have received 10s (50p).
If, however, a married man had children young enough to keep his wife at home, then during the high-price years he could not have earned enough to support his family without supplementation.
But it was an allowance on top of wages.
He was expected to earn as much as he could; that was the point of the "roundsman" system.
The Berkshire justices had made it clear enough that the scale was payable to "every poor and industrious man" .
In the still face-to-face world of the agricultural village the character of the claimants was easily known.
The existence of the bread scale was to guarantee subsistence at a very low level.
It seems more than likely that with parishes concentrating on basic food needs, the other kinds of discretionary payments, which had been a feature of the eighteenth-century poor, were made less often and with declining generosity.
It may also have been the case that magistrates were less willing to overturn the appeals of disappointed claimants, since they were well enough aware that the increasing burden of relief was being thrown on to a decreasing number of shoulders as the proportion of the village populations either needing assistance or at least no longer able to pay poor rates increased.
In general the move towards wage supplementation in the rural South and East enabled the old Poor Law just about to cope with the problem of subsisting the poor in a period of unprecedentedly high bread prices, during which some years can only be described as desperate.
The last act began only when the deep-seated problems of the southern rural economy intensified to produce an endemic rural poverty that persisted even after the wartime prices had ended.
MIGRATION
Contemporaries differed in their view of the overall effect of the Settlement Laws on the mobility of the labouring poor.
They saw things from different perspectives.
For Adam Smith in 1776, laying down the philosophical system which was to become the ideological underpinning of the market economy, they were the greatest obstruction placed on the movement of labour for they affected even common labour, while the regulations of guilds and corporations restricted the movement only of artisans.
Henry Fielding in 1751  saw the matter from the perspective of a London magistrate, linking vagrancy to crime.
For him the laws of settlement hardly prevented the "idle poor" from wandering and a stricter enforcement of vagrancy laws would "compel the poor to starve or beg at home; for there it will be impossible for them to steal or rob without being presently hanged or transported out of the way" .
Whatever personal suffering the laws caused — and there is no doubt they caused a great deal— there is little to suggest that the development of the eighteenth-century economy was frustrated by an unusual level of institutionally produced labour immobility.
There is also much evidence from a variety of sources that the labouring poor moved a great deal in search of employment, if usually not over very great distances.
Most people did not spend their whole lives in one place.
A study of some West Riding parish registers has found that in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, farming was the only occupation where more than half of sons remained in their fathers' places of residence.
Another analysis of a sample of sixteen English parishes has shown that in only one case did the number of males married between 1721 and 1750 who could also be found in both the baptism and burial records exceed 50 per cent(in that case it was 51 per cent ).
The proportions for women were even lower.
It was the argicultural parishes which produced the smallest percentages.
Villages where rural manufacturing enhanced employment possibilities, like the framework-knitting villages of Shepshed and Gedling, had 36 and 51 per cent of their male sample with a "complete" registration.
For the same reason the coal-mining parish of Earsdon also had a more stable population.
Such measures of absences from parish registers are the crudest of indicators, but other evidence points in the same direction.
On the evidence of church court depositions, Professor Clark has suggested that in the early eighteenth century six out of ten males moved at least once in their lives.
Country rates were higher than those of the towns; in the former case the ratio was seven out of ten.
Women were even more mobile, reflecting perhaps the large proportion who at some time  of their life entered service and married extra-parochial partners.
Three out of four country women moved at least once.
Mobility was closely linked to the life-cycle: men and women moved while they were young.
Farm service and apprenticeship, two especially common reasons for relocation, were obviously related to young persons.
In general only a very small proportion moved much after their twenties.
In the case of the Bedfordshire parish of Cardington in 1782, only 57 per cent of boys aged fifteen to nineteen who had spent their childhoods there in their parents' home were still residing in the parish.
At the ages of twenty to twenty-nine only 35 per cent were.
In fact, if the children aged thirty and above are considered as the second generation of adults, then three-quarters of the men and two-thirds of the women were living in parishes other than Cardington.
London was only 45 miles away and seems to have drawn significant numbers of young men and women, more than Bedford which was only 2½ miles away.
For the most part, however, the labouring classes did not move very far.
Clark found that around half of his sample had travelled only 10 miles or less and only a tenth 40 miles or more, with women tending to move over shorter distances than men.
By the eighteenth century the long-range hunger-driven mobility which had provided Tudor and Stuart governments with their problem of vagrant beggars had become insignificant.
It seems likely that the Settlement Laws were not so much preventing migration as inhibiting distance.
This, plus strengthening of the laws against vagrancy in 1714, 1740 and 1744, meant that many of the lower orders found it more difficult and more risky to move over long distances.
There is, however, a more positive dimension.
If the parish-based Poor Law was operating as well for the settled poor as modern historians seem to suggest, then more generous relief and serious attention to the provision of work and cottages may well have led to a decline in subsistence-driven migration.
There were still to be found on the roads a vagrant population of Celtic wanderers from Scotland or Ireland, and those who followed the travelling occupations like chapmen, pedlars and itinerant entertainers, as well as the true travelling people, the gypsies and tinkers.
The largest group on the  roads, especially following an outbreak of peace, were soldiers and sailors; they made up, for example, a third of all migrants passing through Lichfield in 1692.
There was a variety of different patterns of "local migration" .
Nearby towns drew in labour for service or apprenticeship.
Of a sample of immigrants in Stratford on Avon in 1765 examined by Dr Martin, a third had come only 4 miles or less from neighbouring villages, while only a fifth had come from more than 20 miles.
An examination of settlement certificates confirmed this pattern, with three-quarters coming from within 10 miles.
Farm service also produced a local pattern.
The majority of farm servants stayed only the one year with their master after the annual hiring, but they moved only into the service of other farmers drawing labour from the same hiring fair.
Accordingly their mobility, though constant, was roughly constrained by a circle of 15 miles around the relevant town.
The rapid rise of copper mining in eighteenth-century Cornwall certainly expanded the population of the western parishes, but at the expense of the non-mining parishes in the eastern parts of the same county.
Against an overall county population increase of 22 per cent between 1672 and 1744, the western mining parishes of Gwinear, Illogan, Gwennap, Camborne and Kenwyn and Kea all increased by more than 70 per cent; the last named by 400 per cent , although the county as a whole was still losing part of its natural increase to out-migration.
Cornwall is no exception.
It seems clear that the labour needs of the growing mining and manufacturing districts were not significantly met by long-distance migration, although by the end of the period Irish immigrants were contributing, especially to the factory towns of the North.
Professor Clark is probably correct in seeing in eighteenth-century mobility, not a development constraint but a "steady but flexible labour response to economic change" which assisted an "orderly progress" towards early industrialisation.
There is a further sense in which the Settlement Laws assisted the building up of labour forces in manufacturing.
It has been pointed out that the intent of the act of 1691 which allowed settlement "earned" from an apprenticeship, a period of qualifying employment or householding, was constructive.
Its preamble stating that persons chargeable in their parish "merely for want of work" could in another place find "sufficient employment as  to be able to maintain themselves without being burthensome" .
As for the certificate system whereby a parish acknowledged its responsibility to relieve holders who became chargeable while working in other parishes, that may well have helped industrial employers for they received the labour while the risk of having to relieve in cases of unemployment or sickness was underwritten by the parish of settlement.
By the late eighteenth century it was increasingly common for rural parishes to remit payments to their poor who had become temporarily chargeable elsewhere, rather than have them delivered back.
In effect poorer parishes with too little employment available paid a form of subsidy to those with expanding economies.
The working conditions of the labouring classes were considered in an earlier chapter and in the companion to this volume, The Vital Century.
Their standard of living will be assessed in Chapter Seven.
In the following chapter we will examine several aspects of their lives and attitudes, some of which are often loosely grouped by historians as "popular culture" .
Popular Education, Religion and Culture
LITERACY AND SCHOOLING PROVISION
Gentleman, this is to quaint you all of you cor Serning the Billing of this workhous think to starve the poore theare Stephen Wite Stratford Lews of Barfield Wile of TataSon Loyd hintlesham but let them tak care of thin Selves for farit that is hap on shall there Brains be Blown out and that as sure as death and fail not and the hous shall not be bilt a toyle for theare shall be 500 planted soon and will di all it and pull Wiles hous down.
This warning was sent to persons involved in the building of a workhouse at Tattingstone in Suffolk in 1765.
For all its defective syntax and idiosyncratic spelling, its message is clear.
Perhaps we could regard it, along with very many other anonymous letters expressing the grievances of the poorer sort, as an example of "functional literacy" .
At least it is a reminder that eighteenth-century England was a society in whose popular culture literate and oral means of creating and transmitting ideas coexisted.
This did not depend on majority let alone mass literacy.
By the final quarter of the seventeenth century literacy among the adult males of the labouring poor was probably around 30 to 40 per cent, depending on occupation and location.
For women it was only half as high.
Apart from some narrowing of the gender gap, this situation largely persisted through the eighteenth century.
Over its last two decades, slight improvement in some areas may well have been offset by a measure of decline in industrialising areas like the west Midlands and south  Lancashire.
Literacy rates among artisans and shopkeepers was much higher: 80 per cent or more would seem a reasonable approximation for the level reached by the late seventeenth century and persisting through most of the eighteenth century.
The petty bourgeoisie of shopkeepers and self-employed tradesmen needed to keep accounts even if only of a primitive kind, but the growing fraction of permanent journeymen among the artisans grew into a more literate as well as more skilled elite section of the labouring classes.
Some journeymen employed their literacy in their everyday work, compositors in the print trade being an obvious example, but many others had their books of prices.
Hardly any had written manuals for their work.
Even among the skilled the "mystery" of the trade was still conveyed largely through the apprenticeship system with its on-the-job training and induction into the particular culture of the workplace.
Trade-union development did, however, impart a literary dimension for all its continued employment of ritual and symbolism.
The tramping system had to be organised (see below, p. 207).
Records of membership, subscriptions and payments had to be kept, and at times of dispute, petitions and other statements of grievances were drawn up and presented from at least the beginning of the eigh-teenth century.
Devonshire serge weavers, for example, were presenting their case to parliament in 1725, while the journeymen tailors of London had done so in 1720.
Apprentices were probably among the significant consumers of the popular literature of chapbooks, broadsheets and the Newgate "confessions" of condemned malefactors.
Even for many artisans mensuration was probably a more necessary skill than writing, and for the unskilled working class the low occupational functional value of literacy is the most feasible explanation of the stagnation in levels after the seventeenth-century surge.
Dr Schofield, from a study of the marriage registers of 274 parishes, found no significant improvement in overall male literacy levels between 1754, when marriage registers began to require signature, and 1815.
The large majority of the illiterate labouring classes had sufficient access to the written word through the mediation of literate family members, friends or workmates.
Just about the only humble occupation which derived from having the ability to read and write was that of teaching it to working-class children, and at that level school teaching was often the resort of widows, cripples and those generally unable to find better-paid work.
In  John Cleland's novel of 1749, Fanny Hill, the heroine describes her north-country parents as "extremely poor" .
Her father, a net maker, earned a "scanty subsistence" which was "not much enlarged by my mother's keeping a little day-school for the girls in her neighbourhood" .
She did not teach much, for Fanny describes her own educational level as "no better than very vulgar reading; or rather spelling, an illegible scrawl, and a little ordinary plain work" .
The mistress of the church school in a Somersetshire parish in 1805 was not a widow but still sufficiently poor for her ten-year-old son to be killed working in a coal mine.
The best that can be said for the education available for the children of the eighteenth-century poor is that it managed to maintain the levels of the later seventeenth century.
Even the much-vaunted "Charity School Movement" of the early decades seems only to have helped stop a poor level becoming worse.
While the numbers taught by their parents without any formal schooling is unknowable, there is still bound to be a close relationship between the availability and take-up of schooling and the literacy level.
Since provision of education for the lower orders was largely dependent on local initiative and attendance was usually a matter of parental inclination, both were haphazard.
Towns were generally better off than villages, but within the same county variations even between towns could be marked.
A study of Kent has illustrated this.
In 1660 provision was very limited, especially in the rural parishes.
By 1811, with the addition of a modest number of new subscription-based schools designed for the poor, things had improved although the geography of provision remained very uneven.
Almost half of the county's 172 parishes had a school of some kind by 1807, including almost all of those with a population of a thousand or more.
There had been a surge in provision between 1710 and 1725, indicating the influence of the Charity School Movement on a county adjacent to London, but by mid century this had given way to a pattern of augmentary endowments to already established schools and there was no fresh surge until 1780–90.
By 1811 only some rural parishes were without any provision, while most of them had registered some improvement over the seventeenth century.
Improving village schooling may, however, have done no more than keep the total proportion of Kent's children receiving schooling constant, for  there is also evidence of a deteriorating situation in some of the towns.
Examples like Keston and Milsted where 50 per cent or more of poor children were enrolled in non-classical schools were exceptional.
In the worst urban examples the figure was as low as 5 per cent.
Day schooling was received by only a minority of children from the labouring classes, in some parishes a very tiny one.
There was no association of elementary education with a prescribed period of childhood.
Those who did receive schooling did so for perhaps a year or two, often much less, at some point in their childhood, with hardly any attending school beyond the age of ten or eleven.
Even within these short periods attendance was irregular.
Of schooling in the East Riding in the 1790s, it was later recalled: When the labourers' children could obtain employment from the farmers, the school was abandoned, and the youthful pupils were sent to cut weeds in the cornfields in the spring; to frighten away the birds from the standing corn; then to assist in harvest operations; and next to glean the fields which had been reaped.
The poet John Clare's father was a country labourer in Northamptonshire who managed to secure for his son around three months' schooling a year.
Manufacturing and mining made just as heavy demands on child labour, although here the problem was not seasonal but one of whether parents could afford to buy a brief period of schooling before the child entered full-time employment.
A Cornish miner later recalled of his late-eighteenth-century childhood: When I was eight years old my parents sent me to a raiding school kept by a poor owld man called Stephen Martin.
My schoolin cost three a'pence a week.
I was keept there for seven months, and so my edication was worth no less than three shillin and sixpence — there's for"ee!
When my edication was finished, as they do say, I was took hum, seven months larning being all that my poor parents cud afford me, but I shall have to bless God to aull etarnity for that edication.
Charity schools had a negligible impact in areas where child employment opportunities were widespread.
It was suggested  more than fifty years ago by M.G. Jones that the setting up of charity schools with common objectives between 1710 and 1730 under the leadership of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) amounted to a "movement" .
She saw it as one of the major manifestations of eighteenth-century philanthropic puritanism.
Schools affording hundreds of thousands of places were set up to bring some form of education to the children of the poor.
The "movement" combined passion and responsibility in the firm purpose of instilling correct behaviour and moral reformation.
The driving impulse was the fear of the development of a "dangerous class" in the cities where children were growing up ill disciplined and ill exampled by their parents.
To counteract such baneful influence, they should be removed from it into an educational programme designed to instil a proper sense of their place in society, of the duties attached to it and of the importance of attending to the teachings of the established Church.
In the vital years before a child was apprenticed he or she could be captured from the streets, confirmed in God-fearing ways and inoculated against those habits of sloth, debauchery and irreligion which propelled so many of the lower orders to crime, prostitution and heathenism.
This was a distinct motivation from that which had offered free places in the old endowed grammar schools and which had allowed a small measure of upward mobility for the bright working-class child.
The schools lacked any concept of educational advancement and were not providing a popular education as the basis of a common citizenship nor as a matter of occupational utility.
The conviction that the general education of the poor was economically unsound and unnecessary remained.
Instead of the ambitions of the grammar school, the curriculum was confined to the "plain accomplishments" which were the only ones needed by the "generality of the people" .
There was no step up to higher things, but a system complete in itself under which poor children were to receive just that modicum of education which would enable them to become useful and content in their inevitable station as hewers of wood and drawers of water.
Such a conditioning would save not only their souls but their necks.
This was certainly the most sustained attempt to reach the children of the lower orders before the Sunday School movement towards the end of the century, but its extent and consistency have been questioned by historians, some of whom doubt that it was a  "movement" at all.
Its momentum was flagging by 1730 and even its constrained educational objectives were being criticised as a step too far.
Many saw little utility in teaching reading rather than instilling labour discipline more directly.
This strand urged instead the workhouse school, the school of industry, where useful accomplishments like spinning would fill up the time.
However, for the first half of the century the offerers of the catechism still led the way.
Charity schools were inexpensive and could be readily supplied in the boom years, while even such an early champion of the bourgeoisie as Defoe could approve their attack on sloth and indiscipline as going to the heart of the problem of the labouring poor.
It was also to many a crusade defending Anglican Protestantism against irreligion, popery and even the Jacobites.
Miss Jones had argued that it was the coordinating activities of the SPCK which made charity school provision a movement.
The Society was certainly an initiator and active propagator, and when it turned its attention more towards foreign missions, the loss of momentum was noticeable.
But it did not manage the schools and outside London and several other cities, such as Bristol, it had little strength.
In rural districts and in manufacturing towns charity schools could expect to make little progress against the competition of child employment and complaints of this came repeatedly from clothing and mining districts.
Within a diocese charity schools were more likely to be found near the cathedral city than in outlying regions.
Exeter saw a strong movement, but in Cornwall, then part of that see, it was practically non-existent.
If there are substantial doubts as to whether the provision of charity schools was ever sufficiently widespread, directed or differentiated from earlier, or later, efforts to have constituted a special movement, there is none that school provision for the poor in the middle and later years of the century remained uneven and spasmodic.
Professor Stone's assertion that there was "an upsurge of literacy" after 1780 "underlying the process of industrialisation" seems over-confident in view of evidence that the ratio of school places per capita actually declined in places as distant as Lancashire, Leamington, Cornwall, Devon and the East Riding.
This is not  surprising since there was little perception of a functional link between popular education and economic development.
The phrase "factory system" was already entering the language when, in 1807, Davies Gilbert MP, a distinguished scientist, declared: However specious in theory the project might be of giving education to the labouring classes of the poor, it would in effect be prejudicial to their morals and happiness: it would teach them to despise their lot in life, instead of making them good servants to agriculture and other laborious employments to which their rank in society had destined them; instead of teaching them subordination, it would render them factious and refractory, as was evident in the manufacturing counties.
Significant developments were taking place in the early nineteenth century.
Even as Davies Gilbert spoke, discussions were beginning which led to the setting up in 1808 of the British and Foreign School Society.
Originally non-sectarian, it intended to maximise school places by using Joseph Lancaster's monitorial system under which older pupils passed on their lessons to younger ones.
Conservative Anglicans, unable to endorse its open approach in matters of religion, founded a rival organisation in 1811: the National Society for the Provision of Education for the Poor on the Principles of the Established Church.
It adopted a similar monitorial system, developed by Andrew Bell, and set about providing "National" schools to rival the "British" schools of the BFSS.
These were just beginnings.
Neither made a significant provision before 1820, and their rivalry still persisted in the 1830s when the government began at last to assist them with grants.
It was a beginning, but 1815 was reached with not much to acclaim in day-school provision for working-class children and with no national policy as yet in prospect.
From the closing decades of the eighteenth century Sunday schools began to make a contribution, but how significant a one?
Their appearance was quite sudden.
As A.P.
Wadsworth expressed it: "In the early eighties, quite suddenly, the Sunday school movement flashed over the country.
One wonders whether any social reform movement had ever before spread with equal rapidity through England."
The "kindling spark" was Robert Raikes, the printer and proprietor of the Gloucester Journal, who in 1780 was moved to start a school to keep the unruly child workers from the city's pin  manufactory from breaking the sabbath.
The publicity he gave to the idea in his paper was taken up by other newspapers and the example of Gloucester was followed all over the country.
By 1783 John Wesley was writing from Yorkshire, "I find these schools springing up wherever I go." 
They took off especially rapidly in manufacturing south Lancashire.
By 1786 the magistrates of Salford were much impressed with their influence.
If these Institutions should become established throughout the kingdom, there is good reason to hope they will produce an happy change in the general Morals of the People, and thereby render the Severities of Justice less frequently necessary.
Their great merit was that they "schooled" the children of the lower orders without interfering with the need for them to be at work on weekdays, hence their great appeal in manufacturing and mining areas.
The Bishop of Chester saw them as the solution to the problem of reconciling "manual labour and spiritual instruction" in a way so "as not to interfere with or obstruct each other" .
Estimates of total enrolment vary, but it seems unlikely that there were less than 100,000 Sunday school pupils by 1800.
Far from all of these were eager seekers after learning, secular or religious.
Vicars bribed with halfpennies and were known to pressure parents about what was expected before someone became an appropriate recipient of charity.
Certainly Sunday schools had the opportunity to advance working-class literacy, but that was not seen as their main purpose.
That was perhaps best defined by a Manchester committee: "They call in a sense of religious obligation to the aid of industry." 
It was also claimed that "The improvement of these children in learning has been wonderful; in religious knowledge still more surprising." 
It did not take long for moral earnestness to clash with secular utility.
The issue was that of teaching writing on the sabbath, which was being described as a "growing evil" by 1786.
The original impulse had been non-denominational, but by the late 1790s the Anglican Church was drawing apart to go its own way, fearful that Methodism especially was gaining converts and even, as the Bishop of Rochester expressed it in 1800: "Schools of Jacobinical religion and Jacobinical politics abound in this country in the shape of charity schools and Sunday schools." 
The schools of the established Church banned the teaching of writing for this kind of reason as much as the Methodists did  for sabbatarian ones.
There is simply no way in which to measure the contribution to popular education made by Sunday schools.
Hardly anyone can have learned both to read and to write and probably few learned even to read just by attending Sunday classes.
But for those who could receive a smattering of instruction at home, or who had spent a short while at day schools in their infancy, they may well have nourished a plant that might otherwise have ceased to grow, or even withered.
POPULAR RELIGION
Looking back from 1826, a Cornish vicar wrote:
Within my remembrance, there were conjuring parsons and cunning clerks; every blacksmith was a doctor, every old woman was a witch.
In short all nature seemed to be united — its wells, its plants, its birds, its beasts, its reptiles, and even inanimate things in sympathising with human credulity; in predicting or in averting, in relieving or in aggravating misfortune.
Oral tradition played a major part in transmitting and passing down this culture of superstition.
Samuel Bamford, the son of a Lancashire weaver, recalled: My poor aunt Elizabeth no more doubted these things, than she did the truth of every word betwixt the two backs of her Bible.
Often when on a winter's night we youngsters were seated round the hearth…would she set her wheel aside, take a pinch of snuff, hutch her chair towards the other hob, and excite our curiosity and wonder by strange and fearful tales of witches, spirits, and apparitions, whilst we listened in silence and awe, and scarcely breathing, contemplated in imagination, the visions of an unseen world, which her narratives conjured up before us.
The reference to her Bible suggests two things: firstly the oral and the literary could exist side by side, and secondly that religion and superstition were not necessarily perceived as contesting forms of popular belief.
The most popular form of reading among the literate poor was, as Dr Vincent has pointed out, one which told much  the same tales as did the oral tradition.
John Bunyan wrote of the reading of his youth: "Give me a ballad, a news-book, George on horseback, or Bevis of Southampton; give me some book that teaches curious arts, that tells of old fables; but for the holy Scriptures I cared not." 
His Pilgrim's Progress was by far the most popular book in the cottages of the poor, and in Apollyon he had conjured up a monster fit for any fable: scaled, bear-footed, dragon-winged and breathing fire and smoke from a lion's mouth.
Next in popularity were the various almanacs Professor Harrison has described as having "catered to the needs of a great part of the nation, and their peculiar form served to keep alive the ancient traditions of folk astrology" .
Bamford wrote of his parish church in the eighteenth century: "every one in those days admitted that there was not a rood of earth around it which was not redolent of supernatural associations" .
It was a form of association which had not been unremarked by several of the socially better placed.
An early nineteenth-century parson wrote: In the last age some of the rusticated clergy used to favour the popular superstition, by pretending to the power of laying ghosts etc. etc.
I could mention the names of several persons whose influence over their flocks was solely attributable to this circumstance.
More tersely, a lawyer noted in his diary in 1795: "Superstition is gone, and refinements there on have made the people very irreligious." 
It was a significant symbiosis, central to any discussion of what constituted the popular religious experience or pattern of beliefs.
In recent years several historians, some influenced by social anthropology, have revealed the large gap which existed between "official" and popular religious perceptions.
Dr Obelkevich in a detailed study of rural Lincolnshire has shown that the "religious realm" of the rural poor reached beyond Christianity to "encompass an abundance of pagan magic and superstition" which was integrated with a Christian doctrine itself not left unchanged as it passed from church to cottage.
In Cornwall, which was to grow into one of  Methodism's early strongholds, the teachings of John Wesley were absorbed only through a haze of superstitious beliefs and practices.
It has been suggested that the starkness of early Wesleyan theology made for a rather close match, with local preachers assuming something of the role of conjurer.
Dr Gilbert has pointed out that when the evangelist Hannah More remarked in 1789 on the existence of whole village populations no less estranged from the services of the Church than were heathens, she was belatedly recognising something which Wesley and Whitefield had been proclaiming for decades.
The established Church failed to keep up either with the growth of the population or with the changing geography of its distribution.
It has been noted that early Methodism took root most significantly where the Church was weak.
It did not so much contest with the establishment as succeed in areas like the mining districts of Cornwall, Kingswood and around Newcastle, where there was no contest in the sprawling villages which were growing out of the reach of a moribund parish structure.
This structure would in any case have presented problems of adaptation, but it was much worsened by the prevalence of pluralism with its associated non-residence.
In 1812 almost one parish in ten was not served even by an underpaid and indifferent curate.
All these manifest problems intensified the effects of a creeping indifference on the part even of the southern rural poor.
A sample of thirty Oxfordshire parishes shows a progressive decline in the number of communicants from 911 in 1738 through 896 in 1759 to 682 by 1802.
By 1801 the number of Anglican communicants nationally on Easter Day was 535,000, only around a tenth of the population of age to be confirmed.
Overwhelming evidence of less than staunch religious attachment to the established Church does not, however, deny that its reach was embracing in other respects.
Dr Clark has written of the eigh-teenth-century Englishman: The agency of the State which confronted him in everyday life was not Parliament, reaching out as a machinery of representative democracy…but the Church, quartering the land not into a few hundred constituencies but into ten thousand parishes, impinging on the daily  concerns of the great majority, supporting its black-coated intelligentsia, bidding for a monopoly of education, piety and political acceptability.
Although the rapid decline of the church courts into virtual desuetude over the eighteenth century removed the only institutional form of church control over the moral behaviour of the lower orders, they could hardly be unaware of the continuing power of the parson operating both through the vestry and through areas of personal control such as that over charity and at the vital moments of baptism, marriage and burial.
By the last decade of the eighteenth century there is evidence that the wider powers of the Church, even in rural England, were weakening rather than enhancing its spiritual authority.
Professor Evans has shown how rapidly the Church not only lost the attachment of the rural populace but aroused its hostility as tithe gathering became more rapacious and as clerical justices became increasingly common.
The decline of the Anglican Church as a purveyor of religion has often been seen by historians as related to the rise of Methodism, while positive aspects have hardly been noted.
Nevertheless the efforts of conservative historians, although they have done much to restore the image of the Church of England after 1830, have done little to qualify the depiction of the period from the early eighteenth century to that date as a "phase of prolonged, rapid, and disastrous decline" .
To write, as one historian has recently, that "a sign of the vitality and strength of Orthodox churchmanship in the eighteenth century was its capacity to put forth new branches: Methodism and Evangelicalism" is to make one point while obscuring another.
It is indeed the case that both of these "new branches" professed an orthodox Arminian theology and regarded themselves as movements within rather than against the Church of England.
However, they originated in the vitality of some churchmen motivated by what they considered their Church's general lack of vitality.
John Wesley directed his mission towards the poor, whom he considered spiritually deprived and ignored.
That his theology was orthodox and that his support for the monarch and the political establishment was unswerving are important.
However, movements  often develop in directions unintended by their founders.
There was a significant challenge to the establishment inherent in Methodism's message, its organisational novelties and its presumption of spiritual equality.
Those of the gentry and clergy who perceived this may have been driven by instinct and may have over-reacted.
They may have seen some dangers in Methodism which were not in fact there.
It was in no sense a revival of the political dissent symbolised by Cromwellian puritanism.
But there is truth in the telling of Wesley by one gentleman: "You are the most disturbing dogs in the nation." 
A warrant was issued by one justice against a preacher in the name of "A person, his name unknown who disturbs the peace of the parish" .
John Wesley was a reluctant convert to open-air preaching — "I would have thought the saving of souls almost a sin, if it had not been done in a church" — but at Bristol in 1739 he followed the example of George Whitefield and "submitted to be more vile, and proclaimed in the highways the glad tidings of salvation" .
He was no more eager to accept local lay preachers; but he overcame his reluctance and these two developments became Methodism's most visible and challenging features.
Charles, John Wesley's brother, co-itinerant and best-known hymn writer, noted the appearance of "exhorters" , as local prea-chers were first known, in west Cornwall as early as 1746.
His reaction was a very guarded welcome.
I advised and charged them not to stretch themselves beyond their line by speaking out of the [local]society, or by fancying themselves public teachers.
If they keep within their bounds as they promise, they may be useful in the church.
In the following year John Wesley examined the qualities of eighteen exhorters who had emerged in the Cornish Societies.
Three of them he thought had special gifts but five were "dangerous" .
The remaining ten might be useful "when there was no preacher in their own or neighbouring societies provided they would take no step without the advice of those who had more experience than themselves" .
There were around forty exhorters in England by this time, so their growth does seem to have been especially marked in Cornwall.
John Wesley could admire the correctness with which "an  unlearned tinner speaks extemporare" , but more typical of his class was the reaction of one of his opponents in a letter to the Bishop of Exeter.
He described the "teacher" of the local Methodists as "no better than a mean illiterate tinner, and what is surprising, but a boy of nineteen years old" .
Here was Dr Johnson's fundamental reaction to lay preaching as "utterly incompatible with social or civil society" .
With much irritation the Duchess of Buckingham, who was after all the illegitimate daughter of a deposed king, wrote to the Countess of Huntingdon, an unusually high-born follower of George Whitefield:
I thank your ladyship for the information concerning the Methodist preaching; their doctrines are most repulsive, and strongly tinctured with impertinence and disrespect towards their superiors, in perpetually endeavouring to level all ranks and to do away with all distinctions, as it is monstrous to be told that you have a heart as sinful as the common wretches that crawl on the earth.
Persons of rank hardly needed anything as manifest as an active involvement in lay preaching on the part of the poor to resent the impropriety of an assertion of spiritual equality.
When John Wesley asked "a little gentleman" why a Methodist tinner had been arrested, he was told: "Why the man is well enough in other things, but his impudence the gentlemen cannot bear.
Why sir, he says he knows his sins are forgiven."
For the converted and those seeking to become so, the necessary support and pressure came from membership of the Society and participation in the regular local "class meetings" into which it was divided.
As class leaders as well as local preachers, persons of humble birth had the opportunity to play a responsible role in their communities.
Confidence gained and abilities thus discovered, for example in organising or in public speaking, could be harnessed for wider purposes.
In his biography of John Wesley the by then very conservative Robert Southey warned: Perhaps the manner in which Methodism has familiarized the lower classes to the work of combining in associations, making rules for their own governance, raising funds, and communicating from one part of  the kingdom to another, may be reckoned among the incidental evils which have arisen from it.
Southey's life was published in 1820 and even then its tone was rather more prophetic than a reference to an "evil" which already existed.
Following what has become known as the "Halévy thesis" , historians have more readily seen Methodism as a force for stability against "the threat of revolution" than as one which worked for it.
In the apprehensive 1790s hostility towards Methodism certainly increased.
Partly because it was increasing in numbers; more particularly because it was seeking to gain a foothold in the rural parishes which had thus far been largely impervious to its appeal and especially because, in the era of the French Revolution, anything which seemed to pose a threat to the Church of England established by law was suspect.
Despite their protestations of loyalty, Methodists could not escape being associated with Jacobinism by some.
Those who tend to see the eighteenth century as above all "the Age of Wesley" usually bring a good deal of retrospectivity to their view of the rise of Methodism over a period at the end of which Methodists were still not especially numerous in the nation as a whole.
Wesleyan membership in 1816 was 189,777 to which the breakaway New Connexion added only 8,146.
Even if we multiply this by three to allow for the greater number who considered themselves adherents although they had not joined the Society, and then increase the resulting 200,000 to half a million to allow for more casual "hearers" , this is still not a large fraction of a population of 10 million.
At the time of the American Revolution in 1776, when Wesley took great pains to publicise the "loyalty" of Methodists, there were only 30,875 members.
John Walsh has written of Methodism earlier in the century when it was still painfully experiencing instigated mob hostility that it is "improbable that infant Methodism was strong enough to have much overall effect as an emollient to industrial disturbance, let alone prevent a general revolt" .
Eric Hobsbawm has similarly written off its significance in explaining why Britain escaped revolution.
He has pointed both to its overall lack of numbers and to the fact that some of the areas where it was strong, west Cornwall for example, were not in any case likely locations for revolutionary agitation.
It has been suggested that Methodism generally produced an attitude of mind and sense of resignation as well as the habits of order and "industry" which combined to reinforce in the proletariat the necessary submission to the disciplinary imperatives of industrial capitalism.
Edward Thompson in particular has stressed this effect, writing of Methodism's late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth-century leaders: They weakened the poor from within by adding…the active ingredient of submission; and they fostered within the Methodist Church those elements most suited to make up the psychic component of the work-discipline of which the manufacturers stood most in need.
Methodism was in an unusual position to do this.
For although the great mass of its membership was working class, it also embraced an increasing section of the industrial bourgeoisie.
The effect of Methodism in increasing the acceptance of harsh working conditions by its working-class adherents was remarked by William Beckford on a visit to a Cornish mine as early as 1787.
Piety as well as gin helps to fill up their leisure moments…
Methodism has made a very rapid progress, and has been of no trifling service in diverting the attention of these sons of darkness from their present condition to the glories of the life to come.
There is little doubt either of the "extraordinary correspondence between the virtues which Methodism inculcated in the working class and the desiderata of middle-class Utilitarianism" , or of the fact that through the process of religious conversion and its reinforcement through the spiritual discipline of the Methodist system of regular "class" meetings, these attitudes were deeply instilled.
All this gives it some importance in bringing the workforce to acceptance of the new work disciplines of the industrial revolution.
But how much importance, as with the question of its role in averting revolution, depends upon an assessment of Methodist strength.
Of the minority of the working classes who were Methodists by 1815 even after the growth surge which began in the 1790s, most were not members of the forming industrial proletariat.
Miners apart, artisans have been shown by Dr Field to have been the group most closely associated with Methodism.
Around two-thirds of its eigh-teenth-century membership were "manufacturers" in the sense of  the time, that is working craftsmen like weavers and tailors.
While it established centres of strength in many of the growing industrial towns of the Black Country, the West Riding and south Lancashire, it was, relative to the population, stronger in the manufacturing and mining villages.
The hand-loom weaver on the eve of his long decline was much more likely to have been a Methodist than was the mule spinner of the new generation proletariat.
Methodism also became and remained strong in some urban centres of old-style manufacturing such as Norwich and the Potteries.
In an interesting but rather elusive study of Methodism, which sees it as "the English counterpart to the democratic revolution" , the critical dynamic in a "modernisation" of English society which bypassed the need for revolution, Professor Semmel writes that Wesley primarily addressed his message to "The poor of the nascent proletariat of England's growing factory towns" .
To present Methodism as essentially an urban phenomenon is seriously misleading.
Wesley made little progress with agricultural labourers because they were tied into the rigidities of the traditional social order, although he blamed it on the stolid stupidity of the peasantry, but in many mining and manufacturing villages Methodism throve.
Probably many urban employers in the new forms of manufacture would have liked more of their workers to have become self-disciplined Methodists, but it was the employers of the village-dwelling miners who could already appreciate the benefits by the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The phase of Methodist growth which began in the 1790s was not marked simply by the addition of numbers.
The revivalist excitement of the early years reappeared.
Revivalism also began to appear in the parallel growth of some of the dissenting churches and, most extremely, in the emergence of extraordinary movements of popular messianism and millenarianism.
Edward Thompson has placed the fervent nature of popular religious outbursts in the excited years of the French Revolutionary wars into a pattern of oscillation with the peaks of popular radicalism, serving as the "chiliasm of the defeated and the hopeless" .
The defeat of British Jacobinism at the end of the 1790s was the starting point of an effervescence of fringe religious movements.
The best known was that which followed the Devonshire prophetess Joanna Southcott.
She first recognised her call in 1792 at the age of forty-two and at her death in 1814 was still  announcing that she was to bear a saviour child, the "Almighty Shiloh" .
Her disciples kept her body warm for several days, expecting a resurrection.
The child she could not present, but at least 100,000 people believed in her.
She had once been a warm Methodist and so too, probably, had been most of her followers.
For those who see Methodism only through the solid shopkeeper image of Victorian times, this may seem a strange assertion.
That safe and quiet Methodism had little in common with the revived excitement of the wartime years.
Methodism then, as Southey remarked, made of religion "a thing of sensation and passion, craving perpetually for sympathy and stimulants" .
Cornwall was particularly prone to revivals, so much so that their occurrence suggests their functional role was one of periodic recruitment to and consolidation of the membership.
That of 1814, however, became known as the Great Revival and it was much more than simply a recruitment phenomenon.
So striking was the experience that many were said to believe it was preparatory to the end of the world.
Such a sight as the chapel of Redruth afforded, and the other towns and parishes in succession was never witnessed here.
Men crying with loud and bitter cries, till the anguish of their souls had opened every pore of the body, and produced a perspiration which fell from their face to the ground.
From this you may form some idea of their distress, and the holy violence used in entering the strait gate.
Almost all temporal business was at a stand, and the shops mostly shut up.
When market day came there was scarce any buying or selling, for all were "labouring for the bread which endureth to eternal life" .
The cries for mercy were not confined to the chapel, but extended to the streets, and men and women were seen…in the streets, supported on each side from the chapel to their houses, for they could neither stand nor walk, and were not ashamed to, "cry to Him who is able to save" .
In the Redruth circuit alone…they have added two thousand to the society.
Excitement indeed! and it even caught up a sober and spiritually distanced Quaker who could not "find words sufficient to draw it in colours strong enough" but has left a useful description of a phenomenon which seems to have lasted for several weeks, "when the great noise subsided, but the fire still existed" .
He found words  strong enough to describe a "torrent" which "bore down everything in its way" , a "great current" and "an extraordinary agitation" .
Cornwall was no centre of radicalism, so one would not look there for a pattern of oscillation, but a detailed study of the Great Yorkshire Revival of 1792–6 has led its author to the conclusion that Thompson's speculative idea gains some support from the experience of the North.
In any case any pattern of interaction between popular radicalism and revivalism, whether oscillating or of any other kind, could not be discerned in a period bounded by 1815.
It would need to look at least at the two following decades.
POPULAR RECREATIONS
Methodism may not have been "puritan" in the challenging sense of the seventeenth century, but it was so in its behavioural attitudes.
From the beginning it confronted the secular "idle" pastimes of the labouring poor, prohibited them to its followers and generally opposed the "forces of revelry" .
Towards the end of the eighteenth century Anglican evangelicalism reinforced the attack, but it operated on the poor; Methodism did that and worked in the hearts and minds of the poor.
What both opposed was a vital popular culture, which had in the eighteenth century entered on a vigorous phase.
The pastimes of the "plebs" included rude sports such as wrestling, cudgelling, football, quoits, bear and badger baiting and cock fighting.
Such activities revolved around the agricultural calendar, village feasts, markets and hiring fairs, or, in the case of manufacturing workers, traditional holidays including "Saint Monday" .
Edward Thompson maintains that for a variety of reasons traditional pursuits were strongly resilient through the eighteenth century and were weakened only by forces which developed in the nineteenth.
His view of a robust plebeian culture embraces more than recreation, although the forms this took played an important and integrated role in a popular culture which represented a whole way of life.
It was the "comparative freedom" of the common people which invigorated this popular culture.
 "This is the century which sees the erosion of half-free forms of labour, the decline of living-in, the final extinction of labour services and the advance of free, mobile, wage labour." 
Capitalism, if the labour market was to operate, needed a workforce which was both mobile and wage responsive, and this meant an interim period in which old forms of control were eroded before newer and more appropriate forms of social and industrial control had fully emerged to take their place.
Henry Fielding perceived this in 1751 when he wrote:…the commonality by degrees shook off their vassalage, and became more and more independent of their superiors.
Even servants, in process of time, acquired a state of freedom and independency unknown to this rank in any other nation; and which, as the law now stands, is inconsistent with a servile condition.
But nothing hath wrought such an alternation in this order of people as the introduction of trade.
This hath indeed given a new face to the whole nation, hath in a great measure subverted the former state of affairs, and hath almost totally changed the manners, customs, and habits of the people, more especially of the lower sort.
The great novelist, here writing as a criminologist, was evidently seeking to describe a social accompaniment of the transition to a capitalist mode of production, which to him as a magistrate was most evident as a problem of order.
Changes in hiring forms and in master-to-man relationships tending towards the predomination of the wage form in both agriculture and manufacturing resulted in only a part of the labourer's life, his working hours, being under the control of his employer.
As other forms of control and influence, such as that of the lower clergy, diminished, the people were given a space in which to make their own culture.
This freedom did not necessarily find expression in forms which were in conflict with the ruling patrician elite.
In fact the country gentry were able to patronise popular leisure to some extent in a paternalist extension of their own authority, since no change in the status system was involved.
There is, for most of the century, no simple suggestion of a dominant class resisting a popular culture and attempting to supplant it with a preferred alternative, but rather a willingness not only to tolerate it but to accept a functional involvement.
This was not new in the eighteenth century.
Peter Burke has shown how in early modern Europe the gentry had enjoyed participation in many of the recreations of the poor, but in the eighteenth century their role in patronising and encouraging certain popular  activities served broader purposes.
Through the manipulation of doles in times of dearth, the putting up of prizes for sports and the supplying of beer for calendrical and special festivities, together with an elaborate and conscious "social theatre" of ceremony, the gentry were able to rule and distance themselves from the consequences of their own exploitation.
Reciprocation is inherent in a relationship which is an act of giving from above and of receiving from below.
Thus the poor were not slow to demand (perhaps as a crowd, with its own forms of theatre and symbolism) recognition of what they considered their "rights" .
In such practices the links, for example, between food rioting for "just prices" and persisting in lighting bonfires in public places on 5 November even if they were regarded as "nuisances" by authorities, are evident.
Robert Malcolmson's pioneering researches have placed eigh-teenth-century recreations sociologically with a thoroughness and insight which can hardly be equalled in a general textbook.
He has described the vulgar pastimes of football, bull baiting, etc. and revealed the extent of gentry encouragement and patronage.
He has also noted the importance of publicans as profit-minded promoters of plebeian events.
How far can their involvement be viewed as a counter tendency, i.e. one working towards commercialisation of working-class leisure?
This is an important consideration, but for the moment it can be noted that the activities of the drink sellers took place within existing recreational forms.
They were an adjunct to and lubricant for existing activities rather than part of the supplanting of a traditional culture.
In the countryside the timing of feasts, festivals, fairs and wakes was determined largely by the farming calendar and there was a degree of integration between the rhythms of work and those of leisure, leading Thompson to suggest some degree of anachronism in the use by historians of the word "leisure" .
Much recreation was associated with occasions which served to bind the community and emphasise its cohesiveness.
Malcolmson has shown that fairs had special significance in terms of courtship and sexual activity for the young as well as allowing participants the chance of winning status and prestige among their peers.
The older villagers mainly watched, but by so doing at least attached themselves to and reinforced the validity of the actions of the young.
As important as any of the  functions of popular recreation was the simple element of "carnival" introducing moments of release into hard and humdrum lives.
Group solidarity was the cornerstone of plebeian activity, for it was as a group that the poor both sported and, on occasion, demanded their rights, fair prices or customary access.
It was as a group that they could in "counter-theatre" mock, mimic and remind their social superiors of their presence as well as discipline offenders against their community norms through charivaris or similar folk forms of expressing displeasure.
As a crowd they had power as well as anonymity.
In the detailed researches of Malcolmson and others there is ample illustration of the vigour of recreational forms which were an essential part of a plebeian culture, consideration of which is central to an understanding of the social relations of the period.
A different perspective on eighteenth-century leisure has been offered by Professor Plumb.
He has seen in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the emergence of a commercial "leisure industry" responding to a bourgeois desire to emulate the existing minority culture of the elite.
He has illustrated the expanding provision of leisure opportunities for a growing middle class and offered a convincing account of, for example, the spread of newspapers and periodical literature and the complex of activities associated with the remarkable rise of the leisure towns.
Indeed, their growth, which Dr Borsay has described as a key dynamic in an "urban renaissance" between 1680 and 1760, is central to his argument for an expanding leisure industry.
However, although Professor Plumb suggests the participation of "better-off" tradesmen he clearly sees the leisure industry as catering mostly for the expanding and increasingly prosperous middle class.
But is there a possibility that it reached further?
Plumb, though he mentions horse racing, with working-class spectators, and prize fighting, is really talking about a culture dependent on literacy, not about traditional sports, and about an added dimension to bourgeois life.
Thompson is concerned to place plebeian recreations into a popular mentalité which remained active through the eighteenth century.
The leisure industry was an urban phenomenon at a time when most of the population did not live in towns.
For urban artisans the receiving of a handed-down leisure product is at least plausible, but in the  countryside where no significant group mediated between patrician and pleb, it is much less so.
Professor Plumb has suggested that commercial leisure was beginning to squeeze popular as well as "high" culture.
Thompson, on the contrary, has drawn lines which link the plebs with the patricians to form a deference/patronage model making sense of many aspects of social relations in a century in which the space between an old paternalist (master/servant) relationship and the coming discipline of the industrial economy was filled with a plebeian culture of evident vitality.
Perhaps a commercial squeeze on popular recreational forms can at least be seen in London and possibly other growing urban centres.
Henry Fielding wrote of the capital in 1751: "What an immense variety of places has this town and its neighbourhood set apart for the amusement of the lowest order of the people." 
By the time Francis Place was serving his apprenticeship in the 1780s he and his fellows were avid consumers of leisure.
Apprenticeship was, however, a youth as much as a class phenomenon, and although Horace Walpole might remark of Vauxhall pleasure garden that everybody from "the Duke of Grafton down to children out of the Foundling hospital" went there, an admission fee of 2s 6d a head was a considerable barrier, though some women from the lower orders went there in the way of business.
In a challenging analysis Hans Medick has pointed to the increasing output of gin as indicating greater working-class expenditure on leisure.
Gin was, after all, commercially produced and consumed only by the lower orders.
Thompson's work has emphasised a tradition-based resistance to emerging capitalism but, Medick suggests, concentrates on only one dimension of the relationship between plebeian culture and the expansion of capitalist markets.
The other dimension, he argues, is found in an everyday life which was to some extent in harmony with the market economy — in consumption, in fashion and especially in changing forms of plebeian drinking.
In this dimension the lower orders did invest money as well as "emotional capital" in leisure.
Despite low incomes they had not switched priority to the long-term needs of their households.
Instead, conditioned by the nature of the family economy inherited from days of lower wage-dependency, they regarded earnings above those necessary for a customary material standard of living as a  surplus which could be spent on leisure, festivities and luxuries.
This suggests that the constant complaints of their social superiors, that the poor's expenditure was irrationally related to their incomes, were not simply class prejudice.
There was clearly a rising consumption of gin which was equally clearly a capitalist product.
Indeed, initially favoured by the government to soak up excess cereal production, it was one which linked agricultural, manufacturing and commercial capitalism before it reached its proletarian consumers.
Consumption increased sixfold between 1700 and 1743, suggesting that to some degree traditional culture was being undermined by changes in the demand for and taste in leisure — a chosen indulgence on the part of the lower orders.
Medick has posed an important question, but his English examples are narrowly drawn.
How representative was London's "Gin Age" ?
The rise of spirit smuggling, gin, rum and brandy, reflects an increase in national consumption, but we do not know enough to suggest that the drinking culture was changing in the countryside and in the small towns.
The beer and cider which lubricated the great festivities of the rural calendar, as at harvest for example, were not bought, they were made by farmers and were expected largesse.
Evidence from manufacturing also indicates that drinking customs continued to be linked to beer consumption, quite often expected from employers as a perquisite.
Nevertheless, Medick's linking of new forms of recreation to the early period of adjustment to a money wage and to well-noted irregular rhythms of labour offers a more convincing explanation for the commercialisation of working-class leisure than does a simple downward percolation of middle- class forms.
From his approach it is possible to link some eigh-teenth-century forms of recreation to the revised view of nineteenth-century forms recently presented by Dr Cunningham with its greater emphasis on commercial provision for working-class tastes.
From at least the closing years of the eighteenth century the decline of gentry involvement and even tolerance of plebeian sports was evident.
Malcolmson has commented that a result of this withdrawal of patronage by the gentry and the better-off farmers as social distance increased was that "a solid barrier so developed between the culture of gentility and the culture of the people" .
Northamptonshire mumming, Shrovetide football, and "Plough Mondays" are examples of practices which were no longer encouraged and to an extent positively discouraged by a gentry which increasingly distanced itself from rude diversions and vulgar games.
Evangelicalism became an especially potent force in the attack on traditional pastimes.
It was distinguished by a belief in the inherent depravity of popular recreational forms.
Such activities were not just a waste of time which could be more usefully passed making profits for capitalists.
They were not just inconvenient and disruptive, but sinful.
The evangelical movement within the Church of England, from the royal proclamation of 1787 issued at the instigation of William Wilberforce, aimed at stirring up the vigilant suppression of "vice" and attacked pastimes even when they were not breaking the sabbath.
Committed evangelicals were a minority, but the movement greatly influenced the attitudes of a wider section of the ruling classes in the way they came to regard plebeian recreations.
Where Methodism took hold, the force of the new puritanism was vastly more effective, largely because it attached sections of the working class itself to the moral crusade and began that polarisation of "respectable" and "rough" which was a developing feature in working-class communities in the nineteenth century.
John Wesley had confronted popular recreational forms from the early days of his mission.
His Journal records his disgust with the "savage ignorance and wickedness" of the Newcastle colliers who assembled on Sundays to "dance, fight, curse and swear and play at chuck-ball, span-farthing, or whatever came next to hand" .
In 1766 he arrived at Otley on feast day and found the town "gone mad in noise, hurry, drunkenness, rioting, confusion, to the shame of a Christian country" .
Charles Wesley congratulated himself in 1744 that as a consequence of his having preached against wrestling on his visit to Cornwall in the preceding year, the village of Gwennap had been unable to find enough men for their next contest, "all the Gwennap men being struck off the Devil's list, and found wrestling against him not for him" .
By the early nineteenth century even an Anglican clergyman was prepared to give credit to the Methodists for the fact that in Cornwall there were no more "desperate wrestling matches…and inhuman cockfights" and fewer "riotous revellings" .
It was not simply a matter of counter action, for the chapel with its meetings, services, love-feasts, etc. became in itself a centre of non-work-time  activities and as the nineteenth century advanced, a deliberate purveyor of counter attraction.
Such attacks were reinforcing the pressures on time and space which in a changing economy were restricting the room allowed to traditional recreational forms.
In 1824 a retrospective view regretted as one of the social costs of enclosure that "the poor have no place on which they can amuse themselves in summer evenings, when the labour of the day is over, or when a holiday occurs" .
It was an echo of Goldsmith's Deserted Village written more than fifty years earlier.
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene, Lived in each look, and brightened all the green; These, far departing, seek a kinder shore, And rural mirth and manners are no more.
Town growth, too, as William Hutton's history of Birmingham indicates, threatened space, especially as much of it was a matter of infilling within existing boundaries.
However, even by the middle years of the nineteenth century an industrial city like Manchester had not expanded so far as to prevent its mill workers walking in the country on Sundays.
The long, regimented day, six of which made up a working week, obviously constrained the recreational possibilities for factory workers.
The evidence is clear, too, that in mining districts the first part of the nineteenth century saw a serious erosion of holidays.
In most towns, however, the factory system was hardly evident and many urban workers seem to have been still keeping hold of Saint Monday as, almost, an accepted holiday in 1815.
At least, that is what the evidence from both Birmingham and Bristol suggests.
As for the countryside, the main complaint of the wage labourer was of underemployment and at certain seasons of the agricultural calendar many of them must have wished they did not have time on their hands.
In this respect, as in so many others, the eighteenth-century economy was a developing rather than a developed one.
The transformation of leisure, like the transformation of work, had for large numbers of the labouring poor hardly begun even by its end.
The Standard of Living
Money-wage data and real-wage series based on full-time adult male earnings have serious limitations in the assessment of living stan-dards but can convey much useful information on the wage economy.
They allow comparisons between occupations; within occupations over time; between male and female workers, and between regions.
Joseph Massie's well-known survey of 1759 emphasised two main differentials: that craftsmen's wages were higher than those of common labourers, while in both categories wages were higher in London than in the provinces.
A third should be added: that men's wages were invariably higher than women's, even if for similar or even identical work.
Discussion of eighteenth-century wages — money or real — is helped by dividing the period at the beginning of the French wars in 1793, for not only did 1792 represent an earnings peak for many workers, but the wage history of 1793 to 1815 is dramatically different from that of the preceding ninety years.
Over the latter generally slowly improving money wages brought a degree of improvement in real wages because cereal prices were generally low over the first half of the century.
Thereafter the accelerating rate of population growth coincided with the ending of the bounty of generally good harvests to turn the trend in the cost of living sharply upwards, while in most regions the increase in the labour force changed a labour market in which wages had generally held up for more than half a century.
As two leading historical demographers have recently stressed: "The largest and most obvious effect of the sharp rise in population in the eighteenth century was on the national average wage of labour." 
The kinds of productivity change which can increase  output sufficiently to offset rapid population growth were becoming significant only in the early nineteenth century.
This does not mean that the pace of innovation and of capital formation in the eighteenth-century economy were negligible.
Indeed, they were sufficient to allow an increase in the labour force of about 5 per cent at constant wages.
Any slower rate, as for example in the first half of the eighteenth century, allowed real wages to rise.
The demographic acceleration of the second half of the century depressed them quite sharply, except in those areas in the North and Midlands where manufacturing change and expansion were locally creating a different labour market.
This was a significant exception, but although their higher rate of natural increase and migration into the rising manufacturing districts enlarged the population of earners in the "better-waged" districts absolutely and proportionately, this was insufficient to prevent a fall in the national average real wage.
REGIONAL DIFFERENCES
Since the long-established, much-criticised index on which Figure 7.1 is based relies on southern wage data for critical years during the crucial third quarter of the eighteenth century, it probably tends to a degree of pessimism, but an insufficient one to affect the trend.
This is not surprising if we take account of two factors.
Firstly, the dynamism of the newly industrialising areas provided a net rather than an entire gain to manufacturing output, for historians have increasingly come to recognise that it was in part linked to a measure of "de-industrialisation" in the South and East.
Secondly, noticeable as was migration into, for example, west Lancashire, it did not match the continued pouring of people into London, for which city the evidence for a decline in real wages in the second half of the century is ample and conclusive.
This is the general picture which needs now to be examined in detail.
According to Massie in 1759, London's labourers earned 9s (45p) a week compared with a country level of 5s (25p).
The capital's textile workers, predominantly in silk, earned 10s 6d (52½p) compared with 7s 6d (37½p), while her craftsmen in wood and metal earned 12s (60p), bettering their country cousins by 3s (15p).
Massie's figures are in line with other evidence, in so far as his broad categories allow confident comparison.
(For example, they hide the fact that significantly higher wages were earned by an elite of urban craftsmen.
Defoe's "topping workmen" as mere journeymen earned between 15s (75p) and 50s (£2.50) a week.)
In general he is close to Adam Smith's 1s 6d (7½p) as the "common price" per day of labour in London in 1776, although Smith's 8d (3p) for country labour is a wider differential.
In both London and elsewhere, Smith put the earnings of craftsmen in the building trades as from 50 to 100 per cent higher than those of general labourers.
Dr George suggested a differential ratio between skilled and unskilled labour in eighteenth-century London of around 3: 2.
This seems an acceptable ratio and means that wage series based on the earnings of craftsmen are not as unhelpful in indicating the trend of the wages of ordinary labourers as has sometimes been suggested.
While the ability of organised skilled workers to restrict entry to their trade and to develop defensive strategies probably  means their wages rose more sharply when the economy turned up, and fell less quickly on the downturns, this would have the effect of flattening fluctuations rather than of misdirecting trends.
Over the eighteenth century higher London wages had been driving some manufactures into the country.
Stocking knitting had been removing to the east Midlands from the last years of the preceding century.
Shoe making was progressively employing cheaper labour around and in Northampton, while in the 1780s calico printing moved north to Lancashire.
In general the "topping workmen" were rare enough in London and hardly existed elsewhere, except perhaps in some branches of the metal trades in Sheffield or Birmingham.
At the other end of the skilled earning spectrum were those overstocked trades where entry premiums and skill levels were too low to keep wages much above those of common labourers.
London's numerous tailors were such a case.
For much of the century, their daily rate had been fixed by statute, initially in 1721 at 2s or 2s 6d (10-12½p) per day, but they were hardly ever able to find employment constant enough to earn more than 9s (45p) a week, and in their slack months even less.
Required levels of literacy and dexterity kept the supply of compositors, on the other hand, in better balance with the demands of the printing trade.
Dr Johnson considered them to be just about worth the guinea a week (£l.05) they generally earned.
The saddlers were largely justified in 1777 in stating that their 12 to 15s (60 to 75p) a week was somewhat below the going rate for a skilled trade with a substantial entry premium.
Masons seem to have earned around 15s in London over the first three-quarters of the eighteenth century, and if employment was regular, that seems to represent a "middle line" for metropolitan artisans until the steeply inflationary 1790s.
Wage differentials notwithstanding, the nominal wages of London's skilled men did not much move over the century until the last decade.
Bricklayers' money wages, apart from a slight fall from 1736 to 1742, were unchanged from 1717 to 1792, and their labourers' rates shared their constancy at a ratio of 3: 2.
In the face of the low cereal prices of the first part of the century, this meant a rising trend until the mid 1750s then a sharp and sustained deterioration as the cost of living increased.
Two periods, 1750–70 and the 1780s, saw especially sharp declines, although the generally high  level of economic activity in the latter may have compensated to a degree with fuller employment.
The figures indicate that the real-wage decline of London's workers was already marked before the impact of the soaring prices of the French war years (1793–1815), for there seems every reason to consider the trend of bricklayers' wages as representative.
Both the 1750s and the 1760s contained food-price peaks, 1756–7 and 1766, but there is no escaping the conclusion that the general trend in the standard of living was inexorably downward.
Dr Schwarz measures the decline of the 1760s as being as marked as that of the 1790s.
Outside of London, too, generally over the South, the West and the South-east, a decline in real wages set in at some point in the two decades centred on 1760, as money wages fell behind rising prices.
Dr Gilboy calculated that an annual £15 for the western labourer in 1750 had stretched to only £18.75 by 1775.
More recently, Dr Snell has suggested that male real wages rose in the southern part of the country from 1740 to 1770, then stabilised before the whole gain was wiped out in the French war years.
But for families standards of  living were reduced by the fact that women's earnings had been falling from 1760.
For these parts of the country the evidence on earnings would seem to justify Adam Smith's observation of 1776: "the high price of provisions during these ten years past has not in many parts of the kingdom been accompanied with any sensible rise in the money price of labour" .
The implication is perhaps that there were some parts in which it had; that will be considered below, after we have looked at the pattern of provincial money wages.
Hand-loom weavers in the various textile manufactures were the most ubiquitous of manufacturing workers.
For them Massie suggested a mid-century level of 7s 6d (37½p) a week which agrees well enough with a recent estimate of around £20 a year for West-Country woollen weavers in regular employment.
Two of these reported earnings of 13s (65p) and 18s (90p) to a parliamentary enquiry in 1757, but calculated this on the basis of a fourteen- to sixteen-hour day by a family working as a unit.
Where employed, living-in journeymen got their keep and 6s (30p), which rate was said to have persisted since the 1730s.
These figures were produced in support of the employers' position in the course of a bitter wage dispute; the weavers claimed that on some types of cloth they could hardly make 4d (2p) a day.
A line between these polemical extremes would come close to Massie's 7s 6d (37½p).
Queen Anne's time had been the "golden period" for the serge weavers of the Exeter region.
Although an Exeter weaver could still make 9s (45p) a week in 1750, a level still persisting in nearby Taunton in 1764, by 1787 he had fallen to 8s (40p) and to 7s (35p) by 1791.
Against this wage trend, the rising prices of the latter part of the century were bound to make for severe reductions in living standards.
Professor Hoskins, basing his cost-of-living calculation on a range of local price data, not simply cereals, calculated that whereas real wages of labourers and craftsmen fell by around 30 per cent over the second half of the eighteenth century, those of most woollen workers fell by nearer 50 per cent.
Earnings of other textile workers in the southern and eastern parts of the country, disclosed by Arthur Young in his Tours of the 1770s, suggest a range from the 10 to 12s (50-60p) earned by the specialist blanket weavers of Witney and carpet weavers of Wilton to a low of 5s (25p) scraped by Norwich worsted weavers at a time of serious decline in their trade.
In isolated centres of woollen or worsted weaving, like Romsey, Banbury and Kendal, around 9s a week (45p) seems to have been a "seventies" norm for urban weavers.
Wool combers, essential preparatory workers in the production of worsted yarn, earned more.
Adam Smith presented them as an example of a small group of workers so strategically placed in the chain of production that they could command high wages.
These hardly moved in money terms through the eighteenth century.
At Tiverton in 1809 they had claimed they had received the same rate for 300 years!
For most of the century they earned from 10 to 12s a week (50-60p), and could, it was often argued, have earned more if they had chosen to work more hours.
Shearmen, who cut the pile to finish woollen cloth, were similarly paid.
Cotton weavers hardly existed before the 1770s, during which decade they do not seem to have been able to command wages above the low norm of weavers in general, for although on some types of cloth as much as 12s (60p) could be earned, the average, like that of bleachers and dyers, seems to have been around 7s (35p).
However, their fortunes were soon to enter on that switchback which took them first to a golden age, and then through impoverishment to extinction as they became first the beneficiaries of factory-produced yarn, and then the victims of their own expansion in numbers and, ultimately, of the power loom.
Framework knitters received comparable wages for turning yarn into stockings: in the 1770s from 6s (30p) a week down to 4s 6d (22½p) for the coarser varieties.
These figures relate to 1778 when the knitters were seeking a parliamentary regulation of their wages to levels about a third higher, restoring earnings to the level of twenty years earlier before a long decline had set in.
They did not achieve this, but their future was closely to parallel that of the cotton hand-loom weavers in moving through boom to desperation.
Coal miners usually earned more than farm or common labourers.
Estimates of the earnings of pitmen on the Tyne and Wear vary, but they seem to have been around 7s (35p) up to 1740 and then 10s (50p) up to 1790, with, at busy times, earnings reaching from 2 to 4s (10-20p) above this level.
For Wigan's colliers a level of 10s 10d (54p) is recorded for 1752, and of 1s 6d (7½p) a day for 1764–5.
Lancashire colliers seem to have been able to earn around  1s 9d (8½p) a day by 1786, rather less than the 2s 3d (11p) then being earned on the Yorkshire coalfield, let alone the 3s (15p) for which Staffordshire miners were then striking.
The earnings of metal miners are notoriously difficult to estimate because intricate systems of payment by results produced wide fluctuations.
Cornish tin and copper miners averaged between 5 and 7s (25-35p) in 1730, 7s 6d (37½p) in 1778 and 10s (50p) by the 1790s.
Young estimated the wages of north-country lead miners at 7s 6d (37½p) in 1771.
Colliers probably, and metal miners possibly, were among groups who do not seem to have experienced the widespread fall in real earnings after 1760.
Outside London the highest wages were to be found in Birmingham and Sheffield, the great centres of hardware manufacture.
Young in 1790 gave 10 to 25s (50p-£1.25) as the range for Birmingham but considered the higher level to predominate, making wages there "the highest in Europe" .
Twenty years earlier he had put the bottom of the range at 7s (35p).
Then he had also been astonished to find that some of Sheffield's cutlery grinders earned from 18s (90p) to £1 a week.
Daily earnings of 1s 6d (7½p) to 2s (10p) were general, while a small number of razor grinders could make 10s 6d (52½p) a day, "surprising wages for any manual performance" .
In 1792 wages in Sheffield were said to be so high generally as to allow the leisure-preferring cutlers to live comfortably from working only three days a week.
Do the wages of these two great manufacturing centres indicate, along with the evidence from northern and Midland coalfields, that in the dynamic "industrialising" regions, nominal wages were buoyant enough to maintain or even improve real earnings from mid century through to the 1780s despite the burden of rising prices?
The pioneering wage data published by Dr Gilboy in 1934 revealed a very different trend in Lancashire after 1750 from that in London and the South.
Her index of money wages for Lancashire (1700 = 100) rose from 133 in 1750, through 200 in 1780 to 267 by 1793.
Over the third quarter of the century she estimated a rise in annual earnings of 50 per cent in the North against 7 per cent in the West and no rise at all in London.
Reworking of her indices by Deane and Cole suggests that between the quinquennium 1750–4 to 1785–9 money wage rises in the South varied between less than 4 per cent for London labourers and 19.4 per cent for those of Kent, whereas  in Lancashire labourers gained 64 per cent and craftsmen 40.5 per cent over the period.
As Dr Von Tunzelmann has pointed out, if the same price data are used, with the Lancashire wage data it would produce an increase in real wages from 1750 to 1780 of around 20 per cent, while with southern wage data a fall of around 15 per cent appears.
The manufacturing and mining district of north Staffordshire has recently been claimed to share the Lancashire trend.
An 18 per cent improvement in the real wages of general labourers between 1754–5 and 1788–92 has been estimated.
The wages of building craftsmen rose from 1s 4d (6½p) a day in the 1750s to 2s (10p) in the mid 1770s and 2s 6d (12½p) around 1790, with the most distinct upward trend peaking around 1780.
Carpenters gained a real-wage improvement of 10 per cent and bricklayers one of 14 per cent between 1750–4 and 1788–92.
The major manufacture of the area, pottery, exhibits a wide variety of skills with corresponding wage levels, but skilled male potters seem to have enjoyed an unusually rapid wage increase from the late 1760s to the early 1790s, bringing a real-wage improvement of almost 50 per cent.
The daily rate of hewers on the north Staffordshire coalfield advanced from 1s 5d a day to 2s 6d (7p to 12½p) between 1774–5 and 1789–92, a 75 per cent increase in money wages bringing a real improvement of 60 per cent.
Wage information from Yorkshire is similarly supportive of the Gilboy position, suggesting a 50 per cent increase in the money wages of craftsmen and labourers in the West Riding between 1750 and 1780 and in the North Riding an increase of 100 per cent for the former and 33 per cent for the latter.
Taking the evidence from those areas where industrial employment was expanding, Professor Malcolmson has accepted that they "unquestionably experienced a general increase in real wages" during the last third of the eighteenth century, and qualify the generally unhappy standard of living experience over the rest of the country.
The evidence for this regional divergence does not rest only on wage levels in manufacturing and mining.
An important part of the argument is that the competitive effect of these expanding sectors in the district labour market was to raise the wages of agricultural labour.
It began that division of agricultural England into a high-wage North and a low-wage South which is best known from Sir  James Caird's map drawn when the dichotomy was at its peak in 1850.
Dr Hunt has pointed out that the geography of farm wages changed far more between 1750 and 1790 than at any time in the period 1790 to 1914.
The changes in fact were sufficient to transform the pre-industrial pattern of regional wages.
In the 1760s most of England's high-wage counties were in the south-east and the greatest concentration of low-wage counties was in the north; by the 1790s, eight out of the eleven highest-wage counties were in the north and midlands and only three were in the south-east.
It should be stressed that it is not nearness to industry per se which drew agricultural wages upwards, but proximity to the expanding newer industrial regions.
Old centres of woollen manufacture and of mining in the South-west had no such effect.
Comparing levels over twenty- or thirty-year periods does not reveal how even was the wage performance over them.
Dr Schwarz has suggested that the evidence points to the regional divergence becoming a clear trend only after 1770, with falls in real wages in the 1760s being avoided only by some groups in Lancashire and Yorkshire.
Further, it seems likely that although it may have been the case in the earlier nineteenth century that the proportion of the English population living in the higher-waged North increased both as a result of a higher natural rate of increase and from in-migration, in 1801 53 per cent of the population still lived south of the Severn/Wash line, while north of it counties like Herefordshire and Worcestershire  were not high-waged.
Deane and Cole have pointed out that the statistics of migration during the early industrial revolution suggest little in the way of a south-to-north population drift: "What is surprising is the comparatively minor role played by migration in the early development of the main industrial areas." 
On the whole, up to 1780 the group seems to have lost population, then to have shown a small net gain before a more general movement becomes clear after 1801.
There seems little point in balancing group against group and region against region.
What matters is that economic advances in some regions offset to a degree the general pressure on real wages of the rising population.
That this was so, and that its effect was emphasised by the fact that it was largely in these same regions that opportunities for women and children to earn expanded when elsewhere they may even have declined, explains why home demand at least did not collapse despite increasing dependency ratios, very slowly growing income per capita and a deterioration in real wages on the part of, probably, the majority of the working population.
WAGES IN THE FRENCH WAR YEARS
The long stability of nominal wages ended abruptly in the 1790s.
It had to, for the cost of living soared.
The gentle price rise gave way to a rapid one, especially for food.
Between 1783 and 1793 wheat had averaged 47s (£2.35) a quarter; between 1793 and 1801 it averaged 77s (£3.85) and from 1803 to 1813 92s (£4.60).
In 1812 it had been an incredible 126s (£6.30).
A cost of living index based more widely than on wheat, gives the estimates in Table 7.4.
The average from 1781 to 1790 had been 117.7, with the cheapest year, 1785, at 112.3 and the dearest, 1790, at 125.9.
Faced with such an upward price trend it is hardly surprising that historians have tended to present the war years as a time of deteriorating living standards.
According to Professor Thomis, it is "an area of agreement" that wages were generally unable to keep up with steeply rising food prices, while Mathias, pointing to rising money wages as a feature of the period, concludes that inflating prices generally outpaced them.
All this, supported by literary evidence, suggests deterioration: bleaker diets (but with the poor still demanding wheat), a decline in non-food purchasing, with standards probably lower than at any other time since the wars at the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Von Tunzelmann, remarking that prices had the greater influence on real wage trends over this period, finds that the indices available are much closer to each other than they are for the periods on either side.
They point to a real wage drop of 10 to 12 per cent from 1790 to 1795, then a slight recovery to around 5 per cent below the 1790 level over 1797–8, followed by a plunge bottoming in 1800–1 at 30 per cent below the 1790 level.
Recovery took 1802–3 wages back to that level, but then a fall took them down 10 per cent by 1808–9, before they recovered this in 1810–11 then fell back somewhat to end the war years perhaps 5 to 8 per cent above the level at which they had begun it.
If the food-crisis peaks of 1795, 1800–1 and 1812–13 are disregarded — for it can be firmly concluded that in those years, as in 1739–40 and 1766–7, the living standards of wage-earners must have been substantially, though temporarily, reduced — then the general real-wage trend of the war years suggests no marked movement  either way.
Instead it allows for the discovery of both marginal gainers and losers.
Professor Flinn found no very wide gulf between wage and price increases and concluded that "contrary to the very commonly made generalisation that rapidly rising prices tended to erode real wages…it seems that for many groups of workers…wage rates in general broadly kept pace with rising prices" .
The food price trend, as opposed to short-term fluctuations, over the war years was in the region of plus 65–85 per cent.
If we take the optimistic view, we could suggest that any group of wage-earners who managed to secure a wage increase of 60 per cent cannot have ended the period to any real degree worse off than they began it.
Williamson has suggested that the nominal money earnings of common labourers (non-agricultural) increased by 75 per cent from 1797 to 1815.
This group benefited most from the increasing absorption of men into the Army and Navy which peaked at around 10 per cent of the adult male labour force, nullifying the effect of population increase on the labour market.
Yet the figures for this group in Bath produced by Professor Neale, calculated on average weekly earnings rather than on nominal annual wages, present a very different picture.
Weekly earnings in 1812 were only 16 per cent above their 1793 level, although they had been 25 per cent higher in 1808.
On a 1780 base (=100) the real-wage index was 86 in 1793, and even if the 1801 and 1812 price extremes are excluded (55 and 53) the average real-wage index for the remaining war years is still only 77.7 compared with 91.2 for 1780 to 1792.
Flinn considered Neale's Bath labourers to have been "a particularly unfortunate exception" , but possibly average weekly earnings are a more realistic basis for assessing living standards than are nominal wage rates, and local labour market conditions occasioned considerable variation not only in wages but in the regularity of employment.
All sectors of the economy do not respond alike in times of war.
The Army might take up men, but the effect on the labour market can be offset if women take their place in occupations like weaving.
Some manufacturers lose export markets, while others find war increasing the demand for their products.
Nor do the years 1793 to 1815 mark an equally suitable period over which to examine wage movements for all trades.
The "good years" of textile out-workers, for example, began before the war but lasted only over the first half of it.
In such circumstances, the historian can only present a number of different wage histories.
For farm workers the North–South divide continued, indeed it probably worsened, and countrywide averages are no more helpful than for the 1760 to 1790 period.
In Wiltshire, the poorest of counties, winter rates of 6s (30p) rose to 7s (35p) in 1794.
They then made hard progress to 8s (40p) over the next decade before enjoying a moment of relative prosperity in the last years of the war, reaching 12s (60p) in 1814.
Professor Mathias correctly sees the high demand of the war years for cereals as keeping agricultural wages up with prices, but they started from such a low level that in years of scarcity like 1795 and 1801 they could hardly have sustained life.
This is what the budgetary evidence of Eden and Davies revealed, and was the context for the Speenhamland experiment in supplementing wages from the poor rate.
Weekly Earnings of a Berkshire Farm Labourer
A man and his wife, and five children, the eldest eight years of age and the youngest an infant.
The man receives the common weekly wages of 7s eight months in the year, and by task work the remaining four months about 1s weekly more.
The wife's common work is to bake bread for the family, to wash and mend ragged clothes, and to look after the children; but at beansetting, haymaking, and harvest she earns as comes one week with another about 6d.
From this Davies calculated weekly expenses of 8s 11¼d, leaving a deficit of 5¼d and no allowance for replacing clothing, utensils or bedding.
Dr Horn's assessment is that by the 1790s the southern farm labourer's standard of living had been falling for thirty years, and that an increase of around 85 per cent in money wages over the war years kept it just about level up to 1815.
On Arthur Young's calculation higher wages did not restore living standards to the levels of the 1780s, for weekly earnings then would have bought fourteen loaves in Winchester, whereas in 1815 they could buy only nine.
The post-war farming depression meant that by 1817 earnings were once again back at the level of the late eighteenth century.
There they stayed for a generation of misery.
With rising rural population and the end of the cereal boom, farm wages away from industrial areas simply stagnated.
In Herefordshire, for example, they did not change over the forty years ending in 1805.
For some sections of the labour force, prosperous years which had begun in the 1780s continued at least for the first part of the war.
Notable among these were textile out-workers.
Weavers and knitters flourished in an Indian summer during which power spinning provided abundant yarn, while power weaving lay still in the future.
According to Eden, in 1797 Manchester cotton weavers earned around 16s (80p), and that from choosing to work something less than a full six-day week.
In fact the war years were a period of mixed fortunes for cotton manufacture.
It was in some degree of difficulty in 1793, 1796–7, 1800–1, 1808, and 1811–12.
In the good years, such as 1792 and 1802, cotton weavers' wages over most of Lancashire reached the level of skilled artisans.
However, by the last years of the war the onset of a falling trend in earnings was unmistakable as the full extent of overstocking, concealed by brisk times like 1802 and most of 1810, became clear.
The 225,000 hand-loom weavers in 1811 were three times the number of 1795.
In a handbill of 1818 the cotton weavers looked back to earnings of 15s 9d (78p) a week in 1802–3, which had been "pretty near upon a par with other Mechanicks and we maintained our rank in Society" .
The weavers' claim may even have understated their past prosperity for Wood's figures suggest that average weekly earnings of hand-loom weavers exceeded £1.00 each year from 1802–6, peaking at £1.3s (£1.15) in 1805.
William Radcliffe, however, in a much-quoted description, placed their "golden age" between 1788 and 1803.
There were to be some more good periods, like the first part of 1810, or 1813–14 when wages again averaged 16s (80p) a week.
The ending of the war brought this to an end.
Demobilisation intensified the overstocking of the trade, and by 1818 the depressed weavers were claiming earnings had fallen to as little as 5s (25p) a week for a journeyman and were asking "whether such a paltry sum be sufficient to keep the soul and body together" .
Possibly this was an extreme claim, but Wood's figures for average earnings suggest that  handloom weavers earned 8s 3d (41p) in 1818, less than half of their 1814 wages of 18s 6d (92½p).
For framework knitters in the hosiery manufacture of the east Midlands, their historian William Felkin described a golden age lasting from 1755 to 1785, but a more recent authority has suggested that although knitters by the time of Luddism's outbreak in 1811 looked back to pre-war wages of 10 to 12s (50-60p) for plain work and up to 30s (£1.50) for skilled, they were generally prosperous down to 1809.
The price list agreed by masters and men in 1787 was generally observed for the next twenty years and with employment brisk, knitters were able to earn, up to 1810, 14 to 15s (70-75p) a week for a twelve- to thirteen-hour day: too much for their own good, according to a local clerical magistrate.
Abundance thus rapidly acquired by those who were ignorant of its proper application hastened the progress of luxury and licentiousness, and the lower orders were almost universally corrupted by profusion and depravity scarcely to be credited by those who are strangers to our district.
Among the men the discussion of politics, the destruction of game, or the dissipation of the ale house was substituted for the duties of their occupation during the former part of the week, and in the remaining three or four days a sufficiency was earned for defraying the current expenses.
Nineteenth-century legs were no longer to be clad in fancy hose, and by 1810 with most of even the skilled stockingers crowded into the plain branch, prices and wages began to tumble.
Employers desperately seeking a cheaper product in a crisis of over-production began to introduce "cut-ups" made on wide frames in the stead of "fully fashioned" stockings.
By the time General Ludd began to destroy the wide frames in 1811, wages for those in employ were only 7s (35p) a week from which deductions for frame rent were made.
Even so, those who were fully employed were the fortunate ones, for half the population of Nottingham was on poor relief.
Woollen weavers in the West Country and in the West Riding generally had a good war.
In the former district prosperity lasted throughout the war years, which had seen the increasing use of the flying shuttle (spring loom).
Clothiers in Gloucestershire did not reduce piece rates, and so weavers were able to profit from their  enhanced productivity.
Retrospective evidence from 1840 suggests that up to 1796 when it came into use, a master weaver could earn around 12s 6d (62½p) a week, but from this he had, essentially on the old two-man loom, to pay a journeyman 3s 6d (17½p) and his board, and a further 2s (10p) to a child assistant.
With the flying shuttle he could earn £1. 2s 6d (£1.12½p) and dispense with the services of a journeyman.
In 1803 a weaver claimed that the new loom increased a range of clear earnings from 6 to 7s (30—35p) to 9 to 11s (45-55p).
The employers put it even higher: from 10 to 12s (50-60p) to 18 to 21s (90p—£1.05).
In this district increased trade absorbed the extra productivity and maintained brisk employment.
In the West Riding woollen manufacture the independent working clothiers had long used the spring shuttle, and as a group who produced much of the food needs of their households were well enough protected from the high food prices of the war years.
Weavers of worsteds, who worked on a putting-out basis, took to the flying shuttle around 1800 when less breakable yarn became available.
Like the West Country weavers they benefited from the introduction, one weaver in 1838 recalling that his wages had increased from around 5s (25p) to between 12s 9d (64p) and 17s (85p) a week.
Coal miners, too, seem to have been among the groups to have kept ahead of the wartime price surge.
On the Tyne and Wear the daily rate for pitmen more than doubled from 1793 to 1815, from around 2s (10p) to 4 to 5s (20-25p), bringing a real improvement of 20 to 30 per cent.
In an industry expanding in output and where technology increased rather than decreased the demand for adult male labour, it seems probable that this experience was matched on the country's other coalfields.
It has been suggested that although some occupations in north Staffordshire experienced real-wage falls over the war years, these were generally of no more than 10 per cent, and it seems that colliers, like potters, were among the groups who could maintain living standards by working harder and longer, even if at times money wages lagged.
Metal miners also experienced marked increases in money wages, but it is less clear if they managed to keep fully abreast of price increases.
Eden estimated that the Cornish tin and copper miners earned around 10s (50p) a week in 1797, while a select committee of 1799 gave a monthly range of £1 10s to £2 2s (£1.50p—£2.10).
This suggests a money increase in the order of 50 per cent from 1790 to 1800.
Statistics for  the next fifteen years are scarce, but under the tribute system copper miners were paid according to the selling price of the ore they raised.
This was low in 1801 and 1802 but high over the next five years; it was on the low side in 1812 and 1813, recovered in 1814, but was falling again as the wars ended.
It was, on average, considerably higher between 1805 and 1815 than it was to be from 1815 to 1825.
In general the years from 1793 to 1815 do not seem to have been particularly bad in real-wage experience for the Cornish miners, though they suffered like others from the famine price levels of 1795, 1801 and 1812, in each of which crises they rioted.
Lead miners in the northern Pennines were earning 10s (50p) a week by 1797 and 11s 6d (57½p) by 1815, whereas before the war they had been earning 7s 6d (37½p); a money-wage increase of around 50 per cent over the war years seems indicated, implying a real-wage fall of about 10 per cent.
An index of real wages for London artisans, constructed by R.S. Tucker in 1936, indicated that an index improvement of 23.7 points in money wages from 1793 to 1814 was insufficient to prevent a real-wage fall of six points.
His measurement has underwritten an orthodoxy that the capital's wage-earners suffered declining fortunes which were reversed only by the post-war deflation.
If this was so, then it was despite the considerable success of many groups of skilled workers in obtaining a succession of wage increases.
Artisans' nominal earnings, which had hardly changed from the 1720s to the 1790s, then experienced a series of sharp increases.
By the end of the wars they were 50 per cent above their 1789 level.
The upward movement peaked in 1810–11.
Saddlers' wages moved from a band of 14 to 16s (70-80p) in 1786 to 25 to 27s (£1.25—£1.35) by 1811, and compositors from 24s (£1.20) in 1777 to 36s (£1.80) by 1800.
Yet in a time of "unprecedented inflation, unprecedented wage demands and an unprecedented number of strikes" ', most groups can be considered as having limited the fall in real earnings rather than as having maintained, let alone increased them.
Francis Place produced data on three groups in 1818.
Tailors in 1814 were very much on a level in terms of real wages with 1795, but in the intervening years had been significantly down on that level in eight years, and very seriously below it in 1800 and 1801 when their weekly wage would buy only half the quantity of bread it had purchased from 1777 to 1795.
Their increase in money wages had been from 21s 9d to 36s (£1.08—£1.80), an increase of 66 per cent.
Compositors with a wage increase of 40 per cent did less well, while typefounders, oppressed by a tightly knit group of employers, were unable to secure a money increase and stayed for seventy years  on 18s (90p) a week, experiencing an evident decline in living standards not only in 1795 and 1800–1, but over the last ten years of the wars.
Exceptional groups profited from the war — notably those like shipbuilders and coopers whose specialised services were much in demand for the naval war.
The former could earn 5s 3d (26p) a day for much of the war, but the link between these earnings and the war economy was emphasised by a fall to 3s 6d (17½p) during the brief peace of Amiens.
By drawing so many men into the services, the war may also have enabled the wages of labourers to keep in touch with prices, assisted by the local increase in demand from the construction of London docks.
Spitalfields silk weavers had mixed fortunes, with the war affecting both the extent of foreign competition they faced and the cost and supply of raw silk.
Their wages had been regulated by act of parliament since 1773 and they were awarded an increase in 1795.
The years from 1800 to the end of the war were generally prosperous, except from late 1807 to mid 1808 when imports of raw silk were almost entirely cut off.
For London, as for most of England, the years from 1793 to 1814–15 brought mixed wage experiences, but while the short-term price peaks of 1795 and 1800–1 stand out as years of exceptional distress, there is no clear suggestion of a marked downward trend in real wages.
In so far as war recruitment affected the labour market, by emphasising labour shortage in the brisk years it may have helped advance money wages, while in the worst years it may have limited the extent of unemployment.
One group of male workers merits special attention: the cotton spinners, who were the first real group of factory workers.
How did they fare in comparison with traditional workers in manufacturing?
Well, it would seem.
For reasons linked to the physical strength needed to operate them at the beginning, spinning mules were operated by men.
These mule spinners, assisted by women and children, were an elite group in the early textile mills.
Factory spinning was still in its infancy when the French wars began; by their end mule spinners probably numbered less than 15,000.
Their earnings varied according to their skill level, but in 1806 fine spinners could earn 33s 3d (£1.66) a week, those on medium counts around  30s (£1.50), while even coarse spinners could exceed £1.
Foster has concluded that by the second decade of the nineteenth century, the well-organised mule spinners had "fought themselves" to near parity with London's building craftsmen.
Frances Collier's detailed studies show a skilled group living at the advancing edge of technology yet who were largely able to offset the falling piece rates thus entailed by greater output.
At one mill from 1804 to 1814 the weight of wool spun weekly increased from 12 to 18 lb per man, but wages advanced from 32s 6d to 44s 6d (£1.62½—£2.22½).
Little is known of precise wage levels before the beginning of the nineteenth century, but retrospective evidence suggests that Manchester's spinners were earning between 30 and 38s (£1.50—£1.90) in the 1790s, twice as much as the weaver exampled by Eden.
The worst time began in the autumn of 1810, which year had up to then been one of peak earnings.
Wage reductions were imposed and, until mid 1813, short-time working.
In 1811 most mule spinners could earn only half of their peak earnings; even so this was in most cases more than the earnings of fully employed weavers.
From late 1813 trade improved, and it was for a time in 1814 brisk again.
FAMILY EARNINGS
It was not, however, only from his good wages and comparatively secure employment that the mule spinner's family enjoyed a standard of living well above that of most of the working class.
As Collier put it: "The greatest number of families were in a better economic position after the introduction of the factory system because of the increased earnings of women and children." 
It was not that the wives and children of hand-loom weavers did not work.
They did, but for the most part within their family economy — that is to say they were not separately waged but included within the household.
In cotton manufacture in 1810 children of fourteen earned around 7s 6d (37½p) a week and those of ten 2s 6d (12½p).
Women who spun, although there were very few of them, could earn around 15s, while the larger number who were employed as reelers or stretchers earned about the same.
Clearly, combined earnings of more than £2 a week must have quite commonly been brought into the households of mule spinners, while £2.50 would hardly have been exceptional.
So far as the households of weavers were concerned, putting two or three children to mill work would have doubled the earnings of the father.
How far were such opportunities a new departure?
Answering this question requires a fuller investigation of the availability and remuneration of work for women and children in both the agrarian and manufacturing sectors of the eighteenth century, but there are no series comprehensive enough to talk of trends and movements in women's wages.
Few women had the opportunity to earn other than low wages; many had small opportunity of regular waged employment at any level of remuneration.
In contrast to the chances afforded by the cotton mills, consider Davies' comment of 1795 on the condition of Berkshire farm labourers' families, scarcely able to live on wages of 8 to 9s (40-45p) a week, whose wives earned only from 6d to 1s (2½—5p) weekly when their seasonal and casual earnings were averaged out.
If any one should think that the women's earnings are stated too low in these accounts, he will be convinced that they are not, on considering that these women commonly begin the world with an infant, and are mere nurses for ten or twelve years after marriage, being always either with child, or having a child at the breast; consequently incapable of doing much other work beside the necessary businesses of their families, such as baking, washing, and the like.
In winter they earn next to nothing, few of them having in their youth learnt to knit and spin; and if in summer they are able to go to harvest work, they must pay some person a shilling a week out of their earnings for looking after their children.
It is probable therefore that from 6d to 9d a week is as much as labourers' wives in general, hereabout, earn on an average the year through.
Work for children was equally inconstant and low paid.
A sixteen-year-old boy is described as earning 2s 6d (12½p) and one of thirteen 1s 6d (7½p), "but not constantly" .
In contrasting the earnings during the French wars of a mill-employed Lancastrian family with those of a southern farm labourer's family, we are perhaps dealing with extremes.
If living near one of the more expanding manufacturing or mining centres was likely to bring higher adult male wages, it was also likely to offer better prospects of regular waged work for women and children.
In the 1770s  in the Potteries women could earn 7s (35p) a week as gilders, though men at the same trade could earn 12s (60p).
In the Birmingham hardware trades the increasing use of stamping and piercing machines from the mid eighteenth century increased the employment of women, who usually earned between 2s 6d (12½p) and 7s (35p) a week, similarly well below the wages of male artisans.
At the Sheffield plate works women earned 4s 6d to 5s (22½p to 25p) and in Worcester at glove making their 4 to 5s (20-25p) a week was several shillings below the rate of their male colleagues.
There is a large degree of uncertainty about the extent to which women worked underground in the eighteenth-century coal industry.
Accident reports from the first decade indicate that some did on the Great Northern Coalfield, but hardly any did so by 1780.
By 1800 the only females were girls of eleven to sixteen years picking coal at the surface for 6d (2½p) a day.
At that time women were still employed underground in Cumberland filling the baskets as well as at surface tasks, while the wives of Staffordshire pitmen were said seldom to "do more than attend to the necessary calls of the Family" except for helping with the harvest.
In Lancashire at this time, as in Cumberland, women were still working moving coal in the pits.
In metal mines women practically never worked underground, but work was available at the surface breaking and sorting ores.
Defoe met a lead miner's wife in Derbyshire around 1720 who, "when not preoccupied with the children" , earned 3d (1½p) a day washing ores.
This was considerably less than the 5s 6d (27½p) a week that Arthur Young considered women similarly engaged at Askrigg in the Yorkshire lead mining district to earn.
In the far South-west, Cornish mining took on female labour to a degree unusual in the southern part of the country.
Here, there was from the 1740s a considerable expansion in the number of women working at the surface, for from then to the 1850s the mining of copper was of greater importance than tin and, as was pointed out in 1810, "the copper mines when in full working employ a good number of women and children who are useless about tin" .
A parliamentary committee in 1799 considered there to have been between 4,000  and 5,000 women working at copper mines, but this was an overestimate for an enumeration of 1838, after a considerable expansion, counted 4,526.
A count of women and children at copper mines in 1787 suggests that then women workers may have numbered around 1,500.
Information on earnings is sparse, but in the 1770s wages were probably around 2s 6d (12½p) a week.
It is difficult to estimate their pattern of increase thereafter, but by the 1840s a full-grown young woman could earn 15s (75p) a week, and a twelve-year-old girl 2s (10p).
The recognised craft trades open to women, usually involving needlework, were most often low paid, sometimes exceedingly so.
In a survey of London's trades in 1747, the wages of milliners were said to be "poor and mean" : "Though a young woman can work neatly in all manner of Needle Work, yet she cannot earn more than Five or Six Shillings [25-30p]a week, out of which she is to find herself in board and lodging." 
The writer was persuaded that half of the "common women of the Town" had come from their ranks.
Stay makers earned the same, while journeywomen in mantua making made such "small wages" that, like the milliners, they were in moral danger.
So well organised in support of their pay were the highly skilled journeymen calico printers in the late eighteenth century that even before the advent of machine printing de-skilled them, some employers turned to alternative methods of patterning cloths which used cheaper female and child labour.
In the "picotage" method, printing blocks were studded with tens of thousands of pins or studs which were set by young women who could, after completing their apprenticeship, earn the very high wage for women of 12 to 14s (60-70p) a week.
When patterns were pencilled on by hand, good workwomen could earn £2 a week, although most received much less.
But these were the pattern-creating branches of the trade; once a block had been set, the dye could be splashed on to it by children and the pattern applied to the cloth by lowly paid female labour.
This method was considered so cost-effective that some firms continued to employ it even when machine printing offered an alternative way of evading skilled men's wages.
In all these examples the women worked away from home and for the most part received independent wages.
Some women worked away from home and yet in "team" with their menfolk, husbands or fathers, or were included in the "bargains" made by their husbands.
This was not uncommon in some mining districts and even existed in the craft trade of hat making, the artisans who took in their wives to pick the coarse hairs from their material saving the 6 to 9s (30-45p) a week which they would otherwise have had to pay from their wage.
Most exploited in this respect were the women farm workers, usually young female relatives rather than wives, who under the "hind" system of employment in the North were supplied as a condition of the male worker's annual agreement (bond).
Described by a recent historian of the North-east as "one of the most rigorously controlled and poorly paid of all British labour" , even in the mid nineteenth century it paid only about 3s (15p) a week.
The system which probably developed in the late eighteenth century seems to have been especially increasing from 1790.
In most southern counties wives earned increasingly poorly and casually from day work in agriculture, especially where arable farming was the dominant or developing form.
In pastoral areas a high demand for female labour persisted, and in the dairying regions even increased.
Here, however, it was above all the labour of unmarried young women as living-in farm servants which was sought.
Arthur Young in 1771 on his eastern tour found the dairymaids earned an average of £3 12s (£3.60 per annum).
In Devon in 1796 female farm servants earned an annual £3 to £3 5s (£3.25) over their board.
This was in a generally low-waged county; in 1794 in Durham their earnings were from £4 to £6.
Dr Snell considers there to have been no downward movement in female servants' wages after mid century in the western pastoral counties of Monmouth, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, Gloucestershire, Brecon, Glamorgan, Somerset, Wiltshire, Devon and Dorset.
Indeed, with farming especially brisk and with recruitment affecting the labour market, the French war years were associated with "buoyant and rising" female wages This may also have been the case in Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and Rutland.
By contrast, in areas  with a growing specialisation in cereal production there was a lessening of the demand for women workers, which was accentuated by a growing tendency for men to take over harvest work.
In the eastern counties Snell examined (Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire and Hampshire) female real wages were falling after 1760 for the sharply declining numbers still required.
For young countrywomen able and willing to move to London, however, money wages in domestic service seem to have moved in pace with prices and even to have moved quite sharply upward from around 1800.57.
Up to the last years of the eighteenth century, declining levels of employment in agriculture for the wives and daughters of the countryside could have been offset by the taking in of manufacturing work.
Paramount among such activity was the spinning of wool for cloth or hose making.
It was generally supposed that in the days of wheel spinning six spinners were needed to keep a weaver at work, and the area around the centres of cloth manufacture within which spinning was put out was so much more extensive than that in which the weaving was undertaken that spinning was done "almost everywhere" .
Wages were low; a woman on her own could hardly ever exceed 3d or 4d (1-2p) a day, although with the assistance of one or two children of suitable age, the family income could be more substantially increased.
There seems to have been no clear trend in earnings over the period up to the rapid triumph of machine spinning after 1800; in the West of England rates per pound of wool spun were only marginally higher in the 1770s than in the century's first decade.
In 1793 a woman with two active children could earn between 4 and 5s (20-25p) a week.
There were, of course, short periods of brisk demand when clothiers had to pay higher rates, as in 1760, when one Wiltshire clothier noted in his diary: "we have this year a very great trade, which has thrown the country into a strange hurry, even into a kind of madness in trade.
Our wages are strangely advanced (particularly chain spinning from 11d a score to 15d, and some gave 17d [5p to 6p to 7p]."
But the opposite happened in slack periods.
In the same county in 1738, the rate fell to 6d (2½p) a score.
Rates reported by Arthur Young on his various Tours around  1770 suggest that regional variations were less significant than the type of cloth or the fineness of the yarn (see Table 7.6).
The higher rates given by Young must be considered unusual, for when he visited a silk mill in Sheffield, which like the more famous example at Derby offered a rare chance of factory employment, he judged the women's earnings of 5 to 6s (25-30p) a week to be "very good wages, much more than by spinning wool in any part of the kingdom" .
The advent of the spinning jenny did not at first destroy home employment in spinning.
The early, smaller jennies were used at home, and although the rate paid in the West of England in 1798 was, at 6½d (2½p) a score, only half the rate of the 1770s, the extra output usually more than compensated.
In the 1760s those who had jennies in their cottages possibly earned 1s to 1s 3d (5-6p) a day, two to three times as much as hand-wheel spinners.
In some districts at least in the 1760s and 1770s, jenny spinners could earn as much as many weavers.
However, first larger jennies and then the application of power to them and to the mules took spinning from the cottage through the workshop to the factory where, as we have seen, it became a male employment.
Some women took to the loom, further diluting the labour supply in that branch, and others were able to enter the factories, but for many, especially in the de-industrialising South, the loss of home spinning was a real and much commented-on aggravator of female unemployment and depresser of living standards, especially marked  around the turn of the century.
William Cobbett was to regret the taking away of such cottage employments, "so necessary to the well-being of the agricultural labourer" , as "one of the great misfortunes of England" .
There were some cottage industries which came to take up part of the "space" left by factory spinning, such as straw-hat making and lace making, but they were more localised and tended even by the standards of hand spinning to be low-paid.
In the small Dorset town of Corfe Castle in 1795 the earnings of 129 females in poor households were listed.
A few still spun, but the great majority were hand knitters.
Their average earnings were 1s 5d (7p) a week, and fifty of them earned only 1s (5p).
A distinguishing feature of spinning when put out to the cottage women and children was that it created the possibility of increasing the money earnings of the family from an occupation distinct from that of the man.
In the households of the small master clothiers of the West Riding woollen manufacture, though not in its differently organised worsted branch, the wives, daughters and female servants may well have spun wool for the household's own cloth — "Prithie, who mun sit at bobbin weel?" asks the wife in a poem of 1730 when set another task by her husband — but even so yarn had still to be taken in from other spinners.
But elsewhere, if wives and children in weaving cottages spun wool or cotton, then along with those in the cottages of farm workers they spun at piece rates for the merchant clothiers.
Otherwise women and children did not earn independently in the proto-industrial household in its cloth or hosiery branches.
No more did they do so in the Black Country's nail-making trade, where the family's output depended upon women as well as men working at the anvil.
In some of these shops I observed one, or more females, stript of their upper garment, and not overcharged with their lower, wielding the hammer with all the grace of the sex…
Struck with the novelty, I enquired, "whether the ladies of this country shod horses?" but was answered with a smile, "they are nailers" .
Elsewhere in the Black Country in 1741, William Hutton might also have seen women at the family forges making chains, nuts, bolts and screws, though these were much less populated trades than was nail making.
Dr Berg has suggested that the spread of family-based cottage manufactures played a part in determining the low status and value of women's work even though it, and that of the increasing number of children they produced, was both necessary for the manufacture and significant for family earnings.
It was the premium put upon child labour within the domestic family economy of textile manufacture which provides the context for Defoe's observations of around 1720 on Norfolk that "the very children after four or five years of age, could earn their own bread" , while at Taunton "there was not a child in the town, or in the villages round it, of above five years old, but, if it was not neglected by its parents, and untaught, could earn its own bread" .
Defoe considered it to be manufacturing which conferred this "blessing" on a vicinity.
It is true that William Cobbett, born in 1766, was to write, "I do not remember the time when I did not earn my living" , but he was the son of a moderately successful small farmer in a district where hop growing enabled a decent living from small acreages for a family with three sons to help work it.
His father had been the son of a labourer who had earned 2d a day from ploughing, and such low-paid occasional work was typical of what was available for the children of farm labourers until, in such places as it was not in decline, they could be put to live-in farm or domestic service at around the age of fourteen.
Before the coming of the cotton mill there were few opportunities for children to make a steady monetary contribution to family earnings.
William Hutton, the son of a framework knitter, was sent to work at Derby's silk mill in 1730; he later cursed his luck for having been born in the one city in the world where such could have been his fate.
Mining sometimes offered independent employment for children.
Two rare "lives" of working-class Cornish children in the third quarter of the eigh-teenth century reveal both their subjects, the sons of small farmers, to have worked around tin stamps.
Arthur Young suggested that children at the Askrigg lead mines could earn from 1s 10d (9p) to 4s 2d (21p) a week in the 1770s.
Pin making was the manufacture most dependent on the labour of children.
Young described it at Warrington, Gloucester and Bristol.
In these small manufactories adult labour was confined mainly to supervision and it was nimble-fingered children who, for wages of between 1 and 2s (5-10p) a  week, produced the pins.
Such examples apart, a consequence of the decline of cottage spinning and knitting was that it removed the earnings of children as well as of grown women.
A family might earn from spinning as much as 4s (20p) a week in the days before the mill, but that only at favourable times of the family cycle when two or perhaps three children were working as well as the mother.
The changing age structure of the mid eighteenth century significantly increased the number of dependent children in the population and, as Dr Cunningham has pointed out, explains the coexistence of the two views that child employment was desirable and that it was insufficiently available.
Social and Industrial Protest
FOOD RIOTS
Throughout the period living standards were more affected in the short term by price rises than by wage movements.
When 80 per cent or more of working-class incomes was spent on food, and most of that on bread, then even in the modernising economy of later eighteenth-century England the state of the corn harvest remained by far the most important determiner of well-being.
Poor harvests increased food prices to pressure budgets barely adequate at most times, while seriously deficient harvests brought not just high prices but real scarcity, and for some of the poor absolute want.
Furthermore, food prices could sharply distinguish the standard of living in one year from both the preceding one and the next.
Small wonder, then, that even among miners and manufacturing workers the most common form of protest was the food riot.
To varying extents, food rioting has been recorded in 1727–9, 1737, 1740–1, 1748, 1756–7, 1766, 1771–3, 1782–4, 1789, 1792–3, 1794–6, 1799–1801, and 1812.
Thereafter they were more widely spaced in both chronology and geography but have been recorded in 1817–18, 1831 (confined to Cornwall), 1847 (again confined to Cornwall in England, though extensive in Scotland) and final episodes in Devon in 1854 and 1867.
In some of these years, for example 1757, 1766, 1795 and 1801, they were very extensive indeed.
The Annual Register for 1766 lists more than fifty outbreaks in forty places, and at least as many seem  to have escaped its notice.
Pioneering scholarship in the 1960s by Rudé and Rose suggested that food rioting first occurred in Oxfordshire in the closing years of the seventeenth century and then spread over the South and West and into the Midlands, but were uncommon in the northern counties.
Later research suggests, however, that they were more common in the North-west than had been supposed and probably began in the South-east in the late sixteenth century, and has cast doubt on the validity of seeking to impose too rigid a geographical pattern on food rioting from the recorded incidence.
Rose and Rudé did, however, establish the essential forms and functions of the food riot, and the next outstanding contribution was to come from E.P.
Thompson in 1971 who introduced the hugely influential concept of the moral economy into the study of popular protest.
He emphasised the extent to which rioters were concerned to fix "just" prices on seized corn, or, as they sometimes put it, sought to "regulate" prices.
They saw themselves as acting legitimately in the context both of custom and of paternalist legislation of the Tudor and Stuart era which had sought to control the marketing of corn, flour and bread in the interests of the poor consumer.
This had included restricting the activities of middlemen (factors or "badgers" ) who were suspected of enhancing prices and of allowing the fixing of prices by local justices.
In addition to dealers, other objects of anger were farmers who were thought to be withholding grain from the market and thus creating an "artificial" scarcity; merchants who attempted to buy up corn to move it from the district in which it had been grown at times when local markets were under-supplied; and millers who were considered to be either bulk buying and hoarding corn or else charging the poor too much for grinding grain.
Commercial users of grain such as brewers of beer or vinegar or producers of starch were also picked out from time to time.
Cereals either as corn, flour or bread were the main concern but other foods, notably cheese and meat, were also seized and re-sold at "just" prices.
The incidents of 1766 can serve to illustrate the usual and recurrent forms of food rioting, although the geographical pattern  reflects the fact that the North had a better harvest than the South that year.
In Gloucestershire and Wiltshire cloth workers destroyed mills and took grain which they distributed among themselves.
At Exeter, another clothing centre, cheese was seized and sold at a lowered price, while the Cornish miners forced butchers to lower the price of meat, which also happened in Wolverhampton.
At Derby cheese was taken off a boat on the Derwent, while at Lechdale a wagon of cheese intended for London was intercepted.
In Devon wheat removed from the granaries of farmers was carried directly to market and "sold openly from four to five shillings a bushel" after which the crowd returned both the money and the empty sacks to the farmers.
This sense of purpose and of confinement to "legitimate" objectives is briefy conveyed in a single sentence describing events at Malmesbury: "They seized all the corn; sold it at 5s [25p]a bushel, and gave the money to the right owners." 
Although a fully national market for grain hardly existed in the eighteenth century, a widespread trade was being operated as increasing urbanisation extended the demand for food supplies over greater distances.
London, the greatest market of all, was well enough supplied and mostly escaped food rioting, but its reach was vast.
Supplied in normal years by the South and the East, it extended to the North and even to Cornwall in years of short supply.
Cornwall can serve as an illustration of the problems faced in some areas.
Not only did factors draw on it in some years for London, but later in the century the rise of Plymouth as a naval centre provided a counter attraction for corn from its eastern half which might otherwise have gone into the increasingly populous western mining districts.
By the mid eighteenth century the rise of tin and copper mining had in any event produced a precarious balance between local grain supplies and a growing population.
In years of scarcity, therefore, the miners faced not only enhanced prices but a real deficiency in supply as the activities of agents buying for London increased and as farmers displayed an increasing preference for selling in large quantities rather than piecemeal in local markets.
We have had the devil and all of a riot at Padstow.
Some of the people have run to too great lengths in the exporting of corn…
Seven or eight hundred tinners went thither, who first offered the cornfactors seventeen shillings for twenty-four gallons of wheat, but being told they  should have none, they immediately broke open the cellar doors, and took away all in the place without money or price.
From this account of 1773, two things can be noted: the miners first offered a price, and the objects of their anger were merchants intending to remove corn from the locality.
There were also many incidents in which the crowd distinguished between dealers and farmers selling their own produce directly: "At Nottingham fair the mob seized upon all the cheese the factors had purchased, and distributed the same among them, leaving the farmers' cheese unmolested." 
Given such selectivity the term "mob" seems inappropriate, as it does to the Cornish miners who themselves punished some of their number who stole spoons from a farmhouse.
If it seems surprising that the same forms of rioting should recur from one place to another over lapses of time, it should be remembered that food rioting was neither an isolated nor a continuous form of popular action.
It was a recurrent one, withdrawn from the popular memory when pressure situations arose.
In some places the proclivity to riot was especially marked.
Some consuming communities were more vulnerable than others to the effects of high prices and scarcities.
John Stevenson has noted the importance of transport networks, with riots occurring not only at sea ports but also along inland waterways where corn might be moved out of a district, such as on the Trent or Avon.
Large industrial or mining communities increased the incidence not only because of the ease with which crowds could be formed, but because of their dependence on buying food in local markets.
This explains the sense of invasion when miners, or weavers, came in force to the market towns: Cornish tinners into Truro, Penryn or Penzance; Kingswood colliers into Bristol or those of Bedworth into Coventry.
Rural clothing workers in the West Country or East Anglia were also prominent and textile expansion seems to have brought food rioting to places like Halifax, Huddersfield and Rochdale in the 1780s.
Women were often the instigators of market riots, but many incidents reveal prior intent and planning.
In 1737 a Falmouth merchant buying up corn for shipping to London was warned:
I am told you have bought up a large quantity of corn lately, which has been the means of raising the price of corn to such a degree, as to incense the tinners so much against you…that I am credibly informed no less than a thousand of them will be with you tomorrow early: they are first to assemble at Chacewater and then proceed for Falmouth.
This I am told was publicly declared at Redruth market last Friday.
Anonymous threats were frequently sent to those suspected of hoarding or of enhancing prices, or warnings to justices that unless they intervened direct action would be undertaken.
This is to latt you to know and the rest of you Justes of the Pace that if Bakers and Butchers and market peopel if thay do not fall the Commorits at a reasnabell rate as thay do at other Markets thare will be such Raysen as never was known.
This was received by a Norwich magistrate in 1766, and there was indeed to be a very fierce riot in that town.
The farmers of Odiham in Hampshire got an even more pointed warning.
To the Damd Eternal Fire Brands of Hell belonging to Odiham and its Vicinity.
In other Words to the Damd Villans of Farmers that with hold the Corn…
This is to inform you all that me and my Companions have Unanamously agreed and likewise made Oath to Each other that if There is not a speedy Altaration made for the Good of the poore that you have corn thinking to make your fortunes of shall have it burnt to the Ground whether it Be in Stacks or Barns for the fire that took place Last Week was but the begining of your Troble, we know every Stack of Corn about this Country, and Every Barn that hath Corn concealed in it for the Purpos of starving the Poore But we are Determind if thare is to Be Starvation it shall be a General thing not a parcial one for both Gentle and Simple shall Starve if any Do.
Posters appeared in some villages advertising what was intended the next market day and calling on "one and all" to join in.
One old miner even recollected seeing one which called upon the fathers of starving children "in the name of God and the King" to prevent vessels laden with corn from leaving Cornish ports.
The size of  crowds assembled was considerable; although the evidence is impressionistic they must have commonly numbered several hundreds and perhaps, on occasion, more than a thousand.
In the crowds were to be found most kinds of urban and industrial workers but hardly ever farm labourers; in many cases they were shielded from the market by receiving part of their wages in kind, and in general the authority structure of the countryside was sufficient to deter them from rioting.
From time to time strong ceremonial and ritual elements emphasised the importance of legitimacy and tradition.
Processions were headed by fife and drum, banners proclaimed "bread or blood" , loaves were carried on pikes.
In Cornwall in 1796, 1801 and 1812 a noose and contract was taken around to farmers, who were threatened with the former if they did not agree to sign the latter.
Actual violence as opposed to threat and intimidation was not much present in the English food riot.
As Dr Stevenson has put it: "English crowds appear to have killed no one deliberately in the various food disturbances which occurred from the beginning of the eighteenth century to the beginning of the nineteenth." 
In this context the often conciliatory responses of the magistracy can be noted.
In general they did not seek harsh retributory sentences once order had been restored and in a surprisingly large number of cases actually went some way towards meeting the wishes of the crowd by doing something to encourage a lowering of prices and initiating or participating in relief measures.
It was perhaps with the expectation that food rioting sometimes secured short-term remedy that the eighteenth-century crowd resorted to it so frequently.
INDUSTRIAL PROTEST
Although industrial disputes were much less common than food riots, historians have recently come to recognise that they were much more frequent than had been allowed.
Professor Malcolmson considers them to have been "fairly common" , and Dr Dobson listed 383 between 1717 and 1800.
He divided these into more than thirty occupational groupings, some of which, woollen workers  for example, could be further subdivided.
Weavers and combers might at most times make common cause against clothiers, but when the import of ready-combed Irish wool was the issue at Tiverton in 1749 they came to blows.
That so many disputes were reported in the range of newspapers consulted by Dobson is indicative of a much larger population, either not yet discovered by historians or not reported in their own time.
This "dark figure" is unknowable, but there is a clear enough indication that organisations of a type which would later become familiar as "trade unions" but were better known to their own time as workers' "combinations" were well established and widespread among skilled workers in the eighteenth century.
Professor Christie has even suggested that they played a sufficiently significant part in the lives of "multitudes of craftsmen and artisans" to take the edge off the development of revolutionary consciousness.
Professor Fox has recently emphasised the importance of an early development for the later history of British trade unionism: "The artisan-craft tradition by which the British trade union movement more than any other was deeply marked is a pre-industrial and pre-capitalist tradition." 
 "Pre-capitalist" is perhaps misleading.
The rise of a class of capitalist employers predicated the emergence of defensive labour organisations, but this separation of interests long pre-dated the arrival of the factory and the "industrial revolution" as normally envisaged.
The Webbs in their celebrated history of trade unionism recognised this, but their insistence on a clean break between the guild organisation of the crafts which embraced masters and journey-men and the beginnings of trade unionism was overdrawn.
Unions of journeymen commonly sought to retain the restrictive and regulative customs of the "trade" over such institutions as apprenticeship and expected of the state that it continue to guarantee "rights" against, in particular, the "infringements" of innovating masters.
They even inherited much of the ceremony and ritual.
At Exeter in 1726 the serge weavers were said to have "Clubs, where none but weavers are admitted; and that they have their ensigns and flags hung out at the door of their meetings" .
It is at least possible that workers' combinations operated in more propitious circumstances in the eighteenth century than they did in the early nineteenth.
In the latter they had to cope with de-skilling innovations in technology and organisation as well as with the effects of rapid population growth on the labour market.
Marx recognised as much when he interposed the "period of manufacture" between that of guild manufacture and that of "machino-facture" : "Inasmuch as handicraft skill formed the basis of manufacture and inasmuch as the integral mechanism which was at work in manufacture had no objective skeleton existing apart from the workers themselves, capital had continually to wrestle with the subordination of the workers." 
To Adam Smith, disputes between masters and journeymen were endemic in eighteenth-century manufacturing.
What are the common wages of labour, depends everywhere upon the contract usually made between those two parties, whose interests are by no means the same.
The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give as little as possible.
The former are disposed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower the price of labour.
The first recorded use of "strike" in its modern sense is probably in the evidence of a journeyman tailor at the Old Bailey in 1765, but the thing long pre-dated the word.
By the time Smith wrote in 1776, some form of workers' organisation approximating to trade unionism has been found among many groups including hatters, wool combers, tailors, weavers, cabinet makers, wheelwrights, curriers, carpenters, bricklayers, masons and calico printers.
Most of these would have qualified even under the Webbs' strict insistence that only "continuous associations" qualified as trade unions.
This insistence is, however, inappropriate to the actual situation of most eighteenth-century manufacturers.
An industrial relations expert, who has written a history of cotton unions, has remarked that whereas general historians of the labour movement report only sporadic trade unionism in that industry in the eigh-teenth century, historians of the district or of the industry tend to assume a continuous collective labour presence.
Following the Webbs too closely means that the surviving documentation of intermittent eruptions is interpreted as indicating ephemerality.
But  continuous association need not imply permanent formal organisation.
Members of a trade regularly brought together in workplace or community could acknowledge regular leaders and develop and insist on customary work practices without embedding any of this in formal regulations and procedures.
Such a collective presence may have been submerged at times, but did not necessarily disappear.
It would not disappear.
Thus Turner has written that the sporadic appearance of trade unionism arose not from the absence of collective association but from the "intermittence" of the actual need for collective action".
When that need arose there is clear enough indication of the availability of collective response from a continuing association which does not always need to have been preserved as a formal organisation.
For rural weavers the habit of association was in itself sufficient to produce at need an organisation to provide deputations or conduct strikes, and this habit was reinforced rather than created by more formal links such as village friendly or burial clubs.
The habit of association among hand-loom weavers could last as long as the class of workmen itself, or at least until it became too unstable and diluted to preserve it.
Country cotton weavers claimed in 1756 to have been long accustomed to meet weekly at a public house to discuss trade matters and that their friendly society or "box club" had developed from this and in its turn found itself exercising trade-union functions.
Town weavers in places like Manchester worked in small numbers in workshops.
That the "shop" was a natural unit for trade unionism is confirmed even in present-day language.
Through delegation to central meetings, a structured union organisation could develop organically.
The very simplicity of the structure meant that even formal break-up might be only a temporary interruption since the survival of the essential units made for easy reconstruction.
Turner has demonstrated that so far as cotton weavers were concerned, associational persistence can be reconciled with only sporadic incidence, since the true foundation was the durable one of the habit of association within a "community" of workers, or indeed, in the case of the manufacturing village, within an occupational community.
Cotton weavers can be viewed as representative rather than exceptional.
Dr Randall has shown, in studies of the food rioting of 1766 and of the industrial strife of 1765–6 among the Gloucestershire  woollen workers, "a community of shared values and expectations" incorporating beliefs and attitudes inexplicable by purely economic considerations underlying both forms of protest.
He writes of an "industrial moral economy" .
A Norwich wool comber protested to the employers in a dispute in 1752: "We are social creatures and cannot live without each other, and why should you des-troy community…?" 
Where weavers, knitters and the like existed as communities of producers the defence of customary standards and expectations was more evident than calculative bargaining.
Even what appears to be what Adam Smith called an "offensive" combination — one which "without any provocation…combine of their own accord to raise the price of their labour" — may turn out to have been workers taking advantage of a temporary shift in the labour market to restore previously enjoyed conditions of employment.
Employers naturally represented such actions as "unjustified" rather than admit to their remedial nature.
Against the sometimes successful upward negotiation of wages by some groups of urban artisans must be set the long persistence of "customary" rates in other trades.
One West-Country weaver referred to in 1802 stated that his rate per yard had never altered, "nor yet in my father's memory" .
Nor were all urban craftsmen able to lift their earnings.
The London masons complained in 1775 that their 50s (£2.50) a week had not changed for seventy years.
Defensive combinations were not, of course, confined to rural workers.
Other artisan groups also from time to time found themselves on the receiving end of employer "impositions" .
The shipwrights of Exeter, for example, bound themselves in 1766 not to work for masters who were seeking to employ them at "less wages than have been from time immemorially paid to journeymen shipwrights" , to "deprive" them of "several of their ancient rights and privileges" and to impose longer hours than had been "usual and customary" .
In the royal dockyard at Portsmouth the shipwrights struck in 1775 against the imposition of a piece-rate system which, they claimed, "would occasion progressive suicide in our bodies" .
However, among shipwrights and other skilled workers, especially in London, there is clear enough evidence of a more modern trade-union consciousness, still based on the "trade" , and jealous of its practices and "rights" but operating in what Dobson has called an "industrial relations system" , that is an arena of interaction within which employers and workers perceived their roles and the moves which were open to them.
Here it is possible to refer to "conflict resolution" and "bargaining" based on a mutual appreciation of strength.
Among several groups, such as the weavers and combers of the south-western serge manufacture and the tailors, hatters and printers of London, there is clear evidence that organisations recognisable as trade unions were in existence by the first two decades of the eigh-teenth century.
Twenty-three of the disputes listed by Dobson occurred before 1730.
A proclamation was issued in 1718 against "unlawful Clubs, Combinations, etc." of wool combers and weavers:…which had illegally presumed to use a Common Seal, and to act as Bodies Corporate, by making and unlawfully conspiring to execute certain Bylaws or Orders, whereby they pretend to determine who had a right to the Trade, what and how many Apprentices and Journeymen each man should keep at once, together with the prices of all their Manufactures, and the manner and materials of which they should be wrought; and that, when many of the said Conspiritors wanted work, because their Masters would not submit to such pretended Orders and unreasonable Demands, they fed them with Money, till they could again get employment, in order to oblige their masters to employ them for want of other hands.
The details of a complaint by the master tailors of London in 1721 show that the organisation revealed in evidence at a trial in 1765 and described again in 1818 by Francis Place as a "perfect combination" had been by that last year in existence for a century.
It was claimed in 1721 that more than 7,000 journeymen had:…lately entered into a combination to raise their wages, and leave off working an hour sooner than they used to do; and for the better carrying on their design, have subscribed their respective names in books…at the several houses of call or resort (being public houses in and about London) where they use; and collect several considerable sums of money to defend any prosecutions against them.
They warned that the "ill example" was already spreading to journeymen curriers, smiths, farriers, sail makers, coach makers, carpenters, bricklayers, joiners and "artificers of divers other arts and misteries" .
They might also have mentioned the hatters who seem to have been organised by 1700 and who had by 1777 a "congress" which made by-laws, extracted fines and sought to limit the number of apprentices masters could take.
The masters were forced to give in to wage demands in 1772 and 1775.
The congress levied a weekly subscription of 2d (1p).
One master complained that when five of his employees refused to join, he was visited and told to discharge them, otherwise his workforce would be called out.
Later he put out some work to one of the five, but the journeymen returned, demanded he take it back and levied a charge of 3 guineas (£3.15) for their loss of time in attending to "this act of justice" .
When he refused, all his journeymen quit.
Petitions from Manchester, Newcastle under Lyme, Burton on Trent, several towns in Leicestershire, Derby, Bristol, Liverpool, Chester and Hexham in 1777 indicate the geographical range of the hatters' union.
Such a reach was enabled by the "tramping" system.
It was widespread among craft unions like the wool combers who were said to have become "one society throughout the kingdom…if any of their club is out of work they give them a ticket and money to seek for work at the next town where a box club is" .
If there was no work there, the tramping artisan was fed, given a bed for the night and a few pence to see him on to the next town on the official tramping route.
In the craft trades it became the "very backbone of union" without which information about rates, conditions and disputes could not have been spread and the federation of local clubs into wider organisations could hardly have developed.
When calico printing moved from London to Lancashire in the 1780s, a ready-made journeymen's union went with it, whose members were so assured of their status and craft autonomy that the employers christened them "gentlemen journeymen" .
At the peak of their power, just before machinery threatened their hold, their effectiveness was evident.
By their combination they prevent the master employing any journeymen they do not approve of, who as they say is not a fair man; and all journeymen must ask the constable of the shop, for the time being,(an officer appointed by the combination) for work before they  ask the master.
They can discharge a journeyman from service without his master's content; they can advance their wages, and in many instances, prevent the master taking more apprentices than they approve of, and such a number, as the nature of the work requires.
In any case where the master does not show a readiness to comply with their demands, they order both journeymen and apprentice, to strike, and turn out (as they term it,) and leave their work.
Among such workers more sophisticated means of conducting disputes had emerged over the century.
There was a clear appreciation of the right time to strike.
The serge weavers in 1725 were said to have chosen the spring at the seasonal peak of demand.
Royal dock-yard workers took advantage of the fitting out of the fleet for war, fellmongers of the large number of deteriorating hides on their masters' hands after the pre-winter livestock slaughter, and Coventry's weavers of demand for black ribbons on the death of a popular member of the royal family.
It was not simply a matter of timing, for there is evidence of preparing for the moment by building up the organisation and, most important, a strike fund.
The journeymen wool sorters of Exeter did this in 1787 before striking at the time when their employers had large wool stocks on hand.
They named their fund the "loaves and fishes" !
Francis Place described the same process among London's leather-breeches makers in 1793, the book binders built up theirs over four years before striking for a reduction in hours, and the calico printers seem to have been constantly engaged in building and rebuilding strike funds.
They, along with compositors, paper makers, wool sorters and colliers, had developed the rolling strike, or strike in detail, whereby shops were turned out one at a time with those in work supporting those who were withdrawn.
In the only passage where he concedes any degree of effectiveness to workers' combinations, Adam Smith said of the wool combers: "By combining not to take apprentices…[they]…reduce the whole of the manufacture into a sort of slavery to themselves, and raise the price of labour much above what is due to the nature of their work." 
This element of control over entry to the trade was crucial to the prospects of artisan unions.
A frontier of  skill had to be defended against dilution by the unskilled, including large numbers of women.
 "Unfair" workers, "knobsticks" as the calico printers called them, were not to be worked with, and in this defence, fundamental to all other purposes such as maintaining or improving wages or hours, the artisans were able to claim a legitimacy not only from the "customs of the trade" but from the statute of artificers passed in 1564 and popularly known as "5 Elizabeth" .
This statutory requirement for an apprenticeship to be served before a trade could be taken up was not repealed until 1814 in the face of organised trade-union opposition.
Although throughout the preceding century case law decisions had narrowed its scope and denied its extension to any trade not in being at the time of its passage, it had remained nevertheless of great importance as a legitimating symbol of skilled labour's "rights" .
In the late eighteenth century an "Ode to the Memory of Queen Elizabeth" , composed after the saddlers had been in a dispute, proclaimed: Her memory still is dear to journeymen, For sheltered by her laws, now they resist Infringements, which would else persist: Tyrannic masters, innovating fools Are check'd, and bounded by her glorious rules.
Of workmen's rights she's still a guarantee.
The passing of the proscriptive Combination Acts in 1799 and 1800 is a well-known landmark in trade-union history, but they are much misunderstood if they are seen as placing trade unions in a novel position of illegality.
Adam Smith had maintained in 1776 that "those laws which have been enacted with such severity against the combinations of servants, labourers and journeymen" were a major weapon in the hands of employers, as were the powers to deal with riot and disorder when frustrated workers began to attack persons or property.
In the preamble to around a dozen eighteenth-century statutes prohibiting trade unionism in specific English trades, combinations are already described as unlawful, the purpose of the statute being to offer the employers the chance to secure quick, summary punishment.
Not only were there also one or two very old statutes to which resort could be made, but the common law of conspiracy was generally held to preclude collective actions designed to harm employers' interests: "it is not the denial to work except for more wages than is allowed by statute, but it is for a  conspiracy to raise their wages, for which these defendants are indicted" , concluded a famous judgement against some striking tailors of Cambridge in 1721.
That the law was available does not mean that masters always, or even often, made use of it.
It was not in their financial interest to provoke or prolong strikes or to create bitterness and resentment when trade was brisk and labour not in demand.
Accordingly workers striking on an economic upswing often found employers more ready to negotiate than to prosecute, although if masters decided to combine to take on the union by resisting a wage demand or even enforcing a cut and bound themselves not to employ each other 's dismissed workmen, the law might be a more ready resort.
The Sheffield cutlery trades, London printing, paper making, coal mining and woollen manufacture all provide well-documented examples.
In Exeter the wool staplers moved quickly in 1787 to imprison some striking wool sorters who were seeking to advance their wages, but at several other times since the statute they employed had been enacted in 1726, they had conceded advances sought by their journeymen.
Use of the law was capricious, so unions operated in a context of risk rather than of full and constant constraint.
In 1799 parliament turned a petition for an act specific to journeymen millwrights into a general prohibition of trade unionism over matters of wages or hours which was slightly amended in 1800.
This action is commonly attributed to the fear of the working class stirred up by the course of events in France.
In the debate Lord Holland recognised the dread among the upper classes that the lower orders might be seduced by subversive principles, "particularly afloat at this moment" , but also considered that some masters were taking advantage of this moment to "enforce their views and render their workmen more dependent than they had hitherto been and than in all fairness and equity they ought to be" .
The Combination Acts brought the state into a more manifestly repressive role against trade unions, although the initiation of proceedings still rested on the employers.
The simultaneous withdrawal of the state from regulative intervention in labour matters clearly advantaged employers and it is hard to deny that all this amounted to class legislation.
Over fifty years ago Dorothy George contested the views of writers like the Webbs and the Hammonds that 1799 and 1800 amounted to "the most unqualified surrender of the State to the discretion of a class in the History of England" .
She denied they were in any sense a new departure and asserted them to be "a very negligible instrument of oppression" .
The grip of her revision is surprising, for it has long been in need of revision itself.
That the acts were not a new departure is argued by those who draw attention to the pre-existing illegality of trade unions under the law of conspiracy and under around forty statutes, a number of which were specific to particular trades.
This "forty" seems to have assumed almost biblical status among historians.
It is a seriously distorting figure.
Of thirty-four statutes repealed along with the general act in 1824, twenty had been passed since 1714; ten of these had been passed in Dublin and did not apply to England and one was specific to Scots miners.
Eight of the nine specific to particular English trades balanced prohibition of combination with wage-regulating clauses binding on employers.
The exception was an act relating to paper making which had been passed in 1796.
Clearly, even if the acts were not a new departure in terms of the basic question of legality, they were hardly more of the same.
As for the claim that the older acts and the common law had allowed the imposition of harsher penalties, this was not for the simple fact of combination but for activities linked with industrial disputes that could have attracted prosecution for riot, intimidation, assault or destruction of property as much after 1799 as before.
Further, employers could not have it both ways; if they sought summary conviction before justices of the peace, they could hardly have had penalties of a harshness imposable only by the courts.
This leaves the common law of conspiracy under which prosecutions continued to be brought while the acts were in force.
Common-law decisions are not made in a vacuum.
In 1799 parliament had pronounced its opinion on the illegality of trade unionism and this was part of an atmosphere in which courts were expected to find against it.
Nor should it be forgotten, as Professor Orth has pointed out, that in 1799 penalties were prescribed for the first time for workmen as a class, not for hatters or paper makers as a special group; in other words, the language of the act was concerned with a horizontal  social division, not with the reconciliation of difference within the vertical structure of a craft.
The Combination Act of 1800 had a varied effect.
The verdict of the clerk to the select committee of 1824 which reviewed it was that it had been a dead letter so far as "those artisans on whom it was intended to have an effect" , namely printers, tailors, shoe makers and shipbuilders in London who continued "their regular societies and houses of call as though no such act were in existence" .
A recent study of London's trades has noted the spread and organisational development of unionism during the period.
When a deputation of framework knitters from the east Midlands came down to London in 1812 to lobby in support of a bill to regulate the hosiery trade, they had no difficulty in making contact with trade unionists.
They met up and talked with the carpenters' committee, who would have lent £3,000 out of their fund of £20,000 had they not been astonished to learn that the knitters had themselves no permanent fund "to answer any demand at any time" .
Instead they dispensed a condescending homily.
What would our trade be, if we did not combine together?
Perhaps as poor as you are, at this day!
Look at other trades! they all combine,(the Spitalfields weavers excepted, and what a miserable condition are they in).
See the tailors, shoemakers, bookbinders, gold beaters, printers, bricklayers, coatmakers, hatters, curriers, masons, whitesmiths, none of these trades receive less than 30s a week, and from that to five guineas this is all done by combination, without it their trades would be as bad as yours.
It was among out-working trades like weaving and knitting that the Combination Acts had most effect.
For them and for some of the new workers of the industrial revolution in the Midlands and North, the acts brought an era of "secret unionism" .
This effect has been given a special significance in the writings of E.P.
Thompson and John Foster who see repression carrying trade unionists into an undercover association with the Jacobin republican movement — the very alliance their passing had been intended to inhibit.
According to Foster, in the cotton districts of south-west Lancashire union  leadership fell into the hands of political radicals who were reported to be drinking the prime minister's health in consequence!
In fact the acts symbolised repression as much as they enabled it.
It seems to have been the case that attempts to defend their interests by knitters, wool and cotton workers met with a much greater degree of hostility from masters and magistrates than did those made by urban artisans.
The first factory unions, formed by the mule spinners, were similarly treated.
Incidence of prosecution was not high.
Foster noted only seven convictions in Lancashire during five years of trade-union activity between 1818 and 1822, but like Thompson he insists on their general prohibitive influence.
Prosecutions might have been made under the law of conspiracy or under 5 Elizabeth for leaving work unfinished, but to trade unionists they were all "the laws against combination" .
Gravenor Henson, the leader of the Framework Knitters "Union, regarded the existence of the acts as" a tremendous millstone round the neck of the local artisan, which has depressed and debased him to the earth, every act which he has attempted every measure that he has devised to keep up or raise his wages, he has been told was illegal: the whole force of the civil power and influence of the district has been exerted against him because he was acting illegally".
Other witnesses, some of whom had themselves been imprisoned, spoke feelingly of the dread of the Combination Laws in the east Midlands and their use to cower the knitters into defeat, at a time when wages had sunk to 7s (35p) a week.
The tendency of historians to play down the general effect of the Combination Laws seems rather insensitive to the feeling of oppression widely found in these manufacturing districts.
MACHINE BREAKING
According to Adam Smith, attacks on machinery were symptoms of desperation on the part of workers nearing the end of their ability to remain on strike.
Sometimes they probably were, but more often they formed part of a purposive policy of intimidation which Professor Hobsbawm called "collective bargaining by riot" .
The place of  violence in English labour history has been reconsidered since the earlier historians, notably the Webbs and Hammonds, followed a Fabian predisposition to exclude it from the mainstream of labour action.
Intimidation also embraced the sending of threatening letters, sometimes warning of intended attacks on machinery but other times threatening private property or the person.
In 1799 the shearmen of Wiltshire threatened those who were introducing dressing machinery: "if you follow this practice any longer…we will keep som people to watch you about with loaded Blunderbuss or Pistols And will certainly blow your Brains out it is no use to destroy the Factorys But put you Damn'd Villions to death" .
Hobsbawm emphasised an important distinction between machine breaking where the machine itself was seen as a threat to employment, and those cases where machinery was destroyed simply as a means of putting pressure on employers in disputes unconnected with its use.
Miners, for example, have no quarrel with pit-head gear; they cannot work without it.
So when the Wigan colliers threatened in 1792 to throw down the engines, they were seeking both to pressure the mine owner and to prevent him from reworking the pit with "blackleg" labour, also the likely object of Cornish miners who pulled up the ladders in a dispute of 1795.
A sharper awareness among historians of the purpose of actions previously dismissed as desperate or revengeful has helped explain why groups of workers not infrequently combined intimidatory action with more "legitimate" forms.
The weavers and combers of the serge districts in 1725–6 had their "clubs" with by-laws seeking to "regulate" apprenticeship, wages, hours and methods of working, but they forced entry into houses, spoiled wool, cut cloth and roughly treated both masters and those journeymen who refused to join the combination.
The woollen workers who rioted in Melksham against wage-cutting clothiers in 1738 were from a group of workers sufficiently well organised to petition both parliament and local justices.
Pressure on masters and on strike-breakers was part of the structure of many disputes and, as Hobsbawm points out, no less effective than most other options open to protesting workers.
Despite the long history of machine breaking, it was the concentrated events of 1811–16 which gave "Luddism" to the language.
In 1811 letters and proclamations signed "Nedd Ludd" or "Captain Ludd" or even "General Ludd" preceded or followed attacks on machinery in the framework-knitting districts of Nottingham.
Throughout 1811–12 attacks on machinery took place not only through the stocking-making counties of Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire and Derbyshire but also in the woollen districts of the West Riding and the cotton districts of Lancashire.
Objectives differed, but "Ludd" as leader of the "army of redressers" was invoked in each case.
There were further less extensive outbreaks in 1814 and 1816.
At the peak of the agitation more than 12,000 troops were stationed in the disturbed regions of the Midlands and the North — more soldiers than Wellington took with him on his first expedition to Portugal in 1808 in the Peninsular War.
A prelude to 1811–12 had been played out in the woollen districts of Wiltshire between 1799 and 1802.
Here the shearmen fought vigorously and, as Dr Randall has demonstrated, with some success against two innovations.
These were the gig mills, which raised the nap on the cloth prior to shearing and vastly shortened the time needed compared with the old hand method, and shearing frames, which by mechanically aligning the heavy forty-pound shears reduced the time taken to a quarter.
The main target at the height of the riots in 1802 was the gig mill, but that was because very few shearing frames had as yet been introduced.
In this respect the shearmen's action was pre-emptive.
Attacks on mills took place alongside more "legalist" methods of protest, including strikes and formal petitioning of parliament.
The direct action, by a well-organised union of skilled workers, seems sufficiently to have deterred most clothiers in Wiltshire from introducing machinery for around twenty years.
The petitioning of parliament to enforce Tudor statutes proscribing the use of machinery in woollen manufacture, however, had an unintended consequence.
After taking much evidence from masters and employers in the woollen manufacture, the statutory outcome was the repeal in 1809 of the old legislation, not only that on machinery but also that requiring apprenticeship.
Accordingly when, in 1811, the shearmen of the West Riding, locally known as "croppers" , who had been in regular and supportive contact with the Wiltshire shearmen throughout their struggle, faced  the introduction of machinery in their turn, the "peaceful" option of petitioning parliament had been foreclosed.
The Orders in Council of 1811, imposed as part of the economic war against Napoleon, had hit the hosiers of the east Midlands very hard by closing their American market.
It was their wage-reducing attempts to cut costs which led to Luddism.
They sought to employ unskilled labour — "colting" — to make stockings by a cheaper method.
These inferior goods were made by producing a woven square on a wider frame which was then "cut up" and seamed.
This, not the introduction of new machinery, was the grievance of the framework knitters.
As one of their songs explains, the struggle would continue: Till full fashioned work at the old fashioned price Is established by Custom and Law.
Then the Trade when this ardorous contest is o'er Shall raise in full spendour its head, And colting and cutting and squaring no more Shall deprive honest workmen of bread.
At first the knitters concentrated on an unavailing petitioning of parliament, but trouble began during a wage dispute in March 1811 when local justices in Nottinghamshire refused to intervene after hosiers cut the rates they paid to their knitters.
Sixty frames belonging to one of the hosiers were smashed, and by November such activity had become widespread, reaching into Leicestershire.
General Ludd's anger was discriminating: "His wrath is entirely confined to wide frames /And those that old prices abate." 
During the most active phase, from March 1811 to February 1812, 1,000 frames were destroyed in a hundred separate attacks, and a worried government responded by making machine breaking a capital felony and despatching 2,000 troops to Nottingham.
This ended the main phase, and resistance once again concentrated on the attempt, organised by the United Framework Knitters, to secure a parliamentary bill.
This failed and with prosecutions under the Combination Acts being set in train, the frustrated knitters turned again to frame breaking which continued spasmodically to 1816.
At the beginning of 1812 the first attacks on shearing frames by the Yorkshire croppers began.
 "Ludd" was again invoked, but so too was a new name, "Enoch" , the huge hammer of destruction named, ironically, after the firm of Enoch and James Taylor who made both the shearing frames and the sledges which broke them!
Great Enoch still shall lead the van.
Stop him who dare!
Stop him who can!
Press forward every gallant man With hatchet, pike and gun!
Oh, the cropper lads for me, The gallant lads for me, Who with lusty stroke The shear frames broke, The cropper lads for me.
Threats intensified and an organisation capable of attacking larger mills was built up.
The most serious incident came in April 1812 when two men were killed in attacking the well-guarded mill of William Cartwright.
In an aftermath when the relentless and remorseless inhumanity of the mill owner and his magisterial friends passed into local lore, an attempt was made to assassinate Cartwright and one was successfully carried out on another mill owner, William Horsfall, who had boasted his intent to ride up to his saddle girths in the blood of Luddites.
After this, West Riding Luddism entered a phase when machine breaking became a focus for wider grievances and tensions as disturbances spread out beyond the clothing districts into Rotherham and Sheffield, with raids in search of arms, bullets and money marking its final stages.
In Lancashire and Cheshire events were less "pure" .
There was a machinery issue in the introduction of power looms.
Several rioters were killed during an attack on a mill using them at Salford in 1812, but few manufacturers had as yet introduced them, or were intending to in the near future, and disturbances were intermingled with food riots and political agitation.
Once again the name of Ludd was invoked and there were rumours of links with Notting-ham.
An attempt to burn down a warehouse at Stockport was followed by rumours of secret gatherings, armings and oath taking and there was certainly talk of a general rising.
Until the major reinterpretation by E.P.
Thompson in 1963, a consensus view of Luddism prevailed among historians.
The Hammonds had placed Luddism as the resort to violence by traditional workers who had failed in the face of a growing laissez-faire <pb n=218 ideology to persuade parliament to protect them by invoking old paternalist statutes.
Machine breaking was a final act in the struggle of artisans to maintain or revive customs and laws which the new breed of capitalist employers was determined to evade.
However, they were unable to place a violent movement like Luddism into the mainstream history of a developing labour movement.
Those knitters who broke the machines had to be separated from the "constitutionalists" who organised the petitioning of parliament.
Anxious to deny any significant revolutionary input, they were at pains to resist any suggestion that machine breaking could have had any links with a revolutionary political movement.
They did, however, note that the disturbances of 1811–12 were distinguished by a new level of planning and organisation, but still insisted that the involvement of "proper" trade unionists was limited to sympathy.
Gravenor Henson, the leader of the Framework Knitters' Union, they argue, did not even approve of Luddite actions.
They have been more willing than other historians to accept at face value his retrospective remark of 1824: "The branch who broke the frames never contemplated any such thing as the combining." 
The parallel existence in Nottingham and Leicester of a movement for parliamentary redress alongside machine breaking has allowed historians other than the Hammonds to claim that each was the method of a distinct group.
Such a "compartmentalisation" is less easy in the cases of Yorkshire and Lancashire.
Here, too, the Hammonds were concerned to dismiss suggestions that Luddism was anything more than a despairing form of industrial protest without any real degree of political revolutionary intent.
Faced with evidence to the contrary, which the government of the day either believed or at least affected to believe, they resort to describing the reports of arms, oaths and plans for insurrection sent in by government spies as exaggerations or fabrications, especially those of Bent, from Lancashire: "The Home Office Papers contain numbers of illiterate communications from him, full of lurid hints of the approaching outbursts of the lower orders, encouraged by mysterious beings in higher places." 
They further discounted reports of oath taking in Lancashire or in the West Riding.
Their interpretation remained unchallenged until E.P.
Thompson questioned their reading of this evidence in 1963.
…a special pleading which exaggerates the stupidity, rancour, and provocative role of the authorities to the point of absurdity; or by an academic failure of imagination, which compartmentalises and disregards the whole weight of popular tradition…
We end in a ridiculous position.
We must suppose that the authorities through their agents actually created conspiratorial organisations and then instituted new capital offences (such as that for oath-taking) which existed only in the imagination or as a result of the provocations of their own spies.
Most recent historians would agree that the Hammonds were much too reluctant to accept that there was even serious talk of revolution, although the majority do not go so far as Thompson in their assessment of the seriousness of the threat.
It is reasonable, however, for Thompson to ask why such a degree of compartmentalisation of objectives should be presumed to have been the case in 1812, when war had been largely continuous over twenty years, when trade unions were under the interdict of the Combination Acts, when the hand-loom weavers and knitters were suffering a catastrophic drop in earnings and when high food prices were producing widespread and severe hunger.
Thompson's view of Luddism is connected to the argument of The Making of the English Working Class, that a revolutionary underground movement linked the Jacobinian agitation of the 1790s to the re-emergence of more open radicalism after 1816.
It is not a view shared by historians like Thomis who consider Luddism to have been "industrial in its origins and industrial too in its aims" .
Recently Craig Calhoun has also criticised the "revolutionary" view of Luddism.
To him it was essentially a community-based populist movement which, while it was capable of employing a revolutionary rhetoric, was not so of organising a revolution.
Professor Dinwiddy was more willing to accept the existence of a revolutionary movement in Lancashire and the West Riding which had begun to mobilise in a rudimentary way and which did administer oaths and invoke the name of Ludd.
However, he did not think it was of formidable enough dimensions even to link the industrial towns of the North, let alone spearhead a wider rising.
It is in the nature of the evidence that the debate will remain inconclusive.
At very least, however, the Luddites presented the government with a problem of order of a magnitude hardly reached since.
Well-planned and  executed night attacks on machinery and factories took place over wide districts and a long time span by men who, having set governmental authority at defiance, disappeared back into the community by day.
In the face of an unprecedented presence of troops, Luddism was the nearest thing to a guerrilla campaign waged on English soil.
Even if only for that reason, to regard it as simply an expression of industrial grievances is ludicrously inadequate.
LONDON DISORDERS
In London, as Professor Rudé has noted, the incidence of civil disturbance was not so closely tied to peaks in food prices.
This does not mean that the capital experienced less frequent disorder; far from it.
It was reputed to be one of Europe's most disordered cities, and there was scarcely a year in which some rioting did not take place.
Industrial disputes were endemic and, when they involved large and close-knit groups like the Spitalfields silk weavers, the coal heavers of the Thames or, most unruly of all, the sailors of Wapping, presented serious problems for the authorities.
All three of these groups were active in the period of widespread industrial disputes from 1766 to 1769.
Sailors were then protesting about their wages, but they were capable of rallying to other causes.
They were the most frequent of the Tyburn rioters who contested with the surgeons' agents for the bodies of the hanged.
They formed the great bulk of the riotous crowd in 1749 who, after three sailors had been robbed in a brothel, rioted and burned down bawdy houses in the Strand in a three-day riot, although the only unfortunate Tyburn example made on this occasion was the improbably named Bosavern Penlez, a wig maker.
There were occasions when a London crowd was activated by wider considerations.
Professor Rudé has shown that its members were not generally from the delinquent, vagrant or criminal poor and were often unfairly described as "a mob" .
They came notably from the petty tradesmen, craftsmen, journeymen and apprentices of the capital's myriad manufactures.
Time and again those brought to trial reveal proper trades and had completed apprenticeships.
Government attempts to restrict the sale of gin in 1736 are usually considered to have been behind disturbances in that year, but these also involved the resentment of building workers and weavers at being displaced from employment by the cheaper Irish.
As Robert Walpole explained to his brother: "Their cry and complaint was of being underworked and starved by the Irish." 
At one point the grievance brought out an East End mob 4,000 strong which destroyed some Irish public houses.
Among nine taken into custody were a weaver, sawyer, carpenter, brewer, blacksmith and several servants.
The riots were in a sense a foretaste of the Gordon Riots of the summer of 1780.
These provided the most frightening episode, perhaps, in any Western European city before the French Revolution.
Apart from the destruction of Catholic chapels and the houses of some Catholics, the riots included the freeing of prisoners from Newgate and other gaols, an attack on the house of Lord Chief Justice Mansfield and even one on the Bank of England.
Sta-tistics reveal the seriousness of the riots.
At their height, and they lasted four days, 10,000 troops were called out.
Of 162 persons who later stood trial, sixty-two were sentenced to death, of whom twenty-five were hanged.
A total of 210 people were killed outright by the soldiers, another seventy-one died later and 173 were less seriously wounded.
The extent of the firing of buildings was such that observers thought the whole city was ablaze.
The riots had begun when a crowd of around 60,000, mostly of the "better sort of tradespeople" , were brought together by the Pro-testant Association on St George's Fields to pressure parliament into rescinding the very limited measures of Catholic relief which had been enacted in 1788.
A section of the crowd turned events when it attacked the private Catholic chapels of several embassies.
The next evening a mob re-formed.
This time it had a more obviously proletarian presence, with working artisans and labourers in evidence.
Catholic chapels and private houses were pulled down, and the riots spread to the East End with riots against Catholic inhabitants in Spitalfields.
The riots continued for three days, climaxing on 7 June when it was finally quelled and the half-mad leader of the Protestant Association Lord George Gordon taken to the Tower.
The biographies of those arrested tell a similar tale to  those of other eighteenth-century riots.
They were not a common riff-raff.
Almost all of them were supplied with sound testimonials and professed a proper trade.
Only fifteen were charged with theft.
There had been little looting.
Property had been thrown out into the streets and burned.
The same thing had happened during the riots against the Strand bawdy houses in 1749.
What were their motives, if they were not rapine and robbery?
There was strong anti-Catholic feeling but it was mostly against substantial rather than poor Catholics.
Rudé has pointed out that hostility against the working-class Irish was much less evident than in 1736 and 1763.
In a sense, a very basic one, the riots were political: "a groping desire to settle accounts with the rich, if only for a day and to achieve some rough kind of social justice" .
One rioter, on the point of attacking a non-Catholic property, asserted: "Protestant or not, no Gentleman need be possessed of more than £1,000 a year." 
The attack on the Bank of England may have been "blind and desperate" but it was unmistakably a gesture against the very symbol of plutocracy.
The riots of 1736, too, had crystallized general resentments of the lower orders.
Rumours that the increased duties to be levied on gin were but the beginning of a general excise, an indirect tax that would hurt the poor much more than the better-off, fuelled the crowd's antipathy towards the government: "If we are Englishmen…let them see that wooden shoes are not so easy to be worn as they imagine.
 "No wooden shoes" ; "No potatoes, No Popery" ; no imprisonment without trial; liberty, freedom, and, especially, a sympathy with anyone who seemed to be making a stand against government's inherent tendency towards arbitrary action.
These were the factors that moved London's crowds of working artisans, journeymen and apprentices.
Those of them which were not about the Englishman's standard of living (no peasant wooden shoes and no Irish potatoes) were shared by many of the "middling people" ; these were the issues and they were more important than any lingering popular Jacobitism, although that sentiment certainly existed.
The disturbances of 1736 and 1780 have organisational similarities.
In both episodes, groups of rioters were led by "Captains" .
 "Tom the Barber" was one in 1736, while among those revealed by  the trials in 1780 were a journeyman wheelwright and a coach maker.
In both disturbances attacks on property were not indiscriminate.
There was talk of a "list" , and in both years the arrested rioters were operating close to their own streets and parishes.
In both cases the artisans who made up a high proportion of the arrested do not appear in the rate-books, suggesting that they were not among those tradesmen who could be considered part of the "middling sort" .
But neither were they from the very poor and vagrant population.
Rudé's researches established that few of those tried after the Gordon Riots were unemployed, hardly any had previous convictions and all were of settled abode.
There were occasions when riots were connected with more overtly political incidents.
Professor Rogers has shown the role of the wider populace when elections were contested in the widely enfranchised Westminster constituency in 1741 and 1749 and has suggested they foreshadowed the riots associated with John Wilkes.
The cry of "Wilkes and Liberty" had first been heard in 1763 when the publisher of the anti-Government North Briton had been imprisoned after the issue of a general warrant.
The populace generally played little part in that agitation, but when Wilkes returned from the exile in 1768 to which he had fled from fear of imprisonment, debt and the fighting of a duel, to fight the Middlesex election, he became the symbol of a much wider agitation.
The winter just ending had been exceptionally severe, causing great hardship to the poorer people.
Bread prices were beginning to rise and industrial disputes were entering very bitter phases in several large occupations, including coal heavers, silk weavers and sailors.
Wilkes, as a symbol of defiant resistance to government, was taken up by all these groups.
The rioters, who held the streets of London for three days after Wilkes' election, although they did not come exclusively from the working classes, were still overwhelmingly so composed.
Wilkes had many levels of supporters, from the Middlesex freeholders who voted for him, through City interests "independent" of those linked through finance and contracting to the government, to the "middling sort" of householder.
Politically it was the awakening of these groups which was most important, for as Professor Christie has concluded: <pb n=224 Contrary to their claims that they were fighting off the onset of a Tory authoritarian reaction, Wilkes and his friends in various minor ways were extending the range of civil liberties, liberalising the constitution, and opening the way for developments that would only mature in the years after Waterloo.
Those coal heavers, weavers, sailors, labourers and others of the lower orders who took to the streets in 1768 were to a large extent caught up in a political moment which coincided with longer-running economic grievances.
That does not mean that they parroted slogans without appreciating their significance.
Reaction to pre-sumed threats to liberty and freedom, as well as a long-standing tendency to support the "victims" of government, made up the political dimension of London crowd action.
That is, they did until the watershed of the 1790s when, inspired by events in France and soon to be given a "red book" in Tom Paine's Rights of Man, the first popular movement for radical reform appeared.
It was marked by the formation of the London Corresponding Society at the beginning of 1792 with its low subscription and search for "numbers unlimited" .
But, as the name of the Society implies, its object was to form links with a raised artisan political consciousness in the provinces, with towns like Norwich and, especially, Sheffield in the forefront.
The geographical reach of popular radicalism was long.
 "In this neighbourhood Citizens abound," was the optimistic message the LCS received from west Cornwall in 1796.
That was a huge overstatement, but it at least demonstrates how widespread the discourse of political radicalism had become.
Membership of the corresponding societies is hard to measure, and wider influence even more so.
At its peak in 1792 the LCS had around 800 active members with a further 5,000 attending its divisional meetings from time to time.
When in 1795 it began holding a series of open-air demonstrations in London, surprising numbers seem to have attended — possibly more than 100,000, given the tendency for such occasions to become "fairs" with women and children attending as well as men.
Sheffield had the largest membership, certainly in relation to its population and probably in absolute terms as well.
Estimates from various sources, some hostile, range between 1,500 and 2,500.
Norwich was in the same league, but most large urban centres had much smaller memberships.
In a wider context, sales of  Tom Paine's Rights of Man were huge especially during 1792 when perhaps as many as 200,000 of the cheap edition were sold.
Edward Thompson has argued that there was a change in popular sentiment in that after 1791 it was no longer possible for the "establishment" to pressure radicals by raising "Church and King" mobs against them and their property.
Birmingham radicalism had been subdued in this way in the famous riots of 1791 against the radical dissenter Joseph Priestley.
The real problem with assessing popular sentiment over the 1790s is the interplay of contradictory forces shifting it between radicalism and loyalism.
The outbreak of war with France in 1793, with a developing fear of invasion, brought xenophobia to aid loyalism.
The hunger crisis of 1795–6 and the later one of 1800–1 gave radicals the misery of the lower orders to play upon.
A decisive victory in a battle brought patriotic celebration, while at other times when things were going less well the failure to seek a peace could swing sentiment the other way.
Even before it proscribed the corresponding societies by law in 1799, thus turning a decade of more open popular radicalism into a following one of underground conspiracy and plans for insurrection, the state had begun to take things very seriously indeed.
It redefined treason and sedition and severely constrained the freedoms of meeting, speech and writing, and it funded a massive output of loyalist pamphleteering to counteract the Rights of Man.
Historians of the conservative tendency, in rejecting the claims of the leading historians of the popular reform movement, seem to be suggesting that it must have been over-reacting.
However, that there is no simple way of quantifying the strength of popular radicalism does not deny that the 1790s were a watershed in British political history.
At their beginning the members of the LCS debated for five nights in succession: "Have we, who are Tradesmen, Shopkeepers and Mechanics, any right to obtain a Parliamentary Reform?" 
They decided that they had.
In so doing they served notice that, although enthusiasm would ebb and flow through the following decades, a new and fundamental fact had entered the politics of the nation.