

PARTICULAR OFFENCES
13 Theft, robbery, pictures at an exhibition, taking without consent, abstracting electricity
INTRODUCTION TO THE 1968 THEFT ACT
The Theft Act 1968 was based on the Eighth Report of the Criminal Law Revision Committee, Theft and Related Offences, Cmnd 2977, 1966.
The Committee decided that the law required thorough overhauling because it was complex and failed to tackle several instances of dishonest dealing with property.
The 1968 Act was to be a short, simple measure, a fresh start, free from technicalities and the first step towards codification of the criminal law.
Old terminology such as larceny, larceny by a trick, false pretences and embezzlement were replaced by modern terms.
Some words which had a fixed meaning under the old law were retained, e.g. "receive" in handling, and "menaces" in blackmail.
Some parts of the new law are best explained by reference to the defects of the old, e.g. s.5(4) is difficult to understand without reference to Moynes v Coopper [1956]1 QB 439.
Unfortunately the Act has not turned out in the way that its progenitors hoped.
Interpretation of the Act has led to difficulties even in simple situations.
For example, does one appropriate property for the purposes of theft when one touches it, takes it, or puts it in one's bag?
Part of the Act, since repealed, was called by the Court of Appeal in Royle [1971]1 WLR 1764 a "judicial nightmare" .
Offences overlap, and there are problems with key concepts such as dishonesty.
Where the statute looks as if it does not cover certain forms of conduct the courts have sometimes read the statute widely to convict the "manifestly guilty" .
The phenomenon is especially common in theft when a charge would have been more appropriately brought under s.15, obtaining property by deception.
There are also difficulties in seeing how the Theft Act offences relate to civil law concepts, such as restitution, on which they are based.
Lord Diplock in Treacy v DPP [1971]AC 537 said that the Act was "expressed in simple language as used and understood by ordinary literate men and  women" .
Interpretation of the statute has, however, been technical.
Since some terms such as "trust" are technical, a technical interpretation cannot always be avoided.
THEFT
Basic definition
Section 1(1) of the 1968 Theft Act contains a basic definition of theft.
The mens rea is "dishonesty" and "the intention permanently to deprive" .
The actus reus is "appropriates" , "property" and "belonging to another" .
Sections 2–6 offer partial or sometimes complete explanations of these concepts.
The penalty will be seven years"maximum imprisonment once the Criminal Justice Act 1991, s.26(1), is in force.
The alteration is the result of a recommendation in the White Paper, Crime, Justice and Protecting the Public, Cm 965, 1990, para. 3.14.
Lack of consent to the appropriation by the owner need not be proved: Lawrence v MPC [1972]AC 626.
Lack of consent is therefore not a constituent element in theft.
It is, however, relevant to the other elements.
If the owner agrees to the appropriation, the accused may not be dishonest.
Moreover, once the elements of theft are satisfied, it does not matter that the victim has no civil law remedy.
Dishonesty
Dishonesty replaced the concept of fraud in the previous law.
Fraud was a legal concept, but dishonesty is largely a matter for the jury.
It seems that the framers of the Act wanted to update the terminology, but not to change the concept.
The Act states in s.1(2): "It is immaterial whether the appropriation is made with a view to gain or is made for the thief's own benefit." 
A person can therefore steal property by destroying it.
Dishonesty is partly defined in the statute.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee did not totally define dishonesty because "dishonesty is something which laymen can easily recognise when they see it" (p.20).
By s.2(1) the accused is not dishonest if he:(a) believes he has a legal right to deprive the victim of the property;(b) believes that the victim would have consented to the appropriation of the property, if he had known of the circumstances;(c) finds property, when the owner cannot reasonably be found.
Examples of (a) are a belief that the accused was allowed to borrow the item (Kell [1985]Crim LR 239 (CA)) and where the accused took pottery in lieu of wages (Wootton [1990]Crim LR 201 (CA)).
A claim of a moral right to the asset does not fall within s.2(1) (a), but may be not dishonest within the principles to be discussed  shortly.
An example of (b) is Flynn [1970]Crim LR 118, where a cinema manager took £6 as an advance on his salary.
As for(c), there will be an appropriation for the purposes of theft if the accused cannot at first discover the owner but later finds out the identity.
In those circumstances whether the accused is dishonest falls outwith s.2(1) but within the principles discussed below.
It should also be noted that for the purposes of theft property may belong to more than one party.
A lost golf ball may be owned by the golfer but possessed or controlled by the landowner.
The golfer's name may not easily be discovered, but it may be easy to determine the landowner's identity.
Throughout s.2(1) an honest belief suffices.
The accused does not, for instance, need to have reasonable grounds for his belief that the owner would have consented, had he known of the circumstances.
An illustration is Holden [1991]Crim LR 478 (CA).
The accused claimed that he had been granted permission by a supervisor to take scrap tyres from a certain firm.
He had previously worked for the firm and was due to go back to it.
He believed on those grounds that he had a legal right to the tyres.
This partial definition of dishonesty applies to theft and other Theft Act offences where theft is an ingredient.
It does not, for example, apply to the offence of abstracting electricity.
The different definitions open up the possibility of divergent interpretations.
Furthermore, in the 1968 Theft Act seven offences expressly mention dishonesty, but six do not.
In blackmail the equivalent of dishonesty is an unwarranted demand.
The Act has a further provision on dishonesty in theft.
By s.2(2), "A person's appropriation of property may be dishonest notwithstanding that he is willing to pay for the property." 
Therefore, an individual can be guilty of theft even though he had £1,000 in his purse and said on arrest that he would pay for the items shoplifted.
Even if the accused does not fall within s.2(1), he may still be not dishonest for the purposes of the Act.
The first major case in this area was Feely [1973]QB 530.
The accused took money from his employers, intending to repay.
The Court of Appeal ruled that outside s.2(1) the question of dishonesty was for the jury applying "the current standards of ordinary decent people" .
The court said that dishonesty can be equated with immorality.
The case itself was concerned with the substitution of money but was applied generally to other instances of dishonest conduct.
With regard to the taking of money, the accused has the intention permanently to deprive the victim of the coins and notes actually taken, even though he means to replace them with an equivalent amount.
The law was simple to state and was in accordance with Brutus v Cozens [1973]AC 854, where the House of Lords held that ordinary English words such as "insulting" should be left for the jury.
Feely was applied to offences of obtaining by deception in Greenstein [1975]1 WLR 1353 (CA).
The same test applies now throughout the Theft Acts and in conspiracy to defraud.
It is that stated in Ghosh [1982]QB 1053 (CA).
The accused is dishonest if his conduct is dishonest according to the current standards of ordinary decent people and if the accused knows that his conduct is regarded as dishonest according to those standards.
In Ghosh, the accused, a surgeon acting as a locum in a hospital, claimed fees for performing operations.
Those fees were not owing to him.
He was charged with dishonestly obtaining money by deception, contrary to s.15(1)  of the 1968 Theft Act.
He was found guilty and the Court of Appeal in a reserved judgment dismissed his appeal.
The two-fold test was:(a) The jury are to apply the "ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people" : if the accused is not dishonest by those standards he is not guilty.
(b) If he is dishonest by the first test: "The jury must consider whether the defendant himself must have realised that what he was doing was by those standards dishonest." 
The accused is dishonest if he acts in a way which he knows ordinary people would regard as dishonest.
The court gave illustrations of ardent anti-vivisectionists who raided laboratories and Robin Hood.
The court thought that these people were dishonest, though reasonable jurors may disagree.
On the Ghosh approach an accused who steals from the rich to give to the poor must be acquitted if he believes that reasonable people would regard what he did as not dishonest.
The Ghosh definition applies to fraud offences: Lockwood [1986]Crim LR 244 (CA).
The difference between Feely and Ghosh should be noted.
In Feely the test of dishonesty was objective.
In Ghosh the state of the mind of the accused is relevant.
The court did not say why the test changed from "ordinary decent people" to "reasonable and honest people" : are honest people different from ordinary ones?
The test for dishonesty of "reasonable and honest people" is circular.
The Ghosh test may be quite difficult to explain to a jury.
It appears to be contrary to what the Criminal Law Revision Committee and Parliament intended when they established "dishonesty" in the 1968 Act.
Furthermore, juries can reach inconsistent verdicts.
What is dishonest in York may not be dishonest in London, and since dishonesty is judged by current standards, what is not dishonest in 1992 may be dishonest in 1997.
There seems to be little evidence to support the view that twelve persons chosen at random can decide what is dishonest better than could Parliament or the judges.
The decision creates a distinction between dishonesty in s.2(1) and dishonesty outside of it.
Section 2(1) looks at the genuineness of the belief, not at the reasonableness of it.
In Small (1988) 86 Cr App R 170, the Court of Appeal held that unreasonable belief could be an honest belief, but reasonableness of the belief was "a strong factor" in determining the honesty of the belief.
With regard to blackmail the Criminal Law Revision Committee did not want a test that the accused's belief had to be reasonable because such could be out of line with the rest of the 1968 Act, yet Feely and Ghosh do just that in relation to dishonesty falling outside of s.2(1).
Furthermore, some ordinary-language terms in the Act are matters of law, such as "makes any…demand" in blackmail (Treacy v DPP, above).
The courts have held that if there is no evidence that the accused believed that he was not dishonest by the standards of ordinary people, the judge need not give a direction in Ghosh terms: Roberts (1987) 84 Cr App R 117 on handling; Price (1989) 90 Cr App R 409 on deception; and Squire [1990]Crim LR 341 on conspiracy to defraud.
After all shoplifting is dishonest according to current standards of ordinary decent people.
It need not be decided in every case.
In O'Connell (1992) 94 Cr App R 39, the accused had obtained several mortgage advances on houses.
He said that he  intended to repay the sums by renting out the dwellings or by selling them.
He gave evidence that he did not regard the giving of a false name on an application form as being dishonest.
The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge was incorrect to hold that such evidence should be excluded.
By stating that he intended to fulfil his contractual obligations by repaying the loan, there arose the question whether he was dishonest in giving a false name.
While the fulfilling of the obligations or the intention to repay is not per se not dishonest it is evidence that the accused was not dishonest under Ghosh.
Accordingly, the evidence should be admitted.
However, the court applied the proviso (see Chapter 1).
Where the case is apt for a Ghosh direction, the whole test must be given not just the first part: Ravenshad [1990]Crim LR 398 (CA) and Brennan [1990]Crim LR 118 (CA)(on handling).
The fact that the accused was suspicious that barrels of lager were stolen was not sufficient.
It should be noted that (a) where the accused's behaviour falls within s.2(1), Ghosh is irrelevant: Wootton, above;(b) that the accused may act dishonestly even though he did something which the civil law allows him to do, such as retain the overpayment of a bet (Gilks [1972]1 WLR 1341); and (c) that as a result of Lawrence v DPP, above, a person may be dishonest despite the fact that the owner has consented to the appropriation.
One academic point in Ghosh deserves consideration.
Two problematical areas in modern-day criminal law are dishonesty and intention.
With regard to the latter the House of Lords has stated that intention is an ordinary English word which in most eventualities the judge should leave undefined.
The jury, however, does not ask whether the accused believed he was acting with the relevant state of mind, but under the Theft Acts as well as offences of fraud the jury must acquit if the accused believed that what he did was not dishonest by the standards of ordinary decent people.
If the accused falls below that standard, it seems strange to inquire whether he knew that he fell below it.
Both intention and dishonesty are questions for the jury, but are treated in different ways.
What the Court of Appeal wanted to do in Ghosh was to punish only those people to whom "moral obloquy" was attached.
To illustrate this proposition the court took the example of a person who comes to England and Wales from a country where public transport is free.
In England and Wales public transport is not free but the foreigner believes it is.
The court said that he was dishonest by the standards of ordinary decent people: "His conduct, judged objectively by what he has done, is dishonest." 
To exonerate him the court invented the second stage: did he believe that reasonable people would regard his behaviour as not dishonest?
Surely, however, the court dealt with the first stage wrongly.
The accused was not dishonest, judged objectively as well as subjectively.
The question might be phrased as: do you believe it dishonest for a person not to pay a fare which he believes he does not owe?
Unlike the Robin Hood example, the answer should be straightforward.
If the foreigner is not dishonest at this first stage there is no need to ask the second question.
Moreover, the hypothetical situation presented by the court is really one of mistake of fact.
The foreigner thought that fares were not paid, whereas in truth they were.
On the facts as he believed them to be he was not dishonest.
The facts are not ones involving different beliefs about what is honest and what is not.
Intention permanently to deprive
The second element of the mens rea in theft is the intention permanently to deprive.
An intention to return sooner or later is not such an intent: Warner (1970) 55 Cr App R 93.
The word "permanently" prevents most unauthorised borrowings being theft.
Dishonest borrowings, even for a long time, are not theft.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee justified non-liability in para. 56 of Theft and Related Offences.
The moral considerations of dishonest borrowings were different from those of theft.
Such borrowings were not very common.
Criminalising them would cover trivial matters, such as neighbours quarrelling over a lawnmower.
To create a law would waste police time on minor matters.
It would be especially hard on students.
Two instances of dishonest borrowing, pictures at an exhibition (s.11) and cars (s.12), are offences.
The contrary arguments are these:(a) If the crux of theft is the dishonest appropriation of another's property, the intention permanently to deprive seems otiose.
(b) The social importance of the accused's conduct does not depend on such an intention.
After all there are many trivial thefts.
(c) If the victim wants the thing during the time when the accused has dishonestly borrowed it, he cannot use it, whether or not the accused intends permanently to deprive.
(d) Such an intent is not needed in most other Theft Acts offences such as obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception (s.16).
(e) As we have seen, an intention to repay or substitute may be dishonest because the defendant cannot replace the very thing taken, yet if he intends to return the property itself, he is not guilty of theft because he does not have the intention permanently to deprive.
The concept is explained in s.6(1): A person appropriating property belonging to another without meaning the other permanently to lose the thing itself is nevertheless to be regarded as having the intention of permanently depriving the other of it if his intention is to treat the thing as his own to dispose of regardless of the other's rights; and a borrowing or lending of it may amount to so treating it if, but only if, the borrowing or lending is for a period and in circumstances making it equivalent to an outright taking or disposal.
The Court of Appeal in Lloyd [1985]QB 829 said that s.6 "sprouts obscurities at every phrase" .
The basic thrust of it is that it should be looked at only exceptionally: Lloyd.
Most cases fall simply within s.1(1) "s basic definition of theft, which includes the phrase" intention of permanently depriving", and there is no need to consider s.6.
Only in cases where it is not clear whether or not there is an intention permanently to deprive where the accused acts "without meaning the other permanently to lose the thing" need one look at s.6.
According to Warner s.6 clarifies and gives explanations of the requisite state of mind.
In Warner the accused took a box of tools, intending to return them shortly.
He was not guilty of theft because he had an intention to return, even though the handing back might be an indefinite period  later.
Accordingly s.6(1) offers only a partial definition of "intention of permanently depriving" .
Section 6 has been interpreted in the following ways.
It speaks of intention permanently to deprive.
There is no need for actual permanent deprivation; that is, s.6 belongs to mens rea, not actus reus.
The phrase "equivalent to an outright taking" is obscure.
It would seem to cover the situation where the accused takes the victim's umbrella dishonestly and the victim buys back the umbrella, not realising that it is his own.
In ordinary language the accused does not intend to deprive the victim permanently of his umbrella, but s.6 deems there to be an intention permanently to deprive.
The accused has appropriated one of the rights of the owner, the right to sell the article.
This principle seems to have been applied in Johnstone [1982]Crim LR 454 (Crown Court).
Two defendants were lorry drivers for a soft drinks company.
They collected more bottles than they had accounted for.
There was a deposit on each bottle.
The bottles were dishonestly delivered to a shopkeeper, the third defendant, who was to get the deposits on the bottles from the company and share the money with the first two defendants.
The bottles would therefore go back to the company, which would only pay one deposit on each bottle but the deposit would end up in the hands, not of the purchasers of the soft drinks, but of the defendants.
The Recorder held that since the bottles would be returned to the company, the defendants did not intend to treat the bottles as their own to dispose of regardless of the company's rights.
If the accused takes the umbrella and leaves it on a bus, the victim is unlikely to get it back.
The accused may have the requisite intent; if not s.6 can supply it.
Another example may be a stolen cheque.
In the ordinary course of banking the victim gets the cheque back but after encashment.
It is no longer a valid cheque.
The accused is deemed to have the intention permanently to deprive (see Mulligan, below).
If the accused intends to keep the thing until all the goodness or virtue has gone out of it that is equivalent to an outright taking.
In Lloyd the accused had cinema films copied to be sold as videos and returned them.
It was held that the virtue had not gone out of films as films.
The public would still pay to see them at the cinema.
The position is different where the accused takes the victim's season ticket, uses it up and then hands it back.
In those circumstances the accused has the intention permanently to deprive because of s.6(1).
In Bagshaw [1988]Crim LR 321, the accused intended to return gas cylinders when he had finished with them.
The court hinted that the accused was guilty even though not all of the goodness had gone out of the property.
There is debate whether in these circumstances s.6(1) is fulfilled.
 "Equivalent to an outright taking" may cover a situation where the season ticket is almost used up, but not where only one of the journeys is made or operas attended.
The difficult, totally unresolved issue involves the situations in between.
Lord Widgery CJ in Lloyd took a stronger view: "all its goodness or virtue" must go for s.6(1) to apply (emphasis added).
An example of intending to treat the thing as one's own regardless of the other's rights is Chan Man-sin v A-G of Hong Kong [1988]1 All ER 1 (PC).
The accused, an accountant, forged 10 cheques on two companies' bank accounts.
He was charged with theft of the debt owed by the bank to its customers, the companies.
The Privy Council rejected the argument that there was not theft because the companies had  not been deprived of anything.
The Judicial Committee held that the accused purported to deal with the companies' property regardless of their rights.
Accordingly, the Hong Kong version of s.6(1) was satisfied.
Some examples of s.6(1) In Velumyl [1989]Crim LR 299 (CA) the accused took £1,050 from a safe at work to lend to a friend.
He expected to get the money back after the weekend.
It was held that since the accused did not intend to return the particular banknotes, he had the intention permanently to deprive.
His intention to repay the equivalent amount was relevant to dishonesty, not to the intention permanently to deprive.
The same result will apply to petrol.
You borrow my car, intending to replace the petrol you have used.
You have the intention permanently to deprive me of the petrol.
In Coffey [1987]Crim 498 (CA) the accused obtained possession of machinery by a worthless cheque.
He was charged with obtaining property by deception contrary to s.15 of the Theft Act 1968, which also requires an intention permanently to deprive.
He claimed he intended to keep the machinery until a dispute with its owner had been settled.
The court said that these facts gave rise to one of those rare cases where a direction on s.6(1) was needed.
Did the accused intend that the period of his keeping the machinery would be so long as to amount to an outright taking?
Was the accused treating the goods as his own to dispose of regardless of the owner's rights because the owner could get the machinery back only by giving in to the demands?
The conviction was quashed because no such direction was given.
In Scott [1987]Crim LR 235 the accused took a pair of curtains from a store.
He returned them the next day, asking for a refund.
It was held that he was treating the property as his own to dispose of regardless of the shop's rights contrary to s.6(1).
In Mulligan [1990]STC 220 (CA) stolen Inland Revenue Certificates about payment of tax were found in the accused's sock.
It was alleged that the accused had stolen some of the vouchers in the book and sold them.
The accused contended that the vouchers were worthless because their essential character had been destroyed.
It was held that he had an intention permanently to deprive because he intended to sell them irrespective of the Revenue's rights, despite the fact that the vouchers would come back to the Revenue.
While no case has been discussed "intention" in the concept "intention permanently to deprive" presumably bears that meaning which was discussed in Chapter 2.
Section 6(1) also includes the term "meaning" .
That term is another way of saying "intending" .
The phrase "the thing" means "the property" mentioned in the opening words of s.6(1) and defined in s.4.
If something is not property, the accused cannot have an intention permanently to deprive the owner of that property.
In Oxford v Moss (1978) 68 Cr App R 183 (DC), an engineering student at a university read the contents of an examination paper.
All the goodness and virtue went out of the paper by his action.
The court held, however, that confidential information, i.e. the questions on the paper, was not property for the purpose of the Theft Act.
Accordingly, the accused's behaviour did not amount to an intention permanently  to deprive the owner of the information.
If the accused had taken the paper itself, he would have been found guilty of theft of that piece of paper if he did not intend to return it, but that charge does not reflect the nub of what the accused did, namely cheat.
Section 6(2) states:…where a person, having possession or control (lawfully or not) of property belonging to another, parts with the property under a condition as to its return which he may not be able to perform this (if done for purposes of his own and without the other's authority) amounts to treating the property as his own to dispose of regardless of the other's rights.
This sub-section covers pawning property, intending to redeem it, without being able to guarantee that it will be returned, and gambling with the item.
An alternative view is that the accused is guilty only if he foresaw that he might not be able to redeem the article.
This point awaits discussion.
The problem of conditional intention
Does the accused have the intention permanently to deprive when he has not made up his mind to keep the thing permanently?
In Easom [1971]2 QB 315, there was a spate of handbag-snatching in cinemas.
A policewoman sat in a cinema with her bag attached to her wrist by cotton.
A man sat next to her, took the bag and walked away.
He opened the bag and found no money or other valuables.
He discarded the bag and its contents.
Edmund Davies LJ said that conditional appropriation was not theft.
The accused did not have the intention permanently to deprive at the relevant time.
The charge nowadays would be one of attempted theft where the accused intended to steal anything of value or anything in a container such as a pocket, holdall or room.
Appropriation
Under the old law of larceny the thing had to be carried away (asportation).
Accordingly land could not be stolen.
Now it can be, subject to the rules in s.4 (see below).
The new word was "appropriation" , which it was hoped would be easily understood by the triers of fact.
That hope has been dashed.
Under present law an article can be stolen without being taken away.
For example, if the accused puts his hand into the victim's pocket and grabs hold of a watch, there is an appropriation because of the definition found in s.3(1) of the Theft Act 1968: "any assumption by a person of the rights of an owner amounts to an appropriation…
"
The House of Lords in Morris [1984]AC 320 said that s.3 contained only a partial definition, as indeed did the Criminal Law Revision Committee.
For a discussion of this topic see A. Halpin [1991]Crim LR 426, who considered that s.3 confirmed that a certain type of appropriation — the type at issue in Morris — was indeed an appropriation but did not totally define the concept.
The undefined portion covered what occurred in Lawrence, above, an appropriation with the consent of the owner.
Section 3 on this <pb n=276? view deals with appropriation when the accused divests the victim of ownership where the accused already has some enjoyment of the property (e.g. he has possession) or where the accused falls short of taking complete control at the moment of appropriation.
The distinction is between complete taking and divesting of the property (Lawrence) and an appropriation for a particular purpose (Morris).
In the former case it does not matter that the victim consented; in the latter the conduct must be unauthorised.
This approach is complex and may not be the law.
In Lawrence the Lords held that the accused can steal even though the victim consents to the taking.
The Court of Appeal said that there was consent within Lawrence only when the victim knew of the facts and no pressure was exerted on her: A-G's Reference (No. 2 of 1982)[1984]QB 624.
The House of Lords' decision in Lawrence that there may be theft despite the owner's consent is applied generally to all forms of consent.
In Lawrence the appropriation took place because an Italian student handed over extra money to a taxi-driver who had deceived him as to the taxi fare, but Lawrence is not restricted to instances where the accused appropriated by deception.
Within the Theft Act there is an appropriation even though the owner consented to it.
It might have been assumed that the corollary was that the prosecution did not have to prove that the accused assumed the rights of the owner contrary to the owner's wishes but in Morris it was held that a person appropriated only if he adversely interfered with or usurped the rights of the owner.
Appropriation meant that the owner did not authorise the transaction.
Accordingly, the law seems to draw a line between lack of consent and lack of authorisation.
In Morris the accused took goods from the shelves of a self-service supermarket.
He substituted lower price labels for those on the goods.
He paid the lower price at the checkout but was then arrested and charged with theft.
It should be noted that the accused would have had no defence to a charge of obtaining property by deception by switching the price labels.
The question for the House was whether the swapping of the labels amounted to an appropriation.
The principal speech was delivered by Lord Roskill.
(a) The accused is guilty if he assumes any of the rights of the owner.
He need not assume all of the rights.
(Section 3(1) actually says "any assumption…of the rights…" , not "any assumption of any right among the rights" is an appropriation.)
The destruction of property or the accused's putting his hand over money in the victim's pocket will be an usurpation of one of the rights of the owner.
(b) Appropriation requires an act of adverse interference with or assumption of an owner's rights, i.e., some unauthorised dealing with the property.
Contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in Morris the accused does not appropriate when he takes articles from a shelf, even if he intends to steal.
At that point he is acting with the consent of the shopkeeper.
(c) On the facts of the case, the appropriation was adverse to the shopkeeper because the accused removed the goods from the shelves and swapped the labels.
(It could be argued that this approach confuses appropriation and dishonesty.
The dishonest accused is doing something authorised when he  removes goods from the shelves; yet surely if the owner knew, he would not allow or authorise the accused to take anything.
Moreover, there is fraud on the shopkeeper: the accused has concealed his dishonesty.)(d) The accused was not guilty if he switched labels "with some perverted sense of humour" .
(Again there seems a confusion between appropriation and dishonesty.)
Lord Roskill's emphasis on the necessity for there to be both a removal from the shelves and a label-switching does not deal with the dishonest label-switcher who has not removed the goods from the shelf.
Lord Morris found it "not difficult to envisage" that this act "could be" an appropriation.
He could have straightforwardly said that the label-switcher had assumed one of the rights of the owner and had therefore appropriated.
On that view why did he stress that both the label-switching and the removal from the shelves had to take place?
It could be that Lord Roskill wished in this way to exonerate the mischievous label-switcher, but that person is anyway not guilty of theft because he does not have the mental element.
On the facts the accused was guilty at the time when the label was swapped, not at the time when he removed the item from the shelf, intending to switch the label.
The accused was guilty when he did something which the owner did not authorise.
Lord Roskill said that the law was this: "[i]t is the doing of one or more acts which individually or collectively amount to…adverse interference with or usurpation of the owner's rights which constitute appropriation under s.3(1)." 
Therefore the accused is guilty of theft before he passes the checkout.
The Lords did not in their speeches think that they were undermining the authority of Lawrence.
The House approved cases the authority of which had been in doubt.
In Skipp [1975]Crim LR 114 (CA), the accused was not guilty of theft of two loads of oranges and one of onions until he deviated from the correct route.
While he was on the correct route he was not guilty even though he intended to steal.
Accordingly even though he picked up three loads there was only one appropriation because there was only one deviation.
(Presumably there were three obtainings for the purposes of s.15.)
His possession was therefore lawful until the deviation despite his intention permanently to deprive.
Skipp adopted the same line as Morris.
In Eddy v Niman (1981) 73 Cr App R 237 (DC), there was no appropriation when the accused put goods into a basket in a self-service store.
He did exactly what he was invited to do, place goods into the receptacle provided.
That act was authorised.
Therefore, there was no appropriation.
Eddy v Niman is open to the criticism that in the terms of s.3(1) there was an assumption of the rights of the owner when he took the goods from the shelf and placed them in the shopping trolley.
A store presumably would not authorise dishonest persons putting items intended to be stolen even into the shop's trolley.
The fact that the accused later decided not to steal does not negative the earlier appropriation.
Lord Roskill in Morris said that the requirement in Eddy v Niman that there had to be an "overt act" was too narrow and that the act "need not necessarily be overt" .
The Court of Appeal in Fritschy [1985]31 July LEXIS (not reported in [1985]Crim LR 745 on this point) said that they did not understand Lord  Roskill's comment, but anyway the accused was not guilty because he had done nothing in England which had not been expressly authorised by the victim when he collected krugerrands in England.
For theft there must be adverse interference or usurpation.
Fritschy itself applied Morris.
The Lords in Morris disapproved of the reasoning in Dip Kaur v Chief Constable of Hampshire [1981]1 WLR 578 (DC).
A cashier saw only a £4.99 price tag when the accused presented a pair of shoes.
The other shoe had a £6.99 price label and the price was in fact £6.99.
It was held that the accused was not guilty of theft because the transaction was a contract of sale which was voidable for mistake but had not been avoided.
The accused received ownership of the shoes.
Lord Roskill said that the niceties of civil law ought not to be imported into criminal law and that Dip Kaur was probably wrongly decided: she had appropriated.
A way of upholding the outcome in Dip Kaur is to hold that the accused was not dishonest.
She made no attempt to conceal the £6.99 price label.
Morris was in turn approved in Chan Man-sin v A-G of Hong Kong, above.
A person who drew on someone's bank account was assuming the rights of the owner, and to be guilty the accused did not have to assume all rights of the owner.
The English case of Wille (1988) 86 Cr App R 296 (CA) is to the same effect.
A bank account was opened by a company.
Each cheque had to be signed and countersigned.
However, from the start the bank honoured cheques signed by one party only, the accused.
It was held that by drawing on the company's bank account, the defendant had assumed the rights of an owner.
Reconciling Lawrence and Morris
If one takes an item from the shelves in a self-service shop, has one appropriated it?
Applying Morris one has not because one has not done an unauthorised act.
Applying Lawrence, however, you can appropriate in spite of the shopkeeper permitting you to do what you have done.
In Lawrence, when an Italian student permitted the taxi-driver to take money in excess of the correct fare, was not the driver doing what he was expressly or impliedly authorised to do?
If he was not — and that must be the answer because Morris did not overrule Lawrence — there must be a narrower meaning of authorisation.
Attempts to reconcile these two decisions have expanded human ingenuity and expended an unconscionable amount of time, effort and paper.
In Philippou (1989) 89 Cr App R 290, the Court of Appeal said that Lawrence and Morris were not irreconcilable.
The adverse act required under Morris did not mean that the prosecution had to prove that the appropriation was not done with the authority of the owner because so to hold was inconsistent with Lawrence.
The next major authority is the civil law case of Dobson v General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp plc [1990]QB 274 (CA).
The plaintiff advertised a gold watch and diamond ring for sale.
A rogue agreed to buy them.
The rogue paid by a building society cheque.
The cheque had been stolen and was worthless.
The plaintiff's insurers, the defendants, refused to pay on the insurance policy, arguing that there was no theft.
Parker LJ, who recognised the apparent conflict between Lawrence and Morris, gave the main judgment.
(a) Property did not pass when the contract to buy was made.
Therefore, at the time when the plaintiff received the cheque, the articles were still "property belonging to another" .
(b) Even if property could pass in exchange for a worthless cheque, the articles still belonged to another within s.5 of the Theft Act at the time of the appropriation.
(c) If property did pass at the moment of the making of the contract, the making of the contract constituted the appropriation, because by that act the rogue assumed the rights of the owner.
(d) Following Lawrence it did not matter that the plaintiff had consented.
(e) The House in Morris did not regard themselves as saying anything which conflicted with Lawrence.
Contrary, however, to the view of Lord Roskill in Morris, Lawrence was a case in Parker LJ's view very much concerned with appropriation: "I would have supposed that the question in Lawrence's case was whether appropriation necessarily involved an absence of consent." 
(f) Parker LJ stated: "whatever R v Morris did decide it cannot be regarded as having overruled the very plain decision in Lawrence's case that appropriation can occur even if the owner consents and…
R v Morris itself makes it plain that it is no defence to say that property passed under a voidable contract."
(g) Skipp is to be treated as a case where"there was much more than the mere consent of the owner.
There was express authority, indeed instruction, to collect the goods.
It could not therefore be said that the defendant was assuming any rights."
His secret intention did not matter.
Until the accused diverted the goods he was following the owner's instructions.
There was no appropriation until the deviation occurred.
Theft did not take place until the accused did the unauthorised act.
Certainly, however, if the owners had known of the secret intention, they would not have consented.
(h) On the facts of Dobson the rogue did interfere with or usurp the plaintiff's rights.
Dobson therefore postulates a distinction between express authority and mere consent.
In the former there is no appropriation, in the latter there is.
It is difficult to understand that distinction.
The second judgment (there were only two judges) was delivered by Bingham LJ.
He did not find Lawrence and Morris easy to reconcile but since"the House in R v Morris considered that there had plainly been an appropriation in Lawrence's case, there must have been because [the victim], although he had permitted or allowed his money to be taken, had not in truth consented to the [accused]taking anything in excess of[what was agreed].
This is not a wholly satisfactory reconciliation, since it might be said that a supermarket consents to customers taking goods from its shelves only when they honestly intend to pay and not otherwise."
On the facts, property passed on delivery of the watch and ring.
That point in time was also the  time of the appropriation.
Therefore, property still belonged to the plaintiff at the time of the appropriation.
Therefore, theft occurred.
Dobson differentiates between consent and authorisation.
The latest case, Gomez [1991]3 All ER 394, seems to differ substantially from Dobson.
In Philippou and Dobson, Lawrence was preferred; in Gomez the court applied Morris.
The accused, assistant manager of an electrical goods shop, agreed to supply items costing over £16,000 to a person in exchange for two stolen building society cheques.
The accused and that person were acting together in a dishonest enterprise.
The shop manager agreed to the transaction provided that the bank agreed that the cheques were acceptable.
The accused later told the manager that the cheques were as good as cash, i.e. there was a fraudulent misrepresentation.
The manager would not have agreed, had he known of the truth.
The cheques were later dishonoured.
The Court of Appeal held that there was no theft because the accused had not appropriated the property.
The contract for the sale of goods was voidable not void, and had not been avoided when the goods were delivered.
The manager had expressly authorised the goods to be removed.
Accordingly, there was no misappropriation, and the conviction was quashed.
Lord Lane CJ stated:(a) If there was a conflict between Lawrence and Morris, the latter was to be preferred, but the Lords in Morris did not see a conflict.
(It might be inquired why Morris was to be followed.
The answer may be that it was the later decision.)
After this point Lawrence was ignored.
(b) Applying Morris, was there an adverse interference with or usurpation of the owner's rights?
 "Morris decides that when a person by dishonest deception induces the owner to transfer his entire proprietary interests, that is not theft." 
(Just one of the confusing matters in this area of the law is that Lord Roskill in Morris did not say this.)
Such occurred here.
The accused took possession of the goods because he was entitled to do so under the terms of the contract.
That contract could have been avoided but was not.
Compare Morris, where at the moment of the price labels being swapped the shopkeeper retained ownership, the entire proprietary interest.
(c) The law is, therefore, that persons who obtain goods by presenting a cheque which they know will be dishonoured are not guilty of theft.
There is misrepresentation but no appropriation.
It should be noted, however, that in Lawrence there was an appropriation when the accused obtained goods by deception; that under Lawrence the accused may appropriate when the parties are in a contractual relationship; and that Lawrence shows that the same facts can amount to theft and obtaining property by deception.
(d) Dobson, which was a civil case, did not apply in criminal law: "We find it difficult to draw a line between express authority and consent." 
Lord Lane CJ added:[o]ne hesitates to suggest that different legal considerations might apply according to whether the proceedings are taking place in the civil rather than the criminal courts and we do not do so.
However, one notes the passage in Lord Roskill's speech in Morris where he says this…"…
I respectfully suggest that it is on any view wrong to introduce into this branch of the criminal law questions whether particular contracts are void or voidable on the ground of mistake or fraud or whether any mistake is sufficiently fundamental to vitiate a contract.
These difficult questions should so far as possible be confined to those fields of law to which they are immediately relevant and I do not regard them as relevant questions under the Theft Act 1968".
Dobson therefore did not undermine the Gomez view of the ratio of Morris
(e) The charge should have been under s.15 of the Act, obtaining property by deception.
Accordingly Morris was applied with the result that the accused was not guilty because the shop manager had consented to the taking of the items.
However, it can be argued under civil law the delivery of something under a contract which is voidable for fraud is the act by which the accused adversely interferes with or usurps the victim's rights.
There is, therefore, an appropriation.
Alternatively, as in Dobson according to Parker LJ, the acceptance by the accused of the victim's offer to sell constituted the appropriation.
In Gomez, Lord Lane CJ said that the goods passed under the voidable-but-not-avoided contract with the victim's consent and express authority.
But surely there is no true consent when the victim has been induced to authorise a transaction by fraud?
At the time of writing, Gomez is on appeal to the Lords.
Summary
The House of Lords held in Lawrence that a person was guilty of theft even when the owner has consented to the taking of the property.
In Morris the Lords held that there was no appropriation without an adverse interference with or usurpation of the owner's rights.
The Court of Appeal has struggled to reconcile the two decisions but has come in for criticism.
The Lords are now taking a third bite of the cherry.
Another view is that this area is ripe for reform by Parliament.
If the draft Code were enatced, that hope would be dashed, for the Code does not purport to reform the law of theft.
Other examples of appropriation
(a) Taking the goods: Stapylton v O'Callaghan [1973]2 All ER 782 (DC).
(b) Putting goods into the accused's shopping bag: McPherson [1973]Crim LR 191 (CA).
(c) After Morris simply taking hold of the goods is not an appropriation, if the owner agrees to that.
(d) Taking money from a customer and not ringing up the price on the till: Monaghan [1979]Crim LR 673 (CA).
The failure to record the transaction is not, after Morris, an authorised act.
(He is also guilty of false accounting, contrary to s.17 of the Theft Act 1968.)
It should be noted that the shop assistant was guilty of theft, and not just of attempted theft.
He may never have decided to remove the money, and he did exactly what the shop had instructed him to do: put the money in the till.
His dishonesty was used to prove his appropriation.
Under the old law of larceny he may not have been guilty of attempted larceny.
The law has been extended so that he is now guilty of theft.
(e) Deceiving the victim into handing over an extra £6 for a taxi-ride: Lawrence, above.
(f) Deceiving a shop assistant into charging less: Bhachu (1977) 65 Cr App R 261 (CA).
The assistant will also be guilty of theft if she was in league with the customer, e.g. Pilgram v Rice-Smith [1977]1 WLR 671 (DC).
A supermarket assistant, in cahoots with a customer, wrapped goods and deliberately understated the price.
It was held that there was an appropriation by the assistant because she had no authority to deal with the goods in this way.
(g) Getting a shopkeeper to cash a cheque sent to the accused by mistake: Davis (1989) 88 Cr App R 347 (CA).
(h) Presenting another's cheque: Wille, above, even though the bank had no mandate to honour the cheque, and Chan Man-sin v R, above, where the cheques were not binding on the company.
Yet compare the civil law.
In Tai Hing Cotton Mill Ltd v Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd [1986]AC 80 (PC) an account was debited because of a forged cheque.
The debit was void because the bank had authority to pay only against valid cheques.
The bank had to pay for the account-holder's loss.
Therefore, the account-holder lost nothing.
In theft terms it is difficult to see that one of the rights of the customer has been adversely interfered with.
The Privy Council in Chan Man-sin advised that the owner of a credit at the bank or of a right to draw on an account"has, clearly, the right as owner to draw by means of a properly completed negotiable instrument or order to pay and it is…beyond argument that one who draws, presents and negotiates a cheque on a particular bank account is assuming the rights of the owner…
It is…entirely immaterial that the end result of the transaction may be a legal nullity, for it is not possible to read into [the Hong Kong version of s.3(1)]any requirement that the assumption of rights there envisaged should have a legally efficacious result."
(i) Transferring export licences from one firm to another: A-G of Hong Kong v Chan Nai-Keung [1987]1 WLR 1339 (PC).
(j) Sending a telex to a bank asking it to transfer funds: ex p Osman [1990]1 WLR 277 (CA).
There was not merely an attempt to appropriate, but an appropriation.
The accused had assumed the rights of a customer to have the cheque met.
A contrasting case is Navvabi [1986]1 WLR 1311 (CA).
The accused drew by cheque card on a bank balance which had insufficient funds to meet the sum.
It was held that there was no appropriation because there was no identifiable property, merely a contractual right against the bank.
This is an important principle.
Even if the accused is not in possession there may be an appropriation.
An illustration is Pitham & Hehl (1976) 65 Cr App R 45 (CA).
The accused offered to sell furniture to third parties.
The furniture belonged to a man in prison, and the accused was not in possession.
It was held that by the offer to sell, the accused was assuming one of the rights of the owner, the right to sell.
(If another person dishonestly agreed to buy, he will be guilty of handling stolen goods.)
There is debate whether there is an appropriation in such circumstances.
Gl.
Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law, 2nd edn, Stevens & Sons, 1983, 764, criticised Pitham: if a butler invites the maid to join him in stealing the Duke's silver when he has found the key to the safe, surely he has not at that time appropriated the silver.
Section 3(1) deems there to be an appropriation where the accused "has come by the property (innocently or not) without stealing it" .
There is an appropriation where in those circumstances he later assumes "a right to it by keeping or dealing with it as owner" .
An example is when a drunken student takes a flashing yellow light from a road excavation, puts it into his bedroom, wakes up to discover it there, and decides to keep it.
He has come by the property without stealing it and has later assumed a right to it by keeping it.
An example where the latter part of s.3(1) did not apply is Broom v Crowther (1984) 148 JP 592 (DC).
The accused bought a theodolite, suspecting that it was stolen.
He left it in his bedroom while he decided what to do with it.
It was held that there was no appropriation while he was making up his mind.
There would be an appropriation once he had decided to keep it.
Therefore, one can appropriate by making up one's mind — a far cry from asportation.
One person who would otherwise appropriate is exempted by s.3(2).
Where property or a right or interest in property is or purports to be transferred for value to a person acting in good faith, no later assumption by him of rights which he believed himself to be acquiring shall, by reason of any defect in the transferor's title, amount to theft of the property.
If the accused later discovers the defect in title and sells the item without disclosing the defect, he will have obtained the sale price by deception, the deception being that he has a good title.
Appropriation may be a continuing act.
In Hale (1978) 68 Cr App R 415 (CA), the accused, wearing a stocking mask, went into the victim's house, took her jewellery box, and tied her up.
The court held that the theft was not over by the time the lady was tied up.
They were therefore guilty of robbery when they used force seconds after seizing the property.
Because the courts have held that appropriation does not occur instantaneously they have been able to expand and contract the term to catch those who are "manifestly guilty" .
Hale was a case on robbery.
The accused is not guilty of that offence if force or threat of force is not used at the time of the theft.
Therefore, to catch the accused the appropriation must be read as a continuing act to include situations where the taking is not by force but there is a struggle afterwards.
However, the accused is not guilty of the offence of handling if the actus reus is committed otherwise than "in the course of the stealing" .
That phrase is read narrowly to convict the accused of handling rather than theft, handling being a more serious offence than theft.
Theft by sole controllers of companies
In McHugh (1989) 88 Cr App R 385 (CA), the accused used money of a company of which he was a director to pay off the debts of subsidiary companies, of which he was also a director.
It was held that there was an appropriation.
Mustill LJ said, obiter, said that where the alleged appropriation was done by a person who was beneficially entitled to the whole share capital of the company, there was no appropriation because he would have the authority of the company to act as he did.
It would not matter whether the consent was expressly or impliedly given, i.e. there is no theft from a company when it has consented to the taking.
On the facts, however, the accused was not the sole proprietor.
Therefore, he could not appropriate from it.
The Court of Appeal in Philippou, above, however, held differently.
The two sole directors of a company used corporate money to buy a building in Spain for themselves.
The court looked to Morris for guidance.
Lord Roskill had said that: "it is the doing of one or more acts which individually or collectively amount to…adverse interference" which constitutes the appropriation.
He had approved cases such as McPherson, above, where dishonesty had converted what the accused did into an adverse inference with the owner's rights.
The mens rea of the defendants transmuted the innocent act of transferring assets to Spain into a dishonest appropriation of the money.
The fact that they controlled the company which consented to the transfer was irrelevant in the light of their dishonest appropriation.
The court in Philippou does not appear to have known of the dictum in McHugh.
Certainly the company has a legal personality separate from that of the directors, but where the directors as the defendants take money from the company, they are acting as the company.
Since the directors are the sole shareholders, the shareholders are not deprived of anything, and it could be said that the sole controllers are not dishonest within Ghosh.
On the other hand, it might be said that in criminal law a company can authorise transactions only for its own benefit.
Where the director or directors is or are not in sole control of the company, there is no difficulty in holding that he or they can appropriate from the company and the property belong to another.
Similarly a partner can appropriate partnership property (Bonner [1970]1 WLR 838 (CA)), and a co-owner can appropriate property from the other co-owners.
In these instances the company, the other partners and co-owners have a proprietary right to the property within s.5(1).
Property
The second element of the actus reus of theft is property.
Section 4(1) gives a broad definition of property: "money and all other property, real or personal, including things in action and other intangible property" .
 "Money" includes foreign money.
A thing in action is property without physical existence which can, however, be enforced by legal action, such as the right to sue to recover a debt.
Some forms of intellectual property such as patents are also covered.
However, Oxford v Moss, above, held that confidential information such as exam questions is not property for the purposes of the Theft Act.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee's Eighth Report, Theft and Related Offences, Cmnd 2977, 1966, 39, said that electricity could not be stolen because it was not a substance and the Divisional Court held so in Low v Blease [1975]Crim LR 513; instead a separate offence, s.13, abstracting electricity, was created.
At common law a human corpse could not be stolen because there was no "property" in it.
Certainly a sample of blood (Rothery [1976]RTR 550 (CA)) and of urine (Welsh [1974]RTR 478 (CA)) can be stolen.
Presumably also sperm in a sperm-bank and human organs for transplant can be stolen.
Whether a body kept in a store for medical students' use is property is debatable.
Some examples
(a) Property covers export quotas: A-G of Hong Kong v Chan Nai-Keung, above.
(b) If a first person owes the victim a sum of money, the accused forges an assignment from the victim to him, and the first person pays the accused, the accused has stolen property (and obtained it by deception).
(c) A difficult topic is cheques.
If a company secretary uses company cheques to settle his own debts, he has stolen the company's credit balance as well as the cheque itself.
While there has been development, the principal authority remains Kohn (1979) 69 Cr App R 395.
The accused, an accountant, drew cheques on his employer's account.
He was guilty of theft.
The causing of the bank account to be reduced was appropriation, and the account was property.
The court held that debiting an account which is not overdrawn or one where the overdrawing is within the agreed limit (a credit facility) is theft because the bank has an obligation to meet the drawing.
That obligation is enforceable by action.
Therefore, it is a debt, a thing in action, which is property.
(In Chan Man-sin the thing in action was said to be the benefit of the contract with the bank.)
However, drawing on an overdrawn account or an account overdrawn beyond the agreed credit limit does not amount to the appropriation of property because the bank has no obligation to meet the drawing.
The accused has not appropriated a thing in action, because the bank did not owe the money to anyone.
The charge should be attempted theft or obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception.
Cheques, telexes and appropriation
Kohn was approved in Thompson [1984]1 WLR 962, Doole [1985]Crim LR 4, Chan Man-sin, above, and ex p Osman, above.
An alternative view is found in Wille, above.
The accused, a company director, drew cheques on the company's account and used the money for his own purposes.
The cheques had not been countersigned, and it was arguable that the bank had no authority to honour them.
The Court of Appeal, however, held that the lack of authority was irrelevant, and the accused had appropriated the credit balance, which was a thing in action, by drawing the  cheques.
This case was approved in Chan Man-sin.
One problem with cheques is: when does the appropriation take place?
Does it occur on withdrawal or when the entry is made in the bank's books, i.e. when the account is debited?
What happens when the account is in the black at the time of presentation but in the red when the bank honours the withdrawal?
If the latter applies, there is no thing in action and so no property to steal.
Kohn, Tomsett [1985]Crim LR 369 (CA) and Doole support that view.
For example, in Tomsett, the accused, a telex operator employed by a bank in England, diverted money sent by his bank to New York.
The court held that the money was appropriated only when the telex took effect.
Since the telex did not take effect in England, the English courts have no jurisdiction.
Navvabi [1986]1 WLR 1311 (CA) said that Kohn was obiter on this point.
The Privy Council refused to decide this point in Chan Man-sin, where the accused assumed the rights of the owner by drawing on the account.
Ex p Osman held that the sending of a telex amounted to an appropriation.
Therefore, theft was complete at that moment, contrary to Tomsett.
In point of interpretation the line taken in ex p Osman looks correct.
Under Morris any assumption of any of the rights of the owner suffices, and there is no need to prove that the accused deprived the owner of anything.
Accordingly a preparatory act can be an appropriation (cf. the law of attempt)!
If an accused steals a cheque, he is guilty of theft of a piece of paper.
When he cashes the cheque, he has stolen the amount stated on the face of the cheque.
Land, flora and fauna
By s.4(2): A person cannot steal land, or things forming part of land and severed from it by him or by his direction, except…
(a) when he is a trustee or personal representative, or is authorised by power of attorney, or as a liquidator of a company, or otherwise, to sell or dispose of land belonging to another, and he appropriates the land or anything forming part of it by dealing with it in breach of the confidence reposed in him; or
(b) when he is not in possession of the land and appropriates anything forming part of the land by severing it or causing it to be severed, or after it has been severed; or
(c) when, being in possession of the land under a tenancy, he appropriates the whole or part of any fixture or structure let to be used with the land…
The basic rule is therefore that land cannot be stolen, but there are exceptions.
An example of (b) is where one farmer grazes cattle on the victim's land without the latter's consent.
The farmer has caused to be severed something which forms part of the land.
Soil is land.
There may be difficulties knowing what forms part of the land and what does not.
Before the Act a hut that was bolted onto a concrete base was held not to be part of the land whereas the concrete base, obiter, was.
Grazing cattle on land will cause the grass, part of the land, to be severed.
Under (b) the extension of a boundary fence does not steal the land enclosed because there is no severance.
Under (c) an accused will be guilty of theft (provided all the other ingredients of theft are satisfied) if he, the tenant, hacks out an Adams fireplace for whatever purpose.
If, however, the person in possession of the house is not a tenant but a licensee, s.4(2) (c) does not apply and he will not be guilty of theft of the fireplace!
And being in possession s.4(2) (b) does not apply.
The law is in need of reform to bring about consistency between tenants and licensees.
Under a later part of s.4(2) land does not include incorporeal hereditaments such as easements, which can therefore be stolen.
A person who picks mushrooms growing wild on any land, or who picks flowers, fruit or foliage from a plant growing wild on any land, does not (although not in possession of the land), steal what he picks, unless he does it for reward or for sale or other commercial purpose.
For purposes of this subsection "mushroom" includes any fungus, and "plant" includes any shrub or tree (s.4(3)).
Under s.4(3) the accused is guilty only if he has a commercial purpose.
If the accused picks mistletoe to sell in the streets at Christmas, he is guilty, provided the other elements of theft are satisfied.
With regard to plants s.4(3) will be satisfied if it is picked for a commercial purpose.
If, however, the whole plant is dug out, s.4(2) comes into play because the plant forms part of the land and is stolen by severing it (s.4(2) (b)).
Wild creatures, tamed or untamed, shall be regarded as property; but a person cannot steal a wild creature not tamed nor ordinarily kept in captivity, or the carcase of any such creature, unless either it has been reduced into possession by or on behalf of another person and possession of it has not since been lost or abandoned, or another person is in course of reducing it into possession (s.4(4)).
In s.4(4) there is no need for a commercial purpose.
The accused who appropriates a grouse hidden by a poacher to be collected later will be guilty of theft (provided the other elements exist), even though he does not intend to sell it in a pub.
The accused steals the grouse from both the poacher and the landowner.
Belonging to another
By s.5(1) of the Theft Act 1968:[p]roperty shall be regarded as belonging to any person having possession or control of it, or having in it any proprietary right or interest (not being an equitable interest arising only from an agreement to transfer or grant an intent).
A thief may therefore steal from several people: the owner, the possessor, and the person in physical control.
For this reason the owner may be guilty of theft from the possessor or controller.
An example of the application of s.5(1) is Woodman [1974]QB 754 (CA).
A company sold off all the scrap metal on the site on its disused factory but retained control of the site.
It did not know that the purchaser of the scrap had left some behind.
The accused removed some of the metal.
It was held that he was properly indicted with  stealing from the company because a person or company in control of the site is deemed prima facie to have control over things on the land.
(The presumption that the owner had control over items on the land would, however, be rebutted where a third party had hidden drugs or explosives on the land.)
Woodman demonstrates that the owner need not know he owns the property.
The same argument will apply to lost golf balls.
It seems that rubbish left in a skip belongs to the skip-owner and rubbish in dustbins belongs to the local authority.
Items abandoned and not owned by anyone no longer belong to another and so cannot be stolen.
An illustration would be a newspaper left in the street.
The phrase in brackets in s.5(1) excludes from "belonging to another" the following situation.
The accused agrees to transfer shares to the victim but before doing so he transfers them to a third party.
The victim has only an equitable interest, and the accused is not guilty of theft of the shares.
The accused may, however, be guilty of theft of the money or of obtaining the money by deception.
There is a dictum in Edwards v Ddin [1976]1 WLR 942 (DC) that s.5 offers only a partial definition of "belonging to another" , but the statement is probably incorrect.
Section 5(1) has been interpreted in the following ways:(a) It does not cover cases where under the civil law ownership of the goods has passed.
If there is a contract and the seller has delivered to the buyer, the latter obtains ownership even though he has not paid for the item.
The principal case is Edwards v Ddin.
A driver had his tank filled with petrol.
He then decided not to pay and drove away.
By virtue of the Sale of Goods Act 1979, s.18, at the moment of driving off the petrol no longer belonged to the garage.
Therefore, it was not property "belonging to another" , and so could not be subject to theft.
The same principle applies to the accused who eats a meal in a restaurant and then decides to leave without paying: Corcoran v Whent [1977]Crim LR 52 (DC).
As well as there being no theft, the accused has not obtained property, the petrol or the food, by deception because he obtained the property before the deception.
(If, however, the accused intended all along to drive off without paying, he has obtained the petrol by deception: McHugh (1977) 64 Cr App R 92 (CA).
It was assumed in McHugh that these facts would also amount to theft, but Morris scotches that notion: the driver is authorised to put petrol in the tank.)
Parliament has filled this gap by creating the offence of making off without payment in s.3 of the Theft Act 1978.
It should be remembered that the position is different in a shop, whether self-service or otherwise, where ownership does not pass to the alleged thief the buyer, until the goods have been paid for even if the buyer obtains possession before payment.
In this case the seller retains ownership, the "proprietary right" within s.5(1), and so the goods belong to another and can be stolen.
The same applies where the accused gets petrol at a self-service station.
In this situation property does not pass until the petrol is paid for.
An easier case is Walker [1984]Crim LR 112 (CA).
The victim bought a video from the accused.
It was defective and he took it for repair to the accused, who  sold it.
The accused's conviction was quashed because the judge had not explained to the jury that the sale amounted to theft only if the victim had a "proprietary right or interest" in the video.
(b) The interests under s.5(1) include liens and bailments at will: Turner (No. 2)[1971]1 WLR 901 (CA).
In Turner (No. 2) the accused left his car at the victim's garage for repair.
After it had been repaired, he drove away without paying.
In civil law the victim had a "lien" over the car, which meant that he was entitled to keep the car until the repairs had been paid for.
The trial judge instructed the jury to ignore the concept of a lien.
On that approach the repairer was a bailee at will.
The Court of Appeal held that the owner had stolen his own car because the victim had been deprived of "possession or control of it" .
A cobbler has a right to retain mended shoes until they are paid for.
This right is called a "lien" .
If the owner snatches the shoes back, he will have stolen them for they belong to another for the purposes of theft.
Therefore, the owner, the person with the right to immediate possession, is guilty of theft when he exercises that right!
A bailee at will cannot prevent a bailor from getting the item back, yet doing so is theft.
It is thought that there is no theft where the owner recovers an impounded car because the police have no right to retain it: Meredith [1973]Crim LR 253, per Judge Da Cunha.
The power to remove obstructions did not include a power to keep the car from the owner.
There is no theft where the accused induces a testatrix to revoke her will and make another, for there is no proprietary interest in the executors: Tillings [1985]Crim LR 393.
In Hancock [1990]2 QB 242 it had not been decided whether coins were treasure trove or not.
The answer to that question would mean that they belonged either to the Crown or not.
The accused, the finder, was not guilty of theft because at the moment of appropriation the coins were not property belonging to another.
It is therefore not such property where there is only in the alleged owners a claim to a proprietary interest.
There is also authority for the proposition that for the purposes of s.5(1) a copyright owner does not have a proprietary interest in the item copied: Storrow [1983]Crim LR 332.
(c) In Shadrokh-Cigari [1988]Crim LR 465 (CA), a bank made a mistake of fact and the accused received money.
The bank retained an equitable right to the money.
Therefore, it belonged to them within s.5(1).
Presumably the reason why the bank has an equitable proprietary interest is that the law imposes a constructive trust.
There is, however, the contrary authority of A-G's Reference (No. 1 of 1985)[1986]QB 491 (CA), where the manager of a tied pub sold beer as that of the brewery when he had purchased it elsewhere.
The court held that, even if there was a constructive trust, such did not create an equitable interest in the brewery.
The case has been criticised for deciding that there is no constructive trust where the accused uses the victim's facilities to make a secret profit.
(d) A thief has "possession or control" within s.5(1).
Therefore, a second thief can steal from the first: Meech [1974]QB 549 (CA).
It does not matter that the owner has a better right to possession than either of the thieves.
Section 5(2)—(4) deals with cases where property belongs to the accused before he dishonestly appropriates it.
By s.5(2):[w]here property is subject to a trust, the persons to whom it belongs shall be regarded as including any person having a right to enforce the trust, and an intention to defeat the trust shall be regarded accordingly as an intention to deprive of the property any person having that right.
Normally theft by a trustee from a trust will fall within s.5(1).
The trustee has a legal interest in the property; the beneficiaries have an equitable interest.
Section 5(2) deems the property to belong to the beneficiaries.
(Similarly appropriation by an executor will be theft because the legatees have an equitable proprietary interest within s.5(1).)
Where the trust does not have identified beneficiaries, such as a charitable trust, s.5(2) applies.
The Attorney-General is the person who enforces charitable trusts, and by s.5(2) a theft by a trustee of such a trust is a theft from him.
By s.5(3):[w]here a person receives property from or on account of another, and is under an obligation to the other to retain and deal with that property or its proceeds in a particular way, the property or proceeds shall be regarded (as against him) as belonging to the other.
(a) The accused himself must know of the obligation.
It is insufficient that his agent knew: Wills (1991) 92 Cr App R 297 (CA).
(b) The principal problem is understanding the need for particular arrangements.
The basic rule is that s.5(3) applies only where the victim has imposed particular arrangements on the accused.
The main authority is Hall [1973]QB 126 (CA): The accused, a travel agent, received money from clients.
He did not arrange trips and could not repay the money.
It was held that he was not guilty of theft because there was no such special arrangement as would give rise to the obligation in s.5(3).
The same reasoning was used in Lewis v Lethbridge [1987]Crim LR 59 (DC): The accused received £54 in sponsorship money for a colleague who entered the London Marathon.
He did not give the money to charity.
The court said that a failure to pay a debt was not theft and held that there was no obligation to retain and deal with the money in a particular way.
There was no rule of the charity that the accused had to hand over the notes and coins received or to maintain a separate fund.
The result might perhaps have been different if the money was in a collecting box.
(Perhaps the court ought to have found a trust.)
The decision may, like Hall is too, be seen as surprising.
One might expect one's money to be used to buy holidays or be handed to charity, but that is not what happens.
The money can be mixed with other money, for example, to pay the electricity bill.
The money is not kept separate.
It is not those coins and notes which are to be handed over.
The position has been held to apply to an  insurance agent, who was under no duty to hand those notes and coins to the company (Robertson [1977]Crim LR 173 (CA)), and to a person in receipt of housing benefit, who was under no legal obligation to use the money to pay off rent arrears (DPP v Huskinson [1988]Crim LR 620), even though that was the purpose for which the accused received the benefit.
In A-G's Reference (No. 1 of 1985), above, the accused sold other beer than that of the brewery to which he was tied and made a profit for himself.
It was held that he was not a trustee of the money for the brewers and therefore he was under no obligation to deal with it in a certain way.
Section 5(3) was inapplicable.
The same reasoning presumably applies to bribes.
The position is different where there are particular arrangements.
The law is illustrated by the pre-Theft Act case of Hassall (1861) 169 ER 1302 where the treasurer of a Christmas club did not spend the money on Christmas treats.
In Davidge v Bunnett [1984]Crim LR 297 (DC) the accused was given money by her flatmates to pay the gas bill.
She spent it on other things.
She was held to be guilty of theft.
She was under a duty to use the money to pay the gas bills (cf. Hall, where the accused was not under a duty to use that money for that holiday).
In Brewster (1979) 69 Cr App R 375 (CA), an insurance agent was guilty of theft of the premiums because the money had to be handed over to the companies he worked for under the terms of his contract.
Therefore, he was under an obligation to deal with the money in a particular way, that obligation being constituted by the contract.
The fact that the firms allowed him to use the money for his own purposes and replace it was merely an indulgence.
Robertson, above, also concerned an insurance agent, but there was no such obligation.
In Wakeman v Farrar [1974]Crim LR 136 (DC), the accused received a warning that he must return a lost cheque after he had received an over-the-counter payment from the Department of Health and Social Security.
The cheque was thereby subject to a legal obligation within s.5(3).
(c) On analogy with Gilks [1972]1 WLR 1341 on s.5(4) the obligation in s.5(3) must be a legally enforceable one, and this proposition was apparently accepted in Meech [1974]QB 549 (CA) and Mainwaring (1981) 74 Cr App R 99 (CA).
An example of a non-legally enforceable obligation is a gambling debt.
(However, a bet on the Tote is legally enforceable because the Tote can neither win or lose, and there is accordingly no wager.)
Cullen (1974), unreported, seems to be contrary to cases such as Mainwaring.
A mistress was given money to buy food.
The court thought that there was a legal obligation, which she breached by spending the money on herself.
As a matter of contract law, however, the outcome would have been different.
There would have been no contract but a non-binding domestic arrangement.
She therefore would not have been liable for breach of contract.
The result looks odd: she is guilty in criminal law but not liable in civil law.
Whether there is a legal obligation is a question for the judge: Mainwaring.
The jury's task is to see whether the duty arose on the facts.
(d) Meech held that the accused was under an obligation to retain and deal with a cheque if he believed that he was under such a duty, though in fact he was not.
In the light of the need for a legal obligation Meech looks incorrect on this  point.
In Meech the victim obtained a cheque by fraud.
The accused cashed it for him.
The accused and a couple of friends staged a false robbery to get the money from the victim.
The court held that the appropriation did not occur until the fake robbery took place, not when the accused decided to get the money (Morris would hold this part of Meech to be correct).
By s.5(4):[w]here a person gets property by another's mistake and is under an obligation to make restoration (in whole or in part) of the property or its proceeds or the value thereof, then to the extent of that obligation the property or proceeds shall be regarded (as against him) as belonging to the person entitled to restoration, and an intention not to make restoration shall be regarded accordingly as an intention to deprive that person of the property or proceeds.
One way of approaching s.5(4) is to hold that ownership of goods is not transferred to the alleged thief in situations where under civil law it would not have passed.
Therefore, s.5(4) does not apply where under civil law ownership would not have been transferred.
Ownership would not have been transferred where the mistake is so fundamental that the transaction is void such as when there is a mistake as to the relevant identity of the recipient.
If s.5(4) does not apply to such mistakes, what is left?
Therefore, s.5(4) applies to voidable contracts; that is, where the mistake is not so fundamental that the contract is void.
Ownership passes to the alleged thief under a voidable contract and remains with him until the contract is avoided by the innocent party.
Section 5(4) deems ownership to remain with the victim.
Section 5(4) is not needed for void contracts because ownership remains with the victim.
This reading derives support from the legislative history of the provision.
The aim was to reverse the decision in Moynes v Coopper, above.
The employee received a pay packet which contained an overpayment.
The amount should have been reduced because he had received an advance on his wages.
He later discovered the overpayment and spent the money.
He was not guilty of the offence, which is now theft, but would now be so because of s.5(4) where the innocent party's belief is classified as a non-fundamental one.
Under civil law the accused is under a duty to make restitution ( "an obligation to make restitution" ).
Section 5(4) is applicable and the accused is guilty of theft of the excess.
This effect of s.5(4) can be seen from A-G's Ref (No. 1 of 1983)[1985]QB 182.
The accused was overpaid, the money going into her current account.
The Court of Appeal held that she had acquired something by mistake and she was under a duty to make restoration.
The case demonstrates that s.5(4) applies to intangible property (the debt) as well as tangible property.
Another approach to s.5(4) is to argue thus: s.5(4) applies only if the contract is void.
If the contract is voidable, there is no "obligation to make restoration" because the obligation does not arise until the innocent party elects to avoid the contract.
There is only a potential, not an actual, obligation.
The contrary contention is that there is a legal obligation even though it depends on the innocent party's making the election.
In Chase Manhattan Bank NA v Israel-British Bank NA [1981]Ch 105, a civil case, it was held that the innocent party to an overpayment retains an equitable right where the overpayment was brought about by a mistake of fact.
Therefore, s.5(1) applies and there is no need to rely on s.5(4).
The Court of Appeal adopted this understanding of the law in Shadrokh-Cigari, above, but also held that s.5(4) was another way to the same result since there was also an obligation to make restoration.
In Shadrokh-Cigari a bank erroneously transferred money to an account of a child, whose guardian the accused was.
He persuaded the child to sign mandates authorising the bank to issue drafts in his favour.
Either the bank retained an equitable interest in the drafts within s.5(1) or the accused was under a duty to restore within s.5(4).
It must be said that as a matter of civil law the existence of an equitable proprietary interest is doubtful.
Under s.5(4) the obligation must be a legally enforceable one: Gilks, above.
A gambling debt is not legally enforceable.
Therefore, if a bookmaker pays out money in the mistaken belief that a certain horse has won, s.5(4) is inappropriate.
Ownership of the money, it was thought, did not pass.
Therefore, the money remained property belonging to another.
(Civil law appears to be, however, that property does pass to the winner of a bet.)
If it was not until later that the accused discovered that he had been overpaid it is suggested that the money no longer belongs to another because ownership of it passes on payment.
 "Proceeds" in s.5(4) covers money received from a third party who had cashed a cheque for the accused: Davis (1989) 88 Cr App R 347 (CA).
Section 5(4) should be read as not applying to mistakes induced by the accused's deception.
Otherwise, theft and obtaining property by deception would very largely overlap — see the next chapter.
ROBBERY
Introduction
This offence may be seen as a crime both against property and the person.
By s.8(1) of the Theft Act 1968:[a]person is guilty of robbery if he steals, and immediately before or at the time of doing so, and in order to do so, he uses any force on any person or puts or seeks to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force.
This subsection creates two offences: robbery and assault with intent to rob.
Robbery is essentially an aggravated form of theft.
All the elements of theft must be proved before a conviction may be secured for this offence.
An accused is therefore not guilty of robbery if he believes that he has a legal right to deprive the victim of the property.
In Robinson [1977]Crim LR 173 (CA), the accused demanded  that the victim repay a debt owed by the victim's wife to him.
He had a knife to reinforce his demand.
The court held that the facts did not constitute robbery because the accused was not dishonest, because he thought he had a legal right to the money (see the discussion of s.2(1) (a) above).
The actus reus
 "Force" is an ordinary English word, apparently chosen because it is comprehensible to lay people.
It is for the jury to determine its meaning: Dawson (1976) 64 Cr App R 170 (CA).
Whether jostling is force is for the jury.
The Court of Appeal approved this approach in Clouden [1987]Crim LR 56.
The force must be used in order to steal.
In Donaghy [1981]Crim LR 644 (Crown Court), the accused ordered a taxi-driver to take him from Newmarket to London and made threats to his life.
Once in London he stole £22 from the driver.
He was held not guilty of robbery because the threats were not made in order to take the money.
The force must be used "on" the person not just on the property to be misappropriated.
An example is putting a hand over the victim's mouth to stop her screaming: Hale (1978) 68 Cr App R 415 (CA).
It has been suggested that "on" means "against" and therefore it is not robbery if the accused snatches the victim's bag unless the victim retains hold or recovers it and there is a fight.
Perhaps this distinction is too little to bear the weight placed on it.
The section states "on any person" not "against" .
In Corcoran v Anderton (1980) 71 Cr App R 104 (DC), there was robbery where a handbag was tugged away from the victim, even though she did not lose control.
In Clouden snatching a basket out of the victim's hands was robbery.
It is thought that the Criminal Law Revision Committee, the Report of which formed the basis of the Theft Act, would not have wanted such a result but would have preferred the outcome to be theft (para. 65).
The force must be used "immediately before or at the time of" the theft.
It is not robbery where the accused uses force to escape.
If, however, "appropriation" in the definition of theft is a continuing act, the accused may be convicted of robbery if thee is a force during a struggle to escape: Hale, approved in Gregory (1983) 77 Cr App R 41 (CA).
It seems that whether the accused is guilty of robbery if he uses force when escaping is a question for the jury: Hale (unreported on this point).
It is immaterial that the accused uses force on some person other than the one from whom he takes the item.
If the accused uses force on a railway signalman to make him stop a train, it is robbery if the accused steals from the train.
Section 8(1) covers not only force but the threat of force.
The threat must be one which puts the victim "then and there" in fear of force.
A threat of future force is not sufficient.
In those circumstances a charge of blackmail is appropriate.
The sub-section also covers where the accused "seeks to put" a person in fear of force.
An example is threatening a deaf person.
Mens rea
Besides the mental element required for theft, it is probable that the force must be applied intentionally or at least recklessly and that the accused must be aware that the force is being used on a person.
PICTURES AT AN EXHIBITION
Section 11(1) of the 1968 Theft Act provides:…where the public have access to a building in order to view the building or a part of it, or collection or part of a collection housed in it, any person who without lawful authority removes from the building or its grounds the whole or part of any article displayed or kept for display to the public in the building or that part of it or in its grounds shall be guilty of an offence.
The public must have access for s.11 to apply.
It is not sufficient that a small class of the public has access.
 "Collection" covers "a collection got together for a temporary purpose" , but not one "made or exhibited for the purpose of effecting sales or other commercial dealings" .
Taking a painting from a commercial art gallery does not fall within s.11.
Section 11(1) has the following effect.
If there is a country house surrounded by grounds and the public has access to the grounds but not to the house, a s.11(1) offence is not committed when the accused removes something from the grounds.
That result applies still, even if the public has access to the house for purposes other than seeing exhibits, e.g. to visit the tea-shop.
Section 11(1) is restricted to the purposes there mentioned.
If the accused takes a cross from a display at a church, he is not guilty if the cross is part of worship, not part of an exhibition: Barr [1978]Crim LR 244.
 "Article" is undefined but is a broad term.
An item in store and rarely seen by the public falls within the protected subject- matter: Durkin [1973]QB 786 (CA).
Section 11(2) states:[i]t is immaterial…that the public access to a building is limited to a particular period or particular occasion, but where anything removed from a building or its grounds is there otherwise than as forming part of, or being on loan for exhibition with, a collection intended for permanent exhibition to the public, the person removing it does not thereby commit an offence under this section unless he removes it on a day when the public have access to the building as mentioned in sub-section (1) above.
The effect of s.11(2) is this.
If the accused enters a country mansion which is open only on certain days and takes a painting on a day when the house is open to the public he is guilty.
If, however, he goes in with the public on that day, conceals himself, and takes the painting on the following day, he is not guilty.
The mens rea is intent.
The accused must intend to remove the article, knowing that he does not have the owner's consent or lawful authority.
Section 11(3) exonerates the accused "if he believes that he has lawful authority for the removal of the thing in question or that he would have it if the person entitled to it knew of the removal and the circumstances of it" .
There is no requirement of dishonesty or intent permanently to deprive.
Section 11 is therefore a crime which deals with dishonest borrowing.
TAKING WITHOUT CONSENT
Section 12 of the 1968 Theft Act is one of the offences where the accused is guilty without having an intention permanently to deprive.
Section 12(1) states:…a person shall be guilty of an offence if, without having the consent of the owner or other lawful authority, he takes any conveyance for his own or another's use or knowing that any conveyance has been taken without such authority, drives it or allows himself to be carried in or on it.
The sub-section is aimed at joyriding.
The offence is a summary one: Criminal Justice Act 1988, s.37(1).
It cannot therefore be attempted.
The crime in s.9 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 of vehicle interference (see Chapter 12) partly covers this gap, though that crime is restricted to motor vehicles.
Analysis
(a) "Conveyance" .
The term covers land, water and air conveyances.
Section 12(7) excludes from the definition of conveyance a vehicle under the control of someone not carried in or on it.
This definition excludes postmen's trolleys found in some towns.
Also excluded are horses: Neal v Gribble [1978]RTR 409.
A horse is not a "conveyance constructed or adapted for the carriage of a person…" 
(b) "Takes" .
A person can take a vehicle, even though he is already in possession of it.
There need be no driving away but some movement is needed: Bogacki [1973]QB 832 (CA).
The offence was not committed when the accused started the engine of the bus but made no attempt to move it.
In Pearce [1973]Crim LR 321 (CA), the accused was guilty when he put a boat onto a trailer and drove it away for later use.
(c) "Allows himself to be carried in or on it" .
Provided the other elements of the offence are fulfilled, the accused is guilty if he is a passenger in the conveyance.
The vehicle must move while he is in or on it: Diggin (1980) 72 Cr App R 204 (CA).
(d) "For his or another's use" .
It is not sufficient that the accused takes the car as a joke, as happened in Stokes [1982]Crim LR 695 (CA), where the accused pushed a car round a corner in order to create the impression that it had been stolen.
He did not use the car as a conveyance.
Similar is Dunn [1984]Crim LR 367 (Crown Court).
The accused pushed a motorbike 40 yards so that he could have a good look at it under a streetlight.
He had not ridden it.
It was held that he had not used it within s.12(1).
Compare Bow (1976) 64 Cr App R 54 (CA).
The accused got into the driver's seat, released the handbrake, and steered the car downhill for 200 yards.
He had used it as a conveyance.
There was no requirement that the engine had to be started.
It was no defence that the accused had a good motive, namely to stop the car obstructing him.
(e) "Without the consent of the owner" .
The courts have stated that the driver who was driving the vehicle with the consent of the owner does not become guilty of s.12 if he makes a reasonable deviation, e.g. to go to the toilet.
However, an unreasonable deviation brings s.12 into play.
The main authority is Phipps (1970) 54 Cr App R 300 (CA).
The accused received permission to drive the victim's car to the station.
He drove it to the coast.
He was guilty.
He as a bailee had exceeded the purpose of the bailment.
Surprisingly the courts have distinguished deviation cases from ones in which the accused has obtained the use of a conveyance by fraud.
In those circumstances the accused is not guilty.
The two main authorities are Peart [1970]2 QB 672 and Whittaker v Campbell [1984]QB 318.
In Peart, the more authoritative case, the accused received a car from the victim when he had told him he wanted it for a certain journey.
In fact he drove to a further place, as he had always intended.
The Court of Appeal allowed his appeal.
The Divisional Court in the second case even said that s.12 was inapplicable where there was a fundamental mistake e.g. the accused deceived the victim as to his identity.
A mistake induced by deception made the contract void, yet the consent was valid within s.12!
In Phipps the accused borrowed the car to drive his wife to Victoria Station.
He promised to return it that evening.
He did not do so.
He was guilty of this offence when he used the car for his own purposes the following day.
However, in Peart the accused was not guilty when he obtained a car on the undertaking that he was going to drive it 30 miles in one direction but drove it 100 miles in another.
Applying Phipps he would have been guilty if he had drove to the agreed destination and then driven to his true destination.
This fact merely needs stating to show how absurd the law is.
The Court of Appeal (Civil Division) in Singh v Rathour [1988]1 WLR 422 distinguished Peart and Whittaker v Campbell on the grounds that the defendant knew that he was using a minibus for a purpose which exceeded the limitation under which he had borrowed it.
Where as in Whittaker v Campbell the vehicle was hired there is a charge possible under s.1 of the Theft Act 1978, obtaining services by deception.
That section, however, requires an understanding that the service will be paid for.
Peart, where there was a gratuitous borrowing, would not fall within s.1.
(f) The mens rea.
The accused need not know that the owner does not consent or know that the conveyance has been taken without authority.
(See also (g) below.)
In the "allowing" form the accused must know that the conveyance has been taken without lawful authority.
It is uncertain whether wilful blindness is sufficient.
(g) Section 12(6) exculpates the person who acts "in the belief that he has lawful authority to do [what he had done]or that he would have the owner's consent if the owner knew of his doing it and the circumstances of it" .
The test is subjective, and it does not matter whether the accused actually had authority or consent.
Clotworthy [1981]Crim LR 501 (CA) illustrates the workings of this sub-section.
The accused drove a car, which was under repair, from one place to secure premises.
He contended that he believed that the owner would consent, had he known.
The accused had no insurance.
Clotworthy demonstrates that it is the accused's belief which counts, not whether the owner really would have consented, had he known of the lack of insurance.
In Briggs [1987]Crim LR 708 the accused was seen riding a motorbike two days after it had been taken without lawful authority.
He said that he believed he had lawful authority to ride the bike because he was repairing it for a friend.
There is precedent for saying that a drunken belief that the car belongs to the accused when it did not does not give a s.12(6) defence: Gannon (1988) 87 Cr App R 254.
A person charged with theft may be convicted of s.12, but not of s.11.
(h) There is a separate sub-section dealing with the taking of bicycles.
Section 12(5) provides:…a person who, without having the consent of the owner or other lawful authority, takes a pedal cycle for his own or another's use, or rides a pedal cycle knowing it to have been taken without such authority, shall…be liable…
ABSTRACTION OF ELECTRICITY
Section 13 of the Theft Act 1968 reads:[A]person who dishonestly uses without due authority, or dishonestly causes to be wasted or diverted, any electricity is guilty of a crime.
Covered by the actus reus are the unauthorised use of a photocopier or the employer's phone for private calls, unless impliedly permitted.
The mental element is knowledge of the taking and dishonesty.
It is thought that the later element is governed by Ghosh, above.
The partial definition of dishonesty found in s.2 does not apply.
There is no requirement that the abstraction is for the accused's benefit.
REFORM
The Law Commission's draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989, is a restatement of present law.
 "The aim has been to achieve consistency with Code style and method in point of language, presentation and clarity of statement, without affecting substance" (p.270).
One minor change is that the crime of assault with intent to rob, at present found in s.8, is transferred out of the part of the draft Code dealing with property offences to the part dealing with offences against the person (cl. 78).
The Commission accept that both the 1968 and 1978 Theft Acts and the case law on them are thought by some to be "seriously defective" , but the draft Code was a restatement not a Code to reform the substance of the law.
14 Obtaining by deception, making off without payment
INTRODUCTION
The Theft Act 1968 created five offences of obtaining by deception, of which the most important are obtaining property by deception (s.15) and obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception (s.16).
Part of s.16 was abolished by the Theft Act 1978, which created three offences: obtaining services by deception (s.1), evading liability by deception (s.2), and making off without payment (s.3).
The s.3 crime does not require deception and is treated separately.
The other four offences have several concepts in common, which will be discussed before the differences are noted.
THE THEFT ACT 1968
Obtaining by deception
Obtaining includes getting property to which one may be entitled such as money from the Department of Social Services: Lally [1989]Crim LR 648.
It must be proved that the accused did receive the item.
Bogdal v Hall [1987]Crim LR 500 (CA) illustrates this proposition.
The accused was charged with obtaining three girocheques by deception, the deception being that he was unemployed when in fact he was working.
The prosecution could not prove that he had encashed the giros because they are destroyed by the DSS twelve months after they have been received back from the clearing banks.
The Court reluctantly allowed his appeal.
The moral must be not to destroy cheques and receipts or to prosecute earlier.
The false statement or trick must have deceived the victim into acting as he did.
The deception must cause the obtaining: Doukas [1978]1 WLR 372 (CA) and King [1987]QB 547 (CA).
Whether the deception was an operative cause is a question for the jury: King.
In that case the defendants falsely claimed that trees were dangerous and offered to cut them down.
It was held that a jury could find that they had obtained money by deception, and not in return for chopping down the trees.
A case illustrating the lack of a causal link is Collis-Smith [1971]Crim LR 716 (CA).
The accused had petrol put into the tank of his car.
He then falsely stated that his firm would pay.
He was not guilty because the deception came after the obtaining.
He did not obtain by deception.
The effect is that the accused is not guilty if the victim did not rely on the deception.
If, for example, the victim knew that the accused was trying to obtain by deception, but nevertheless gave him the item, the accused is not guilty.
There has been no obtaining by deception.
In Laverty [1970]3 All ER 432 (CA) the reason why the victim bought a stolen car was because he thought the accused was authorised to sell it, not in reliance on the fact that it did not have its original number-plates.
Since the accused was charged with representing that the car had its original plates he was not guilty because that misrepresentation did not induce the victim to buy.
Even if he had known of the switch, the victim might indeed still have bought.
The deception charged ought to have been that the accused was entitled in law to sell.
That representation was false and induced the victim to buy.
Whether the victim did rely on the representation must be left for the jury: Attewell-Hughes (1991) 93 Cr App R 132 (CA).
In Wheeler (1991) 92 Cr App R 279 the victim, a regular customer of the accused, bpught a medal from him one morning.
The accused was a stallholder in a market.
Following their usual custom the accused kept the medal until the victim collected it later in the day when the latter would pay for it.
When the victim returned on the fateful day, he had in the interim heard that the medal was on a list of stolen property.
He asked the accused whether it was on the list.
The accused dishonestly replied "no" .
The court allowed the accused's appeal.
The victim had become owner at the time of the deception.
Therefore, the accused did not obtain the price of the deception.
Presumably, however, the victim would not have paid, had he known of the deception despite his having a legal obligation to pay.
Therefore, he paid by deception, and the accused did obtain by deception.
The proposition that the deception must operate on the victim's mind may be inconsistent with three House of Lords' decisions.
In DPP v Ray [1974]AC 370, no evidence was adduced that the waiter was misled by the accused's implied representation that he was going to pay for his meal.
In Lambie [1982]AC 449 and MPC v Charles [1977]AC 177, the payee did not care whether the accused's account was in the red because he was going to be paid anyway in accordance with his contract with the bank or credit card company which provided the cheque card or credit card.
The House of Lords adverted to this problem in Kassim [1992]1 AC 1, a case on s.20 of the 1968 Act, procuring the execution of a valuable security by deception.
Lord Ackner noted that problems arose when the misrepresentation was that the  accused was authorised to use his cheque guarantee card or credit card when he knew that he was not.
The shopowner did not care whether the accused was authorised or not because he was paid anyway, provided that the conditions of the card were fulfilled.
He called for reform from Parliament to bring s.15 up to date.
He did not consider that the law in s.20 should be stretched to cover the difficulty in s.15.
Where the deception made no difference to the victim, it has been said that the accused is not guilty.
(See also going equipped in Chapter 15.)
In Rashid [1977]1 WLR 298 (CA), a British Rail steward served his own sandwiches as those of British Rail.
The court held that he was not guilty because the customers did not care whether the sandwiches were his or British Rail's.
It may be that Rashid cannot stand after Charles and Lambie.
Certainly it is hard to reconcile it with Doukas [1978]1 WLR 372 (CA).
A waiter sold his own wine as that of the hotel.
The court held that had the customers known of the fraud they would not have bought the wine.
In other words a person may be deceived even though it did not cross his mind whose wine he was buying.
Doukas is in turn difficult to reconcile with Laverty.
If the victim in the latter case had known of the facts, he would presumably not have bought the car.
It is suggested that the law should not demand "but-for" causation as it does in homicide.
The deception need not be the sole factor in obtaining.
Deceit may be practised only on a human mind.
Therefore, the accused is not guilty of a deception offence by "deceiving" a machine by, for example, putting fake coins in a cigarette machine.
The question was left open in Davies v Flackett [1973]RTR 8, where the accused drove off without paying from a car park while a stranger held up the barrier.
Sometimes a human mind will be deceived.
If the accused puts a false coin into a parking meter, then (assuming traffic wardens have human minds) the warden will be misled into believing that the charge has been paid.
The charge could be making off without payment contrary to the 1978 Act (but see below).
Other possible charges are theft and abstracting electricity (where the machine is electrical) or specialised offences such as under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1967 on parking meters.
The Law Commission, Computer Misuse, Law Com.
No. 186, 1989, paras 2.4–7, thought the gap in the law was very narrow.
If no one is deceived there is no obtaining by deception.
If one helps oneself to a service or property, one does not obtain by deception.
Once it is shown that the deception caused the obtaining, there is no need to prove that the accused suffered a loss: Kovacs [1974]1 WLR 370 (CA).
Deception
The 1968 and 1978 Acts define deception in the same way: "any deception (whether deliberate or reckless) by words or conduct, as to fact or as to law, including a deception as to the present intentions of the person using the deception or any other person" (s.15(4)).
There are two difficulties in this definition.
It is thought that this sub-section does not fully define "deception" .
(a) A deception as to present intentions occurs where, for instance, the accused obtains money in advance for building work and then decamps.
He has promised that he will build an extension if given money.
That representation was a deception as to what he intended to do.
However, if the accused obtains property on credit but he cannot pay when the instalments fall due, he has not acted deceitfully if he intended to pay at the time of obtaining the item.
(b) Deception by words or conduct: an example is Silverman (1987) 86 Cr App R 213 (CA).
The accused gave an excessively high quotation for repairs.
There was a duty of mutual trust between his victims and him, the victims being elderly and he having done work for them over some years.
The Court held that he need not state expressly that his quote was a fair quote.
His silence raised the representation that he would not make more than "a moderate profit" .
An illustration of deception by words is Banaster (1979) 68 Cr App R 272 (CA), which held that a judge was entitled to leave to the jury the question whether a mini cab driver at Heathrow airport deceived a foreigner when he said that he was driving an "airport taxi" because the foreigner, who was on his first visit to England, might have thought that the taxi was an official one.
Similarly, to say that a fare was the "correct fare" might have deceived the foreigner into thinking that the fare was an official one.
There are several cases illustrative of implied representations.
Following DPP v Ray, above, a person who goes into a restaurant and orders a meal implies that he has money to pay for the meal.
There is a deception as to the accused's intentions.
The waiter would not take the order if he knew that the accused did not intend to pay.
The comparison case to DPP v Ray is Guildford v Lockyer [1975]Crim LR 235 (DC).
The accused went into a restaurant.
What he ordered did not arrive.
He sampled one of the other dishes on the table but did not like it because it was cold.
He left, but was charged with what is now s.2 of the 1978 Act, evading liability by deception.
The court held that he was entitled to adopt the attitude that he would take the dish tendered and see whether he liked it.
On the facts there was no deception.
Following Harris (1975) 62 Cr App R 28 (CA), a person who books a room at an hotel implies that he has money to pay.
As we have seen, a waiter at a hotel implies that the wine he offers is that of the hotel and not his own: Doukas, above, and in Silverman there was an implied representation that a quote was fair in the circumstances of mutual trust.
(c) The definition of deception covers a deception as to facts.
An example is King [1979]Crim LR 122.
A car dealer turned back the mileometer on a car and then put up a notice that the mileage "may not be correct" .
It was held that he had impliedly represented that he had no reason to disbelieve the clock.
The definition excludes a deception as to opinion but "fact" is a wide term.
It includes representations of fact expressed as opinions.
The usual illustration is a car dealer stating that one car is a better runner than another.
This statement is a representation of fact if the dealer is aware of the reasons for so stating.
The definition also covers a deception as to law.
A misrepresentation by the accused that the law was such and such when it was in fact different, and by  that misrepresentation he obtained property, will lead to a conviction of obtaining property by deception.
There can be a deception by omission.
This type occurs where the accused represents the truth to another but afterwards the facts change and the accused does not inform the victim that the facts have changed.
DPP v Ray illustrates this situation.
If the accused enters a restaurant intending to pay but then decides not to, the waiter is relying on the continuing representation that the accused will pay.
That representation has become false by silence.
(d) If the victim is not deceived, the accused has not obtained by deception.
The attempt may be charged.
(e) The definition covers not just intentions ( "deliberate" ) deception but also reckless misrepresentations.
The Court of Appeal in Staines (1975) 60 Cr App R 160 held that "reckless" meant "an indifference to or disregard of…whether a statement be true or false" .
Carelessness therefore did not suffice.
The Lords in MPC v Caldwell [1982]AC 341 did not advert to deception offences when determining the law of objective recklessness.
There is a dictum of Lord Roskill in Seymour [1983]2 AC 493 (HL) that recklessness in modern criminal statutes (such as the Theft Acts) is defined in the Caldwell sense, but that dictum has not been applied to rape, which is also defined in a modern statute.
To hold that "reckless" bears a subjective meaning would be consistent with the definition in the tort of deceit: one would not wish a person to be convicted of a crime when he would not be tortiously liable.
The requirement of dishonesty seems to confirm the need for subjective recklessness.
The fact that the accused gave no thought to the risk of someone being deceived does not square with the requirement that he obtained by a deception.
(f) Cheques, cheque cards and credit cards.
In Hamilton (1991) 92 Cr App R 54 (CA) the accused presented a signed cash withdrawal slip at the bank.
The court held that the accused represented that the bank owed him the money and that he was entitled to withdraw it.
He was not entitled to withdraw the money in his account if he had obtained it by means of a false cheque.
He had no right to demand payment from his own account.
Ex turpi causa non oritur actio.
The accused could not take advantage of a previous wrong, i.e. of the forgery by which the money came into his account.
The Court said obiter that presenting a cheque gave rise to the same representations.
In MPC v Charles, above, the Lords held that a person who signs a cheque implies that his bank will be able to meet it when presented.
(If this is not so, there will be a deception as to fact within the definition.)
There is no representation that at the time when the cheque is signed the accused had sufficient funds in his account.
In the words of Pollock B in Hazelton (1874) LR 2 CCR 134, which were approved by the Court of Appeal in Gilmartin [1983]QB 953, the accused represents that "the existing state of facts is such that in the ordinary course the cheque will be met" .
Charles decided that the accused had the bank's authority to draw the cheque so as to create a contract between the bank and the payee.
Charles was applied in Lambie, a case involving a credit card.
A Barclaycard was presented at a Mothercare shop but that card was overdrawn.
The accused was  charged with obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception.
The Lords held that there was no difference between a cheque card, as in Charles, and a credit card.
There was a representation that the accused had actual authority to make a contract with the shop and that the bank would honour the card.
If the shop manager knew that the accused was acting dishonestly and had no authority from the bank, he would not have completed the transaction.
Accordingly, the accused was guilty.
The Lords considered that a charge of obtaining property by deception (s.15(1)) would also have been successful, and was easier to apply than s.16(1), obtaining a pecuniary advantage.
The same result as in Charles and Lambie applies to postdated cheques.
 "The drawer impliedly represents that the state of facts existing at the date of delivery of the cheque is such that in the ordinary course the cheque will on presentation for payment on or after the date specified in the cheque be met" (per Robert Goff LJ in Gilmartin, approved in Hamilton).
Problems with Charles and Lambie
(a) Lord Roskill in Lambie said that a charge under s.15(1) would have succeeded more easily than the actual charge under s.16(1), but the act was the same for both offences.
The assistant was induced to enter into the sale of goods as a result of a misrepresentation.
By that misrepresentation the accused obtained both property and a pecuniary advantage.
How can one charge be easier to prove than the other?
(b) One might wish to argue that in both cases the accused was not dishonest towards the shop.
She knew that the bank would pay, and therefore the shop would suffer no loss.
(c) As the shop assistant in Lambie said in her evidence, it did not matter to her what the accused's credit status was at her bank because the shop would be paid whether the credit was good or bad.
Since creditworthiness did not matter to her, why should she be interested in whether the accused had authority to use her card, for the bank would pay whether the accused had authority or not?
Nevertheless, Lambie was followed on this point in Hamilton: the cashiers would not have completed the transactions had they known of the forgeries.
(d) It is sometimes suggested that the banks should be left to their civil remedies, and that they should check their clients more carefully.
Certainly at the time of the 1968 Act there were few cheque cards or credit cards.
The Act was not designed for them.
For example, P. Paulden in (1982) iv (1) Liv LR 69 argued that the misuse of cheque cards or credit cards is a breach of contract; the criminal law should not be used to penalise breaches of contract; therefore, it should not be a crime to misuse a cheque card or credit card, and if the Act is to be used to penalise such breaches, Parliament should say so.
(e) The Lords in Charles and Lambie said that the cardholder impliedly represents that he has the bank's actual authority to use the card.
The seller of the goods, however, is not deceived and any dishonesty is towards the bank.
The seller cannot lose, and indeed the bank tells the seller not to concern himself with the  authority given to the cardholder.
The Lords in both cases argued that the seller would not have proceeded with the sale, had he known of the lack of authority, but the argument is hypothetical because the seller did not know.
Even if he had known, he might have proceeded, for he is not concerned with the lack of authorisation.
Charles and Lambie seem inconsistent with the Eighth Report of the Criminal Law Revision Committee, Cmnd 2977, 1966, para. 57, on which the 1968 Act was based.
The body preferred "deception" to the previously used terms because it had "the advantage of directing attention to the effect that the offender deliberately produced on the mind of the person deceived" .
Charles and Lambie take attention away from the mind of the person deceived.
Dishonesty
Dishonesty must be proved.
The fact of deception does not per se prove dishonesty.
The partial definition in s.2(1) of the Theft Act 1968 does not apply.
Greenstein [1975]1 WLR 1353 (CA) and Melwani [1989]Crim LR 565 (CA) held that the law in Feely [1973]QB 530 (CA) and Ghosh [1982]QB 1053 apply.
The reader is referred to Chapter 13.
The court in Greenstein said that an accused could be dishonest even though no one lost any money.
The Court of Appeal had earlier said the same in Potger (1970) 55 Cr App R 42.
If the case calls for a Ghosh instruction, the judge should give the direction in Ghosh word for word: Ravenshad [1990]Crim LR 398.
However, several cases have determined that it is not always necessary to give a Ghosh direction.
For example, in Price (1989) 90 Cr App R 409 (CA), such an instruction is necessary only where the accused might have thought that ordinary people would regard his conduct as honest.
The accused falsely represented to payees that he was the beneficiary under a £100,000 trust.
He signed cheques.
He was charged with, among other things, obtaining property by deception.
On the facts the sole issue was whether he believed himself to be the beneficiary.
The court thought that on these facts it was potentially misleading to give the full Ghosh direction.
The other mental elements in ss.15-16
Besides dishonesty the mens rea in s.15 is: intentionally or recklessly making the deception (see above); intention permanently to deprive (by s.15(3) this phrase bears the same definition as in s.6: see Chapter 13; an example is deceiving the victim into giving a loan); and intent to obtain property.
In s.16, besides dishonesty, the mental element is making the deception intentionally or recklessly, and the intent to obtain a pecuniary advantage.
There is no requirement of an intention permanently to deprive.
In these offences there is no equivalent to s.1(2) of the 1968 Act which states: "[i]t is immaterial whether the appropriation is made with a view to gain, or is made for the thief's own benefit." 
This provision, it is assumed, was omitted because under ss.15-16 the accused does act "with a view to gain" .
The other elements of the actus reus in s.15
By s.15(1) of the Theft Act 1968:[a]person who by any deception dishonestly obtains property belonging to another with the intention of permanently depriving the other of it shall…be liable…"
By s.34(1) the definitions of "property" and "belonging to another" in ss.4(1) and 5(1) are incorporated into s.15(1).
The property, it is thought, must already be in existence at the time when it was obtained.
In Chan Wai Lam v R [1981]Crim LR 497, the Court of Appeal of Hong Kong held that an accused was not guilty of obtaining a lease by deception because the lease did not exist until the victim granted it.
The accused would, however, be guilty if the lease already existed and the accused dishonestly obtained an assignment of it.
If no lease was in existence at the time when the accused made the false representation, it is believed that the accused would not be guilty under s.15 of obtaining possession of the land by deception because he would not have the intention permanently to deprive.
By parity of reasoning with Chan Wai Lam v R the accused who deceives the victim into writing a cheque in his favour is not guilty under s.15 because the amount represented by the cheque did not exist until the cheque was drawn.
The correct if inappropriate charge should be obtaining the paper on which the cheque was drawn.
In fact in Duru [1976]1 WLR 2 the Court of Appeal thought that both charges in relation to the thing in action represented by the cheque and to the paper itself were to be upheld but the judges' minds were not directed at this issue whether property must exist at the time of the obtaining.
It should be noted that the other sub-sections on "property" (s.4(2)– (4)) and "belonging to another" (s.5(2)– (5)) are not incorporated.
As in s.4(1) "property" includes money.
In Edwards [1978]Crim LR 49 (CA) a squatter let rooms in a house.
He was convicted of obtaining the rent by deception.
In Levene v Pearcey [1976]Crim LR 63, a taxi-driver falsely told his passenger that the route was blocked and charged more for the longer way.
He obtained the excess by deception.
In Ashbee [1989]1 WLR 109 (CA), the accused made a false application for a passport.
The passport was "property" .
Since s.4(2) is not incorporated into s.15, the accused will be guilty if he deceives his neighbour into moving the boundary fence in his favour in order to gain the land, but he would not be guilty of theft by moving the fence.
By s.15(2) "…a person is to be treated as obtaining property if he obtains possession or control of it, and" obtain "includes obtaining for another or enabling another to obtain or retain" .
A person is therefore guilty if he obtains ownership alone without possession or control.
Similarly, if the accused obtains possession or control without ownership, he is guilty.
An example is where a transaction is void for fraud but the accused obtains possession or control by deception.
If the transaction is void for fraud, the accused does not obtain ownership (i.e. property) but is guilty if he acquires possession or control.
The accused is guilty if he obtains property for someone else.
The phrase "enabling another to obtain" covers the situation at issue in DPP v Stonehouse [1978]AC 55 (HL).
The accused left his clothes on a beach in Miami and resurfaced under a false identity in Australia.
He wished  his wife to be deceived into claiming the insurance on his life.
Had his plan worked he would have been convicted of obtaining the insurance money by deception through enabling his wife to obtain it.
One point of interpretation of s.15(2) is that it does not criminalise the accused who by deception enables himself to retain property: the sub-section is restricted to enabling another to retain.
The definition of pecuniary advantage in s.16
By s.16(1) of the 1968 Act [a]person who by any deception dishonestly obtains for himself or another any pecuniary advantage shall…be liable…"
Section 16(2) provides:[t]he cases in which a pecuniary advantage…is to be regarded as obtained for a person are cases where —(b) he is allowed to borrow by way of overdraft, or to take out any policy of insurance or annuity contract, or obtains an improvement of the terms on which he is allowed to do so; or
(c) he is given the opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration in an office or employment, or to win money by betting.
Introduction
This was repealed by the Theft Act 1978, s.5(5).
The phrase "for a person" at the opening of s.16(2) includes "for another person" : Richardson v Skells [1976]Crim LR 448 (Crown Court).
Section 16(2) is a definitive list of the pecuniary advantages obtainable within s.16(1).
There is only one offence of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception (Bale v Rosier [1977]1 WLR 263), but there are several ways, i.e. those ways in s.16(2), in which the offence can be committed: DPP v Turner [1974]AC 357 (HL).
If the accused is charged under one part of s.16(2) he cannot be convicted of an offence under the other paragraph: Aston & Hadley [1970]1 WLR 1584 (CA).
If the facts fall within s.16(2) it is immaterial that the accused did not actually obtain a pecuniary advantage (DPP v Turner), and as MPC v Charles, above, demonstrates, there is no requirement that the person deceived suffers a financial loss.
There is little overlap between ss.15(1) and 16(1).
Most money frauds fall within s.15(1).
The chief exception is s.16(2) (b), allowing the accused to borrow by way of overdraft.
Section 16(2) (b)
In Watkins [1976]1 All ER 578 a Crown Court held that the accused was guilty at the moment of being allowed to borrow.
There was no need for him to use the overdraft.
In Waites [1982]Crim LR 369 (CA) the accused used a cheque guarantee card.
The bank was contractually obliged to honour the cheque even when honouring put the accused's account into the red.
The court held that the defendant  was "allowed" to borrow.
Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 6th edn, Butterworth, 1988, 559 n6, comment: "[T]his seems a surprising decision as it would surely astonish bankers to learn that by issuing such cards they are allowing their customers to borrow by way of overdraft to an unspecified amount" (their emphasis).
Waites was applied in Bevan (1986) 84 Cr App R 143.
The Court of Appeal held that the overdraft was impliedly requested by the accused, and the bank impliedly though reluctantly agreed to it.
(This ruling also explains what occurred in Charles.)
J. Stannard, Recent Developments in Criminal Law, SLS, 1988, 59, averred: "Bevan is another in the long line of cases where courts have adopted a strained construction of legislation in order to convict a person who is clearly guilty of dishonest conduct but also does not appear to be adequately covered by any legislative provision." 
A simple illustration of s.16(2) (b) is obtaining insurance at better rates by intimating that one is a non-smoker when in fact one is.
Section 16(2) (c)
This paragraph is largely self-explanatory.
There are a few difficulties.
A tenancy of a tied public house is not an office, and the tenant does not obtain the opportunity to earn remuneration in employment because he is paid by his own efforts, not by the brewery: McNiff [1986]Crim LR 57 (CA).
It is thought that the independent contractor is not covered.
One can be guilty under s.16(2) (c) even though the office carries no remuneration.
The phrase "win money by betting" covers the accused who deceives another into accepting a wager.
If the bet were successful, a charge of obtaining property by deception could be laid.
The overlap between ss.1 and 15
(a) The Criminal Law Revision Committee's Eighth Report, Theft and Related Offences, Cmnd 2977, 1966, 41, on which the 1968 Act was based, envisaged that some fact situations would give rise to liability under both ss.1 and 15.
The previous law of deception had only covered situations where the accused had obtained ownership.
Section 15 extended the law to include situations where he obtained possession or control as well as ownership.
The aim was that s.15 alone would cover obtaining ownership by deception.
Both s.1 and s.15 would cover obtaining possession or control by deception.
Theft would not cover obtaining ownership by deception.
Note that a person is guilty under s.15 if he obtains ownership but does not obtain possession or control; and if the accused is in possession or control, he is guilty if he obtains ownership by deception.
(b) The overlap cannot be total.
By s.4 land generally speaking is not property which can be stolen.
It can, however, be obtained by deception.
If there is no deception, s.15 cannot apply.
(c) Appropriation and obtaining are similar concepts.
If the accused gets a video on credit intending to sell it, he has obtained it by deception and he has assumed one of the rights of the owner within the definition of appropriation.
(d) Both offences contain the concepts of "intention permanently to deprive" and "belonging to another" .
(e) The House of Lords in Lawrence [1972]AC 626 confirmed that the two offences were not mutually exclusive, as was obvious.
Their Lordships did not tackle the question of the extent of the overlap.
(f) If there is a deception, the better charge is s.15.
(g) The above points are accepted by all commentators.
The Court of Appeal in Lawrence [1971]1 QB 373 went wider than the House did.
Their decision was that a person is guilty of theft when he acquires ownership by deception.
On the facts of Lawrence the accused's conviction for theft was upheld even though the victim intended to transfer property.
The civil law deems that the victim did not intend.
In this fashion there is virtually a total overlap between theft and obtaining by deception.
Such is contrary to the wishes of the CLRC (p.28): "A bogus beggar is regarded as a rogue but not as a thief…
To create a new offence of theft to include conduct which ordinary people would find it difficult to regard as theft would be a mistake."
(h) Leaving aside the Court of Appeal decision in Lawrence, the overlap occurs where the accused obtains the property by deception but has not obtained ownership at the moment of the appropriation.
When the accused appropriates, he will have stolen the property from the person who retained the interest in the property.
For example, if the accused obtains ownership through deception but the owner retains possession or control, he will commit theft when he assumes the rights of the owner.
Similarly, if the accused obtains the thing by deception through inducing a mistaken belief in the mind of the victim but ownership is not transferred because of the type of mistake, the victim retains an interest within s.5(1) and accordingly the property can be stolen by the accused's appropriation.
The Theft Act 1978
Edmund-Davies LJ in Royle [1971]1 WLR 1764 (CA) called s.16(2) (a) a judicial nightmare.
There were inconsistent dicta about its width.
After Royle, as a result of the speeches in DPP v Turner, the law improved.
Nevertheless, the issue of s.16(2) (a) was the subject of a Report by the Criminal Law Revision Committee, Thirteenth Report, Section 16 of the Theft Act 1968, Cmnd 6733, 1977, which resulted in the Theft Act 1978.
Only s.16(2) (a) was repealed.
The remainder of s.16 remains in force.
Unfortunately the new offences are not inserted into the 1968 Act, and there are now two Theft Acts, the second one three pages long replacing a paragraph three lines long.
Obtaining services by deception (s.1)
Section 1 provides:(1) A person who by any deception dishonestly obtains services from another shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) It is an obtaining of services where the other is induced to confer a benefit by doing some act, or causing or permitting some act to be done, on the understanding that the benefit has been or will be paid for.
Points of interpretation
(a) Deception has the same meaning as in the 1968 Act.
(b) Unlike s.15 of the 1968 Act there is no requirement of an intention permanently to deprive.
(c) The service must be one which is provided for reward, i.e. the service must be a commercial one, not a free one.
A service done out of friendship such as helping out at a barbecue or because of a threat is not within s.1.
In Atwal [1989]Crim LR 293, the obtaining of a credit card such as Visa did not fall within s.1 because it was not paid for.
However, an American Express card will fall within s.1 because it has to be paid for.
Provided that the service is to be paid for, the accused is guilty whether or not he acted for gain.
For example, if the accused hires a room for gymnastics when it is used for band practice, he is guilty.
In Halai [1983]Crim LR 624, the Court of Appeal held that the accused was not guilty under s.1 when he received a mortgage advance because such advance was not a service.
The court considered that the accused should have been convicted of obtaining property by deception.
In Widdowson (1985) 82 Cr App R 314, the same court decided that a hire-purchase agreement was a service within s.1.
On that approach Halai looks wrong.
Surely obtaining a loan is obtaining a service.
Another aspect of Halai, however, seems correct.
The accused opened a building society account.
That service is not one which is paid for.
Therefore, the accused was not guilty of that offence.
The court also said that opening an account was not the conferring of a benefit in ordinary language, though that ruling is questionable.
It is moot whether "paid for" includes benefit paid for not in money but in some other item of value.
(d) By s.1(2) "service" is broadly defined.
Obtaining a place at a university for one's daughter is a service and is so despite the accused herself not obtaining the service for herself.
The accused may be guilty even though he does not in ordinary language obtain a service.
For instance, if the accused obtains an unserviced flat, a conviction under s.1 is possible.
(e) The service must be obtained.
An agreement to provide services will not suffice, and a charge of attempted obtaining should be used.
(f) The benefit must be "conferred" .
If the accused helps himself to services, for example, by sneaking into a cinema when no one is looking, there is no obtaining by deception.
(g) The deception must cause the obtaining.
If the accused leaves without paying because he is absent-minded, he is not liable, and remains not guilty even though he discovers his mistake afterwards.
(h) The accused need not have an intent to cause financial loss or make a gain.
There is no phrase such as "with a view to gain" in s.1.
(i) The debt in s.1 need not be a legally enforceable one.
An "understanding" is not necessarily a legally enforceable understanding.
Sections 2–3 are expressly restricted to legally enforceable liabilities.
Therefore, a prostitute's services can be obtained by deception with s.1.
(j) A point sometimes missed by students is that the deception need not relate to the reason why the accused is paying for a service.
If the defendant produces a false driving licence to hire a car, he is still liable for this offence even though he pays the hire charge.
A problem throughout the Theft Act is that of the overlap among the offences.
If the accused dishonestly uses a credit card to obtain goods, he has obtained those goods by deception and obtained the benefit of the delivery of those goods, a service, by deception.
Evading liability by deception (s.2)
Section 2 provides:(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, where a person by any deception —(a) dishonestly secures the remission of the whole or part on any existing liability to make a payment, whether his own liability or another's: or
(b) with intent to make permanent default in whole or in part on any existing liability to make a payment, or with intent to let another do so, dishonestly induces the creditor or any person claiming payment on behalf of the creditor to wait for payment (whether or not the due date for payment is deferred) or to forgo payment: or
(c) dishonestly obtains any exemption from or abatement of liability to make a payment; he shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) For purposes of this section "liability" means legally enforceable liability; and subsection (1) shall not apply in relation to a liability that had not been accepted or established to pay compensation for a wrongful act or omission.
(3) For purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person induced to take in payment a cheque or other security for money by way of conditional satisfaction of a pre-existing liability is to be treated not as being paid but as being induced to wait for payment.
(4) For purposes of subsection (1)(c) "obtains" includes obtaining for another or enabling another to obtain.
Points of interpretation
(a) Section 2(1) (a) and (b) are limited to the evasion of existing debts.
Section  2(1) (c) applies to the evasion of future debts, but it is not restricted to such debts.
Therefore, para. (c) could swallow up the other paragraphs.
The omission of "existing" in para. (c) was deliberate: Firth (1990) 91 Cr App R 217 (CA).
(b) There are three common features to the offences in s.2(1): deception of the creditor in respect of a liability, dishonesty, and the use of deception to gain an advantage: Holt [1981]1 WLR 1000 (CA).
(c) The section is limited to the obtaining of credit in respect of the payment of money ( "liability to make a payment" ).
It does not extend to the delivery of goods or the performance of work or any other duty.
The relevant charge would be under s.1.
(d) "Existing liability" in s.2(1) (a) and (b) includes a liability enforceable only by a court order: Modupe [1991]Crim LR 539 (CA).
A hire-purchase agreement which is not properly executed cannot be enforced by the sellers' recapturing the item but only by a court order.
Nevertheless, it is an existing liability.
There is no such liability where the agreement was void.
On the facts of Modupe the accused was guilty of inducing his creditors to wait for payment when he had obtained credit by stating that he owned property when he did not and by exaggerating his employment status.
(e) The parts of s.2 are not mutually exclusive.
Section 2(1) (a) and (b) overlap: Jackson [1983]Crim LR 617 (CA).
The words are difficult to interpret.
For example, what is the difference between securing the remission of liability (s.2(1) (a)) and inducing the creditor to forgo payment (s.2(1) (b))?
According to Jackson "remission" covers the activity of an accused who pays for petrol by using a stolen credit card.
The effect is that even if the liability remains in full the accused has secured a remission of it.
The contrary argument is that because the full amount remains due, remission of liability has not been secured, and the charge should be one under s.2(1) (b).
Certainly in ordinary language the accused has not secured the remission of liability because the victim does not remit the debt in these circumstances.
In Holt the Court of Appeal held that para. (a) required the debtor to communicate his decision to the creditor and required that the legal consequence was the extinguishment of the debt.
Neither requirement applied to para. (b).
Paragraph (b) therefore is concerned with the unilateral avoidance of liability.
(f) Paragraph (c) covers cases where deception occurs before the debt is incurred, such as the accused falsely representing that he is a full-time student to obtain discount travel.
Section 2(1) (c) will also, for example, cover situations where the accused gains admission free or at a reduced charge by pretending to be an old age pensioner.
In Sibartie [1983]Crim LR 470, the Court of Appeal held that showing a season ticket which did not cover the journey was attempting to obtain an exemption from liability.
In truth, however, the inspector would not have been induced to exempt the accused from liability because he acted on the assumption that none existed.
Perhaps the facts are better viewed as ones of forgoing payment within para. (b).
In Firth it was held that s.2(1) (c) covered omissions as well as commissions, a failure to give information that the  accused's patients were private ones.
The accused was under a duty to provide the information so that the hospital could charge properly.
(g) In Andrews [1981]Crim LR 106, a Crown Court judge ruled that s.2(1) (b) applies only to bouncing cheques when the creditor has been persuaded to accept them instead of cash.
The reason is that s.2(3) provides that, for the purposes of s.2(1) (b) in this situation only, the creditor is deemed to have been induced to wait for payment.
Therefore, if payment is normally by cheque, there is no inducement to wait for payment.
(h) The accused may commit the s.2(1) (b) offence either by intending to make permanent default of his own liability or intending to let another make permanent default, but the liability must be his own: Attewell-Hughes, above.
The accused, manager of a hotel, paid several debts by means of cheques which he knew could not be honoured.
He was guilty under s.2(1) (b) in respect only of the debts made while he was manager and not of debts incurred previously by the hotel owner.
The law is different in s.2(1) (a), which speaks of "liability…whether his own liability or another's" .
In s.2(1) (b) the phrase "let another do so" still refers to the accused's own existing liability and it was another way of committing the offence.
(i) By s.2(2), s.2(1) is limited to legally enforceable debts.
 "Legally enforceable" in s.2(2) does not mean that the liability must be in existence for s.2(1) (c) to apply.
(j) An example of a dishonest obtaining of exemption from liability to make a payment occurred in Firth.
The accused, a consultant gynaecologist and obstetrician, falsely represented by his silence that some of his patients were NHS patients, not private ones.
As a result no charge was made.
The Court of Appeal held that the accused had a duty to provide information as to the status of his patients.
He had dishonestly and intentionally not fulfilled that obligation.
Section 2(1) (c) was fulfilled and the accused's conviction was affirmed.
Section 2(1) (c) did not require the accused to do anything.
An omission sufficed.
Firth may be generalisable: a person can obtain by deception even though he did not put forth a misrepresentation, when he is under a duty to disclose.
Applying Firth, it is irrelevant that the victim did not know there was any liability.
Making off without payment
Section 3 provides:(1) Subject to subsection (3) below, a person who, knowing that payment on the spot for any goods supplied or service done is required or expected from him, dishonestly makes off without having paid as required or expected and with intent to avoid payment of the amount due shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) For purposes of this section "payment on the spot" includes payment at the time of collecting goods on which work has been done or in respect of which service has been provided.
(3) Subsection (1) above shall not apply where the supply of the goods or the doing of  the service is contrary to law, or where the service done is such that payment is not legally enforceable.
Points of interpretation
 "This is not an easy section to construe" : Allen [1985]1 WLR 50 (CA).
(a) The principal difference between this offence and the others in this chapter is that the accused is guilty of making off whether or not he deceived anyone.
Where there is a deception, s.3 and the deception offences will both apply.
(b) Like s.2 but unlike s.1, s.3 is restricted to legally enforceable payments (s.3(3)).
The offence in s.3 will not be committed by an accused who walks away from a betting shop or brothel.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee, on the Report of which the 1978 Act was based, considered that s.3 would not apply, but s.1 would be appropriate if the accused did not intend to pay from the start of the transaction.
(If the services are obtained but without deception, s.1 does not apply.)(c) The "payment" need not be by money.
If a restaurant accepts luncheon vouchers, "payment on the spot" in s.3(1) applies.
(d) Dishonesty need not be present at the start of the transaction.
Section 3 covers the situation where the accused goes into a restaurant or petrol station intending to pay but leaves without doing do.
(e) The phrase "with intent to avoid payment" is read as meaning "with intent never to pay" : Allen [1985]AC 1029 (HL).
On the facts the accused was not guilty if he intended merely to delay paying a hotel bill of £1,286.
He told the hotel that he was in financial difficulties and surrendered his passport to it.
The effect of Allen would appear to undermine the thrust of the crime.
The accused will after Allen be guilty if he simply vanishes with no intent to repay.
It is thought that Allen undermines the rationale behind s.3.
(f) It is uncertain whether s.3 covers the giving of worthless cheques.
It is sometimes thought that it does.
However, in Hammond [1982]Crim LR 611 (Crown Court), a judge ruled that if the victim accepts a cheque without a guarantee card, he knows that he is taking a risk.
The accused is therefore not guilty of this offence if she drafts a worthless cheque.
One argument is that payment by a worthless cheque does not satisfy the requirement in s.3(1) that the creditor is "paid" because the victim takes it in satisfaction of the debt.
On the other hand, the creditor does expect a valuable cheque.
Therefore, payment by a dud cheque is not payment "as required or expected" within s.3(1).
If Hammond is correct, there is nevertheless a possible charge under s.2(1) (b).
If the accused merely intends to defer paying, s.3 is inapplicable for the reason stated in (e).
(g) Section 3 does not cover the moonlighting tenant.
The rent is payable "then" but not "there" .
(h) Troughton v Metropolitan Police [1987]Crim LR 138 (DC) illustrates a nice point.
A very drunk accused did not give his name and address to the taxi driver.
The cab driver drove to a police station.
The court held that the driver was in breach of contract through not completing the journey (in civil law terms there was an entire contract).
Therefore, he could not legally demand the fare.
The accused was never bound to pay on the spot for the service.
He was not guilty.
Accordingly, within s.3 it is not enough that the victim expects or requires the accused to pay.
The payment must be legally due.
(i) Where is "the spot" ?
In Brooks (1982) 76 Cr App R 66, the Court of Appeal determined that "the spot" meant the place where payment was required.
In a restaurant that place was the cash desk.
There was no need for the accused to reach the restaurant door.
In McDavitt [1981]Crim LR 843, it was held at Crown Court level that the accused was guilty of the attempt if he had not yet reached "the spot" .
The place of the spot could differ according to circumstances and it is a question of fact whether the accused has departed from the spot.
(j) Section 3 stipulates that the accused must make off.
It is moot whether that phrase covers a situation where the accused departs with the victim's consent.
For instance, if the defendant tells a taxi driver that he must get money from his flat and the driver agrees, does he make off?
In Hammond, above, it was said that there was no making off when the creditor allowed the accused to leave.
In Brooks the Court of Appeal decided that there was no need for the accused to make off stealthily, and that the words "dishonestly makes off" usually required no explanation because they bore their "ordinary natural meaning" .
(k) A shoplifter in a shop where goods are served will be guilty of this offence and theft.
In a self-service shop, however, goods are, it is thought, not "supplied" to him within s.3(1).
If the goods are served, s.3 will apply.
If the accused receives ham from the meat stall in a supermarket he is guilty if he makes off before paying at the cashdesk.
Similarly, the accused is guilty where ownership passes on delivery such as when food is eaten or petrol put into the tank.
However, the accused who sneaks out of a cinema which he has sneaked in to is not guilty: no service has been "done" .
(l) There is no definition of service.
Is it the same as "services" in s.1?
(m) It is suggested that the accused who can be traced (e.g. he has put his name and address on the back of a cheque) can still be guilty of making off.
There is no restriction in the definition to persons who cannot easily be traced.
J. Spencer commented [1979]Crim LR 24: "[w]hy should running away after telling lies carry a sentence of 5 years' imprisonment under s.2(1) (b) when running away without telling lies — which is more harmful, because [the accused]is likely to be harder to trace — only carries a sentence of 2 years under s.3?" 
REFORM
While there have been problems in the interpretation of both Theft Acts the Law Commission in its Report, A Criminal Code for England & Wales, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989, proposed only one minor alteration, the express statement in what is now s.16(2) of the 1968 Act that the pecuniary advantages are solely those stated in that sub-section.
15 Blackmail, burglary, going equipped, handling
BLACKMAIL
Introduction
The term blackmail seems to derive from an old English word "mail" , meaning tribute or rents paid in work, goods, crops or base metal ( "black" ).
If the threat is one of violence, blackmail may be classified both as a property offence and a crime against the person.
By s.21(1) of the 1968 Theft Act:[a]person is guilty of blackmail if, with a view to gain for himself or another or with intent to cause loss to another, he makes any unwarranted demand with menaces; and for this purpose a demand with menaces is unwarranted unless the person making it does so in the belief —(a) that he had reasonable grounds for making the demand; and (b) that the use of the menaces is a proper means of reinforcing the demand.
The framework is that a demand concerning an economic matter is blackmail, but there is an exception that it was warranted.
This exception is the equivalent of lack of dishonesty in other parts of the Act.
Getting property by threatening immediate force (e.g. "your money or your life" ) may be both blackmail and robbery.
The usual charge is robbery.
If the threat is to beat up the victim later, the facts do not constitute robbery because the victim was not put in fear of being "then and there subjected to force" .
In blackmail the demand must be to make a gain or loss, whereas in robbery the threat is made to get property.
Blackmail occurs as soon as the demand is made, whereas robbery requires an appropriation.
Blackmail requires menaces, whereas robbery is dependent on the threat or use of force.
Accordingly, using force without threat is robbery, only because there must be menaces in blackmail.
Menaces other than threats of immediate force cannot be robbery, only blackmail.
The actus reus
A major part of the actus reus is "a demand with menaces" .
Making the demand is sufficient.
The prosecution need not prove that the victim complied.
Demand
The nature of the act or omission demanded is immaterial and it is also immaterial whether the menaces relate to action to be taken by the person making the demand.
(s.21(2)).
The word is defined as in ordinary language: Treacy v DPP [1971]AC 537 (HL).
A demand couched in polite terms is still a demand.
It may be made by words or impliedly.
Actions will suffice, at least if "an ordinary reasonable man" would realise that a demand was being made: Collister (1955) 39 Cr App R 100, a case which would probably be followed today.
A demand is made when and where a letter containing it is posted (Treacy, by a 3:2 majority), and probably continues to be made until it is read by the victim (Treacy 5:0, but obiter).
E. Griew, The Theft Acts 1968–1978, 6th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, 1990, 211, wrote:[i]f a blackmailing demand is "made" as soon as it is spoken or dispatched beyond recall, the possibility of a case of attempted blackmail is limited to fanciful situations such as where [the accused]is affected by a stammer or interrupted in the act of posting.
Menaces
The term does not cover only threats of violence but anything detrimental or unpleasant according to Lord Wright in the civil case of Thorne v MTA [1937]AC 797.
Despite that wide definition, "menaces" is stronger than "threats" .
It bears the meaning it has in ordinary language: Lawrence & Pomroy (1971) 57 Cr App R 64.
In Garwood [1987]1 All ER 1032, the accused, believing that the victim had burgled his house, aggressively demanded £10 "to make it quits" .
The victim gave him the money.
The Court of Appeal held that menaces did not exist unless (a) they would affect the mind of a reasonable person or (b) did affect the mind of the victim and the accused knew that his actions were likely to have such an effect.
The accused, therefore, is guilty of blackmail against a timorous person, when a reasonable person would not have been frightened, only if he knew of the timidity.
Trivial threats are not menaces: Harry [1974]Crim LR 32.
A student who offered shopowners immunity from the activities of ragweek in return for donations to charity was held by the trial judge not to have used menaces.
Gain or loss
Gain and loss are to be construed as extending only to gain or loss in money or other property, but as extending to any such gain or loss whether temporary or permanent; and  (i) "gain" includes a gain by keeping what one has, as well as a gain by getting what one has not; and
(ii) "loss" includes a loss by not getting what one might get, as well as a loss by parting with what one had (s.34(2) (a)).
 "Gain" and "loss" bear wide meanings.
By s.21(1), above, the gain or loss need not be for the accused or to the victim.
The gain or loss need not be permanent.
It is sufficient that, for instance, the accused is allowed to borrow something.
However, this definition shows that blackmail protects economic interests.
Accordingly, it is not blackmail where the accused extorts oral sex from the victim because that is not "money or other property" .
(A different result has been reached in some US states, the blackmail statutes of which are couched differently, e.g. Iowa: State v Todd (1900) 82 NW 322.)
England has an offence of procuring unlawful sexual intercourse by threat or intimidation: Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.2.
Similarly, it is not blackmail where the accused extorts a position of honour or release from lawful custody.
English cases are few, but a threat to get back money owing to the accused falls within s.34(2) (a)(i): Parkes [1973]Crim LR 358; and a threat by a person suffering from osteoarthritis to a doctor that he would shoot him unless he was given a pain- killing injection was held to be blackmail in Bevans (1988) 87 Cr App R 64 (CA), a decision which extends blackmail beyond being a property offence.
While a demand for sex is not blackmail, a demand for money in return for not disclosing that the accused has indulged in such behaviour would be because the gain would be money within s.34(2) (a).
Permitted demands with menaces.
It is not blackmail where the accused believes he has reasonable grounds for making the demand and believes the use of menaces is a proper means of reinforcing the demand.
The requirement of belief relates to the accused's own belief.
He does not have to believe on reasonable grounds that he has reasonable grounds for making the demand and so on: Lambert [1972]Crim LR 422, where the accused threatened to tell the victim's employers of his affair with the accused's wife.
In Harvey (1981) 72 Cr App R 139, the Court of Appeal held that whether a threat to kill, rape or maim was a proper means of reinforcing the demand was a question for the jury, as was the question whether the accused believed that he had reasonable grounds.
However, the court held that the accused does not have this exception when he knows that what he proposes to do is a crime.
The statute is not so worded, and Harvey may be incorrect on this point.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee, Eighth Report, Theft and Related Offences, Cmnd 2977, para. 123, goes against Lambert in that it would have given a defence only when the accused's act was "morally and socially acceptable" .
The requirement of "proper" means covers where the accused demands what is his: such would not be robbery but can be blackmail.
A case which might now be determined differently because of this exception is Dymond [1920]2 KB 260.
The victim of a sexual assault threatened to tell the town of the crime unless she was paid money.
Before the Act she was guilty.
After the Act  she might have believed that she had reasonable grounds for making her demand and that her threat was a proper means of reinforcing the demand.
Mens rea
There are three elements:(a) an intent to make a demand with menaces;(b) a view to gain for himself or another, or intent to cause loss to another;(c) either no belief that he has reasonable grounds for making the demand or no belief that the use of menaces is a proper form of reinforcing the demand
 "A view to" is a way of phrasing "intent" .
BURGLARY
Introduction
This offence may be seen as one which is directed against "criminal trespass" to the home.
At a deeper level it safeguards the feelings of those whose houses have been entered.
By s.9 of the Theft Act 1968:(1) A person is guilty of burglary if —
(a) he enters any building or part of a building as a trespasser and with intent to commit any such offence as is mentioned in sub-section (2) below; or
(b) having entered any building or part of a building as a trespasser he steals or attempts to steal anything in the building or that part of it or inflicts or attempts to inflict on any person therein any grievous bodily harm.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) above are offences of stealing anything in the building or part of a building in question, of inflicting on any person therein any grievous bodily harm or raping any woman therein, and of doing unlawful damage to the building or anything therein.
In s. 9(1) (a) it is not necessary to show that the accused intended to take a specific object or even that that object was in the building: A-G's Refs (Nos 1 and 2 of 1979)[1980]QB 180 (CA).
Section 9(1) (a) is really an inchoate offence.
By sub-s. (3) "building" includes inhabited vehicles and vessels.
A Crown Court held in B & S v Leathley [1979]Crim LR 314 that a large freezer container resting on railway sleepers in a farmyard was a building.
It does not include an articulated trailer used as a store despite its having electric power, steps up to it, and lockable shutters: Norfolk Constabulary v Seekings [1986]Crim LR 167.
A tent will not be a building, nor will a phone kiosk or a mobile shop.
A camper van is debatable.
There may also be problems with buildings in the course of construction.
Is a house being erected only a building when its roof is on?
 "Part of a building" can also give rise to problems.
In Walkington [1979]2 All ER 716 (CA), the accused was guilty under  s.9(1) (a) when he went into a three-sided partition in the middle of a shop where the till was.
The area inside the partition was "part of a building" .
Paragraphs (a) and (b) create separate offences.
It was thought that a person charged under one paragraph may not be convicted under the other: Hollis [1971]Crim LR 525 (CA).
However, the same fact situation may give rise to either offence: Taylor [1979]Crim LR 649.
Therefore, a person charged under s.9(1) (b) may be convicted under s.9(1) (a) because the former includes the latter when the accused is charged with entering with intent to steal or inflict grievous bodily harm: see Whiting (1987) 85 Cr App R 78.
In s.9(1) (a) the statute speaks of "offence" of grievous bodily harm.
It has been said that in s.9(1) (b), which does not mention the term "offence" , grievous bodily harm does not necessarily mean the offences found in ss.18 and 20 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861: Jenkins [1983]1 All ER 993.
It was sufficient that the victim was so shocked by the accused's presence that the victim suffered a stroke.
The accused need not know that the victim was present.
The Lords reversed, but not on this point (MPC v Wilson [1984]AC 242).
The actus reus
Edmund-Davies LJ in an extempore judgment said that the accused has to make "an effective and substantial entry" : Collins [1973]QB 100, the case of the "socks maniac" .
The accused, having taken drink, determined upon sexual intercourse.
He placed a ladder against an upper window, climbed up, and saw a naked woman on the bed.
He climbed down and removed all his clothing except for his socks, which he left on in order to make a quick getaway.
He climbed up and at some point he was beckoned in.
Intercourse took place.
The woman, who had earlier thought that the male was her boyfriend, discovered that it was not.
The question was whether any part of his anatomy had made an effective and substantial entry (into the building) at the moment she beckoned him in.
On the facts the answer was not certain.
The Court of Appeal in Brown [1985]Crim LR 212 widened the Collins definition by holding that the entry had to be effective, but need not be substantial.
The question whether the entry was effective was for the jury.
There was no need for the whole of the accused's body to be in the building: the top half was in a shop-front display, the bottom half outside.
It is thought that "effective" relates to the entry, not to the possibility of theft, rape, etc.
The problem is this: if the accused's intention is to rape and he is in the same position as in Brown with the top half of his body in the building, is his entry therein effective for the purposes of the rape form of burglary?
On the wording of the statute it would seem that an effective entry into the building is sufficient without the accused's going so far as to be in a position to effect his ulterior intent.
It is questionable whether the accused has entered if he inserts a key into a lock or puts his hand through a window.
Under the pre-Theft Act law it was sufficient if  any part of the accused's body was inside.
Collins and Brown scotch that notion, but uncertainty remains whether inserting an implement into the premises is sufficient.
It was under the old law if done in pursuance of the ulterior intent, not if done simply to gain access.
Perhaps the same rule stands.
The Daily Telegraph, 4 March 1979, notes a case where transvestites who hooked dresses through letter boxes pleaded guilty to burglary in a magistrates' court, even though no part of their bodies was through the letter boxes.
This case may be inconsistent with Collins and Brown.
It would be helpful if this point were resolved.
Trespassing means entry without the consent of the owner, express or implied.
If the owner's daughter invites the accused into her bedroom for the purpose of sexual intercourse, he is not trespassing.
It will, however, be trespass if she had no authority to issue that invitation.
In Jones & Smith [1976]3 All ER 54 (CA), the occupier's son had general permission to enter the house but he did not have permission to come in with a friend to steal two televisions, despite the father's saying that his son would never be a trespasser in his house.
The limits of permission were exceeded.
The same rule applies in shops, it is thought.
Jones & Smith may be inconsistent with Collins, where the accused could have been held to be a trespasser because he exceeded his permission to enter.
The point was not seen in Collins, which would seem to be incorrect on this issue.
A possible reconciliation is to argue that in Collins the accused's intent was to rape, if necessary, whereas in Jones & Smith there was no "if necessary" about the intent to steal.
Jones & Smith looks like a simple theft case and the defendants should be so charged.
Mens rea
The accused must deliberately enter knowing that he is a trespasser: Collins, Jones & Smith.
Perhaps recklessness is sufficient: Collins.
Presumably recklessness bears the meaning of Cunningham [1957]2 QB 396.
Where the charge is under s.9(1) (a), there must also be the ulterior intent.
This further intent may be conditional.
Under s.9(1) (b) the accused must have the mens rea of the completed crime, e.g. grievous bodily harm requires intention or reckless in the Cunningham form as to the infliction of some harm.
The term "with intent" in s.9(1) (a) would seem to require purpose, a narrower meaning than intent in murder (see Chapter 2).
Aggravated burglary (s.10)
This offence occurs when the accused has with him a firearm, imitation firearm, weapon of offence, or explosive.
The time at which he must have it with him is the time when he stole etc., if the burglary is the s.9(1) (b) type: O'Leary (1986) 82 Cr App R 341 (CA).
In Francis [1982]Crim LR 363, the accused had a stick with him when he demanded entry into a house, but not when he was stealing from a room.
The Court of Appeal held that the crime was not aggravated burglary.
For the purposes of the s.9(1) (a) type, the relevant time is that of entry.
A weapon of offence is defined in s.10(1) (b) as "any article made or adapted for use for causing injury to or incapacitating a person or intended by the person having  it with him for such use" .
A screwdriver would fall within this definition, which is wider than that in s.1(4), Prevention of Crime Act 1953, in relation to offensive weapons, for it includes incapacitating articles such as handcuffs and, as suggested by the Criminal Law Revision Committee's Eighth Report, p.128, rope (to tie up security guards).
The prosecution does not have to show that the weapon of offence was intended to be used during the burglary.
In Stones [1989]1 WLR 156 (CA), Glidewell LJ said that: "The mischief at which the section is clearly aimed is that if a burglar has a weapon which he intends to use to injure some person unconnected with the premises burgled, he may nevertheless be tempted to use it if challenged during the course of the burglary and put under sufficient pressure." 
The court did not state why they thought this was the mischief, and the Criminal Law Revision Committee's Report considered aggravated burglary was aimed at instances where the accused intends to use or threaten the use of weapons in order to steal.
The accused must know that he has the prohibited article.
If a knife is planted on him, he is not guilty.
The outcome is the same if he has forgotten that he has a knife on him.
One last point on s.l0: the prohibited articles form the mnemonic "wife" — Weapon of offence, Imitation weapon, Firearm, Explosive!
GOING EQUIPPED
Introduction
By s.25:[a]person shall be guilty of an offence if, when not at his place of abode, he has with him any article for use in the course of or in connection with any burglary, theft or cheat.
This offence is often known as "going equipped" .
The crime is one aimed at stopping the accused from committing offences even before he has attempted to steal.
Since one can attempt to go equipped, the range of s.25 together with its inchoate offence is broad.
Actus reus
The accused must have with him an article.
Since the article need not be made or adapted for burglary, stealing or cheating it bears a wide meaning.
A bottle of wine was sufficient in Doukas [1978]1 All ER 1061 (CA), which was approved in Cook (1988) 83 Cr App R 339.
In Minor v CPS (1988) 86 Cr App R 378, a piece of tubing with which to syphon petrol was held by the Divisional Court to be an "article" .
In Rashid [1977]2 All ER 237 (CA) a sliced loaf and some tomatoes fell within "any  article" , though the court held the accused not to be guilty on the facts because train passengers would not care whether sandwiches were provided by British Rail or the steward personally, a questionable decision in the light of Doukas and Cooke [1986]AC 909 (HL).
The question whether a customer knowing of the facts would have taken part in the fraud is one for the jury.
It should not be assumed that people do not care whose sandwiches they are buying in a BR buffet.
The phrase "with him" may cover articles which the accused does not have on his person but does have under his control a short way off.
The phrase "has with him" seems to exclude articles picked up for immediate use.
For example, if the accused was reconnoitring a home preparatory to burglary, he may not be guilty of this offence if he picks up some ladders which he has found in the garden.
 "Place of abode" means the accused's home and no doubt his garage.
The term "theft" covers both theft and taking a conveyance (s.12).
 "Cheat" means an offence contrary to s.15(1), obtaining property by deception.
The correct way for approaching the actus reus in relation to cheating was laid down in Doukas and approved in Cooke:(a) was there an article for use in cheating?(b) did the accused deceive another?(c) did the accused obtain by that deception?(d) was there dishonesty?(e) was "the obtaining…, wholly or partially, by virtue of the deception" ?
This method was used by the Court of Appeal in Whiteside [1989]Crim LR 436: The defendants were selling counterfeit cassettes at a price much cheaper than that charged for real tapes.
They argued that they did not claim that the cassettes were genuine.
It was held on the point that they did not disabuse the crowd of the notion that the tapes were genuine that the jury were entitled to draw the inference that any buyer was relying on a representation that the tapes were genuine.
There was no need to prove that anyone was in fact deceived.
One looks at the accused's state of mind.
However, the Court of Appeal quashed their convictions on the ground that the recorder should not have directed the jury that it was sufficient that the obtaining was partly (following Doukas) the result of the deception.
It has to be said that the Court of Appeal's judgment is weak.
Cassettes and other things may be purchased for multiple reasons — perhaps usually they are.
If so, Whiteside rules out convictions in such circumstances.
There is a strong argument against Whiteside and cases such as Doukas and Rashid.
Prof. Smith in The Law of Theft, 6th edn, Butterworth, 1990, para. 385, and in his commentary on Whiteside attacked present law which requires there to be asked whether a person would be deceived.
That is, one has to inquire into the potential victim's state of mind: would he have cared?
Such is not what s.25 states.
The section seems to require solely an intent to obtain.
It does not matter whether the victim would rely on the deception.
Mens rea
None is stated in the sub-section, but it is assumed that the accused must intend to use the article in the course of or in connection with the burglary, theft or cheat, and  he must know that he has the article with him.
In Hargreaves [1985]Crim LR 243, the accused had a piece of wire adapted to clock up credits on gaming machines.
The Court of Appeal held that he was not guilty when he had not decided whether to use it or not.
The court did say that an intention to use the article, should a suitable opportunity arise, would be sufficient mens rea.
Perhaps the principal authority is Ellames [1974]3 All ER 130 (CA).
The accused had been involved in a robbery.
He had with him masks, gloves, and guns.
It was held that he was not guilty.
Section 25 deals with preparation for crime, not what occurs after crimes.
The court said, however, obiter, that he would be guilty of the offence if he was storing the articles for use by others (i.e. "use" need not be his use) or if the accused intended to use the article for any burglary.
It did not have to be proved that the accused intended to use the article for a particular burglary, theft or cheat.
The court said, moreover, that "in connection with" covered using an article to escape from the scene of a crime.
HANDLING
Section 22(1) of the Theft Act 1968 stipulates:[a]person handles stolen goods if (otherwise than in the course of the stealing) knowing or believing them to be stolen goods he dishonestly receives the goods, or dishonestly undertakes or assists in their retention, removal, disposal or realisation by or for the benefit of another person, or if he arranges to do so.
Before 1968 only "receiving" was a crime.
Now there are 18 ways in which the offence of handling may be committed: see Nicklin [1977]2 All ER 444 (CA)— there is only one crime but several ways of committing it.
A dictum to the contrary in Bloxham [1983]1 AC 109 (HL) seems to be wrong.
The main division is that between receiving and the rest of the sub-section: per Lord Bridge in Bloxham.
The second part is often charged as a single count embodying such words of the sub-section as are appropriate to the facts: Deakin [1972]3 All ER 803 (CA), Bloxham.
If one is charged under one part, one cannot be convicted under the other: Nicklin.
Actus reus
Handling is a term of art.
There is no need for the accused actually to touch the goods, and he may touch the goods without being a handler.
Section 34(2) (b)
By s.34(2) (b):[g]oods, except insofar as the context otherwise requires, includes money and every other description of property except land, and includes things severed from the land by stealing.
Presumably things in action are covered: A-G's Ref.
(No. 4 of 1979)[1981]1 All ER 1193: balance in a bank account.
Section 24
By s.24 goods are stolen for the purposes of handling if any one or four conditions is fulfilled:(a) they have been stolen contrary to s.1;(b) they have been obtained by deception contrary to s.15;(c) they have been obtained by blackmail contrary to s.21;(d) they have been subject to an act done in a foreign country which was both a crime in that country and had it occurred in England, would have been theft, obtaining by deception, or blackmail in this country.
The offence extends to the proceeds of the stolen goods: s.24(2).
The goods must actually have been stolen at the time of the offence.
It is not enough that he believes them to have been stolen: Haughton v Smith [1975]AC 476 (HL).
A person who mistakenly believes the goods to be stolen is therefore not guilty of handling — charge the attempt.
And see s.24(3):[n]o goods shall be regarded as having continued to be stolen after they have been returned to the person from whom they were stolen or to other lawful possession or custody or after that person and any other person claiming through him have otherwise ceased as regards these goods to have any right to restitution in respect of the theft.
So goods once stolen cease to be so on restoration.
They also cease to be stolen when taken into police possession: A-G's Ref.
(No. 1 of 1974)[1976]QB 744.
Possibly this was not the intention of Parliament for "restored" seems inappropriate to describe the situation where goods have come into the police's possession.
The goods must have been reduced into the custody of the police: A-G's Reference.
A constable reported that goods on the back seat of a car were stolen.
He removed the rotor arm and kept watch on the car.
The Court of Appeal held that whether the officer had taken possession was a question for the jury, and that the answer depended on whether he had made his mind up to take possession so that they would not be removed, or whether he had an open mind and merely wanted to stop the driver getting away without being questioned.
The case is to be distinguished from Haughton v Smith on the ground that in that case the prosecution conceded, perhaps wrongly, that the goods had been reduced into the police's possession.
A similar case is GLC Police Commissioner v Strecker (1980) 71 Cr App R 113 (DC)— initialling goods to indicate that they had been stolen did not indicate possession.
Handling
Handling may be done in several distinct ways.
It is easier to divide up s.22 than to look at it all at once.
Handling means:(a) receiving the goods;(b) undertaking the retention, removal, disposal or realisation of the goods by and for the benefit of another person;(c) assisting in their retention etc.; or
(d) arranging to do any of these things.
The phrase "by or for the benefit of another person" applies to each preceding word denoting handling: Sloggett [1972]1 QB 430.
Finding stolen goods is not "receiving" them: Haider [1985]22 March (CA) LEXIS.
 "Retention" connotes a positive act such as concealment or misleading the police: Kanwar [1982]2 All ER 528.
It does not cover simply keeping goods after the accused has discovered that they have been stolen: Broom v Crowther (1984) 148 JP 592.
 "Disposal" covers dumping, giving away and destruction.
A buyer is not involved in the "realisation" of stolen goods: Bloxham, above.
The term does cover the sale or exchange of goods.
 "Assisting" is based on a positive act of encouragement or helping.
The fact that the accused's wife spent money on their flat does not mean that he assisted in the disposal of money stolen by the wife: Coleman [1986]Crim LR 56.
It does not cover using stolen property left in one's father's garage: Sanders (1982) 75 Cr App R 84.
However, telling lies to the police is assisting in the retention of stolen goods: Kanwar, above.
Arranging to receive goods before they have been stolen does not amount to handling: Park (1988) 87 Cr App R 164 (CA), because "guilty knowledge must exist at the time when the offence is committed" .
The goods have to be stolen before the offence is committed.
A charge of conspiracy would succeed on these facts.
May a person handle by an omission?
The words "receiving"  "undertaking" and "arranging" all seem to suggest a positive act, but "assisting" covers omissions, provided that there is a legal duty to act: Brown [1970]1 QB 105 (CA)— allowing another to place stolen goods on his property.
Brown was followed in Pitchley (1972) 57 Cr App R 30 (CA), where the accused was under a duty to withdraw money from his bank account and return it to the owner.
 "Otherwise than in the course of stealing" 
These words ensure that not every thief is also a handler.
The phrase contemplates that the "course of stealing" extends beyond the point and moment of theft.
Only if the issue, whether the accused is really the thief or the handler is live, need the phrase be proved by the prosecution: see Cash [1985]QB 801 (CA), approving Griffiths (1974) 60 Cr App R 14 (CA), and A-G of Hong Kong v Yip Kai-foon [1988]AC 642 (PC).
In Greaves [1987]The Times, 11 July, it was held that it was a question for the jury whether a gap of 17 days between burglary and handling meant that the accused was not the burglar and so could be convicted of handling.
The phrase "otherwise than in the course of the handing" does not solve every issue of the relationship between theft and handling.
The problem is complex.
In Pitham & Hehl (1976) 65 Cr App R 45, a person took the two defendants to his friend's house and sold them the furniture of his friend who was in prison.
Were the defendants guilty of handling?
They could only be so if the seller had stolen the goods.
The Court of Appeal held that he had appropriated the goods for the purposes of theft when he showed them the goods and invited them to buy.
Therefore, the defendants could be convicted as handlers.
The Court of Appeal in Gregory (1982) 77 Cr App R 41 considered this case to be one of "instantaneous appropriation" , yet Pitham & Hehl does look like a case where the course of stealing was not complete at the time when the defendants got their hands on the furniture.
One difference between theft and handling is that the bona fide purchaser of goods is not guilty of theft when he later discovers that they were stolen (s.3(2)).
However, if he gets the goods, finds out that they are stolen, and sells them, he is guilty of handling.
Though not resolving all problems, the Court of Appeal in Shelton (1986) 83 Cr App R 379 held:(a) if there is doubt as to whether the appropriate charge is theft or handling, both can be charged;(b) the jury should be directed that a handler may also be a thief but he cannot be convicted of both in relation to the same property at the same time; and (c) if the jury cannot agree whether theft or handling has been proved, the jury should be discharged.
The Privy Council in Yip Kai-foon went a little further.
If there are alternative theft and handling counts, the jurors should not be instructed to convict of the offence which it seems more probable to them that the accused committed.
They should look first at theft.
If theft is not proved beyond reasonable doubt, they should consider handling.
If handling is not proved, the accused is not guilty of either, even though the jury thought that he was definitely guilty of one of them.
Yip Kai-foon was applied by the Court of Appeal in Foreman [1991]Crim LR 702.
Prof Smith's comments are noteworthy: The jury may well be sure that the defendant is guilty either of theft or of handling but quite unable to decide which.
In Yip Kai-foon the Privy Council rejected the solution which has been adopted in some jurisdictions of directing the jury to convict of the offence which they consider to be more probable.
Such a solution "detracts, or may be thought to detract, from the obligation of the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable  doubt that the accused is guilty of the particular offence, before they enter such a verdict" .
But if that solution is objectionable, the one adopted is more so.
Suppose that the jury, having been directed in accordance with the present decision, consider first the robbery charge, as instructed.
They conclude that the defendant was probably guilty of robbery.
But they are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt so they decide, quite properly, to acquit of robbery.
When they turn to the handling charge they must presume that he is not guilty of robbery; and, if they are quite satisfied that he must have been guilty of the one offence or the other, they are bound to conclude that he was guilty of handling.
That is, they must convict him of the offence which they think he probably did not commit.
The result is entirely arbitrary.
If the jury were to consider the handling account first they would reach the conclusion that he was guilty of the robbery.
It is not clear why the theft or robbery count should be considered before that of handling except that the theft or robbery must have come first in time.
The solution rejected in Yip Kai-foon of directing the jury to convict of the offence which they consider to be the more probable is, at least, rational and less potentially repugnant to the principle that the prosecution must prove its case.
(Of course since we do not know what happens in the jury room — and it is illegal to find out — the likelihood is that the jury will disregard the law and convict the accused of one offence or the other, hardly the best possible outcome.)
Perhaps there should be a review of possible alternative verdicts under the Theft Acts.
Shelton points out that handling is a more serious offence than theft and has a maximum of 14 years' imprisonment.
Handling is a serious offence because handling encourages thieves.
It is, in the words of the Criminal Law Revision Committee's Eighth Report, 1966, para. 127, "to combat theft by making it more difficult and less profitable to dispose of stolen property" .
Mens rea
It must be proved that the accused handled the goods "knowing or believing them to be stolen goods" and that he acted dishonestly.
Knowledge must be proved at the time of the handling: Atwal v Massey [1971]3 All ER 881.
Finding out that the goods were stolen after receipt is not handling, but if the accused then, for example, sells them, he may have arranged for their disposal for the benefit of another.
(It could also be theft, where there is no need for the disposal to be for the benefit of another.)
The test of "knowing or believing" is subjective: Atwal, Stagg [1978]Crim LR 227.
Constructive knowledge is insufficient: Bellenie [1980]Crim LR 137.
One of the leading authorities is Hall (1985) 81 Cr App R 160.
The Court of Appeal held:[a]man may be said to know that goods are stolen when he is told by someone with first hand knowledge…that such is the case…
Belief…may be said to be the state of mind of a person who says to himself: "I cannot say I know for certain that these goods are stolen, but there can be no other reasonable conclusion in the light of circumstances…
What is not enough…is mere suspicion".
This definition of "believing" appears narrow.
It does not include thinking that something is probably true, a state of mind which may be part of "believing" in ordinary language.
There is no need for this direction to be given if the issue is solely one of belief.
Only if the distinction is between belief and suspicion is it "prudent" to give it: Toor (1987) 85 Cr App R 116 (CA) following Harris (1987) 84 Cr App R 75 (CA).
The point seems to be that "knowing or believing" are simple words which do not in the ordinary run of things require an explanation.
As stated in Hall suspicion is insufficient.
Grainge [1974]1 All ER 928 (CA) had so held previously.
Thinking that something is more likely than not stolen is not "believing" : Reader (1978) 66 Cr App R 33.
Nor is it enough if the accused acted with wilful blindness, even though in some areas of criminal law wilful blindness is treated as knowledge: Griffiths, above, Pethick [1980]Crim LR 242 and Moys (1984) 79 Cr App R 72.
It is handling if the accused knows or believes the goods to be stolen.
He need not know the identity of the thief or of the owner or the nature of the goods: McCullum (1973) 57 Cr App R 645.
The question of dishonesty is settled by reference to Ghosh [1982]QB 1053 (see under theft).
Roberts (1987) 84 Cr App R 117 held that the second stage of the Ghosh test does not have to be given in handling cases if there is no evidence that the accused did believe that he was not dishonest by the standards of ordinary decent people.
REFORM
If enacted, the draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989, will contain the offences of burglary (cl. 147), aggravated burglary (cl. 148), blackmail (cl. 154), handling (cl. 172 as expanded in cl. 174), and going equipped (cl. 175).
Blackmail and handling are unchanged.
Burglary is very slightly redefined in its s.9(1) (b) form to correct the anomaly that the infliction of grievous bodily harm need not amount to an offence.
Accordingly the accused is at present guilty if he negligently caused such injury.
The paragraph is restated to ensure that the offence is required in order to convict of this form of burglary.
By cl. 18(a) "knowingly" includes a situation where the accused "avoids taking steps that might confirm his belief" that a circumstance exists.
This reform would extend present law.
Clause 172 is also redrafted to clarify the law and reads:[a]person is guilty of handling stolen goods if (otherwise than in the course of the stealing) knowing or believing them to be stolen goods, he dishonestly —
(a) receives or arranges to receive the goods; or (b) undertakes or arranges to undertake their retention, removal, disposal or realisation for the benefit of another; or (c) assists or arranges to assist in their retention, removal, disposal or realisation by another.
16 Manslaughter
INTRODUCTION
Manslaughter is not defined in a statute.
In Church [1966]1 QB 59 (CCA), Edmund-Davies J was driven to say that "there has never been a complete and satisfactory definition of manslaughter" .
It acts as a sort of catch-all offence where the accused has caused death but did not have malice aforethought or has a defence to murder.
Since "murder" is a strong term and some killings are not seen to be as heinous as the archetypal murder case, the retention of a second form of criminal killing is probably a good idea.
One difficulty, however, is that this offence covers a wide range of situations from killings just short of murder to carelessly causing death.
In some instances death is caused fortuitously.
There is therefore no gradation in the types of manslaughter, though there is in the sentence.
The maximum is life imprisonment, but the average in the 1980s was four and a half years.
The old classification of manslaughter was into voluntary and involuntary, the former being when the accused had the mens rea for murder but there is some mitigating factor, which could be provocation, diminished responsibility or killing in pursuance of a suicide pact.
Involuntary manslaughter is unlawful homicide without malice aforethought.
A person does not need to be acting involuntarily (see Chapter 4) to be guilty of this form of manslaughter.
A modern categorisation is this:(a) killing by omission when the law imposes a duty to act;(b) killing by gross negligence or by recklessness (there is debate whether the former form has survived the introduction of reckless manslaughter in the 1980s);(c) killing by an unlawful act, also called constructive manslaughter;(d) killing where there is provocation (see Chapter 2), diminished responsibility (see Chapter 11), or a suicide pact.
The maximum penalty is life imprisonment.
MANSLAUGHTER BY OMISSION
The general issue of omissions in the criminal law was discussed in Chapter 4.
Manslaughter by omission occurs where the accused in breach of a duty imposed by law fails to carry out an undertaking, whether contractual or otherwise, and the victim dies as a result.
In Pittwood (1902) 19 TLR 37, a level-crossing keeper failed to close a gate.
A person crossing the line was killed.
The court held that the keeper was guilty of manslaughter, even though he did not owe the contractual duty to open and close the gate to the victim.
Other cases occur in Chapter 4.
The mental element is uncertain.
In Smith [1979]Crim LR 251 the judge seems to have directed the jury that in this type of manslaughter the accused had to foresee a real risk to his wife's health, and Sheppard [1981]AC 394 confirmed that this was so.
An alternative mental element was lack of awareness that the victim's health was at risk because the accused did not care (see "wilfully" in Chapter 5).
It appears that the type of injury which must be foreseen is serious injury and if that is so, the statement that indifference to any harm to health or welfare was sufficient (Stone & Dobinson [1977]QB 754) is incorrect in the light of authorities from the 1980s.
This head of manslaughter is swallowed by the reckless form if there is no difference between what the accused foresaw and what a reasonable person would, subject to this dispute.
It should be noted that an omission is not sufficient for unlawful act manslaughter and that neglect (omission) and negligence are not the same thing.
Neglect is not doing, while negligence is doing something carelessly.
The lack of liability in unlawful act manslaughter for an omission which caused death has been criticised on the grounds that an omission, especially a deliberate one, is blameworthy, and it can cause death.
KILLING BY GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR BY RECKLESSNESS
Until recently and perhaps even nowadays there was a form of manslaughter where the accused had killed the victim in a grossly negligent fashion.
With the development of the form of recklessness found in MPC v Caldwell [1982]AC 341 (HL), which applies in this area (Seymour [1983]2 AC 493 (HL)) there are now authorities to the effect that manslaughter by gross negligence has been totally swallowed up by reckless manslaughter: Kong Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App R 18 (PC) and Goodfellow (1986) 83 Cr App R 23 (CA).
The basic rule of liability was stated in Goodfellow: has the accused acted in such a way as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm and, having recognised it, gone ahead, or not given any thought to that risk?
The accused need not realise that he is putting  someone at risk: Seymour.
As a result of Seymour an accused is guilty if he did not realise that there was an obvious risk of some personal injury to another.
Goodfellow confirmed that the facts can constitute both reckless and unlawful act manslaughter, but the rules differ.
A risk of what?
Before the irruption of reckless manslaughter Fenton Atkinson LJ in Stone & Dobinson, above, rejected the view that the accused had to be grossly negligent as to the likelihood of death or serious injury.
He said that gross negligence signified "indifference to an obvious risk to health and welfare and an appreciation of such risk coupled with a determination to run it" .
After Caldwell Lord Roskill in Seymour spoke of a very high risk of death, but he said that in the context of manslaughter caused by a car ( "motor manslaughter" ) in order to distinguish that offence from causing death by reckless driving, or at least such is the construction put on his words in Kong Cheuk Kwan v R, and Lord Roskill did uphold the trial judge's direction which included a reference to an obvious and serious risk of physical injury.
Both Goodfellow and Kong Cheuk Kwan v R demand only a risk of physical injury.
Therefore, it can be said that there need not be an obvious and serious risk of death in reckless manslaughter.
Stone & Dobinson's test of "obvious risk to health or welfare" would broaden manslaughter perhaps unacceptably, and the position is now that accepted by the Privy Council and Court of Appeal.
In Lawrence [1982]AC 510, Lord Diplock said that there had to be an obvious and serious risk of some physical harm or substantial damage to property in relation to reckless driving and causing death by reckless driving.
Omitting the reference to property this decision was extended to manslaughter involving cars in Seymour though the Crown wished to reserve the question whether a risk to property was sufficient: on the facts it was not relevant.
In Kong Cheuk Kwan v R, Lord Roskill referred to a risk of causing damage but on the facts that was a relevant risk because a collision between two hydrofoils did create such a risk.
In Goodfellow the Court of Appeal ruled that there should be no reference to the risk of damage to property.
In ex p Jennings [1982]3 All ER 104, the Lords decided that in both causing death by reckless driving and reckless manslaughter there had to be "an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury" .
The so-called "lacuna" in Caldwell (see Chapter 3) applies in reckless manslaughter.
If the accused foresaw that his act might injure the victim but decided that there was no risk, he is not guilty if the victim dies as a result.
On the facts of Lamb [1967]2 QB 981 the accused could not be guilty of reckless manslaughter when he shot his best friend not realising how the chamber of a gun revolved on pressing the trigger.
The Court of Appeal thought that he could be convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence, but if that form no longer exists, he cannot be, and he falls within the gap in Caldwell.
Before Seymour there was a type of manslaughter where the accused, being aware of the possibility of injury (i.e. subjectively reckless), killed someone.
Pike [1961]Crim LR 547 (CCA) illustrated this form.
The accused gave his mistress carbon  tetrachloride to increase sexual satisfaction.
He had administered the fumes to a number of women over several years with no side-effects.
However, on this occasion the victim died.
It was held that the trial judge was correct to direct the jury that the accused was guilty of manslaughter if he was aware of the risk that some physical harm might occur.
After Seymour there is doubt whether this form of manslaughter survives.
Under that case the accused must take an obvious and serious risk.
That element is missing from Pike.
However, if in Pike there was no obvious and serious risk of injury, this form of manslaughter has a part to play.
The possible survival of gross negligence manslaughter
While most of the cases which were decided under the heading of gross negligence would be decided the same way under reckless manslaughter, from cases such as Lamb, above, manslaughter by gross negligence may survive despite Lord Roskill's statement in Kong Cheuk Kwan v R that the term was not to be used.
The term gross negligence was never defined in the cases.
The criminal law, however, did recognise that an accused could be guilty only if he acted in a grossly negligent fashion.
Acting carelessly was insufficient.
As was said in the classic authority, Andrews v DPP [1937]AC 576 (HL), "simple lack of care as will constitute civil liability is insufficient" .
In Bateman [1925]All ER Rep 45, Lord Hewart said that a person was guilty only if he demonstrated "such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against the State and conduct deserving of punishment" , a circular definition but one which gives a flavour of the topic.
Watkins LJ in Seymour in the Court of Appeal (1983) 76 Cr App R 21 stated that this direction must not be used: "It is no longer necessary or helpful to make reference to compensation and negligence." 
Yet in Ball [1989]Crim LR 730 the Court of Appeal did just that.
It was as if Kong Cheuk Kwan v R and Seymour had never occurred.
The grossness of the conduct will vary with regard to the facts of each case.
For example, a surgeon may justifiably run the risk of killing the patient if the operation is necessary to save life, whereas employers may not take a substantial risk with the lives of their workers in order to increase profits.
Examples help to show the distinction between carelessness and gross negligence.
In Akerele v R [1943]AC 255 (PC), which approved the law in Bateman, a doctor's careless mixing of a powder with the result that five children died was not manslaughter.
The fact that someone died is not by itself gross negligence, and one cannot multiply the carelessness by the five deaths to create gross negligence.
Grossness was a question of degree for the jury, and it would be rare to find a professional person so negligent.
In Bateman itself the accused took part of the victim's uterus away during childbirth and did not remove her to hospital for five days.
She died.
On appeal he was found not guilty because he was carrying out a normal procedure approved by the medical profession.
It was merely that the procedure had gone wrong.
In Long (1830) 172 ER 756, a person who was not a doctor killed two patients by applying corrosive plasters to their chests.
There was "gross and improper rashness and want of caution" .
He was convicted (but fined £250).
After Seymour it is thought that all of these accused would be guilty of  reckless manslaughter.
If so, the law has been extended from gross negligence to carelessness.
One difficulty in knowing whether gross negligence manslaughter has survived is the use in older cases of recklessness as a synonym for gross negligence.
The Court of Oyer and Terminer, Dublin, required "gross negligence" or "recklessly negligent conduct" : Elliott (1889) 16 Cox CC 710.
The accused was not guilty of manslaughter of 76 passengers when he separated a train on an incline, causing coaches to run backwards into another train.
In Andrews v DPP Lord Atkin defined gross negligence as "a very high degree of negligence" or recklessness.
In Cato [1976]1 WLR 110 gross negligence and recklessness were used synonymously.
Even after Seymour gross negligence and recklessness are used interchangeably.
In Sargent [1990]The Guardian, 3 July, Boreham J at Leeds Crown Court is reported as saying: "You were so negligent as to be reckless as to this woman's welfare" , by pumping so much oxygen into her during an operation that she swelled up like a Michelin man.
Note the reference to "welfare" , a low test which is below that required for reckless manslaughter.
In summary, if gross negligence manslaughter survives, it is wider than reckless manslaughter because, provided that the carelessness was gross, the lacuna case is covered.
However, according to Reid (1990) 91 Cr App R 213 (CA) the accused is, it seems, guilty of reckless manslaughter if he does not advert to a risk which ought to have been taken seriously and someone dies.
Inadvertence is another way of saying "negligence" .
Accordingly (simple) carelessness falls within reckless, but not gross negligence, manslaughter.
Another distinction is that in reckless manslaughter recklessness as to physical injury is needed; in gross negligence the criterion may be merely gross negligence as to health or welfare.
Reform
The Law Commission's draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989, proposed to abolish manslaughter by gross negligence.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee had recommended the same in its Report, Offences Against the Person, Cmnd 7844, 1980.
In cl. 55 of the draft Code "reckless" manslaughter is defined in accordance with cl. 18(c) (see Chapter 3), which restores the subjective meaning.
UNLAWFUL ACT OR CONSTRUCTIVE MANSLAUGHTER
This type of manslaughter gets its name from the requirement that the victim must have died as a result of an unlawful act and liability is constructive because the accused is guilty even though he did not foresee death.
The same act could be both this form of manslaughter and reckless manslaughter.
In Goodfellow above, the accused set fire to a house so that he could be rehoused.
Three died.
The unlawful  act was arson, and he was reckless as to the risk of injury.
This type of manslaughter occurs when death is caused by an unlawful act intentionally or recklessly committed by the accused which reasonable persons would foresee as liable to cause some injury, though not necessarily serious injury: Church, as approved in DPP v Newbury [1977]AC 500 (HL) and Goodfellow.
The accused is guilty even though he personally foresaw no risk of injury.
 "Injury" covers shock causing physical injury, but not emotional disturbance: Dawson (1985) 81 Cr App R 150 (CA).
It was said that the act had to be directed or aimed at the victim.
In Dalby [1982]1 WLR 425 (CA), the accused was found not guilty because the unlawful act, the supply of a dangerous drug, did not cause the victim's death.
Obiter the court said that the supply of the drug was not directed at the person of the accused.
This was a novel requirement and appeared inconsistent with the decision of the Lords in Newbury, where the defendants did not aim the stone, which killed the victim, at him.
Nevertheless, the House refused leave to appeal in Dalby.
A comparison case is Cato, above.
The accused was guilty when he injected heroin into his friend.
In Dalby the victim injected herself.
In Mitchell [1983]QB 741 the Court of Appeal held that there was a novus actus interveniens in Dalby.
In this way the result in Dalby can be reconciled with earlier law.
Even at the time when Dalby was taken to represent the law, it was not quite true to say that the act had to be directed at the victim, since the doctrine of transferred malice applies.
In Mitchell the accused pushed a man who fell against an 89-year-old woman in a queue at a post office.
She suffered a broken leg, developed thrombosis and died.
The accused was guilty of manslaughter even though he did not direct his attack at the victim.
It should be noted that the accused was guilty of manslaughter, even though he intended only a battery.
In Pagett (1983) 76 Cr App R 279 (CA), where a girl was used as a shield by the accused (see Chapter 2), the court did not deal with the point that under Dalby the act had to be directed at the victim.
The court said obiter that the accused would have been guilty even if the police had shot dead an innocent bystander, though the actual victim was innocent too.
The point is that the accused did not direct his act at her.
The Court of Appeal finally gave the "aimed at" rule its quietus in Goodfellow.
Dalby was held to have been decided in the way that it was because a direction was needed whether or not there was an intervening act, i.e. the words in Dalby did not mean what they said.
The result in Dalby is preserved.
The accused did not (now) cause the victim's death.
On the facts of Goodfellow where the accused set fire to his dwelling, there was no break in the chain of causation which led to the death of his wife, son and son's girlfriend.
In Ball, above, the court mentioned the "aimed at" doctrine but did not treat it as a separate element.
The elements of the offence
(a) This type of manslaughter is different from gross negligence manslaughter.
A lawful act which is performed carelessly does not automatically become an unlawful act for this purpose, even if a lawful act done carelessly amounts to an offence (e.g. careless driving): Andrews v DPP, above.
Therefore a person  who kills while driving carelessly is not guilty of this form of manslaughter, but may be guilty of reckless manslaughter.
(b) The unlawful act need not be a violent act but it must be "a dangerous act, that is, an act which is likely to injure another person" : Larkin [1943]1 All ER 217.
Church adopted a like definition.
In Mahal [1991]Crim LR 632 (CA), it was held that a jury could find that pushing someone through an open window 22 feet from the ground could lead to "the risk of some harm" .
(c) An act which is a tort only and not a crime is not an unlawful act for the purposes of unlawful act manslaughter: Franklin (1883) 15 Cox CC 163.
(In Franklin there was a crime, larceny (nowadays theft), but that crime was not mentioned and it was not in itself dangerous.)
An omission cannot be a wrongful act: Lowe [1973]QB 702 (CA), not following Senior [1899]1 QB 283 (Court for Crown Cases Reserved).
Jennings [1990]Crim LR 588 (CA) confirmed the need for there to be a crime and for the unlawful act to be identified.
Possessing a knife was not per se an unlawful act under the Prevention of Crime Act 1953, s.1.
The accused's intention had to be considered to determine whether he wished to use it to inflict injury.
Whether the accused had that intent had to be left to the jury.
Without that state of mind there was no unlawful act manslaughter when the accused stabbed his brother who was trying to restrain him.
There must, therefore, be a mental element in the "unlawful act" , though this proposition is not always stated in the cases (see for example, Newbury, where it is difficult to state what the unlawful act was).
See also Lamb, below.
The requirement of mens rea for unlawful act manslaughter may be easily satisfied.
If the accused kills by fire, the unlawful act is arson.
That offence can be committed by a person who was Caldwell-reckless.
Therefore, he is guilty of manslaughter, even though he gave no thought to an obvious (and serious) risk of criminal damage.
The actus reus and mens rea are totally out of step.
A lawful act such as a killing in self-defence is not an unlawful act for this purpose.
In two cases the "unlawful act" is hard if not impossible to find despite the requirement of an unlawful act.
In Cato, above, the victim produced heroin and syringes and invited the accused to have a fix.
Several times during the night they injected one another.
In the morning the victim died.
The accused's conviction for manslaughter was upheld.
In Lipman [1970]1 QB 152 the defendant was also convicted of manslaughter (for facts see Chapter 10).
In both cases the ingestion of drugs was not a crime.
Possession is the offence but possession did not cause the death.
The defendants at the time of the victims' deaths were presumably unconscious and it is accordingly difficult to attribute to them any mens rea.
Getting into a state as a result of which someone died may have been reckless in ordinary language but there was a gap in time, a lack of contemporaneity, between the getting into the state and the victim's death.
The House refused leave to appeal in Lipman, and it was approved by the House in Majewski [1977]AC 433.
The accused need not know that the act is unlawful: Newbury, DPP v Daley [1980]AC 237 (PC).
(d) Whether the unlawful act was a dangerous one is judged not by the accused's  state of mind, but by a sober and reasonable person in the defendant's position.
The test is objective: Church, Lipman, Newbury, Dawson and Ball, above.
In Newbury, two teenagers pushed part of a paving stone from the parapet of a railway bridge as a train was approaching.
The stone passed through the window of the cab and killed a guard.
The Lords held that the boys were guilty even though they did not realise that what they were doing might harm others.
They were guilty if they did an act which was unlawful and which "all sober and reasonable people" would recognise as being dangerous.
The jury must place themselves in the accused's position with the accused's knowledge.
In Dawson it was held that a reasonable person robbing a petrol station would not know of the attendant's bad heart.
However, the accused would be guilty if he became aware of the condition during the robbery.
A contrasting case is Watson [1989]2 All ER 865 (CA): the jury were to take into account the knowledge of the victim's age and (frail) condition which he had acquired after he had broken into her house.
However, the reasonable person, while imbued with the knowledge the accused acquired throughout the crime, is not imbued with the mistaken beliefs he had.
In Ball, above, the accused killed his neighbour with a shotgun.
He said he thought the gun contained blanks.
He had grabbed a handful of cartridges from his pocket, which contained both blank and live cartridges.
The court held that it did not matter whether the accused thought about dangerousness.
Whether the act was dangerous was to be judged by what the reasonable person would have appreciated.
The accused's own "intention, foresight or knowledge is irrelevant" , said Lord Lane CJ.
The ruling as to the objective test is not affected by s.8 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, which relates to proof: Newbury.
Further examples of unlawful act manslaughter
Hayward (1908) 21 Cox CC 692: "death from fright alone caused by an illegal act, such as threats of violence would be sufficient" (Ridley J).
Larkin, above: brandishing an open razor, intending to frighten the victim's man and inadvertently killing the victim.
Hall (1961) 45 Cr App R 366: producing a knife, intending to terrify his wife.
Larkin was applied.
Mackie (1973) 57 Cr App R 453: using excessive violence on a child.
This case was approved by the Privy Council in DPP v Daley, above.
A similar case is on chastisement is Conner (1835) 173 ER 194.
(For more on the "escape cases" see Chapter 2.)
Buck & Buck (1960) 44 Cr App R 213: illegal abortion.
Mahal, above: pushing the victim through an open window 22 feet above ground.
Where there is no unlawful act, there is no unlawful act manslaughter.
In Lamb, above, the accused pulled the trigger of a gun and killed his best friend, but there was no assault because both did not expect a bullet to come out of the barrel.
Sachs J said that mens rea was an essential part of this type of manslaughter.
In Jennings, above, the accused had a sheathknife to protect himself from a person with whom he had been quarrelling.
He was told by his brother that the person was looking for him.
He got out his knife but stabbed to death his brother, who was attempting to restrain him.
Since the possession of the knife was not in itself illegal, the jury should have been directed to look at the accused's intent.
He might have had it with him to protect himself against "an imminent and particular threat" .
It was not sufficient that any bystander would on those facts have realised that some injury was inevitable.
Summary
Goodfellow sums up this area of law.
The accused is guilty of unlawful act manslaughter if the responses to these questions are in the affirmative: "(1) was the act intentional?(2) was it unlawful?(3) was it an act which any reasonable person would realise was bound to subject some other human being to the risk of physical harm, albeit not necessarily serious harm?(4) was the act the cause of death?" 
The Court of Appeal took a similar view in Watson, above, when it approved the trial judge's direction.
Manslaughter is the offence committed when one person causes the death of another by an act which is unlawful and which is also dangerous, dangerous in the sense that it is an act which all sober and reasonable people would inevitably realise must subject the victim to the risk of some harm resulting whether the defendant realised that or not.
KILLING IN PURSUANCE OF A SUICIDE PACT
Like provocation, this form of manslaughter is given to someone who has malice aforethought.
By s.4(1) of the Homicide Act 1957 if the accused kills in pursuance of a suicide agreement by two or more persons, the crime is manslaughter.
The burden of proof demonstrating this mitigating factor is on the accused: s.4(2).
The year and a day rule applies to this form of manslaughter as to the other ones: Coroner for Inner West London ex p De Luca [1988]3 All ER 414.
By s.4(3) a suicide pact is defined as:
A common agreement between two or more persons having for its object the death of all of them, whether or not each is to take his own life, but nothing shall be treated as done by him in pursuance of the pact unless it is done while he has the settled intention of dying in pursuance of the pact.
REFORM OF MANSLAUGHTER
By cl. 55 of the draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989: A person is guilty of manslaughter if —
(a) he is not guilty of murder by reason only of the fact that a defence provided by s.56 (diminished responsibility), 58 (provocation) or 59 (use of excessive force) applies; or
(b) he is not guilty of murder by reason only of the fact that, because of voluntary intoxication he is not aware that death may be caused or believes that an exemplary circumstance exists; or
(c) he causes the death of another —
(i) intending to cause serious personal harm; or
(ii) being reckless whether death or serious personal harm will be caused.
Manslaughter remains a catch-all offence.
Because of the narrowing of one aspect of the fault element of murder (cl. 54(1) (b)) to "intending to cause serious personal harm and being aware that he may cause death" , manslaughter is extended into part of the area currently covered by murder.
Unlawful act manslaughter, as it now stands, is abolished.
Suicide pact killings are retained (cl. 62), not as manslaughter but as a separate offence, punishable with a maximum of seven years' imprisonment.
This reform is in accordance with the recommendation of the Criminal Law Revision Committee.
It should be noted that contrary to present law, where the accused kills using excessive force in self-defence, he will be guilty of manslaughter (cl. 59), not acquitted.
17 Non-fatal offences
INTRODUCTION
This chapter considers crimes against the person which do not result in death.
Many but not all appear in the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 (hereinafter OAPA).
Those offences which are considered are those most likely to be reviewed on a criminal law course.
Assault on a constable in the execution of his duty, it is argued, properly belongs in constitutional law.
This chapter also deals with the issue of consent.
Two points to bear in mind throughout the discussion are that the same facts can give rise to more than one offence and that the crimes are defined in terms both of the fault element of the accused and the harmful consequences, but the relationship is not perfect.
One is guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm even though one does not intend to do so and one is not reckless as to the result: Savage [1991]4 All ER 698 (HL).
ASSAULT
 "Assault" is used in two different senses: first as a generic term for the separate offences of assault and battery (this usage occurs in s.47, OAPA: see below); and secondly as a term denoting the crime of assault.
The second use is sometimes called "psychic assault" or "technical assault" .
Since there can be an assault without a battery, this section uses the second meaning.
Both assault and battery have been held to be statutory offences: DPP v Little (1991) 141 NLJ 965 (DC).
The charge should be one of assault (or battery) contrary to s.39 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988.
The allegation in the information should not be "assault and battery" , which is bad for duplicity (the legal phrase for saying that two separate offences cannot be contained in one charge), but "assault and beat" or preferably "assault by beating" , both forms constituting only one offence.
The outcome in Little is surprising.
It had been thought that only the penalty was prescribed by statute, just as the penalty for murder is laid down by Parliament.
James J defined assault in Fagan [1969]1 QB 439 as "any act which intentionally or possibly recklessly causes another person to apprehend immediate and unlawful violence" .
The mental element now definitely includes recklessness.
Savage (HL) confirmed this proposition.
Robert Goff J used this definition of the actus reus in Collins v Wilcock [1984]1 WLR 1172 (DC): "an act which causes another person to apprehend the infliction of immediate, unlawful force on his person" .
Whichever definition is used, the gist of the offence is the creation of fear in another's mind.
If there is fear, there can be an assault.
Examples include pointing a gun which may be loaded (St George (1840) 173 ER 921).
As long as there is fear, it does not matter that the gun was in fact unloaded, or as in Logdon [1976]Crim LR 121, the weapon was an imitation firearm.
Shaking a fist at the victim (Stephens v Myers (1830) 172 ER 735) and threatening physical harm (Mackie [1973]Crim LR 54) were assaults.
If there is no apprehension of fear, there is no assault.
Examples would be: where the act is not seen, as when the victim is asleep; where the victim believes that the gun was unloaded (Lamb [1967]2 QB 981); where the victim knows by the accused's words that the threat will not take place (Tuberville v Savage (1669) 86 ER 684; or where the accused could not put his threat into effect: the usual illustrations are shaking a fist while on a non-stop train at a person standing on the platform and doing the same to a person standing on the opposite bank of a fast-flowing and wide river where there is no bridge.
Merely looking for a person is not an assault: Arobieke [1988]Crim LR 314 (CA).
The threat must be one which can be carried out immediately, though "immediately" is read broadly.
Frightening a woman by looking into her bedsit at eleven at night causing her to fear violence was held to be immediate despite the fact that the victim could have escaped in the time it would have taken for the accused to get to her: Smith v Chief Superintendent, Woking Police Station (1983) 76 Cr App R 234 (DC).
It might also be doubted whether the accused intended to apply any force.
In Lewis [1970]Crim LR 647, the accused was guilty even though the victim, his wife, was on the other side of a locked door.
The Smith case also demonstrates that the prosecution need not show exactly what the victim was afraid of.
The requirement of immediate fear means that a threat to carry out violence in the future does not amount to an assault even though fear is present.
There is, however, an offence of threatening to kill (s.16, OAPA).
The threat must be an unlawful one.
Therefore, a threat in self-defence, preventing crime, furthering arrest or lawful discipline is not an assault.
Consent is dealt with below.
It is often said that an assault can be committed only by an act and that an omission is not sufficient.
However, in Fagan the court held the accused to be guilty when he inadvertently parked his car on a policeman's foot, realised what he had done, and refused to drive off.
His omission was converted into an act by the  means stated in Chapter 4.
Since grievous bodily harm can be committed by an omission it would be strange if assault and battery could not be.
It is thought that a deliberate refusal to put a victim's mind at rest when the accused has unwittingly frightened him is an assault.
It is uncertain whether words alone can amount to an assault.
In Meade & Belt (1823) 168 ER 1006 Holroyd J said that "no words or singing" constituted an assault (would Adam Ant's rendition of "Stand and Deliver, Your Money or Your Life" be an assault?), but there are dicta of Lord Goddard CJ to the contrary in Wilson [1955]1 All ER 744, where the accused was guilty of saying: "Get out the knives!" 
Civil law supports liability in those circumstances: Ansell v Thomas [1974]Crim LR 31.
There is also the policy argument that a threat spoken in the dark may be more frightening than one accompanied by actions in the light.
If a threat in the dark not amounting to a threat to kill within s.16, OAPA, is not an assault the result in relation to unlawful act or constructive manslaughter is this.
Where the accused threatens to kill the victim, who is frightened, suffers a heart attack and dies, he is guilty of manslaughter, the unlawful act being the threat to kill.
If, however, the accused threatens to beat the victim up, and he dies in the same way, the accused is not guilty of manslaughter because there is no unlawful act.
Moreover, surely a threat of immediate violence to a blind person should be an assault.
As stated above, words can negative what would otherwise be an assault.
In Tuberville v Savage, the accused laid his hand on his sword and said: "If it were not assize time, I would not take such language." 
The accused's words showed that he did not intend violence and the victim did not apprehend immediate personal violence.
The same principle was applied in Blake v Barnard (1840) 173 ER 485.
The accused said that he would blow the victim's brains out if he was not quiet.
It may be that Blake v Barnard is incorrect.
The threat was not as it was in Tuberville an extraneous condition (assize time), but was a restraint on the victim's freedom of behaviour: that is an assault.
One suggestion is that Blake v Barnard is badly reported and should not be followed.
Certainly in Light (1857)[1843–60]All ER Rep 934, the accused was guilty of an assault when he said: "Were it not for the bloody policeman outside, I would split your head open." 
Light is inconsistent with Tuberville v Savage.
The mens rea in assault is intention or recklessness, as stated by Lord Simon (dissenting) in DPP v Morgan [1976]AC 182, approved by Lord Elwyn-Jones C in DPP v Majewski [1977]AC 443.
The House of Lords in Savage, above, confirmed that recklessness is of the Cunningham variety.
DPP v K [1990]1 WLR 1067 applied Caldwell to assault occasioning actual bodily harm, but that decision was overruled in Spratt [1990]1 WLR 1118 (CA).
There is the troubling dictum of Lord Roskill in Seymour [1983]2 AC 493 that Caldwell applies to all offences, unless Parliament otherwise ordains, but that statement has not been followed in non-fatal offences.
Certainly in indecent assault Kimber [1983]1 WLR 1118 (CA) did not adopt the Caldwell view of recklessness.
In Williams (1983)[1987]3 All ER 411, Lord Lane CJ held that"the mental element necessary to constitute guilt is the intent to apply unlawful force to the victim.
We do not believe that the mental element can be substantiated by simply showing an intent to apply force and no more."
THREAT TO KILL
Section 16 of the OAPA as amended creates the offence of threatening to kill.
It covers a threat to kill in the future.
Since assault requires an apprehension of immediate violence, a threat to injure in the future is not a criminal offence.
This lacuna in the law will be filled if the draft Criminal Code is enacted (see below).
BATTERY
The old definition of battery was that used in Cole v Turner (1705) 87 ER 907 "the least touching of someone in anger" .
Three more recent definitions are:(a) "The actual intended use of unlawful force to another person without his consent" (since then recklessness has been added to the mens rea) per Jones LJ in Fagan v MPC, above.
The court in A-G's Ref.
(No. 6 of 1980)[1981]1 QB 715 added "or any other lawful excuse" to that definition.
 "Excuse" covers exceptions such as properly conducted games, lawful chastisement, reasonable surgery and the like.
(It is uncertain what properly conducted games are: what about a wall of death?)(b) The actual infliction of unlawful force on another person": Robert Goff J in Collins v Wilcock, above.
(c) Apparently the most authoritative: "Any intentional touching without the consent of that person and without lawful excuse.
It need not necessarily be hostile or rude or aggressive, as some of the cases seem to indicate", per Lord Lane CJ in Faulkner v Talbot [1981]1 WLR 1528, 1536, which was approved by Lord Ackner in Court [1989]AC 28, 41–2.
Again, the mental element of recklessness should be added.
(In fact, as Lord Goff, dissenting, said in Court, Faulkner v Talbot is a case on indecent assault, in which in most cases the sole mental element will be intention: did the accused intend to assault in indecent circumstances?)
There is some debate whether hostility is a requirement (see Chapter 18).
Both Faulkner v Talbot and Collins v Wilcock do not require hostility.
There is no need for an assault.
One may batter an unconscious, sleeping or unsuspecting victim.
Examples include: touching, throwing a stone which hits someone, tripping up, kicking, and throwing beer over the victim (Savage (1990) 91 Cr App R 317 (CA), which the Lords approved).
Though the law is not entirely clear, it seems that the violence need not be  directly inflicted.
In Martin (1881) 8 QBD 54 the accused called "fire" in a theatre, causing the victims to be crushed against an iron bar into which they dashed.
There are problems with this case discussed later, but it is thought that the accused would still be guilty nowadays.
The Court of Appeal in Spratt did not hold DPP v K to be incorrect on the point that the injury was indirectly caused (for the facts see later).
The force need not be applied on the victim's body: it can be on the clothes he is wearing: Day (1845) 173 ER 1042.
In Fagan (see above and Chapter 4), it was held to be a battery when the accused inadvertently applied force and wrongfully decided not to stop using it.
If there is no violence, there is no battery.
In Walkden (1845) 1 Cox CC 282, the accused put "Spanish fly" , an aphrodisiac, into the beer at a wedding reception.
Since no force was applied, there was no battery.
(The offence would be one of administering a noxious thing with intent to injure or annoy contrary to s.24 of the OAPA.)
Consent is a defence to battery.
It may be implied from the circumstances.
One can tap a person to gain attention without being charged with battery: Rawlings v Till (1837) 150 ER 1042.
A policeman who taps a suspect on the shoulder does not commit battery: Donnelly v Jackman [1970]1 WLR 562.
However, it was said in Rawlings v Till that physical restraint was a battery.
Accordingly, if the accused takes hold of the victim's arm to restrain him there is a battery: Collins v Wilcock.
It is not entirely clear whether touching is a battery, where the victim has indicated that he does not wish to be touched.
There are other exceptions besides consent: lawful chastisement of a child, force used to effect an arrest, reasonable force in self-defence or to prevent crime.
The mens rea is intention or recklessness: Venna [1976]QB 421.
Though that case was decided before Caldwell (and Lord Diplock mentioned it in Caldwell without disapproving of it), it was thought that in line with the other non-fatal offences it is the Cunningham form which governs.
The Lords in Savage adopted the Cunningham approach.
REFORM OF ASSAULT AND BATTERY
By cl. 75 of the draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989,
A person is guilty of assault if he intentionally or recklessly —(a) applies force to or causes an impact on the body of another; or (b) causes another to believe that any such force or impact is imminent, without the consent of the other or, where the act is likely or intended to cause personal harm, with or without consent.
CONSENT
The law does not prohibit all force on the person, but only the unlawful use of force.
The law is based on reasonableness, yet it may well not reflect public opinion.
Swift J in Donovan [1934]2 KB 498 (CCA) said that with some exceptions: "It is an unlawful act to beat another person with such a degree of force that the infliction of bodily harm is a probable consequence and when such an act is proved, consent is immaterial." 
Those exceptions are difficult to state.
Boxing is permissible, even though the aim is to knock someone out, while spanking, at issue in Donovan, is unlawful.
The result in Donovan will be preserved by cl. 75 of the draft Criminal Code, quoted above.
The relevance of consent is best dealt with by answering three questions:(a) What is the meaning of full or true consent?(b) Are there limitations on the classes of person who may give consent?(c) Are there any forms of behaviour to which the law provides that consent cannot be given?
What is the meaning of true or full consent?
Consent may be express but is usually implied.
As we have seen in battery, consent may arise through custom.
Consent to being tapped on the shoulder in the street, consent to jostling in a rugby match or on the football terraces, are implied.
In all cases consent goes up to a certain point only.
For example, if one consents to sexual intercourse, one does not consent to being strangled: Sharmpal Singh [1962]AC 188 (PC).
Submission is not consent, nor is consent obtained when the victim is drugged or drunk.
Fraud does not always negative consent.
Only where there is deception as to the nature of the act or as to the identity of the accused will there be no consent.
Accordingly, in Clarence (1888) 22 QBD 23, a woman's agreement to sexual intercourse with her husband meant that, surprising as it is to modern ears, he was not guilty of inflicting grievous bodily harm when he infected her with VD.
She had consented to intercourse with him and would not have done so had she known of the disease, yet her consent was not vitiated by his omission to tell her of his bodily condition.
(It may be inquired whether, if the wife knew of the VD, the law permitted the husband to infect her with it on the grounds that she consented to his occasioning actual bodily harm to her.
It is thought that the husband would be guilty under s.47 and consent would not be a defence, the argument being that there is no social benefit in the spread of VD.)
Similar is Bolduc & Bird (1967) 63 DLR (2d) 82, a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada.
A doctor brought a friend to a vaginal examination.
It was held that there was no indecent assault.
The patient was mistaken as to the identity of the friend, who was introduced as a trainee doctor, but not as to the nature of the examination.
The case of Harms [1944]2 DLR 61 was distinguished.
In that case the accused falsely represented sexual intercourse as a medical examination.
There are English authorities similar to Harms.
The dissent in Bolduc & Bird repays study: if consent is to a doctor and student it is not to a doctor and friend.
For more on consent in the context of rape, see Chapter 18.
Are there limitations on the classes of persons who can give consent?
Persons who do not understand the nature of the act cannot give consent.
An example is the case of Burrell v Harmer [1967]Crim LR 169: boys of 12 and 13 could not consent to being tattooed.
The Tattooing of Minors Act 1969 prohibits the tattooing of persons under 18.
Mentally abnormal people cannot consent, though the accused has a defence to indecent assault if he did not know and had no reason to believe that his victim was defective: see ss.14(4) and 15(4) of the Sexual Offences Act 1956.
Boys and girls cannot consent to indecent assault, no matter how willing they are: McCormack [1969]2 QB 442.
A person under 16 cannot consent to surgery but the parent can on his behalf.
Are there any forms of behaviour to which the law provides that consent is no defence?
The law does not allow even an adult to do with his body as he wishes.
It was said in McShane (1977) 66 Cr App R 97 (CA) that no consent can render a dangerous act innocent, but that statement is too broad.
A person can consent to dangerous activities such as sport and surgery.
There are some offences to which no matter how full the consent is, there is no defence.
(a) Murder and serious non-fatal offences (except for games, chastisement, etc): a person cannot consent to being killed, nor can one consent to grievous bodily harm.
A prize-fight is a battery: Coney (1882) 8 QBD 534.
In Leach [1969], The Times, 13 January, a man had himself crucified (though not to death).
He could not consent to the wounds.
In Donovan a girl could not consent to the infliction of six or seven weals on her bottom.
It may be that the case is out of line with modern mores.
Certainly the judges adopted a paternalistic attitude towards the victim, a 17-year-old girl.
It might be thought that she understood what she was doing, and there was no permanent harm (cf. boxing where there may be).
If Donovan is correct a bite during love-making would appear to be actual bodily harm.
In Jones (1986) 83 Cr App R 375, the Court of Appeal held that victims could consent to horseplay, which resulted in a ruptured spleen and a broken arm, though the position would be different if the accused intended to cause harm.
It may be wondered whether the risk of harm outweighed the public policy behind horseplay — boys will be boys.
(b) It used to be thought that sterilisation (perhaps only of a man) without just cause was unlawful as being contrary to the public interest.
Denning LJ said so in the civil case of Bravery v Bravery [1954]3 All ER 59.
This possible restraint seems to have disappeared.
Certainly one can consent to wounds in the course of surgery, at least it is thought to be so if there is a sound benefit, e.g. sex change.
It is thought that therapeutic operations provide such a social benefit by the psychological benefit.
Presumably maiming oneself to avoid conscription in wartime remains a crime.
(c) Heterosexual buggery: Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.12(1).
(d) Incest.
(e) Administration of drugs except for medical purposes: Cato [1976]1 WLR 110.
The law on the issue of consent continues to change because it is based on public policy.
The Court of Appeal in A-G's Reference (No. 6 of 1980), above, said: "It is not in the public interest that people should try to cause or should cause each other actual bodily harm for no good reason.
Minor struggles are another matter.
So…it is immaterial whether the act occurs in private or in public."
The court listed activities where consent was a defence, especially properly conducted sports, lawful chastisement and surgery.
The court in Jones added horseplay.
The court in the Reference did not lay down a closed list: the public interest was the governing consideration.
The burden of proof of lack of consent lies on the prosecution: Donovan, A-G's Reference (No. 6 of 1980).
A mistaken belief in consent is a defence, whether or not the belief was reasonably held: Jones, applying Kimber and Williams, both above.
See also under mistake.
ASSAULT OCCASIONING ACTUAL BODILY HARM
The OAPA 1861 consolidated several statutes dealing with non-fatal offences.
The draftsman did not make the crimes formerly contained in those statutes consistent or create a hierarchy of offences.
It is very much of a hotchpotch.
Section 47 creates the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
There is no definition of "actual bodily harm" — surely all harm is actual!
The term "assault" covers both assault and battery.
According to Saunders [1985]Crim LR 130 (CA) grievous bodily harm means "serious harm" .
Actual bodily harm must mean something less than serious harm.
In Miller [1954]2 QB 282, Lynskey J said that the term "includes any hurt or injury calculated [likely]to interfere with the health or comfort" of the victim.
 "Actual" seems to mean "more than trivial" though Taylor v Granville [1978]Crim LR 482 said that it covered any harm, however slight.
It covers bruises, grazes, black eyes and burns.
In Smith [1985]LSG Rep 198, four or five bruises caused by a belt were sufficient.
In Jones [1981]Crim LR 119, minor abrasions and a bruise were held to be actual bodily harm, though the case was thought to be on the margins.
Pain caused by a kick to the stomach with tenderness afterwards, but leaving no visible injury, was sufficient: Reigate JJ ex p Counsell (1983) 148 JPR 193.
In Miller, an injury to the state of a person's mind was enough (cf. Dawson (1985) 81 Cr App R 170 on manslaughter: shock is not harm unless physical injury is caused).
Criticism of s.47 comes from academics.
Gl.
Williams wrote (1990) 140 NLJ 1227: What the Victorian draftsman intended by "actual" is anyone's guess.
He was evidently searching, unsuccessfully, for something between "trivial" and "serious" .
The courts have  not helped him by sensible pronouncements.
They might have said that harm is not "actual" unless it is something beyond the trivial, for which a charge of common assault is adequate; but they have not imposed even this degree of control.
The question is held to be one for the unrestricted discretion of the jury or magistrates who are allowed to find that even a bruise is enough.
In the scale of harms, a bruise is trivial.
The offence under s.47 is relatively serious, carrying a possible sentence of five years.
If only a bruise is caused, s.47 is an overcharge.
The penalty for s.18 is life imprisonment, substantially more than that for s.20, yet the harm may be the same: indeed, it could be less serious.
No mental element is expressly stated in s.47.
In Roberts (1971) 56 Cr App R 95 (CA), an important case which was approved by the Lords in Savage, the court seems to have held that the mens rea is the same as for common law assault.
After Venna, above, that means that the accused is guilty if he intended to create or is reckless as to creating fear or as to touching and the outcome is actual bodily harm.
On this approach the accused need not intend or be reckless as to actual bodily harm.
On the facts of Roberts a person who assaults with the result that the victim tries to escape and suffers actual bodily harm is guilty of this offence, even though the accused did not foresee actual bodily harm.
This issue is dealt with below.
The case illustrates that an indirect cause is sufficient.
The victim's efforts to escape will not break the chain of causation (see Chapter 2), unless they were "daft" , a stronger term than unreasonable.
In Roberts jumping out of a car going at between 20 and 40 m.p.h. was not "daft" , but jumping out at 70 m.p.h. might be.
Which form of recklessness applies in s.47?
In DPP v K, above, the accused, a 15-year-old schoolboy, was using sulphuric acid in an experiment at school.
Some splashed onto his hand.
He washed it off in the lavatory.
Unknown to the teacher he had taken with him a test tube of the acid to test its reaction with lavatory paper.
While in the lavatory he heard footsteps, panicked and poured the acid into a dryer, intending to come back later to wash it out.
Unfortunately another pupil came in, turned on the dryer and the acid splashed over his face, causing a scar.
The Divisional Court directed the Magistrates to convict.
It held that s.47 could be committed indirectly: "A defendant who pours a dangerous substance into a machine just as truly assaults the next user of the machine as if he himself switched the machine on." 
Controversially the court held that Caldwell [1982]AC 341 (HL) applied to the mental element in s.47.
Cunningham [1957]2 QB 396 was not cited.
Counsel argued that Caldwell governed.
The defence argument was solely that Caldwell could be distinguished on the grounds that in DPP v K there was a gap between the accused's act and the injury, an argument which the court rejected.
The main criticism of DPP v K was in the words of Bennett and Hogan, All ER Rev 1990, 69, that it brought the "thoughtlessly stupid" into the criminal law.
The Court of Appeal in Spratt, above, overruled DPP v K.
The accused fired shots from an air pistol from his flat.
Two pellets hit a seven-year-old girl playing outside.
He had not realised that there were people in the area, i.e. he gave no thought to the risk.
The Court of Appeal quashed his conviction.
McCowan LJ held that: The history of the interpretation of the 1861 Act shows that, whether or not the word "maliciously" appears in the section in question, the Courts have consistently held that the mens rea of every type of offence against the person covers both actual intent and recklessness, in the sense of taking the risk of harm ensuing with foresight that it might happen.
In terms of the dictum in Lord Roskill's speech in Seymour [1983]2 AC 493, Parliament had otherwise ordained with regard to recklessness in s.47 — after Spratt it seems that Parliament can otherwise ordain without expressing such a wish.
The court said that it was not intended in Seymour to cast doubt on Venna which had used the Cunningham definition (but was pre-Caldwell), and Venna was approved in DPP v Majewski [1977]AC 443 and seemingly by Lord Diplock himself in Caldwell.
Savage (HL) confirms that Cunningham applies.
Caldwell does not apply because "maliciously" is a term of art with "a special restricted meaning" .
Does the accused have to intend to cause or be reckless as to causing actual bodily harm or is intention to recklessness as to battery sufficient?
In Spratt, though interpretations vary, the Court of Appeal seems to have required intentionally or recklessly occasioning actual bodily harm.
In Savage (1990) 91 Cr App R 317, the same court (but a different division) on the same day said that intentionally or recklessly causing a battery was sufficient, as long as actual bodily harm occurred.
In Savage the accused threw beer on the victim in a pub.
She let go of the glass (whether deliberately or not is unknown) and the victim was cut by broken glass.
She was held guilty under s.47.
The battery was the consequence of her deliberate throwing of the beer as a result of which the victim was injured.
There was no need to show that she foresaw the possibility of some harm.
The stress was on causation, not recklessness: did the accused commit the assault which caused the actual bodily harm?
The result is in line with Roberts, and is consistent with the decision if not the reasoning in Spratt, where the court seems to have been discussing the nature of recklessness, not whether there had to be mens rea as to the occasioning of actual bodily harm.
Since Roberts was not mentioned in Spratt or in the next case, Parmenter [1991]2 WLR 408, those cases are per incuriam.
The Lords in Savage approved Roberts.
In Parmenter, the Court of Appeal chose Spratt in preference to Savage.
The court thought that the law was "impenetrable" and called for the Lords to review it.
The Lords in Savage approved the Savage (CA) approach.
Lord Ackner said in Savage: The Court of Appeal in Parmenter was wrong in preferring the decision in Spratt.
The decision in Roberts was correct.
The verdict of assault occasioning actual bodily harm upon proof of an assault together with proof of the fact that actual bodily harm was occasioned by the assault.
The prosecution are not obliged to prove that the defendant  intended to cause some actual bodily harm or was reckless as to whether such harm would be caused.
The law was made complex partly by Mowatt [1968]1 QB 421.
A person is guilty under s.20 of the OAPA (see later) when he does not foresee grievous bodily harm but does foresee some harm.
According to Parmenter and Savage (HL) this definition applies to both ss.20 and 47.
Mustill LJ said in Parmenter that, although the two offences are seen as different by defendants and lawyers, the mens rea is the same: If the Cunningham subjective test combined with the low level of intent prescribed by Mowatt is applied to s.47 in the same way as s.20, the moral overtones of the two offences become indistinguishable, and the differences between the two depend upon variations between the levels of physical injury which may often be the result of chance.
Both sections have the same maximum punishment, five years' imprisonment, yet s.20, which deals with maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, is seen as the more serious defence, yet that gravity may now depend on chance.
Mustill LJ continued: The authorities can no longer live together and…the reason lies in a collision between two ideas, logically and morally sustainable in themselves, but mutually inconsistent, about whether the unforeseen consequences of a wrongful act should be punished according to the intent [Cunningham]or the consequences [Mowatt].
In Nash [1991]Crim LR 768 (CA), the court reaffirmed the principle that Caldwell was inapplicable to s.47.
If the accused is charged with s.47, he cannot be convicted of common assault: Mearns (1990) 91 Cr App R 312 (CA) and Savage (HL).
Assault and battery are summary offences (Criminal Justice Act 1988, s.39).
A separate count for common assault must be added.
The position was different before the statute.
In all but exceptional cases, wounding will involve a battery.
Therefore on a charge of wounding (s.20, OAPA) one can convict of s.47 (Savage (CA)).
The law is unsatisfactory.
WOUNDING AND GRIEVOUS BODILY HARM
Section 18 of the OAPA as amended reads:[w]hosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously by any means whatsoever wound or cause any grievous bodily harm to any person…with intent…to do some grievous bodily harm to any person or with intent to resist or prevent the lawful apprehension or detainer of any person shall be guilty…
Section 20 reads in part:[w]hosover shall unlawfully and maliciously wound or inflict any grievous bodily harm upon any person, either with or without any weapon or instrument shall be guilty…
Section 18 is the most serious non-fatal offence against the person, and differs from s.20 in the need for the ulterior intent ( "with intent to" ) and in the different verbs for committing the grievous bodily harm (hereinafter GBH): "cause" in s.18, "inflict" in s.20.
It should be noted that in s.18 the ulterior intent does not relate to wounding: the offence is not satisfied by wounding (or causing GBH) with intent to wound.
Such facts fall within s.20 (if the GBH was inflicted).
The words in s.20 "either with or without any weapon" are pleonastic.
Section 20 speaks of "lawful" apprehension or detention.
If the arrest is wrongful, the accused is not guilty.
If the arrest is lawful but the accused believes it to be unlawful, he is guilty because he has made a mistake of law: Bentley (1850) 4 Cox CC 406.
It might, however, be argued to the contrary that the mistake is really one as to civil law, which does afford a defence, or that if the mistake is a factual one (e.g. was he a constable?) he should also not be convicted.
(See Chapter 5 for discussion of mistake.)
One result of the wording of s.18 should be noted.
It is an offence to cause GBH with intent to prevent lawful apprehension.
If the accused hits a constable while resisting arrest and the constable bangs his head on a kerbstone causing serious injury, he is guilty of GBH with intent.
He need not intend GBH.
The term "unlawfully" in both sections exonerates a person who acts in self-defence or where there is consent or lawful chastisement.
It is hard to see how "unlawfully" can operate with regard to some forms of s.18.
One difference should be noted.
Section 20 refers to "upon any other person" ; s.18 says "to any person" .
Section 18 could be interpreted as holding it to be illegal to wound or cause grievous bodily harm to the accused himself, provided the ulterior intent is satisfied.
Maiming oneself to avoid conscription in wartime, the example used above in relation to consent, would therefore be an offence contrary to s.18, but not to s.20.
Actus reus
A wound is a breach in the whole skin.
It was so held in, among other cases, JCC (A Minor) v Eisenhower [1984]QB 331 (DC), where a ruptured blood vessel was held not to be a wound.
A bruise is not a wound.
It is thought that a wound requires an assault: Taylor (1869) LR 1 CCR 194, except perhaps in "extraordinary" circumstances: Savage (CA), above, which the Lords approved.
In the context of murder the House of Lords held in DPP v Smith [1961]AC 290 that GBH meant "really serious bodily harm" .
This statement was applied to these offences in Metharam [1961]3 All ER 200.
However, the Court of Appeal in Saunders, above, held that "really" did not add anything to "serious" .
That is, there were not three types of harm "really serious" , "serious" and "non-serious" , but just two "serious" and "non-serious" .
GBH covers situations where the skin is not broken as in Wood (1830) 172 ER 749, where a collar bone was broken.
Conversely a wound is not  necessarily GBH.
An example is a pinprick.
Sometimes the same facts are both GBH and wounding such as when the accused chops off the victim's arm.
It should be noted that a wound need not be a serious wound, yet the harm must be serious.
The House of Lords in Wilson [1984]AC 242 overturned earlier authorities which held that "inflict" in s.20 required an assault.
An example, suggested in Savage by Lord Ackner, is inflicting GBH by creating panic.
(Usually, however, there is a battery.)
 "Cause" in s.18 also does not require an assault: Austin (1973) 58 Cr App R 163.
The question remains whether "cause" and "inflict" cover different ground.
Perhaps "cause" covers poisoning, whereas "inflict" does not.
It has been suggested that "cause" applies to causing by omission where there is a duty to act, whereas "inflict" does not.
There is a problem arising from Wilson.
Lord Roskill apparently believed that "inflict" required the direct application of force to the victim.
On this approach, to take an old example, if one dug a pit for the victim to fall into, one would not be guilty under s.20 because one has not directly applied force to the victim.
One will have caused GBH within s.18, because "cause" does not require the direct application of force.
On the facts of Martin, above, the accused would be guilty of the more serious offence, s.18, but not guilty of the less serious offence, s.20.
The result is absurd.
It could have been avoided by having the same verb in ss.18 and 20 or by the Lords in Wilson deciding that "cause" and "inflict" covered the same ground.
The House took the point further: not just did "inflict" require direct application of force, but so did assault occasioning actual bodily harm and common assault.
Therefore, a person could be guilty of the most serious non-fatal assault but not of the lesser assault!
There are also problems with this definition of "inflict" in s.20 with regard to s.23 of the same Act, which creates the offence of administering a noxious thing"…so as thereby to inflict…any grievous bodily harm…
"
Administering poison requires neither a battery nor the application of force.
Therefore "inflict" in s.23 must be wider than "inflict" in s.20.
The OAPA is a mess but surely it is not such a mess.
Lord Roskill's remarks require reconsideration.
There seems to be little difference between the lack of a requirement of assault and the necessity for a direct application of force.
Mens rea
In both ss.18 and 20 the mental element is stated to be "maliciously" .
Section 18 requires proof of a further state of mind: "with intent to do some GBH" .
Coleridge CJ said in Martin that "maliciously" did not mean spitefully.
It normally means in a statute "intentionally or recklessly" .
Negligence is insufficient.
As we have seen (Chapter 3), Cunningham [1957]2 QB 396 held that on a charge of administering a noxious thing under s.23 of the OAPA recklessness was defined as: did the accused himself foresee the consequence?
Though there is a dictum to the contrary in Seymour, above, this definition still applies to ss18 and 20: W v Dolbey [1983]Crim LR 681 (CA), Lynch [1985]14 January, LEXIS (CA), Morrison (1989) 89 Cr App R 17, Rainbird [1989]Crim LR 505 (CA) and Farrell (1989) 89 Cr App R 376.
The Court of Appeal in Savage, above, expressly distinguished the meaning of recklessness in  manslaughter.
Though the Court of Appeal in Dume [1986]The Times, 16 October, refused to say whether W v Dolbey was correct, there is now the Lords' decision in Savage to the effect that it is.
Lord Diplock in Caldwell [1982]AC 341 did not overrule Cunningham but distinguished it.
He considered that "maliciously" was a term of art, whereas recklessness was an ordinary English word.
It seems therefore that Cunningham continues to apply to all statutory offences of "maliciously" .
The problem is that English law as a result protects property more than it does the person, as discussed in Chapter 3.
The following cases exemplify this area of law.
Lynch.
During the night the accused fired his air gun out of the window of his first-floor flat.
He was hoping to hit bottles he had placed on the roof of the garage opposite.
A person standing in the garage was hit.
The defendant contended that he thought that he was a good enough shot to hit only the bottles.
He had put them in a place where the risk would be minimal and he had not pumped the gun the maximum number of times.
It was held that the accused was aware of the probable consequences of firing the gun as he did.
Morrison.
The victim, a detective constable, tried to arrest the accused.
She grabbed his clothes.
The accused dived through a window.
The victim was brought into contact with the glass and serious lacerations were caused.
The accused was charged with one form of s.18, wounding with intent to resist arrest.
The court corrected the trial judge by holding that Cunningham applied.
It expressed regret that English law recognises two forms of recklessness.
Rainbird.
The accused, a school caretaker, fired an air gun at some boys who were trespassing.
He hit one of them.
The trial judge seems to have mixed up the Caldwell and Cunningham versions of recklessness.
The Court of Appeal quashed the conviction, declaring that the subjective definition was necessary.
Farrell.
The ratio is similar to Rainbird.
The victim and accused quarrelled.
The latter picked up a crossbow, intending to use it in self-defence.
He pulled the trigger, believing that the safety catch was on.
It was not.
The Court of Appeal quashed the conviction because the judge had directed the jury in Caldwell terms.
Though Diplock LJ said in Mowatt, above, that the accused was guilty when he should have foreseen harm, the foresight must be that of the accused, not of a reasonable person: Grimshaw [1984]Crim LR 108, Parmenter, above (CA) and Savage (HL).
In Parmenter the accused confessed to causing injuries to his three-month-old son but said that he did not realise that what he was doing would injure him.
Mustill LJ held that the accused himself must foresee some harm.
Prof. Smith's comment on Mowatt at [1990]Crim LR 711 is: "We need some system of stamping a judicial health warning across certain pages of the law reports which have an unending capacity to mislead." 
Diplock LJ's statement in Mowatt that the harm foreseen need not be GBH so long as he foresaw some physical harm, however minor, was approved in Sullivan [1981]Crim LR 46 (CA), followed in Jones, above, and approved again in Savage, above (HL), and Parmenter.
It is sufficient that the accused intends or is reckless as to causing some harm and GBH in fact results.
The result is sometimes known as "half mens rea" .
The accused is guilty even though he did not intend, nor was he reckless as to the full actus reus, GBH.
Whether the law should be this is a moot point.
An intention to frighten is not by itself sufficient mens rea for s.20: Sullivan, above.
Section 47 is, however, a possible charge.
In s.18 the prosecution must prove that the accused acted with intent to do some GBH or resist arrest or prevent apprehension or detainer.
In Belfon [1976]3 All ER 46, the Court of Appeal held that this mental element was not satisfied by recklessness.
In Bryson [1985]Crim LR 669 (CA), it was decided that the fact that harm was probable did not mean that the accused intended that harm.
Intention bears the same meaning as in murder: Bryson and Purcell (1986) Cr App R 45 (CA): see Chapter 2.
As with regard to murder the jury should not be directed as to the definition of intent except in exceptional situations.
In Belfon, a dictum of Lord Diplock in Hyam v DPP [1975]AC 55 that intent covered both desiring a consequence and knowing that a result was likely to happen was disapproved.
Section 18 in summary requires intention.
Foresight is insufficient.
The different forms of the ulterior intent do not sit happily together in s.18: causing GBH with intent to do GBH may be more serious than causing GBH with intent to resist arrest yet the crime and punishment are the same.
Because s.18 is expressed in terms of "cause GBH with intent to do GBH" , the Court of Appeal in Mowatt opined that the term "maliciously" was superfluous.
The thinking is that if one intends GBH, one must foresee GBH as a probable or possible outcome.
If, however, the indictment is based on GBH with intent to resist arrest, "maliciously" is not superfluous.
If the accused seriously harms an arresting officer, without "maliciously" he would be guilty if he foresaw any harm at all.
By retaining "maliciously" in the definition the accused is not guilty unless he foresaw GBH.
On this view the statement in Mowatt that "maliciously" means foresight of any harm, however slight (see below), applies only to s.20 and not to s.18.
It has to be admitted that the law is in a mess.
A person found not guilty under s.20 may be convicted under s.47: Wilson, approved by the House of Lords in Savage.
POSSESSING ANYTHING WITH INTENT TO COMMIT AN OFFENCE UNDER THE OAPA
Section 64 of the OAPA penalises any person who has "in his possession…any…thing, with intent thereof" to commit an offence under the Act.
The Law Commission's draft Criminal Code, Law Com.
No. 177, 1989, does not include this crime.
All remaining portions of the 1861 Act would be included in the Code.
Therefore, s.64 would no longer serve a useful purpose.
It does nevertheless seem a useful offence to catch persons who have not reached the stage of an attempt.
An  alternative view is that s.64 is restricted to explosives because it falls within the part of the Act dealing with explosives.
On a literal reading, however, it is not so restricted.
REFORM OF ss.18, 20 AND 47
Clarkson and Keating (1986) 50 JCrL 405, 415, wrote: Each of the non-fatal offences against the person is, to varying degrees, confused and uncertain…
[I]n relation to each other, they are incoherent and fail to represent a hierarchy of seriousness.
In its Fourteenth Report, Offences Against the Person, Cmnd 7844, the Criminal Law Revision Committee proposed replacing s.18 by "intentionally" causing serious injury, s.20 by recklessly causing serious injury, and s.47 by intentionally or recklessly causing serious injury.
The Code team adopted these proposals in the draft Code of 1985 (Law Com.
No. 147).
The 1989 version substitutes "personal harm" for "injury" (cll. 70–2).
By cl. 6 "personal harm means harm to body or mind and includes pain and unconsciousness" .
There is no definition of "serious" , which is left to the triers of fact.
No doubt there will be inconsistent decisions.
Wounding is not dealt with separately.
The crime will depend on whether the wound was serious harm or not.
Of the other offences adverted to in this chapter, the crime of threatening to kill is extended to threats to cause serious personal harm (cl. 65); administering a substance without consent (cl. 73) and assault to resist arrest (cl. 77) are redrafted.
The crime of assault with intent to rob, found in s.8 of the Theft Act 1968, is taken out of property offences and placed with offences against the person (cl. 78).
Intention and recklessness bear the same meaning throughout the draft Code.
(See Chapters 2 and 3.)
In a roundabout way the defence of consent is preserved by cll. 14(4) and 45(c).
The exception of consent is expressly mentioned in assault (cl. 75).
No list of when consent is a defence was provided in relation to cll. 70, 71, 72 and 75 because "it is impossible to provide a comprehensive and closed list" , a rather lame sentiment.