

European Monetary Union: The case for complete monetary integration — George Zis
Introduction
The European Community [EC]has embarked on a path inexorably leading to the eventual replacement of member countries' currencies with a single European currency.
The precise nature and length of the transition period to Europe's monetary unification have yet to be determined while agreement on the political and economic structures required for the Community's monetary union to be durable is unlikely to be reached before the mid-1990s.
Be that as it may, there now exists a political consensus in favour of the complete monetary integration of the Community.
Alternate forms of monetary union, involving less than complete integration and the retention of national currencies, have been rejected as incompatible with the objectives of the Single European Act.
A single European currency is a necessary condition for the creation of a single European market.
Is the objective of a European monetary union feasible?
What are the expected benefits from the introduction of a single European currency?
Are the costs of replacing EC member countries' currencies significant?
What are the policy implications for member states of a single European currency?
What are the conditions that must be satisfied if the European monetary union is to survive?
These are some of the questions which this chapter seeks to address.
First, a definition of monetary union will be presented.
Then, alternate forms of monetary union will be discussed.
The next section will be devoted to an outline of the background to the current debate on European monetary union.
This will be followed by an evaluation of the arguments for and against the replacement of EC member countries' currencies with a single European currency.
The policy and institutional implications of the current plans will then be considered.
Finally, some conclusions will be presented.
Monetary union: definition
A group of countries may be perceived to constitute a monetary union if they experience identical rates of interest and inflation.
That is, the definition of monetary union describes a set of monetary characteristics which implicitly involves the as if assumption that there exists a single currency throughout the union.
It follows, therefore, that a monetary union is  compatible with member countries retaining their national currencies provided the following conditions are satisfied:(a) there are no restrictions to the movement of capital across the union;(b) member countries' financial sectors are perfectly integrated.
Note that if national currencies are not replaced by a single union currency and the as if assumption is met, then intra-union exchange rates will be fixed even if they are not de jure fixed.
Monetary union: alternate types
Vaubel [1988]identifies a number of alternate sets of monetary arrangements which are in theory consistent with our definition of monetary union.
First, there is the case of currency union, the type of monetary union preferred by the EC, which involves member countries adopting a single currency.
A currency union cannot exist without perfect capital mobility across the union and a fully integrated financial sector.
It follows, therefore, that the creation of a currency union must be preceded by the removal of all impediments to the movement of capital across the member states and the construction of a common legal structure which will facilitate the complete integration of national financial sectors.
Further, in a currency union there can exist only one independent supplier of the union currency which will be responsible for the union's monetary and exchange rate policies.
Any other set of institutional arrangements which would allow member countries to retain a measure of monetary autonomy, however limited, would only serve to subvert the union's credibility and, therefore, its durability.
Second, an exchange rate union involves the irrevocable fixity of intra-union exchange rates and the free movement of capital across the union.
In contrast to a currency union, an exchange rate union does not require the establishment of a union central bank.
National central banks continue to be responsible for the supply of their respective currencies and their exchange rates.
It would appear, then, that in an exchange rate union member countries enjoy a higher degree of monetary autonomy than in a currency union.
However, the national monetary sovereignty identified with an exchange rate union is illusory rather than real.
The member country that chooses to exercise its monetary autonomy and pursue a monetary policy independently of its partner union members, sooner or later will be forced to effect an exchange rate change.
That is, membership of an exchange rate union is incompatible with the pursuit of an independent monetary policy.
It follows, therefore, that the constraint imposed on the conduct of national monetary policies by the irrevocable fixity of intra-union exchange rates implies that there is no real difference between a currency union and an exchange rate union in terms of the degree of monetary autonomy enjoyed by the union member countries.
On the other hand, these two types of monetary union are sharply different in one highly significant respect.
In a currency union, by definition, there are no intra-union  exchange rates.
Therefore, exchange rate uncertainty is confined to the exchange rates of the union currency against the currencies of the countries outside the union.
In contrast, in an exchange rate union there inevitably exists a degree of uncertainty, however limited, regarding intra-union exchange rates.
The concept of irrevocably fixed exchange rates, by its very nature, can never be fully credible.
Whatever the policies and commitments of a country's past and current governments may be, it is not possible to exclude the possibility that some future government will not alter the "irrevocably fixed" exchange rates of its currency, or impose restrictions on the movement of capital and, thus, secede from the exchange rate union.
Third, Vaubel [1988]defines a free intercirculation union as involving the free movement of member countries' currencies throughout the union.
Intra-union exchange rates need not be de jure fixed.
However if all union currencies are to survive in the long run, member countries cannot pursue monetary policies independently of each other.
The currency competition implied by this type of monetary union will result in the persistently deviant currencies being driven out of circulation.
As no government would risk the political cost of its currency disappearing, a free intercirculation union would tend to encourage convergent monetary policies among the member countries.
The inherent discipline of this type of monetary union could theoretically result in common rates of interest and inflation and, therefore, de facto fixed exchange rates.
Finally, the fourth type of monetary union discussed by Vaubel [1988]is the parallel currency union.
Member countries retain their respective currencies but there exists a parallel currency which circulates side by side with the national currencies.
This type of union resembles the free intercirculation union in terms of the currency competition associated with it.
In the case of the latter, a member country's currency competes with the currencies of all the other union member countries.
In a parallel currency union, a member country's currency competes with the parallel currency.
Similarly, a parallel currency union shares certain features with a currency union.
Both involve a common currency circulating throughout the union and both require the establishment of a union monetary authority with responsibility for issuing the union's currency.
As already stated the EC has decided in favour of a currency union.
British proposals for a free intercirculation union and a parallel currency union were firmly rejected by the other EC member countries.
Indeed, these proposals were perceived as a British attempt to delay, if not to subvert, the process towards the creation of a European monetary union.
But how was it that the EC opted for a currency union?
Why a currency union for Europe?
The turmoil in foreign exchange markets of the late 1960s was perceived by the EC member countries as placing in jeopardy the successes achieved in establishing a customs union and the common agricultural policy.
It was believed that fixity of exchange rates was necessary for the consolidation and development of these achievements.
Thus the EC adopted in 1970 the Werner Plan which envisaged the creation of a European monetary union through "the irrevocable fixing of parities and the total liberalisation of capital movement," by 1980.
The Werner Plan placed emphasis on the fixity of exchange rates and complete freedom of capital movements.
It did not consider in any detail the relative merits of a currency union.
The introduction of a single European currency was viewed as potentially having a "psychological effect" of some, but not decisive, usefulness.
The Werner Plan assumed that the IMF international monetary system would survive and, therefore, provide the background against which intra-EC exchange rates would irrevocably be fixed and intra-EC capital movements be  completely liberalised.
The collapse of the IMF system in March 1973 and the first oil price shock of 1973–74 resulted in the EC member countries abandoning the implementation of the Werner Plan.
The process of European integration entered a period of stagnation which lasted until the European Monetary System [EMS]came into being in March 1979.
Following the collapse of the IMF system, countries abstained from systematic interventions in foreign exchange markets in defence of particular parities.
The ensuing behaviour of exchange rates sharply contradicted the predictions of those who argued in favour of flexible exchange rates.
Exchange rate changes turned out to be large and unpredictable rather than small and predictable.
The post 1973 exchange rate changes, more often than not, did not offset inflation rate differentials, as was anticipated by advocates of exchange rate flexibility.
Indeed, on numerous occasions high inflation countries' currencies were revalued rather than devalued.
The outcome of this behaviour of nominal exchange rates was that real exchange rate changes, or changes in countries' competitiveness, were large and unpredictable.
An illustration of the economic damage that flexible exchange rates can inflict is provided by the experience of the UK during 1979–81.
The British rate of inflation was significantly higher than the inflation rates of its main competitors.
Yet sterling was revalued by nearly 25 per cent.
British goods became increasingly uncompetitive and the country's manufacturing sector suffered a severe contraction.
The experience of the 1970s, further, demonstrated that the principal argument in favour of flexible exchange rates was ill-founded.
It had been argued that exchange rate flexibility allows the individual country to determine its own monetary policy and, therefore, choose its preferred rate of inflation.
It was alleged that exchange rate changes would reflect money supply growth rate differentials and, consequently, exchange rate flexibility would insulate countries from external nominal shocks.
But countries attempting to control their inflation rates through the pursuit of independent monetary policies discovered that exchange flexibility hindered rather than facilitated their attempts to effect lasting reductions in inflation.
Disenchantment with exchange rate flexibility and the recognition that inflation cannot be controlled through uncoordinated monetary policies generated the political will in France and Germany to press for the formation of a regional monetary system.
With the agreement of the other EC countries, except the UK, the EMS came into existence in March 1979.
The creation of the system was interpreted by Bilson [1979]as: "…the first step back from the rugged individualism and national self-interest that lay behind the formal acceptance of flexible exchange rates at the Jamaica meetings of the International Monetary Fund in January 1976." 
The objective of the EMS was defined to be the creation of "a zone of monetary stability in Europe" through the "monetary cooperation" among the EC member countries.
The choice of this particular objective was not accidental.
It was preferred to the objective of monetary union because the failure of the Werner Plan had demonstrated the dangers inherent in setting ambitious goals.
Further, it is important to consider the concept of "monetary stability" .
By definition monetary stability has two dimensions: a price and an exchange rate dimension.
Second, stability does not imply fixity or constancy.
Stability, in this context, is measured by the predictability of inflation and exchange rates.
That is, the EMS was not envisaged as a system of fixed exchange rates.
Instead, its objective was to reduce exchange rate volatility and thus promote a greater degree of exchange rate predictability.
Simultaneously, it aimed at  the permanent reduction of inflation rates in the EC as the means of promoting price predictability.
It is an empirical fact that the higher the rate of inflation is, the more unpredictable it will be.
In brief, then, the EMS was set the twin objectives of reducing the volatility of intra-EC exchange rates and of effecting a permanent reduction in member countries' inflation rates.
The EMS has been successful in:(a) reducing exchange rate unpredictability.
Since the formation of the system there have been eleven exchange rate realignments, the last one implemented in January 1987;(b) inducing a reduction of, and an increasing degree of convergence among members countries' inflation rates;(c) generating, as a result of (a) and (b), a greater degree of real exchange rate predictability;(d) encouraging lower and more convergent national money supply growth rates;(e) reducing the variability of national inflation, money supply growth and interest rates.
But, perhaps, the most significant achievement of the EMS was to demonstrate the economic benefits that can be reaped through economic cooperation.
It is arguable that the success of the EMS provided a major stimulus in the formulation and subsequent ratification of the Single European Act.
The system provided a strong impetus to the process of European integration.
But with it came the recognition that the ability of the system to facilitate this process is limited.
There emerged a consensus that such are the limitations of the EMS that the system cannot provide the monetary framework required for the creation of the single European market.
Thus the Single European Act commits the signatory countries to the objective of monetary union.
In the spring of 1989 the Delors Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community was published.
It recommends a three-stage process for the formation of monetary union.
Though the Report could be interpreted as advocating an exchange rate union, it is now accepted that it recommends a currency union.
The EC has adopted the Report's proposals that member countries' currencies be replaced by a single European currency and that a European Central Bank, with responsibility for the Community's monetary and exchange rate policies, be established.
The Delors Report refrains from making the case for monetary union.
What are, then, the benefits and costs of monetary union?
The next section addresses this question by discussing the relative merits of a currency union over an exchange rate union.
The case for a European currency union
Gros [1989]observes that while a currency union involves perfect monetary integration among the member countries, this is not necessarily the case with an exchange rate union.
He draws attention to the experience of Germany and the Netherlands.
The latter has fixed the exchange rate of its currency against the German mark since 1983 and has systematically adjusted its monetary policy to policy changes in Germany.
There are no restrictions to capital movements between the two countries while there exists a high degree of integration of the real sectors of their economies.
It could be argued, therefore, that the conditions for an exchange rate union  between Germany and the Netherlands are satisfied and, consequently, should observe the de facto monetary union of the two countries.
However, this is not the case.
Dutch interest rates are persistently higher than Germany's.
Fixity of exchange rates and complete freedom of capital movements between the two countries have not resulted in the guilder and the mark becoming perfect substitutes.
Exchange rate uncertainty persists and is reflected in the observed interest rate differential.
It follows, then, that in an exchange rate union, in contrast to a currency union, monetary integration may not be complete and the conditions for the creation of monetary union may not be satisfied because of the persistence of uncertainty regarding intra-union exchange rates.
This uncertainty, by definition, does not exist in a currency union.
The creation of a currency union, by eliminating exchange rate uncertainty, may be expected to result in a more efficient allocation of resources in the union in a variety of ways.
First, the elimination of exchange rate uncertainty will enhance the efficiency of the price mechanism as a resource allocator.
Volatile and unpredictable exchange rates result in difficulties in interpreting the market's signals.
Economic agents cannot be certain whether observed changes in relative prices are ephemeral or permanent.
Therefore, they are slow to respond to market changes as reflected by movements in relative prices.
Resources are misallocated and unemployment is higher than it would otherwise be.
A currency union is likely to lead to a reduction in member countries' natural rate of unemployment.
Second, the elimination of exchange rate uncertainty will stimulate the manufacturing sectors of member countries.
Unpredictable and volatile exchange rates are an incentive for resources to be shifted towards the non-traded goods sector which is not exposed to international competition and is largely unaffected by sizeable and unanticipated exchange rate changes.
The creation of a currency union by encouraging a shift of resources back to the manufacturing sectors is likely to result in an increase of the average productivity growth rate of member countries and, again, in a decline of their respective natural rates of unemployment.
Third, the elimination of exchange rate uncertainty will stimulate competitive forces in the union.
The cost of exchange rate risk management does not vary significantly with firm size.
Exchange rate uncertainty places small and medium-sized firms at a special disadvantage.
The creation of a currency union removes this disadvantage.
Fourth, the elimination of exchange rate uncertainty is likely to yield benefits in terms of higher growth rates of intra-union trade and investment.
The conclusion that a currency union is superior to an exchange rate union does not, however, rest only on the relative merits of the two forms of monetary union in terms of exchange rate uncertainty.
In an exchange rate union, the existence of national currencies necessarily implies that economic agents have to bear exchange rate related costs with respect to intra-union transactions.
In a currency union these transactions costs are eliminated.
Further, in a currency union no government of a member country can manipulate the money supply growth rate for electoral purposes.
As already stated, a necessary feature of a currency union is the existence of a union monetary authority responsible for the union's monetary policy.
In contrast, in an exchange rate union member countries' governments retain responsibility for the supply growth rate of their respective currencies and are, therefore, able to manipulate their monetary policy in the short run in pursuit of popularity gains with the electorate.
But such manipulation of the money supply growth rate is a source of inflationary  pressures.
A currency union by eliminating the political business cycle can be said to possess anti-inflation properties which are not necessarily present in an exchange rate union.
The above considerations suggest that the gains in resource allocation efficiency that would ensure the replacement of EC member countries' currencies with a single European currency exceed those which could be expected to follow the "irrevocable" fixing of intra-EC exchange rates.
The Delors recommendation in favour of the creation of a European currency union is consistent with the objectives of the Single European Act.
The 1992 programme aims at the improvement of resource allocation in the Community through the removal of barriers to the movement of goods, services, capital and labour.
The ultimate goal is the complete integration of the Community and the creation of a single European market.
Such an objective would be ill-founded if the process of integration did not aim also at the Community's complete monetary integration which can only be achieved through the establishment of a European currency union.
As neither an exchange rate union, nor an intercirculation union, nor a parallel currency union would necessarily lead to the Community's complete monetary integration, these forms of monetary union are inconsistent with the objectives of the Single European Act.
Be that as it may, what are the problems that need to be solved for a European currency union to be created?
The "costs" of a European currency union
Opponents of the creation of a European currency union, to be found mainly in the UK, have directed a variety of criticisms, not always of an economic nature, against the EC decision to proceed with the implementation of the principal proposals of the Delors Plan.
Some have concentrated on emphasising the implications of member countries no longer being able to employ monetary and exchange rate policies in pursuit of domestic economic objectives.
Even the most ardent advocates of exchange rate flexibility no longer maintain that it is feasible for a country to pursue independent policy objectives in isolation from the rest of the world.
The UK experience since 1979 does not provide convincing evidence in support of the thesis that monetary policies determined at the national level and with disregard for policies in the country's main economic partners can yield significant benefits.
Indeed, the UK experiment with the naive version of Friedmanite monetarism casts serious doubts on whether in fact a country can control its money supply growth rate, even under flexible exchange rates.
The UK government of the 1980s was less than successful in meeting its monetary targets.
Its failure was such that figures for the monetary variable to be controlled, £M3, are no longer published.
It may be argued, however, that the lack of success experienced by the UK in the 1980s with its attempts to control the money supply growth rate was due to special factors and should not be employed against the search for ways of formulating an effective monetary policy at the national level.
Whatever the merits of this line of reasoning, it ignores a significant development in economic agents' behaviour.
The internationalisation of the financial and money markets and the technological revolution in telecommunications have resulted in economic agents increasingly holding diversified currency portfolios.
The implication of this trend is that even if a country could control the money supply growth rate it would not be able to control the domestic long run inflation rate.
Only international monetary policies can ensure the control of inflation.
In brief, then, EC countries currently enjoy only a limited degree of monetary autonomy and this applies only to the very short run.
The benefits of this are  dubious, specially as it is often used for electoral purposes with destabilising inflationary effects for the domestic economy.
Therefore, the cost of the European currency union, in terms of loss of monetary autonomy by the member countries, is, at best, negligible.
The second set of criticisms against the creation of a European currency union draws attention to the circumstances when an exchange rate change is the appropriate policy response.
Accordingly, it is maintained that the loss of exchange rate policy involves a significant cost for EC member countries.
For a high inflation country, the ability occasionally to devalue its currency is important and its exercise can yield benefits.
However, the relevance of this observation when assessing the case for a European currency union is less than obvious.
In such a union, there will exist a single union inflation rate, common to all member countries.
There will exist no inflation rate differentials which could justify exchange rate changes, if they were available.
Similarly, the case for exchange rate changes in response to inflation rate differentials during the transition period to the establishment of the European currency union is less than convincing.
As already noted, a principal objective of the EMS was to induce a reduction in member countries' inflation rates.
The system has achieved this objective and in the process has established its anti-inflation credentials.
Its success is partly explained by the fact that the intra-EMS exchange rate realignments that have been effected were deliberately confined to magnitudes which did not fully offset inflation rate differentials.
Thus, high inflation member countries were penalised and the EMS acquired the credibility which ensured its survival.
If now the exchange rate policy instrument were to be made available for member countries to use more frequently and liberally, the anti-inflation properties of the EMS would be undermined and the gains achieved by member countries in the control of inflation would be dissipated.
Theory suggests that an exchange rate change may be the appropriate response to a country specific shock.
Again, though the validity of this proposition is beyond dispute, its relevance to the debate on the desirability or otherwise of the European currency union is less than obvious.
Such is the degree of integration among the EC member economies that it is difficult to envisage a country specific shock.
Exchange rate changes have been at times suggested as a justifiable response to productivity growth rate differentials.
However, there is no empirical evidence to suggest that exchange rate changes have a systematic or durable impact on productivity growth rates.
Devaluation has often been perceived as an appropriate measure for countries running high and persistent balance of payments current account deficits.
In the case of the EC member countries during the transition period to monetary union, exchange rate changes as a means of correcting current account deficits would not appear to be a desirable response.
For such changes to be successful, they would need to be so large that they would undermine price stability in the Community.
Note, however, that with the establishment of the European currency union, no member country will have a balance of payments problem.
An incipient current account deficit which persists will manifest itself as a regional problem.
Thus member countries may gradually become depressed areas of the Community.
The Delors Committee recognised this potential threat to the cohesion of the union and, accordingly, urged member countries to develop well defined regional policies, with sufficient funds made available to prevent the development of sharp regional disparities.
It may be argued, therefore, that the loss of exchange rate changes as a policy instrument does not involve a cost sufficiently significant as to constitute a convincing argument against  the creation of the European currency union.
Indeed, this would appear to be the judgement of the EC member countries.
The last intra-EMS exchange rate realignment was implemented in January 1987.
That there has been no realignment since then, suggests that the member countries themselves no longer regard exchange rate policy as an effective policy instrument.
Some critics of the Delors Plan have maintained that while the creation of a European currency union may reap net benefits for a number of EC member countries, for others membership of such a union will be positively harmful, at least for the foreseeable future.
They draw attention to the reliance of governments in countries such as Greece, Spain, Italy and Portugal on the inflation tax for a significant component of their revenues.
These countries' fiscal systems are so inefficient, it is argued, that their governments have little option but to actively employ the inflation tax.
For them high inflation is desirable.
The replacement of national currencies with a single European currency would deprive these countries' respective monetary authorities of the right to issue money and with it the revenues which currently accrue to their governments through monetary creation while they would not be able to offset this loss through the use of other taxes.
Therefore, it is suggested, membership of the European currency union and reducing inflation in preparation for such membership will have an undesirable impact on these coutries.
The implications of this judgement are difficult to accept.
It suggests that the benefits of an inefficient fiscal system exceed the costs of high inflation rates.
It is an argument against fiscal reform in these countries.
Yet they have all recognised the urgent need for such a reform, quite independently of the arguments for and against membership of the European currency union, but their governments have lacked the political will to proceed with the necessary changes to their fiscal systems.
Indeed, an externally "imposed" reform would be welcome as it would be politically more acceptable than if it were initiated solely through domestic pressures.
Be that as it may, all four countries are actively seeking to reduce their inflation rate, with Italy being particularly successful.
That is, the permanent reduction of inflation is accorded a higher priority than the size of revenues associated with monetary creation.
A decreasing reliance on the inflation tax can be discerned in all four countries.
It follows, therefore, that the cost associated with membership of the European currency union in terms of lost revenues for these countries is unlikely to be significant.
It is not surprising, then, that this particular set of objections to the implementation of the Delors Plan has received little attention even in the countries likely to be most affected.
In brief, the case for the European currency union is well-founded.
The case against is less than convincing.
The Delors Plan: implementation problems
The Delors Plan advocated a three-stage process towards the creation of the European currency union.
At the beginning of the third stage intra-EC exchange rates are to be fixed and after a relatively short period the ECU will replace member countries' currencies as the Community's sole currency.
Further, at the third stage the European central bank will assume complete responsibility for the union's monetary and exchange rate policies.
It is to be constitutionally independent of member countries' governments and its principal objective has been defined to be price stability in the Community.
This objective will take precedence over any external consideration.
However, when the Community will reach the third stage and whether the currency union will be well-founded are questions that will be largely resolved by  what happens during the transition period.
There continues to exist an element of uncertainty as all EC member countries are not at the same level of preparedness to proceed at an identical pace towards the final stage of European monetary unification.
Similarly, the process of monetary integration must be accompanied by progress towards political integration.
In the absence of the latter, it is doubtful whether complete monetary integration, in the form of a currency union, will be achieved.
It is argued with ample justification that Germany, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Denmark have achieved a sufficient degree of monetary convergence that could immediately proceed to form a currency union.
On the other hand, there is a case, for example, of Portugal and Greece who are not yet even members of the EMS.
Thus, there is growing support for the proposal of a "two-speed" Europe, especially in Germany.
What is envisaged is that at least the above six mentioned countries will form a currency union by the end of the decade, while the remaining EC countries enter into an EMS type relationship with the union until they have converged sufficiently to become union members.
Such a development is of doubtful desirability.
If it were to occur, the economic and political cohesion of the Community would be undermined.
Be that as it may, there remains the problem that countries may not be ready to join the currency by the end of the decade, whatever their current intentions may be.
One suspects that the solution will ultimately rest on political rather than economic considerations.
Germany has insisted that monetary union must be accompanied by political union.
An embryonic European central bank is to come into existence soon after 1994, the starting date of the second stage.
In five years time from now it will have developed into an all powerful, constitutionally independent institution responsible for the Community's monetary and exchange rate policies.
At that stage there must exist the equivalent European political structures.
The European central bank cannot function in a political vacuum.
If it were to do so, the very existence of the currency union would be placed in jeopardy.
The above considerations imply that the path to the European currency union is unlikely to be smooth.
Concluding remarks
The decision to proceed to a currency union and accordingly revise the Rome Treaty was reached on political grounds, just as was the case with the signing of the original Treaty of Rome, the creation of the EMS and the ratification of the Single European Act.
There exists sufficient political will as to inspire confidence that the Community will proceed towards complete monetary integration.
Progress in the implementation of the 1992 programme and the first stage of the Delors Plan, agreed by all EC member countries, is likely to strengthen the political resolve of the Community to maintain the momentum of European integration.
The EC can neither reverse current trends nor bring them to a halt.
Any such attempt will necessarily result in a segmented Community with some countries further progressing towards integration while others become satellite economies.
The political implications for both sets of countries of such a development would be unacceptable.
Therefore, one may conclude that by the end of the decade Europe's currency and political union will be established.
Postscript
The European Council at its Maastricht meeting, in December 1991, decided upon the timetable and the convergence criteria that must be satisfied prior to the establishment of the European Currency Union.
During 1996 the European Council will determine whether a majority of member countries satisfy the convergence criteria and set a date for the union to become operational.
If such a date cannot be set during 1997, then the union will come into effect on 1st January, 1999, irrespective of the number of countries satisfying the convergence criteria.
For a country to meet these criteria: 1.
its inflation must be no more than 1.5 per cent than the average of the lowest three inflation rates in the EMS; 2. its long-term interest rates must be no more than 2 per cent than the average of the lowest three member countries' rates; 3. it must have been a member of the narrow band of fluctuation for at least two years, without a realignment; 4. its budget deficit must be no larger than 3 per cent of GDP; 5. its National Debt must not exceed 60 per cent of GDP.