

Old Regime Diplomacy at its Height, c1600-1789
THE LEGACY OF THE PAST
Many aspects of the diplomatic organisation of western and central Europe as it existed by the beginning of the seventeenth century continued with little essential change down to the French Revolution and indeed beyond.
The core of diplomacy continued to be the resident diplomat, concerned largely with the collection of information and reporting home relatively frequently in despatches of which particularly important or delicate parts were usually in cypher.
He was still supplemented by special ambassadors sent for short periods for particular purposes, though their functions became more and more purely formal.
A preoccupation, though a slowly waning one, with precedence and ceremonial still bulked very large: the safeguarding by the ambassador of the honour and standing of the monarch he represented continued for long to be widely seen as the most fundamental of all his duties.
There were still many unanswered questions, though these became progressively fewer, about the nature and extent of diplomatic immunities.
Slowly, however, this system was changing and developing.
Gradually it became more institutionalised as something resembling organised diplomatic services emerged.
By the eighteenth century foreign offices, departments of state concerned simply or mainly with the making and execution of foreign policy, could be seen in embryo in many parts of Europe.
The geographical scope of these quasi-modern international relations was widened as, from the end of the seventeenth century onwards, a new factor in the European balance, the hitherto unimportant Russian empire, was incorporated in it.
The mechanisms of international relations from the age of Richelieu to that of Robespierre thus show a  mixture of the old and the new, of old methods and assumptions working in and gradually being adapted to, new situations.
But the persisting strength of the old and the traditional, the slowness of change, is a dominant theme of the period.
The diplomat: duties and rewards, difficulties and immunities
In one fundamental respect there had, by the end of the seventeenth century, been a final break with the legacy of the middle ages.
By then it was clear that diplomatic representation was the prerogative of sovereigns alone.
The ambiguities of the sixteenth century, when a mediaeval vagueness as to who had the right to send and receive ambassadors still to some extent persisted, were now a thing of the past.
Entities, however powerful, which were non-sovereign or merely quasi-sovereign, were now generally agreed not to possess such rights.
In the first half of the seventeenth century the Dutch East India Company, for example, still sent representatives of its own to negotiate with European powers; but by its end any diplomatic activity in Europe carried on by non-sovereign entities was a curiosity without practical significance.
François de Callières, the French diplomat who wrote in the 1690s the best-known diplomatic manual of the period, pointed out that the cities of Bologna and Ferrara, now incorporated in the papal state, still sent "diplomatic deputations" to the pope and that in Spanish-ruled Sicily Messina, until the rising of 1674 there, had been able to send similar deputations to Madrid; but he rightly saw these as unimportant hangovers from the past.
However, the diplomacy which really mattered had always been that of sovereign states; this final withering away of the claims of other entities to conduct some sort of foreign relations of their own was merely a kind of necessary tidying-up, the clearing of an undergrowth of quasi-diplomacy.
The most essential function of the diplomat resident for a substantial period of time in some foreign capital remained what it had always been: the collecting and sending home of information.
Normally this duty was spelt out explicitly in the instructions he received at the beginning of his embassy.
Thus Sir William Trumbull, when he was sent as English ambassador to Paris in 1685, was told that: You shall constantly correspond with our ministers in other foreign courts, for our better service, and your mutual information and assistance in your respective negotiations; and you shall also maintain a good correspondence and intercourse with all the other ambassadors, envoys and ministers of princes and  states in amity with us, and as far as you can penetrate into the designs of their respective superiors, and of what you can discover of this nature you shall give us a constant account by one of our Principal Secretaries of State.
Two decades earlier Louis XIV had put it more succinctly: "Nothing happens in the world which does not come under the cognizance of…a good ambassador" , while in the early eighteenth century a leading international lawyer wrote flatly of resident diplomats that "it is precisely for the purpose of getting information that they are maintained in the courts of friendly powers" .
As in the past, this normally involved a process of barter: to obtain information the ambassador had to be able and willing to give it in return.
It was therefore important for him to be well informed about events in his own country and in the political world generally; and ambassadors sometimes asked in their despatches for news which they could trade with their colleagues from other states since, as one of them told the French foreign minister in 1674, "You know that in [diplomacy]as in other ordinary transactions it is necessary to give in order to receive" .
As in the past, governments also attempted, with varying degrees of success, to obtain information by opening and reading the correspondence of foreign diplomats.
Codes and cyphers still gave some protection against this, and in one or two cases at least cryptography was carried in the seventeenth century to a level which was not to be surpassed for generations to come.
The grand chiffre devised in mid-century by Antoine Rossignol, a member of the greatest family of French cryptographers, was not broken, after the key to it had been lost, until the 1870s.
But clearly a great many despatches were intercepted and read in many different parts of Europe.
By the 1650s those to and from all foreign diplomats in London were being opened and copied in the Post Office; and in 1665 the French ambassador acknowledged that the English "have tricks to open letters more skilfully than anywhere in the world" .
In the eighteenth century such practices, at least in Great Britain, became still more professional.
The Jacobite threat, which until the middle of the century seemed to all British statesmen very real, led to intensified efforts of this kind, with attempts to obtain keys to the cyphers used by foreign governments and to gather information from postal centres on the  continent such as Danzig, Brussels, Leyden, Antwerp and Hamburg.
The Post Office Act of 1741 gave legal backing to the opening and copying of letters on the orders of one of the Secretaries of State; and in 1765 a general warrant ordered that all diplomatic correspondence passing through London should be treated in this way.
The "Secret Office" in which this skilled and highly confidential work was done dated back to 1653 and was an unpublicised aspect of the new efficiency which the Cromwellian period brought to much government activity; by the end of the eighteenth century it had a staff of ten.
France also had an active cabinet noir which was often headed by the foreign minister (in the eighteenth century at least four, Torcy, Fleury, Rouillé and Choiseul, combined the two appointments).
Here also the opening and copying of letters was carried to a high level of professionalism.
Even in the 1660s Charles II had been complaining in London that his correspondence with his sister, the Duchess of Orleans, was being regularly opened in the French post, while from about 1748 Louis XV himself began to take a good deal of interest in work of this kind.
Indeed the cabinet noir had a considerably wider scope than its British counterpart.
On occasion it interfered with the correspondence of French ministers or former ministers (Choiseul after his fall in 1770 and Turgot during his period in office in 1774–76), and even with that of members of the royal family.
It was also a slightly larger organisation than that in London, and certainly a more costly one.
Its activities were well enough known to provoke widespread protest in the cahiers of 1789.
A similar organisation of the Habsburg government, the Geheime Kabinets-Kanzlei, operated not merely in Vienna but in Brussels, Liége, Frankfurt and Regensburg and enjoyed a high reputation for its technical skill.
Under the Emperor Charles VI it took the form it was to retain, with some reorganisation in the 1750s, until the 1848 revolution swept it away.
Joseph II in the 1780s attached great importance to its work (not surprisingly for a ruler of his suspicious and autocratic temperament) and it was claimed that in the single year 1780–81 alone no fewer than fifteen foreign diplomatic cyphers were broken in Vienna.
These efforts at information-gathering by fair means or foul were merely an intensification of something visible from the very beginnings of  organised diplomacy.
They had nothing essentially new about them.
The same is true of the view of the ideal ambassador taken by writers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The literature which discussed his duties and the personal qualities which he needed to perform them successfully became in the seventeenth century more copious than ever before.
It even grew as the century went on.
The most complete bibliography available lists thirty-three works of this kind published in the quarter-century 1626–50, sixty-six in 1651–75 and seventy-seven in 1676–1700.
Much of this writing, however, remained essentially the same as in earlier generations — inevitably so, since most of the characteristics of a successful diplomat have not changed over centuries.
Antoine Pecquet, a writer of the early eighteenth century who was also a senior official in the French foreign ministry, is typical of much of what was still being said on the subject.
The diplomat, he wrote, must be modest, self-controlled and discreet.
He must be sagacious and have good judgement, be patient and yet at the same time firm in maintaining the interests of the ruler he represented.
He must be a fluent and persuasive speaker, if possible with an attractive personal appearance, and must understand that liberality in entertainment and general style of life could be an important help in negotiation.
No sixteenth-century writer on the subject would have disagreed with any of this.
In one important respect, however, the attitudes reflected in this uninspiring and repetitive body of writing were changing.
By the last decades of the seventeenth century a much heavier emphasis than ever before was being placed on the need for honesty, for the diplomat to behave in a way which inspired confidence in those with whom he dealt.
This, it was now increasingly argued, would be far more effective in the long run than any amount of sharp practice.
In 1684 Colbert de Croissy, the French foreign minister, urged his son, the Marquis de Torcy, then embarking on an embassy to Portugal, to make every effort "to gain the reputation of a perfectly honourable man, and to deserve it" .
Some decades later Pecquet asserted flatly that deceit in diplomacy was positively dangerous and that "truth and probity are…the two qualities most essential to the success of a public minister" .
Personal virtue, he went on, was indispensable, for "nothing is so dangerous as intelligence when it is guided by a corrupt heart" .
In this new, or at least much heavier, emphasis on fair dealing can be seen a genuine movement away from the  primitive assumptions of the age of Commynes and Machiavelli.
In place of an unbridled power struggle in which almost anything was permissible and extreme instability in relations between states was the norm, it was now being asserted that the task of diplomacy was not to deceive or even perhaps to defeat an opponent, but rather to reconcile conflicting ambitions and help different states to coexist, at least for considerable periods, in a reasonable degree of amity.
Callières stressed more than any of his predecessors the role of the diplomat as a moderating influence and the extent to which, through prudence and common sense, apparently divergent state interests could be at least partially harmonised.
It would be absurd to make high claims for the international morality of the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
In the 1680s, when Colbert de Croissy was preaching honourable behaviour to his son, the theft or attempted theft of despatches was still a commonplace of diplomacy.
But the states of western Europe were now being driven by harsh experience if by nothing higher to aim at something more than the chaotic free-for-all which had marked the Italian wars and the Habsburg–Valois struggles of the first half of the sixteenth century.
Many of the rituals and formalities of diplomacy changed only slowly, sometimes hardly at all, during the two centuries before the French revolution.
Some change there was, however.
A whole series of practices and expedients which had been widely used as an organised diplomatic system began to take shape fell into disuse as it became better established.
Collective embassies with a number of members often of formally equal rank, which had been common in the sixteenth century, rapidly ceased to be so.
It was generally agreed that republics were now much more likely than monarchies to use them; and this belief seems to be borne out by the facts.
In the seventeenth century the new Dutch republic was the only important power to make extensive use of this method of representation.
When the States-General had particular items of important business to transact with a foreign state it continued until late in the century to send abroad for this purpose missions recruited from its own members: sometimes as many as sixteen were accredited.
Until the second half of the century even the greatest powers still occasionally made use of multi-member embassies and there was still some surviving feeling that a ruler was particularly honoured by receiving a group of ambassadors rather than an individual.
Louis XIV, for example, accredited three to negotiate jointly with the English government in 1665.
But this was now increasingly unusual: the individual ambassador or envoy leading and  controlling a mission whose other members were clearly his subordinates was established as the norm.
Another practice fairly common in the sixteenth century, that of the "circular" embassy which visited a series of different states, negotiating with each in turn, also persisted into the first half of that which followed.
Thus in 1629 the Baron de Charnacé represented France on a mission to Denmark, went from there to several of the German states, and from Germany to help negotiate a truce between Sweden and Poland.
In the same year Sir Thomas Roe went as English representative in turn to The Hague, Copenhagen and Königsberg (where the Elector of Brandenburg then was) before also helping with the Swedish–Polish negotiations.
But this sort of arrangement too became rarer as the century went on.
Other practices normal in the past were also now disappearing.
One of the most curious of these was the knighting of ambassadors at the end of their mission by the monarch to whom they had been accredited and the grant to them of augmentations to their coats of arms.
Those of Venice were particularly favoured in this way.
In England Henry VII granted such an augmentation to a Venetian representative as early as 1506, and the practice was not abandoned in London until 1763.
France, the papacy, Poland and perhaps other states, also honoured Venetian ambassadors in these ways, while in 1603 the doge in Venice knighted a group of seven ambassadors sent to him by the Grisons league in Switzerland, and in 1621 James I did the same for six deputies sent to London by the Dutch republic.
But this was no more than a politeness with little political meaning, and one which disappeared, though slowly, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
More important, the practice of rulers or their representatives, in circumstances charged with religious symbolism, swearing solemn and public oaths to observe a treaty was now also disappearing.
It was slow to vanish.
Abraham de Wicquefort, when in 1681 he published the best-known and most widely read work on diplomacy produced anywhere in early modern Europe, could still speak of the formal witnessing of a royal oath to keep a treaty of peace or alliance as one of the obvious reasons for the sending of an extraordinary ambassador.
However, after the end of the sixteenth century provision for ceremonies of this kind becomes rarer and is found mainly in treaties to which Spain was a signatory.
The last case of the taking of such an oath seems to be the despatch in the 1770s of a group of representatives of the Swiss cantons to Paris to swear to the  observance of an agreement just made with the French government.
But long before this the custom, in an atmosphere with a much lower religious charge than in the past and an age when, for all their obvious defects, standards of international conduct were higher than in the mêlée of the early sixteenth century, had lost any real significance.
In rather the same way the practice of giving hostages for the due execution of a treaty, quite common in the distrustful atmosphere of the sixteenth century, was last seen in operation in 1748, when two British peers were sent to Paris as guarantees of the restitution by Britain of the conquests she had made in north America at the expense of France.
The maintenance of diplomats by the states to which they were sent, still common in the sixteenth century, ebbed away in western Europe in that which followed.
Here again the ideas and practices of the past showed considerable vitality.
The most important English writer of the seventeenth century on international law still thought in its middle years that "the reception of ambassadors further requires that hospitality should be provided befitting their rank, and necessaries supplied to them" , and practice varied considerably between different states.
The Dutch showed themselves remarkably conservative in this respect; but elsewhere in the west the practice fairly rapidly died out.
In England Charles I decided soon after his accession no longer to provide for the "diet" of foreign diplomats in London.
In the Ottoman empire and Russia, states very much on the periphery of European diplomacy and seen still as un-European, such traditions proved much more tenacious.
In Constantinople the Porte, until far into the eighteenth century, paid to representatives of the western states a maintenance allowance (ta'in) graduated according to their rank.
Russian diplomats in west-European capitals until the end of the seventeenth century expected to be maintained by the rulers to whom they were accredited, and often complained vociferously when they were treated less generously than they had expected.
In 1662 the English government allocated £2,000 to meet the costs of maintaining a Russian ambassador during his short stay in London; and two decades later another, after much argument, forced his hosts to allow him £100 a week — twice as much as he had originally been offered.
His embassy cost £3,000 in all.
Another in 1687 was less lucky and was obliged to be satisfied with only £50 a week.
This obligation to maintain visiting  embassies was a mutual one, however.
Those which went to Moscow from the west were fed by the Russian government; and the ceremonial presentation each day of food to the foreigners was considered of such symbolic importance that it was kept up even during the terrible famine of 1601–03, the worst in all Russian history.
But arrangements of this kind were always liable to generate disputes.
An English observer much involved in these problems complained of Russian diplomats in 1673 that "it is their Custome, to think, whatsoever they get, too little, and whatever they give, too much" , while in 1698 an embassy sent by the Emperor Leopold I to Moscow argued that in future, to avoid such disagreements, the tsar and the Holy Roman Emperor should each be responsible for the maintenance of their own embassies in the way now generally accepted in Europe.
After the revolution in relations with western Europe produced by Peter I the undignified haggling over money which had marked so many of the short-lived Russian embassies of the past disappeared.
Nevertheless, as late as the 1740s, the British government was still contributing to the cost of housing the now permanent Russian representatives in London at a rate proportional to their diplomatic rank — £200 a year for ministers-resident, £400 for envoys or ambassadors.
However, this was merely a hangover from the past; and after the middle of the century even these payments ceased.
Many of the tangible rewards of diplomatic life changed little, at least in the seventeenth century.
An ambassador could still expect, at the end of his mission, to receive from the ruler to whom he had been accredited a farewell present which was often, particularly for special ambassadors of high social rank, of considerable value.
This was an area where susceptibilities could be all too easily hurt and bad feeling aroused.
Venice, intensely touchy about its international status, was particularly liable to take umbrage if one of its representatives were not offered such a present or were offered one of less value than expected: the failure of the duke of Savoy to make a gift to a departing Venetian ambassador in 1603, for example, aroused notably bad feeling in the republic.
On the other hand an ambassador might refuse a present because he thought it insultingly small, because his mission had been unsuccessful, or because it seemed that the monarch he represented was about to go to war with the one  whose court he was leaving.
In 1665 Lord Holles, when he left Paris, rejected for this reason a valuable diamond offered him by Louis XIV.
The leaving present given to an ambassador could still take a variety of different forms.
During the seventeenth century in England "gilt plate" , its weight carefully graded to accord with the importance and traditional status of the ruler who, through his representative, was being honoured in this way, was the most normal gift.
Thus, in 1614 James I, believing that he was making presents more valuable than his ambassadors at foreign courts were receiving, ordered that in future the French and Spanish resident ambassadors, who had hitherto been given 4,000 ounces of plate on their departure, should in future receive only half as much and that the representatives of lesser states should also have their customary allowance cut by half.
Presents of this kind to resident heads of mission were everywhere more standardised and governed by tradition than those to the more glamorous extraordinary ambassadors, whose duties and length of stay were so extremely variable.
For minor members of foreign missions, of whom ambassadors' secretaries were the most important, gold chains continued during much of the seventeenth century to be a very common form of gift all over Europe.
But such presents varied greatly.
An extraordinary ambassador of particularly high standing, or one whom it was desired to honour markedly, could be given very valuable jewels and other luxury goods.
The Maréchal de Cadenet, a French ambassador on a special mission who stayed in London for only a few days in 1621, was given by James I jewellery said to be worth £2,500, while the duke of Buckingham, the king's favourite, presented him with ponies and four albino falcons, the latter much prized by huntsmen.
The Maréchal de Bassompierre, again a military man, after another brief embassy to London five years later, was given by Charles I "four diamonds set in a lozenge, and a great stone at the end" : this was said to be worth £7,000 and was perhaps the most valuable present ever given by any English ruler to a foreign diplomat.
Moreover, Bassompierre also received from the new French-born queen, Henrietta Maria, "a very fine diamond" .
These were both embassies with a large symbolic and ceremonial element: envoys of this kind were often given presents whose significance was also purely symbolic and which bore no relationship to the length of their stay or to the importance of the issues with which they were concerned.
An imperial ambassador who in 1622 spent only eleven days in London and  achieved nothing of significance nevertheless received a present worth £1,600 on his departure.
Resident ambassadors were usually less generously treated.
Occasionally presents to them took a peculiar and inconvenient form.
It was not uncommon for foreign representatives in Sweden to be given a quantity of copper, the only Swedish product for which there was a ready international market, which they could sell on their return home.
Bulstrode Whitelocke, English ambassador there in 1653–54, was given £2,500 worth of the metal which was eventually cast into guns for the navy (though he also received a miniature of Queen Christina in a diamond setting and the heir to the throne, the future Charles X, gave him a gold box set on one side with diamonds and with Charles's portrait on the other).
The second half of the seventeenth century saw a distinct movement away from the erratic lavishness which had marked much of this aspect of international relations in earlier decades.
As diplomacy became more of a distinct profession, with standards more clear-cut than in the past, the feeling grew that present-giving should be regulated and kept within reasonable limits.
In 1651 the Dutch republic forbade its diplomats to accept gifts from foreign governments; and in 1692 regulations were issued in Sweden which for the first time specified the value of those to be given to foreign representatives on their departure.
In England P.I.
Potemkin was the last Russian ambassador, in 1681, to arrive in London bearing gifts to be presented in semi-oriental style to the king; he was also the last to receive a present in the traditional manner when he left.
However, the role of gifts and "gratifications" of many different kinds in international relations remained substantial throughout the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The States-General might have reservations about presents to departing diplomats; but none the less it gave "the usual respect" of 6,000 guilders to an English ambassador when he left The Hague in 1670, with 600 more for his secretary.
Three years earlier, on the conclusion of an Anglo-Dutch peace treaty, it had already voted the same man a gold chain and a medal worth another 6,000.
A diplomat who helped to bring peace between two belligerent states by mediating between them might be particularly well rewarded.
A century later John Murray, the British ambassador in Constantinople, bitterly  regretted that in 1774 he had not been able to act as mediator in the making of the Russo-Turkish peace of Kutchuk—Kainardji and thus gain the valuable presents from both sides which would have been his reward.
This feeling was shared by his Prussian and Habsburg colleagues, who had cherished the same hopes.
As late as 1792, Sir Robert Ainslie, Murray's successor, complained that by not being called on to mediate in the peace negotiations which had just produced the Russo-Turkish treaty of Jassy he had lost the opportunity to make about £30,000 in presents from both sides, though this was probably a great exaggeration.
Diplomacy could still be made an uncomfortable and even dangerous profession by the slowness and physical difficulty of communications and by the inconveniences of life in the smaller and more remote capitals.
This was, as before, most obvious in eastern and northern Europe, a world of long distances and often almost non-existent roads.
But even contacts between the most developed states of the west could on occasion, as in previous generations, demand from diplomats a good deal of physical hardihood.
Part of the suite of a French special ambassador to London in 1626, on their return journey to Paris, spent no less than five days on the Dover-Calais crossing in very bad weather.
During it they were forced to throw into the sea both the ambassador's carriages, containing more than 40,000 livres worth of his clothes, while twenty-nine of his horses died of thirst.
Moreover, the fact that the embassy had already been delayed in Dover for a fortnight had cost him 14,000 crowns even before these further disasters.
Almost seventy years later the English envoy to Savoy was shipwrecked off the coast of Sardinia and very nearly drowned, with the loss of all his papers and equipage.
These are merely two of many illustrations of the dangers of travel by sea, even though this was often easier, especially over long distances, than movement by land.
It was normal, moreover, as in earlier generations, for a diplomat going to one of the more out-of-the-way capitals, if he expected to stay for any length of time, to equip himself with a mass of essentials which might be difficult or impossible to obtain at his destination.
Thus an English ambassador going to Stockholm in the mid-seventeenth century took with him a great quantity of household goods and even food "hard to be met with in Sweden" , as well as enough horses to fill a ship hired specially to carry them.
His precautions were justified, for when he reached Sweden it proved difficult even to find accommodation for his servants.
A  generation later, another, bound for so great a centre of civilisation as Paris, still found it necessary to take with him sixty boxes of household goods and twenty of food, seven or eight dozen chairs and armchairs, a coach, a chaise and twenty horses.
Courts which were still in constant movement and countries with little in the way of a fixed capital, such as Sweden, were particularly uncomfortable and trying.
Perhaps the most difficult of all was Poland where, as a French secret agent complained in the 1670s, the court "ran about like a troop of gipsies" .
As time went on, the slow growth of Europe's wealth, and the even slower improvement of its communications, did something to reduce this sort of inconvenience, expense and even physical danger.
But at the outbreak of the French revolution there were still capitals where life for a diplomat was uncomfortable and unattractive.
Physical discomforts, however, were now partially offset by the fact that the legal immunities of diplomats were becoming more clearly defined and generally recognised than in the past.
The questions about their nature and extent which had exercised lawyers in the sixteenth century were not completely answered in the seventeenth and eighteenth.
But the position did become clearer in various respects; and the problems and disputes which arose were seldom so acute or threatening as they had sometimes been in the past.
From Grotius onwards there was increasing agreement that diplomats were entitled to a high degree of immunity from civil or criminal proceedings of any kind.
There was now no doubt that an ambassador and his suite had an absolute right to the free practice of their religion, even though it differed from that established in the country where they were stationed.
Sometimes diplomats stretched or abused this right to support dissident religious minorities, to the annoyance of the governments with which they had to deal.
In the 1650s the Venetian representative in London maintained more than twenty Catholic priests who ministered to the numerous English Catholics who filled the embassy chapel to overflowing.
Later French Huguenots were to use the Dutch embassy in Paris in much the same way.
The anger generated by this sort of situation among English Protestants underlay the mob destruction of the chapels attached to the Bavarian and Sardinian legations during the Gordon Riots of 1780; but in general religious frictions of this kind were not a serious source of difficulty.
Legal opinion moved steadily in favour of the absolute immunity of anyone with diplomatic status from the jurisdiction of the host state.
 "I deny" , wrote the most important eighteenth-century commentator on the subject, "that anyone can reach a decision through  duly constituted judicial procedure in regard to the life, property, and reputation of the ambassador except the prince who sent him or the magistrate to whose jurisdiction he was formerly subject" .
This was not yet a universally accepted point of view.
As late as the 1760s an influential theorist could still argue that an ambassador who, on his own initiative, encouraged sedition within the state to which he was accredited, could be punished by it even with death, while if he had acted on the orders of his master he could be held as a hostage until the latter had given satisfaction.
There were still eighteenth-century examples, some of them politically important, of the arrest of diplomats for alleged plotting against the state in which they were stationed.
Counts Gyllenborg and Görtz, the Swedish ministers in London and The Hague, suffered this fate in 1717.
So, two years later, did the Prince de Cellamare, the Spanish ambassador in Paris: his arrest was followed by an effort by the Spanish government to seize his French counterpart in Madrid (who was forewarned and escaped).
But by the later decades of the century such conduct was becoming increasingly unthinkable.
The immunity of diplomats from civil proceedings was also being more and more clearly asserted.
This was a process which extended over a long period, and in the seventeenth century the extent of their privileges in this respect was still far from clear.
In 1666 the Portuguese minister-resident in the Dutch republic had his household goods seized for debt; and when, two years later, he attempted to leave for Portugal his creditors secured a court order for his arrest.
The most important and spectacular case, however, came in London when, in September 1708, A.A. Matveev, the Russian minister, was arrested on the complaint of a number of tradesmen to whom he owed money.
He spent only a few hours in prison; but when he was released the heads of all the foreign missions in London (except that of Sweden, which was then at war with Russia) accompanied him to his house in a demonstration of solidarity and next morning visited him to promise their support.
The following year saw the passing by Parliament of legislation protecting foreign diplomats against criminal and civil proceedings — the most explicit undertaking of this kind hitherto given by any state — and a special mission to Moscow to apologise to Peter I for the insult offered to his representative.
It was still possible, however, for the issue of civil immunity to cause difficulties.
A generation or more later, Baron Cederhielm, the Holstein envoy in Paris and chamberlain to the king of Sweden, was sent to the Châtelet prison at the  demand of his creditors, while in 1772 the Hessian minister in the French capital was officially warned that his furniture could be seized and he himself refused a passport to leave the country if he failed to pay what he owed.
Moreover, there were still jurists prepared to justify such action.
But the whole drift of events was towards a widening and consolidation of the immunities claimed by diplomats in the performance of their duties.
These diplomats, as in earlier generations, were by no means always scrupulous in their use of their privileges.
Everywhere they enjoyed exemption from customs duties on goods to be used by themselves and their households.
It was therefore tempting, and usually easy, to import excessive quantities of goods and then resell them at a profit to local merchants, "from whom" , wrote Callières in 1697, "they receive a tribute, for lending their names to defraud the Sovereign of his dues" .
Two generations later Horace Walpole complained that in London the Spanish ambassador was "almost the only envoy from a foreign court who disdained to turn his exalted office to trading purposes" .
More serious was the way in which, in one or two capitals, foreign envoys used their rights of immunity not merely to shelter criminals in the embassy or legation but also to exclude the local police from a considerable area around it.
They could thus create, ostensibly in defence of their rights, islands of lawlessness in which criminals could take sanctuary and defy the forces of law and order.
This was seen at its most extreme in Rome.
There an unsuccessful effort in 1687 by Innocent XI to end such rights claimed by the French ambassador, the Marquis de Lavardin, led to a bitter dispute.
(The pope may have been influenced by the fact that three years earlier the Spanish government had limited the right of asylum in Madrid, where it had also been quite unjustifiably extended, to the houses of foreign ambassadors.)
Lavardin entered the city with 800 armed men, repossessed his embassy by force and was then excommunicated: these events produced the most active controversy on diplomatic immunities of the entire early modern period.
By the eighteenth century the position in Rome had become so impossible (since not merely considerable areas around foreign embassies but also churches and the houses of cardinals offered refuge to criminals) that the papal police had to be equipped with special maps to show them which streets they were permitted to pass  through.
Similar, though less extreme, French claims in Venice, where the ambassador demanded that any holder of a "patent de familiarité" signed by him must be considered a member of his household, led to a long breach between the two states in 1710–23 and renewed friction in the later 1720s.
Excesses of this sort, however, did not alter the fact that in most respects the legal status of diplomats was, by the eighteenth century, more securely and satisfactorily established than ever before.
The great preoccupation; ceremonial and procedure
A more significant legacy of the past was the continuing intense sensitivity over diplomatic ceremonial and appearances of all kinds.
One obvious aspect of this was the attention which continued to be given throughout the seventeenth century to the public entry of a newly arrived ambassador to the capital in which he was taking up his post.
This remained, as in previous generations, an ostentatious display of the greatness and wealth of the ruler he represented.
Sometimes for this reason civic dignitaries or merchants trading with the country from which the ambassador came would turn out to swell the column of men and vehicles and deepen the impression made on those who watched.
This was, again as in the past, a genuine form of public entertainment; printed programmes giving details of the time and place of the entry and of the carriages and costumes were sometimes sold to potential spectators.
Elaborate descriptions, usually illustrated with engravings showing the sumptuous costumes and the carving and gilding of the coaches, might be published to commemorate the event.
In eastern Europe organised ostentation of this kind remained important on occasion until late in the eighteenth century, well after it had ceased to have much significance in the west.
In 1775, for instance, there were extremely elaborate entries into each other 's capitals by the Russian and Turkish ambassadors charged with the ratification of the peace-treaty between the two states signed in the previous year.
But more important, and certainly more divisive, than such occasions was the endlessly controversial and emotionally potent question of precedence.
Throughout the seventeenth century, and far into the eighteenth, the issue of precedence continued to arouse strong feeling and generate  disputes as it had done in earlier generations.
 "Points of honour, rank, precedence, are the most delicate articles of political faith" , wrote a well-informed commentator as late as 1746.
 "Princes cede towns, even provinces, but all the ability of the most adroit negotiators cannot decide them to give up a rank which they believe to be their right" .
This scale of values, he went on, was justified by both history and necessity.
Sharp hereditary inequalities between the different social orders were essential to the existence of any society.
But if a recognised and accepted scale of ranks were needed within a particular society it was just as essential within the international one made up of different states which Europe was increasingly becoming.
In this greater society"there must be in the first place a certain order of ranks between the chiefs of these particular ones.
Without this they could not communicate with one another, if each claimed to take the first place".
This was an unusually clear and succinct statement of assumptions which had been current for generations.
Few writers, however, wasted much time on theoretical justifications of this sort.
Instead they produced a copious literature on more or less specific issues, highly legalistic, repetitive and partisan, very frequently inspired merely by the need to justify some particular national or dynastic claim.
 "Every state" , wrote a historian at the end of the eighteenth century when such questions had lost much of their earlier emotional charge, "while contending for this high and delicate point, has brought forward every sort of argument, however weighty, or however trivial, which could apply exclusively to itself" .
In all this writing the emphasis was usually very heavily, as in the past, on the obligation of the diplomat to defend jealously the honour of the sovereign he represented against any claim, any change in ceremonial, which might be construed as the slightest threat to it.
This was still universally seen, at least until well into the eighteenth century, as one of his most important duties, perhaps the most important of all.
 "An ambassador" , wrote an anonymous author of the early seventeenth century, "must not permit or allow anyone to challenge or in any other way offend the honour of his Prince on any subject at all" , while more than sixty years later Wicquefort could still assume that ceremonial niceties must be an essential preoccupation of any diplomat.
Such assumptions, and the need for perpetual watchfulness which they implied, inevitably had an inhibiting effect.
 "An ambassador" , wrote a  member of the staff of the Spanish embassy in London in the 1690s,"should be specially careful to maintain the authority of his position and assert his prerogatives, as for instance in not giving the door or the right hand to any minister or individual, whether of his own country or another…
I refer to the ceremony of offering the door, the chair or the right-hand seat in the coach".
When any number of heads of diplomatic missions were assembled in one place, even on the most innocent social occasion, there was always in the seventeenth century, as much as in the preceding one, a likelihood of trouble.
When in 1619, to take an illuminating example, all the foreign ambassadors in London were invited to watch a display of tilting on the birthday of James I the occasion provided a remarkable exhibition of the complications which could arise.
Elaborate precautions were taken to avoid disputes over precedence between the representatives of France and Spain (the long-standing rivalry between these two states was the most serious potential source of this kind of friction) by placing them both on the king's right and at the same distance from him.
However, the Frenchman complained that the Spaniard could be seen by the king whereas he could not; and in any case, he argued, the rulers of France claimed precedence over those of Spain, not merely parity with them.
He therefore refused to attend or to allow his wife to.
The Venetian ambassador complained that though the republic had always been treated as the equal of the kingdoms of Europe he had been offered a place which did not fully reflect this.
Then the Dutch representative in his turn alleged that he was being asked to accept a position implying mere equality with that of the duke of Savoy, which was contrary to his instructions: he therefore also refused to attend.
The Savoyard himself did not appear on the day, apparently because he was unsure whether to give precedence to the representative of the king of Bohemia (the "Winter King" Frederick of the Palatinate); but his absence at once made the Venetian ambassador fear that Savoy, perhaps with French or Spanish help, was intriguing to threaten the precedence claimed by the republic.
Such a chapter of accidents, however ridiculous in modern eyes, epitomised a genuinely important aspect of international relations.
Its importance was institutionalised in the emergence from the later sixteenth century onwards in many states of officials whose duty it was to supervise the reception of foreign diplomatic representatives and smooth out differences between them on questions of ceremonial and precedence.
Such were the conducteur des ambassadeurs and maître des  cérémonies in France, the conductor de los embajadores in Spain, and the master of ceremonies in England.
A number of well-established general principles were accepted as regulating precedence.
It was still widely agreed that, as laid down in the papal ranking of 1504, the Holy Roman Emperor came first of all secular rulers, and this pre-eminence all emperors jealously guarded: it was only after considerable resistance that Ferdinand III (1637–57) agreed to address Louis XIV as "Majesté Royale" .
There was also general, though not complete, agreement that hereditary monarchs ranked above merely elective ones (in spite of the fact that the Holy Roman Emperor was himself elected, at least in form) and that republics ranked lower than any kind of monarchy.
But this left many problems unsolved and in the prevailing state of feeling insoluble.
In particular the emergence as significant factors in international relations of new or growing states with new or heightened claims to precedence raised difficult questions.
Venice was generally agreed to be a sort of honorary kingdom.
Nevertheless, the Venetian government always felt its position to be somewhat ambiguous and was correspondingly sensitive to anything that seemed even remotely to challenge it.
Venetian diplomats were likely to demand every ceremonial honour to which they could assert any shred of claim, and to be very touchy when faced with any apparent threat, however slight, to their status.
The three special ambassadors sent to James II in 1685, for example, to congratulate him on his coronation and ask for English help against the Turks, unsuccessfully demanded privileges which were regarded as quite unjustified — to be "conducted" at their audience with the king by a duke rather than as usual a mere earl and for their coaches to be allowed to enter the courtyard of the royal palace.
The position during the seventeenth century of the duchy of Savoy was much more uncertain than that of Venice.
Its ruler was not, until in 1713 he acquired the title of king of Sicily as part of the Utrecht settlement, formally entitled to royal honours.
In the 1620s the Danish ambassador in London, representing a monarch, refused to pay a courtesy call on his Savoyard colleague; this he felt would be demeaning in view of the difference in rank between their principals.
Yet by then the duchy was already becoming a power of some significance because of its position astride several of the most important routes across the Alps and its growing, though still limited, military strength.
There was thus a discrepancy between the increasing importance of the dukes in international affairs and the position to which they were relegated in terms of formal honours; and as the seventeenth century progressed many governments became willing to regard them as de facto royal.
When Charles Emmanuel II died, in 1675, special envoys bringing news of his death were treated in both Paris and London as the representatives of a king: both Charles II and Louis XIV wore violet mourning, the colour appropriate for a royal death.
In 1696 Louis agreed to give the duke the title of "Royal Highness" in all public acts and to treat his representatives in France as those of a monarch.
The most striking and important example of a conflict between the real significance of a state and the ceremonial treatment to which its representatives were entitled, however, was that of the Dutch republic.
By the beginning of the seventeenth century it was the greatest commercial and financial power in Europe, as well as a very significant military one.
Yet, in spite of the leading position in its political life of the Orange family, it was also clearly not a monarchy in the normal sense of that term: its representatives were therefore not entitled to be treated as those of a crowned head.
But as time went on, the new state, conscious of its strength and achievements, became less and less willing to accept this situation.
The instructions given to the Dutch negotiators at the Munster peace congress which began its work in 1645 insisted on their being treated on the same footing as those of Venice; and by the end of the century Dutch ambassadors in Paris were claiming royal honours.
In his last years even Louis XIV was giving the Dutch republic the treatment in this respect which it demanded.
England suffered to some extent from a similar gulf between her real power and her ceremonial status during the Interregnum of 1649–60, a gulf in this case deepened by the widespread hostility aroused by the execution of Charles I. For several years the standing of the representatives abroad of the various Commonwealth governments was seriously weakened by the disappearance of the monarchy: in 1654, for example, the Danish ambassador in Sweden claimed precedence over his English equivalent since the latter was acting for Cromwell, a mere protector, not for an anointed king.
Yet here again political realities asserted themselves.
Whitelocke, the English  ambassador, found his treatment by the Swedes and his ability to negotiate with them unaffected by ceremonial niceties.
In other words the rules of precedence and other aspects of diplomatic ceremonial were not immutable.
However slowly, the forms tended over time to reflect the facts.
A government which wished to show goodwill, or the reverse, to another could send the appropriate signals by variations, sometimes subtle ones, in its attitude to ceremonial matters.
The symbolism which these involved, and which was indeed their essence, was frequently manipulated for political purposes.
When in 1732, to quote only two British cases, the representative of George II in Turin was promoted from minister plenipotentiary to full ambassador, this was a clear indication of a desire in London to improve relations between the two states (especially as the diplomat in question was an earl), while simultaneously the strained Anglo-Prussian relations of the 1730s were reflected in the fact that Britain was represented in Berlin throughout the decade by a mere secretary (and he a humble army captain).
Many of the manifestations of this passionate interest in ceremonial and precedence were not particularly dangerous.
They could be seen in constant arguments in every European court, as in the past, about the relative positions of diplomats on formal and even informal occasions, their placing at table at meals where more than one was present, the precise way in which they were conducted to their first audience with the ruler to whom they were accredited, when and whether they stood or sat at such audiences, the precise moment when they or the ruler removed their hats, and a variety of such tremendous niceties.
There was no necessary relationship between the real importance of a state and the willingness of its ruler and his representatives to make a fuss over things of this sort.
Seventeenth-century Russia, poor, remote, deeply xenophobic, was not generally seen as part of the European political system at all.
Not until the exhausting struggles with Sweden and Poland in 1654–67 did she show real signs of growth and expansion.
Only after the truce of 1686 with the Poles was it clear that she might well be the force of the future in eastern Europe.
Yet throughout the seventeenth century no diplomats were more pertinacious than those of Russia in asserting what they claimed as the honorific rights of their master.
The "ceremonious stomachs" of Russian ambassadors "whose Nation stands so much on Ceremony" were the subject of comment in England in the early years of the century, as they had already been in the reign of Elizabeth.
Certainly, some of the claims they advanced were extreme even by the standards of so punctilious an age.
In 1614 the Prince of Wales himself had to be excluded from a dinner at which the Russian ambassador was to be present, since it was feared that the latter would refuse to accept a place on the king's left if the prince were seated on his right.
Sixty years later, in a yet more striking case, the newly arrived Russian ambassador to Denmark, finding that the king, Christian V, was in bed and too ill to receive him, insisted on having another bed provided on which he could lie side by side with the king so that they could talk.
The same intensity of punctilio was to be seen in the treatment of foreign diplomats in Russia.
There the government even lent ceremonial costumes from the treasury to poor members of the tsar's council, the boyarskaya duma, so that they could make a suitably impressive show when an envoy from the west was officially received in Moscow.
When, in another striking instance, the earl of Carlisle reached the capital in 1664 as ambassador from Charles II, he had a long argument with the official deputed to receive him as to which should first descend from his sledge when they met formally.
Finally it was agreed that both should get down at the same moment.
However the Russian "tooke occasion to deceive his Excellence, and falsify his word, hanging in the aire betwixt the armes of his servants, and but touching the earth with his tiptoes, whilst the Ambassador came out freely" .
Moreover, no ruler had a title longer or more complex than that of the tsar; and none was more ready to resent the omission of even the smallest part of it.
In 1629 the Tsar Mikhail severely reproved Louis XIII himself for failing to use his full title in official letters and warned him that "We cannot approve your habit of wishing to be our friend and yet denying and taking from us the titles and qualities which almighty God has given us and which we so justly possess." 
If France wanted good relations with Russia his full title (which he carefully recited) must be used in all future letters, for it was the duty of friends "rather to augment reciprocally their titles and qualities than to diminish or curtail them" .
Even the size of the sheets of paper on which the tsar's letters were written varied, at least in the early seventeenth century, according to the status of the ruler to whom they were addressed.
The Holy Roman Emperor, the shah of Persia and the sultan in Constantinople were honoured with large sheets (the fact that two of the  three were non-European illustrates how large a role Asia still played in Russian foreign policy), while the kings of Sweden, Poland, England and Denmark had to be content with smaller ones.
The official seals attached to these letters were protected by cases; but these were decorated when the letter was being sent to one of the greater rulers and merely plain when a less important one was being addressed.
Contemporaries, even the men themselves involved in heated arguments over matters of ceremonial, were often well aware that most of these questions were trivial.
Such disputes, wrote a successful English diplomat in the 1670s, "seem to me but so many impertinencies that are grown this last age into the character of Ambassadors; having been raised and cultivated by men, who, wanting other talents to value themselves upon in those employments, endeavoured to do it by exactness or niceties in the forms" .
There were even occasional suggestions that relations between states be eased and simplified by abandoning the whole idea of an order of precedence betwen sovereigns.
The Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus in the early 1630s, faced with a struggle between rival English and French ambassadors, dismissed such contests as futile since all kings had their authority directly from God and thus were equal in status.
But ceremonial and precedence none the less remained until well into the eighteenth century a factor of importance in international relations.
They could even bring major states to the brink of war.
The best and best-known example of this is the battle fought in the streets of London in 1661 between the retinues of the French and Spanish ambassadors, the culmination of two centuries of bitter competition of this kind.
The official entry to the English capital of a new Swedish ambassador became the occasion for a struggle over which of the two rivals should give way to the other; in this almost fifty men were killed and wounded.
The Spaniards were heavily outnumbered (the French ambassador, d'Estrades, had prepared for a struggle by bringing to London a number of officers from regiments commanded by himself and his son as well as soldiers from the garrison of Gravelines, on the northern coast of France); but they none the less won the immediate contest by cutting the traces of the horses pulling the French ambassador's coach.
Louis XIV, young, anxious to assert his personal and dynastic prestige and conscious of ruling the most powerful state in Europe, reacted vigorously.
(He claimed in his memoirs that the Spanish ambassador had planned the incident and had spent almost 500,000 livres in organising and arming a mob of 2,000 men  to attack d'Estrades and his retinue.)
Spain, exhausted and virtually bankrupt, was forced by the threat of war to give way.
In March of the following year her ambassador in Paris publicly apologised and promised that in future she would recognise French claims to precedence.
This was the most spectacular humiliation suffered by any major European state during the seventeenth century; and Louis did not hesitate to turn the knife in the wound.
All the representatives in Paris of foreign states were invited to witness the Spanish apology and were asked to inform their courts of it, while a medal was specially struck to commemorate the French triumph.
It was, in fact, far from being a complete victory.
The Austrian branch of the Habsburgs continued to give precedence to the representatives of its Spanish relatives, the pope insisted on treating the French and Spanish ambassadors in Rome as equals, and the Spanish government ordered its diplomats not to appear in public with a French one of equal rank, and thus avoid giving way to him.
But the whole incident shows well how issues of this kind could envenom international relations and even threaten international peace.
At sea the question of the salute allegedly owed by vessels, both merchant and naval, of one power to those of another, by firing a salvo, by lowering their colours, or more rarely by half-lowering some of their sails, was the equivalent of these struggles for precedence on land.
Until the 1660s it was, at least in its most acute and dangerous form, mainly an Anglo-Dutch contest.
In the treaties with the States-General of 1654 and 1667 the English government succeeded in having its claims accepted by its rival; and so sensible a man as Sir William Temple felt that nothing had ever given him greater pleasure than forcing the Dutch to give way once more on this point in the peace negotiations of 1674.
From the 1660s, however, Louis XIV began to press very intransigently pretensions of this kind which had already been raised unsuccessfully by Cardinal Richelieu more than a generation earlier.
Once again the threat of outright war was brought into play.
In 1678 and again in 1684 the republic of Genoa was forced by destructive naval bombardments to recognise French claims of this kind.
In 1685, in time of peace, a Spanish fleet was forced to salute a French one after fighting which involved considerable casualties; and in 1688 French and Dutch squadrons fought off the Spanish coast, again in time of peace, over the same issue.
All this testifies to the extreme importance attached to every status-symbol in an avidly status-conscious age.
Less dangerous, but still a  potential irritant, was the way in which this passionate interest in ceremonial could protract and complicate negotiations between states, especially when a number were involved.
No peace congress of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries was unaffected by considerations of this kind.
The formal opening in December 1644 of the congress at Munster was delayed for six months, at least partly by quarrels over ceremonial.
Indeed, well before it assembled, the governments involved had been quite aware that quarrels over precedence would be the first obstacle to peace-making and by no means the least serious.
Its work, once it had got under way, was slowed and complicated by disputes of this kind between the French and Spanish and French and imperial representatives, while the Venetian one, Contarini, threatened to withdraw altogether from the negotiations unless the comte d'Avaux, the leader of the French delegation, treated him on a basis of complete equality.
When in January 1645 the French agreed to give the Dutch representatives the coveted title of "Excellency" this at once led to demands from the imperial electors that theirs must be given it also.
This in its turn provoked similar claims from several of the Italian princes, so that "before long Munster swarmed with Excellencies" .
It was taken for granted, therefore, in the major peace conferences of the later seventeenth century that the arrangements must ensure that no important state was placed in a position of apparent inferiority to a rival.
When France and Spain made peace in 1659 after a struggle which had lasted for almost a quarter of a century it was agreed that their representatives, Cardinal Mazarin and Don Luis de Haro, should meet on a small island in the River Bidassoa, which separated their territories in the Pyrenees.
On it a pavilion was built, joined by separate bridges to the French and Spanish banks of the river, so that neither minister should have to pass through foreign territory.
In this way the appearance of complete equality could be preserved and the amour-propre of both satisfied.
At Ryswick in 1697 the building in which the two sides met was arranged so that the Swedish diplomat who acted as mediator had a central position, with the French representatives and those of the anti-French coalition each occupying an identical wing.
Even here, however, status still reared its head, for Louis XIV clearly thought it derogated from his dignity as a ruler by divine right to be referred to in the final treaty in the same terms as William III, the mere constitutional  king of a parliamentary state.
In the final stages of the peace-making at Utrecht in 1713 the representatives of the different powers avoided many of the difficulties and delays which had marked earlier such conferences by entering the meeting-place in the town hall pêle-mêle (i.e. in no particular order) and then seating themselves at a round table which had no head.
It is possible to make too much of all this.
Just as ideas of precedence between states could be adjusted in practice to cope with the growing importance of the Dutch republic or Savoy, so governments which really wanted to negotiate could always find ways of doing so which side- stepped difficulties of ceremonial and procedure.
Very often, as in all ages, the achievements of an international congress merely reflected the outcome of earlier and less formal negotiations.
The war of 1689–97 saw a long series of such contacts between the belligerents almost from its outbreak; and the final settlement stemmed from protracted discussions between French and Dutch emissaries in 1694–96.
Secret negotiations of this kind could occasionally be at a very high level.
In 1709, when the position of France in the war of the Spanish Succession appeared desperate, the foreign minister himself, the marquis de Torcy, went incognito to The Hague to explore the possibility of making peace on acceptable terms.
Sometimes commanders in the field could be used as negotiators: in 1714 the treaty of Rastadt which ended the struggle between Louis XIV and the Emperor Charles VI was based on personal contacts between the commanders of the opposing armies, Marshal Villars on the French side and Prince Eugene on the imperial one.
Quibbles over ceremonial therefore did not necessarily impede effective contact and negotiation between states.
But they were always, until far into the eighteenth century, a potentially negative factor.
They could always be used when any government wished to drag out proceedings or in some way be obstructive.
Moreover, it must be stressed, they reflected deep and genuine preoccupations of the age.
Rulers and governments might well be willing when it suited their own purposes to overlook the difficulties which precedence, titles and formal procedures in general so often caused.
But anything which seemed to offer a challenge to what they regarded as their rightful status was certain to cause resentment.
This can be seen in their reaction to the most striking change of this kind during the whole early modern period — the assumption by Tsar Peter I in 1721 of the new title of Emperor (Imperator).
This clearly symbolised Russia's new strength and the international position to which she had now raised herself with spectacular speed.
As such it could not be welcome to many of Peter's fellow monarchs.
The smaller Protestant states of northern Europe — Brandenburg-Prussia, Sweden, Denmark — which were all to varying extents anxious to conciliate Russia, had little  hesitation in recognising the new title.
Nor had the Dutch republic, still a great commercial force in the Baltic.
But Britain and the Austrian Habsburgs did not follow suit until 1742, and France and Spain not until three years after that.
Indeed Franco-Russian disputes on this issue flared up briefly once more in the 1760s and were not finally laid to rest until 1772.
In Vienna the new status of the Romanov dynasty was particularly resented.
A second imperial title in Europe seemed to devalue that of Holy Roman Emperor, still a symbol of the unity of Christendom, endowed with great prestige and held continuously by members of the Habsburg family for almost three centuries.
The result was controversy between Vienna and St Petersburg which dragged on for two decades.
By the mid-eighteenth century, and probably earlier, the power of ceremonial, precedence and titles to arouse intense feeling was none the less clearly in decline.
When in 1769 at a ball in St James's palace the French ambassador in London, the comte du Châtelet-Lomont, risked provoking a diplomatic incident by pushing forward to assert precedence over his Russian colleague, Count Chernyshev, he was felt by most contemporaries to have been rude and indiscreet rather than to have shown a proper concern for the honour of Louis XV.
Half a century earlier his behaviour would have seemed much more normal and aroused much less criticism.
Other signs of a relaxation of the extreme punctilio of earlier generations were now clearly to be seen.
A striking one came in 1760 when, at the marriage of the Princess of Brazil, the daughter of King Joseph I, the masterful Portuguese chief minister, the marques de Pombal, announced that though the papal nuncio and the imperial ambassador would take precedence over all other foreign envoys this would be governed so far as the rest of them were concerned simply by the dates on which they had presented their credentials.
This principle, that within each diplomatic rank (ambassador, minister-resident, etc.) precedence should be decided merely by seniority, was to lead more than half a century later, by the international convention of 1818, to a final solution of most of the issues on which for generations so many energies had been expended and so much ink spilt.
Where non-European states and rulers were concerned there were still sometimes considerable efforts to impress by ostentatious display and pompous ceremonial.
In 1778, for example, envoys from the Indian state of Mysore (a potentially valuable ally of France against British power in India) were conducted, when they were  received by Louis XVI at Versailles, by a deliberately circuitous route through a very long series of rooms all of which were filled with stands and spectators in a demonstration of French power and greatness.
A hundred years earlier such an expedient might well have been used to impress envoys from some European state; but by the later eighteenth century it showed merely that the Indians were exotic visitors from outside the European diplomatic system who might be influenced by such essentially childish devices.
At sea, also, time produced more realistic and utilitarian attitudes.
By the eighteenth century salutes were normally given merely by the firing of guns, not by the more humiliating lowering of the flag or striking of sails.
After Trafalgar, Admiralty instructions to the commanders of British men-of-war no longer ordered them to demand a salute from foreign naval vessels in the waters where Britain had for so long claimed such a right.
By the outbreak of the French revolution sensitivities on such matters were still not dead; but they were a much less obtrusive element in international relations than at any time since quasi-modern diplomacy began to emerge three centuries earlier.
More and more, in an intellectual atmosphere increasingly sympathetic to utilitarian rationalism, such preoccupations now seemed trivial, even contemptible.
 "Our ancestors" , complained an English commentator in the 1790s, "gave themselves up, without even seeming to feel the folly of their conduct, to an immoderate and perpetual contest for rank and pre-eminence, often as destructive, as in general it was ridiculous" .
But attitudes of this kind took time to gain the upper hand: the past relaxed its grip only slowly.
As late as 1812 the French representative in Naples fought a duel with his Russian colleague over a question of precedence; and his doing so was officially approved in Paris.
Even in the 1830s the most influential work on international law could assume that salutes at sea were still a significant aspect of the subject.
CHANGE AND DEVELOPMENT
The picture painted in the preceding pages is in the main one of stability, or at least of change which was usually slow and almost unconscious.
But this is only one side of the story.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century several important new developments were beginning to be visible.
The web of diplomatic contacts which had developed in western and central Europe over the last 200 or more years was now being extended further east by the full incorporation in it for the first time of the great new emerging state of Russia: henceforth events in eastern Europe were to be far more significant in the calculations of statesmen in the west than ever in the past.
At the same time, in a much slower and less spectacular process, foreign offices, departments of central government specialising in the formulation and conduct of foreign policy, were emerging in many European states.
Even more slowly, professionalism in diplomacy was becoming more marked.
By the end of the seventeenth century the chaotic medley of titles which had been used in earlier generations to describe diplomats of different ranks had been reduced to a simpler system which in its main lines was accepted by most states.
During the eighteenth century diplomats were less irregularly paid than had hitherto been the case and there can be seen the first efforts, though very limited and ineffective ones, to provide them with some systematic professional training.
The diplomatic network extends
In the seventeenth century, almost as much as in the sixteenth, Russia was a very marginal part of the evolving network of diplomacy.
Embassies still went from Moscow to the states of Europe at irregular and often long intervals and stayed only briefly.
Very often they were essentially ceremonial or symbolic, with little real political business to transact.
A Russian representative stayed for about a year in Stockholm in 1635–36, and another spent four years in western Europe, mainly in the Dutch republic, in the early 1660s; but both of these were sent for mainly commercial purposes and the second was an Englishman long resident in Russia.
It was only in 1673 that a Russian diplomat, V.I.
Tiapkin, was established in Warsaw.
He remained in post for four years and can thus be considered Russia's first permanent diplomatic representative; and though he had no successor until 1688 there was continuous Russian representation in the Polish capital from that time on.
Both Sweden and Poland by the later seventeenth century had established and important places in Russian foreign policy.
Russian representatives sent to them  normally had the rank of Great Ambassador (Velikii Posol) and their complaints over ceremonial were less intrusive than in other capitals.
But further west the picture remained the traditional one of short-lived Russian embassies whose maintenance by their hosts frequently led to embarrassing disputes.
Moreover, these often troublesome missions did little to make the Russian government better informed about the countries to which they went.
They were strictly controlled by the instruction (nakaz) which they were given when they set out, whose emphasis was heavily on ceremonial, particularly on the use by foreigners of the tsar's full title.
The report (stateinyi spisok) on his mission which a Russian ambassador wrote on his return was devoted in the main to showing that he had strictly observed these instructions.
It usually contained very little general information on the country he had visited.
Russian statesmen were therefore often badly informed about the politics of the outside world; and though in 1672 there was an effort to compile for their guidance an official manual of the available information about foreign states this was not published for well over a century.
Nor were foreign diplomats as yet much more welcome in Russia than during the sixteenth century.
They continued to be closely guarded and severely restricted in their movements.
A.L.
Ordyn-Nashchokin, one of the more forward-looking Russian statesmen of the seventeenth century, objected in the 1660s to any permanent foreign diplomatic representation in the country because it would "bring harm to the Muscovite state and embroil it with other nations" and because foreign diplomats would "find out everything that went on in Moscow and tell it abroad" .
This position changed with almost revolutionary speed during the first two decades of the eighteenth century.
By 1701 the young Tsar Peter I had added to the resident representative in Warsaw others in The Hague, Copenhagen, Vienna and Constantinople.
There was more or less permanent Russian representation in London and Berlin from 1707, in Paris from 1720, in Madrid from 1724.
When the tsar died at the beginning of 1725 there were twelve Russian diplomatic missions at work in different European capitals, a figure which was not to be significantly exceeded for the rest of the eighteenth century.
A considerable proportion of this first generation of Peter's representatives in western Europe were  foreigners in Russian service; but by the 1720s these had been replaced by native-born Russians.
Moreover, this growth of diplomatic contacts was a two-way process.
In 1702 there were only four foreign diplomatic missions established in Russia on a long-term basis (apart from some unofficial agents of the hospodar of Wallachia and of some dissident Serbian groups): by 1719 there were eleven.
The entire ethos of Russian diplomacy was now rapidly changing.
The new diplomats, often members of important noble families (Golitsyns, Dolgorukiis, Kurakins) were now increasingly citizens of a European world of high aristocratic culture.
Unlike their predecessors they were at home in French, now establishing itself as the pre-eminent diplomatic language, and cultivated contacts with foreigners.
The conventions of west-European international relations were now fully accepted in Russia, a process helped forward by the appearance there of translations of western works on international law and diplomacy.
When Peter died his country had been irrevocably launched into the mainstream of international relations in Europe.
The other great semi-Asiatic state on Europe's eastern frontier, the Ottoman Empire, behaved quite differently.
There relative seclusion and indifference to most of the doings of the western powers continued to hold sway: this threw into sharper relief the completeness of the change in Russia.
Such lack of interest in any active Turkish diplomatic relationship with the European states stemmed from a deap-seated view of the world.
This drew a clear dividing-line, one impossible to cross, between the "abode of Islam" and the outside non-Muslim world, the "abode of war" .
Between these different worlds relations must always be those of actual or at least potential hostility.
It was the duty of the ruling sultan, at least in principle, to extend so far as he could the area controlled by true believers at the expense of that ruled by Christian infidels.
An attitude of this kind, backed by all the great weight of Islamic religious conservatism, made diplomatic relations of what was now the normal European kind impossible.
By sending permanent representatives to the courts of Europe the Ottomans would have been accepting a kind of regular and established contact with the west which denied their most deeply held assumptions, which implied an at least partial renunciation of the inherent superiority to the Christian world which they claimed, and which for a surprisingly long time, even after the balance of military strength had turned decisively against them, seemed to almost all of them unnecessary and to promise no  real advantage.
By early in the seventeenth century several of the states of Europe — France, England, the Dutch republic, Venice — already had permanent diplomatic representatives more or less securely established in Constantinope (though the English and Dutch ones at least were for long concerned above all merely with the fostering of their countries' trade: the former continued to be paid not by the British government but by a group of merchants, the Levant Company, until as late as the 1820s).
In the eighteenth century they were joined by others — from Sweden after 1734, from Prussia after 1758.
But Turkish missions to any part of Europe remained rare and exotic visitors.
In Ottoman eyes, envoys from the rulers of the Kalmuck and Uzbek tribes of western Siberia and central Asia were, at least until the great defeats of the 1680s and 1690s at the hands of the Habsburgs, more important than those from most European states; and this attitude was slow to change.
The "Tulip Era" of the early eighteenth century saw a brief spurt of interest in the western world and its technological accomplishments: under the Grand Vizier Damad Ibrahim Pasha (1717–30) five short-lived diplomatic missions were sent to Europe — two to Vienna, one each to Paris, Moscow and Warsaw.
But none of these stayed long or was meant to begin any sort of permanent relationship.
They were intended merely to acquire enough western technical knowledge, particularly in military matters, to help strengthen the defensive powers of an empire increasingly threatened by European armies.
Not until 1793 did Sultan Selim III make the first serious effort to establish permanent Turkish diplomatic missions in the main European capitals; and these were unsuccessful and short-lived.
Moreover, throughout the eighteenth century such Ottoman diplomacy as there was remained largely untouched by European ideas and values.
This was most clearly seen in the complete absence of any concept of the personal security and inviolability of the diplomats accredited to the sultan.
When the Ottoman empire declared war on a foreign state its unfortunate representative in Constantinople was very often immediately thrown into the Seven Towers prison there, where he might stay for a considerable time.
This was the fate of the French ambassador in 1658, the Venetian one in 1714, the Habsburg internuncio in 1716, the Russian minister in 1768 and the French chargé d'affaires in 1798.
Until early in the eighteenth century, moreover, foreign diplomats when given audience by the sultan were expected to wear a Turkish-style robe over their normal clothing in order to spare him the repellent sight of European dress.
Habsburg representatives at least continued to do this until 1719; and the Emperor Charles VI felt it necessary to insist in an article of the treaty of Belgrade which he signed with the sultan in 1739 on the right of his representatives to appear at such audiences in European clothes.
In the  seventeenth century Russia and the Ottoman empire had seemed to many European observers not altogether dissimilar; and of the two the latter appeared until the 1680s or 1690s clearly the more powerful.
The very sharp difference in their relationship to western Europe which had developed by the death of Peter I was pregnant with implications for the future.
The beginnings of foreign offices
Foreign ministers and foreign offices, an administrative apparatus exclusively or at least mainly concerned with the formulation and carrying-out of foreign policy, developed much more slowly than the diplomats whom they were to control.
Their evolution was an unplanned and rather haphazard process whose speed and nature differed considerably in different parts of Europe.
Some signs of their emergence can be seen even in the first days of the "new diplomacy" .
A papal Secretaria Apostolica in Rome for carrying on official correspondence had its functions defined by Pope Innocent VIII in 1487; and by the early sixteenth century a quite extensive and well-organised papal secretariat concerned largely with relations with the secular states of Europe had developed.
It was from the secretarius intimus or secretarius papae of this period that the later papal secretary of state evolved, though that title was first used only in 1644.
Almost simultaneously, under Ferdinand of Aragon, Miguel Perez de Alamàn began to specialise in the control and direction of relations with other states in a way which made him probably the nearest approach to a minister of foreign affairs hitherto seen anywhere in Europe.
In sixteenth-century Spain there was usually a secretary of state with particular responsibility for carrying out the decisions of the king in foreign policy matters.
Gonzalo Perez was appointed by Philip II to this position in 1556; and from 1567 the work was controlled by two secretaries, one handling relations with the imperial, French and English courts, the other the Italian affairs which bulked so large in the Spanish scheme of things.
In France, at the accession of Henry II in 1547, each of the four secrétaires des finances was given the task of overseeing the administration of a group of French provinces and also of relations with the foreign states which bordered on these; thus for example the secretary who supervised Burgundy and Champagne was normally also responsible for relations with the Swiss cantons and the states of west Germany.
These secretaries also began to attend meetings of the royal council, though  merely as clerks, not as members, and in 1559 were given the title of secretaries of state.
It was not until 1589 that a single secretary, Louis de Revol, was entrusted with the supervision of foreign affairs in general; and he was still an administrator, not a policy-maker.
From the 1620s onwards, however, there was an unbroken line of French secretaries of state for foreign affairs.
In England the rapid increase in the amount of diplomatic correspondence from the beginning of the sixteenth century accelerated the development of the secretary of state, originally an officer of the royal household who drafted the king's letters and kept his private seal.
After 1540 there were normally two such secretaries; and though they handled an enormously wide range of business, domestic, Irish and later colonial, "the care of foreign affairs was their most important duty" .
In the sixteenth century, and to a considerable extent in the seventeenth also, their function, like that of the French secretaries under the last Valois kings, was merely executive.
England's foreign policy was made by the privy council committee of foreign affairs, and in the last analysis by the king himself, aided by whichever minister or favourite had his ear at a given moment.
But the sheer range and volume of business with which the secretaries of state dealt made them important officers of government.
Russia equipped herself surprisingly early with one of the most ambitious of these early approaches to a foreign office.
The posolskii prikaz (department of embassies), founded in 1549, had by the end of the sixteenth century become a substantial organisation employing almost a score of clerks.
But this again was an administrative rather than a policy-making body.
Its first head, I.M. Viskovaty, and his successors for over a century, were bureaucrats (dyaki); not until 1667 was it led by a boyar, a nobleman of the highest rank.
Moreover, it was not concerned purely with diplomacy and foreign policy.
Like some of its west-European counterparts it had responsibility also for a number of domestic or quasi-domestic concerns such as relations with the Don Cossacks and with foreign merchants in Russia.
By the early seventeenth century, therefore, foreign offices, in so far as they existed, were still for the most part embryonic.
They were usually small.
Their organisation and internal structures were normally fluid, even amorphous.
Their heads, none of whom was of high noble birth and some of whom were of relatively humble origins, were officials rather than statesmen.
Their responsibilities often included areas which had little or nothing to do with foreign policy.
This slow process of evolutionary growth continued in the generations which followed.
The Dutch  republic, the greatest economic and political success story of the age, had at least in form some of the most incoherent and inefficient arrangements of all for the conduct of foreign policy.
In the first half of the seventeenth century it was controlled by a secret committee of the States-General, usually with the stadtholder himself as its chairman.
In the second half of the century decisions continued to be taken by a series of similar committees and indirectly by the seven provinces which sent delegates to the States-General.
This system worked very slowly and made secrecy virtually impossible: it has been calculated that in all some 2,000 people may have had some influence, direct or indirect, on the functioning of this cumbersome machinery.
In practice real power was largely in the hands of Holland, much the richest and most important of the seven provinces, and particularly in those of its chief official, the Grand Pensionary.
For three-quarters of a century from the 1650s successive holders of this post, John de Witt, Gaspar Fagel and Anthonie Heinsius, acted in effect as foreign ministers, and were thus among the most important figures on the European political stage.
Elsewhere some of these embryonic foreign offices were developing and growing, though this was still often a slow process.
In Russia the posol'skii prikaz, which employed fewer than twenty clerks at the beginning of the seventeenth century, had almost twice as many by 1701: it also had a remarkably large number of interpreters and translators.
More importantly, it was now divided into five departments on an essentially geographical basis, three of them handling relations with distinct groups of European states and the other two those with Asiatic ones (China, Persia, the khanates of central Asia and the little Georgian kingdoms in the Caucasus).
A relatively clear-cut organisation of this kind, later to become the typical form of internal structure of all foreign offices, had already been introduced in 1661 in Sweden, where the small machine for the control of foreign policy was still part of the royal chancery and hardly an independent entity at all; but it is interesting that it should also have evolved relatively early in a country still so isolated and underdeveloped as Russia.
In England, by the later seventeenth century, there had emerged a fairly clear-cut distinction where foreign affairs were concerned between a northern and a southern department, with each of the two secretaries handling relations with the foreign states which fell into one of these geographical divisions.
But each could and did act for  the other when necessary; and English diplomats abroad frequently corresponded with both.
This arrangement, flexible but strikingly unmodern, was to last until nearly the end of the eighteenth century.
In France the secretary of state for foreign affairs had now become one of the greatest of government ministers.
During the personal reign of Louis XIV from 1661 onwards the post was held by a succession of distinctly able men — Lionne, Pomponne, Colbert de Croissy, Torcy — and the administrative machine which they controlled grew substantially in size and complexity.
Early in the seventeenth century, moreover, the post of premier commis had begun to emerge.
These high-ranking bureaucrats, of whom there were normally two or three at any one time and who had always long practical experience of international relations, controlled the day-to-day working of the machinery of French diplomacy and were of critical importance to its effectiveness.
By the end of the century they were dividing its work betwen them in a systematic and efficient way.
The machine was still not a completely specialised one.
The secretary of state for foreign affairs still retained, as did his fellow secretaries for war, the navy and the maison du roi, ultimate responsibility for the administration of a group of French provinces; and each of the four still acted as general secretary to the king, in the drawing up and despatching of official documents of all kinds, for three months in the year.
But France, by the beginning of the eighteenth century, had gone far towards creating a modern foreign office, and the prestige of French diplomacy and diplomatic organisation, bolstered by the military successes of Louis' armies until the 1690s, was very high.
The three generations before the revolution of 1789 saw more of the same process of slow institutional adaptation.
Great Britain, now reluctantly more and more involved in the politics of continental Europe, had at length to equip herself with more effective machinery for the conduct of foreign policy.
Even before the end of the seventeenth century James II, in exile in France, had advised his son, should he ever rule in England, to have a single minister with undivided control of relations with other states.
A few years later there was a proposal to set up a council, composed exclusively of professional diplomats who had served abroad for at least seven years, to advise the king on foreign affairs.
As time went on, moreover, there was an increasing tendency for one of the two secretaries of state clearly to dominate the other and become in effect foreign minister.
Bolingbroke in 1711–14, Stanhope in 1714–21, the elder Pitt in 1756–61, were all clear cases of this; and in 1771, and again ten years later, George III — the most efficiency-minded English ruler for three  centuries — pressed for the conduct of foreign policy to be unified in the hands of a single secretary.
Suggestions of this kind culminated in the creation of the foreign office which began its life in 1782.
It was for a long time a small and cheap organisation.
For most of the 1780s it numbered, apart from the secretary of state himself, merely an under-secretary and less than a dozen clerks.
Nor was it particularly efficient, even by the elastic standards of that age.
The British ambassador to Vienna complained in the 1780s that he had not received a line in reply to fifty despatches he had sent home; and when he returned to London he "was under the utmost Astonishment at having been twice to the Secretary of State's Office without finding a single Soul there" .
But its existence meant that Britain had joined the other major states of Europe in providing herself with a minister and an administrative machine designed to conduct and control foreign policy.
In Russia change came earlier and was, at least in form, more striking.
By 1720 Peter I had reorganised the posolskii prikaz, whose importance had declined sharply in the last two decades, as a new college of foreign affairs.
This was a committee, modelled closely on the Swedish example, consisting of a president, a vice-president and two chancery counsellors: its creation was part of a far-reaching overhaul of Russian central government in Peter's last years which involved, among other changes, the eventual creation of nine colleges of this type.
(It is interesting, however, that the tsar seems at first to have intended to give the college some jurisdiction over aspects of Russia's internal administration; and for a considerable time it did in fact handle quasi-internal issues such as relations with the Kalmuck tribes and with the Cossack hetman in the Ukraine.
The idea of a department of state concerned solely with foreign affairs had clearly still to fight for acceptance.)
This break with the past was in some ways more apparent than real, for the first members of the college had all served in its predecessor.
Whether it was even much of an improvement is open to question; like many committees it was cumbersome and slow-moving and by the 1750s it had become notably disorderly and inefficient.
It grew rapidly, however: the 120 employees of its first days had become 261 at the accession of Catherine II in 1762.
Of all the administrative colleges created by Peter in 1718–22 it, together with those of war and admiralty, was the most important and successful.
Elsewhere in Europe there were also significant eighteenth-century  developments.
In Spain, as part of the administrative reorganisation under the first Bourbon king, Philip V, a new secretariat of state was created in 1714 for the handling of foreign affairs.
Until after Philip's death in 1746 it was still an administrative and not a policy-making body; but in the second half of the century it acquired greater power and independence.
Here again, however, can be seen the persisting tendency to link the conduct of foreign policy with miscellaneous internal functions; for the First Secretariat of State, as it was usually known, acquired in 1782 control of the Madrid police.
In the Habsburg territories in central Europe, which because of their exposed geographical position and limited economic strength greatly needed an effective and well-controlled foreign policy, the Emperor Joseph I in 1709 set up a new committee of nine officials for this purpose.
It was reorganised in 1721; and from the 1750s onwards the foreign policies of the monarchy were given greater continuity by a purely personal factor — the very long tenure of the post of Court and State Chancellor, for over forty years from his appointment in 1753, by Prince Wenzel von Kaunitz-Rietberg.
In 1773 he succeeded, with the backing of Maria Theresa, in resisting a proposal for the dilution of his power by the creation of a collegiate-type administration, such as that in Russia, for the conduct of foreign affairs.
The Staatskanzlei, which controlled the day-to-day administration of foreign policy, had already been reorganised and made rather more efficient at the beginning of his period in office.
There was, however, a complicating factor here which did not exist in any other European state.
The ruler of the Habsburg territories was also Holy Roman Emperor, in theory at least the suzerain of hundreds of German states and rulers.
As well as the Staatskanzlei in Vienna administering the foreign policy of the monarchy there was therefore also the Reichskanzlei, the imperial chancery headed by the Archbishop of Mainz, ex officio imperial chancellor, and concerned with the interests and representation of the empire as a whole.
The rivalry between these two, which went far back into the seventeenth century, was ended only by an agreeement of 1790.
This provided that Habsburg diplomats should have credentials from both chanceries.
They were to receive instructions on imperial issues from the Reichskanzlei and on those affecting only the Habsburg territories from the Staatskanzlei, and would divide their reports between the two bodies on the same principle.
This agreement (which gave formal recognition to what had for several decades been becoming established practice) brings out well the complexities and  ambiguities inherent in much of the administrative structure of old-regime Europe.
In Sweden Charles XI and Charles XII kept control of foreign policy firmly in their own hands.
Any influence on the part of the College of Chancery was further weakened by a reorganisation which Charles XII personally carried through in 1713–14.
However, the constitution of 1720, and the collapse of royal power which underlay it, placed control for the next half-century in the hands of the Diet (Riksdag).
A secret committee of this sometimes negotiated directly with foreign diplomats; and the work of the College of Chancery was largely reduced to preparing foreign policy questions for discussion by the Senate.
The revolution of 1772 changed the situation once more.
Gustavus III recovered control and became in effect his own foreign minister.
The powers of the College of Chancery were increased by an ordinance of 1773 and in 1791, just before his assassination, Gustavus set up the King's Office for Foreign Correspondence.
This was a very small organisation.
At its foundation it employed only eight officials; and this number did not increase much for the next half-century.
Nevertheless, it was the nearest approach to a foreign ministry which the country had as yet possessed.
Even in the Ottoman empire there was some sign of change.
There the Reis-ul-Kuttab, or Reis Effendi as he was usually called by foreigners, the head of the grand vizier's chancery, showed some signs of becoming at least an approximation to a foreign minister.
From the Carlowitz peace negotiations with the Habsburgs in 1699, successive grand viziers began to leave him a good deal of control over foreign affairs, though he again was also entrusted with a wide variety of other and quite different functions.
European observers very often exaggerated his importance, however; and the fact that he was expected to accompany the grand vizier on campaign in wartime often drastically reduced his influence on negotiations with foreign diplomats in Constantinople.
It was in France, however, that during the eighteenth century a well-organised foreign ministry of a recognisably modern sort could most easily be found.
The details of its internal structure varied somewhat from time to time, but the main lines remained fairly stable.
A political department, which handled correspondence with French diplomats abroad, was usually divided along geographical lines into two sections each concerned with a distinct group of foreign states.
Side by side with this grew up a number of smaller specialised departments — a bureau des fonds which dealt with the ministry's own internal finances, the surveillance of  foreigners in France, questions of diplomatic privilege and a wide variety of other relatively minor issues; a bureau des interprètes which took shape in the 1750s and 1760s and was given definitive form in 1768; a department concerned with codes and cyphers; and a geographical one which by the 1780s had a remarkable collection of about 10,000 maps.
These and the other sources of expert knowledge which the ministry could call upon (the first of a series of legal advisers was appointed in 1723, for example) suggest a professionalism which it would be hard to equal elsewhere in old-regime Europe.
It is not surprising to find the Russian government in 1784 asking officially for information on the organisation of the ministry; and the memorandum drawn up in response to this request by one of the premiers commis paints, even allowing for some gilding of the lily, an impressive picture of the efficiency with which, at least in theory, correspondence was classified, answered and indexed.
The growth of professionalism
Clearly diplomacy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was still far from modern.
It lacked the impersonality and regularity of the highly organised machines which conduct present-day international relations.
It was often difficult to persuade able men to accept diplomatic posts in distant capitals.
As in the sixteenth century there was a persistent and widespread feeling that an administrative or, better still, court appointment at home provided much rosier prospects.
Men offered a diplomatic post could not be blamed, as one writer put it, for "choosing rather to fix themselves near to the person of the Prince; because the recompences for that service are much greater, and much more frequent, and because those that are absent are commonly forgotten, which makes them look upon an embassy as a sort of an honourable exile" .
Almost at the same moment an English observer put it more succinctly: "Foreign service may sometimes provide a good stirrup but never a good saddle" .
In England and the Dutch republic difficulties of this kind were particularly acute: one result of this was a tendency from the 1660s onwards to give influential figures in Dutch public life, as an inducement to accept a mission abroad, the highest diplomatic rank of ambassador extraordinary, even if the mission in question were a run-of-the-mill one.
Even so, important posts in Dutch  diplomacy had sometimes to be filled by second-rate men or go unfilled for long periods.
In England, also, complaints of the difficulty of finding capable diplomats can be heard until far into the eighteenth century; and many agreed to serve only to put the government under a moral obligation to find some acceptable post for them at home on their return.
Sometimes the difficulties were really acute.
In 1705–06, a striking case, the very important Vienna embassy was vacant for months, repeatedly turned down by a series of those to whom it was offered.
When at last a reluctant taker was found he asked to be recalled almost as soon as he had arrived at his post.
This situation meant that sometimes a completely unsuitable man was entrusted with an important appointment merely because, for some private reason of his own, he was willing to accept it.
A good seventeenth-century example is Thomas Howard, second earl of Arundel, a great collector of pictures, who volunteered in 1636 for a special embassy to the Emperor Ferdinand II simply because he wished to see and perhaps buy a number of art treasures about which his agents in Germany had sent him glowing reports.
In spite of his total lack of previous diplomatic experience, and a reserve and arrogance which alienated many of those he had to deal with, he was sent on this important and, in the event, quite fruitless mission.
The slow growth of the idea of diplomacy as a distinct profession meant that appointments could still, down to the French revolution, sometimes be made in a remarkably haphazard way on the basis of family connections and sheer luck.
In the early years of the "new diplomacy" in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries it had not been unusual for a diplomat who died in post to be immediately succeeded by a relative, often a close one, who had been attached to his mission with this possibility in mind.
Thus in 1506 the Spanish representative in Venice was succeeded by his son, who presented to the doge on the day after his father's death credentials prepared in advance; and when about the same time a French ambassador to Hungary died, his duties immediately passed to his nephew, who completed the work of the embassy.
Almost two centuries later it was being proposed that in much the same way every Spanish ambassador should have assigned to him a son or younger brother "to assist him as a comrade in his work" , be instructed in the conduct of embassy business and handle matters the ambassador himself could not spare time for, with the implication that he might well succeed to the post  if it fell vacant.
The casual and amateurish character of much British diplomacy in particular, even in the eighteenth centry, is reflected in the fact that when an appointment, especially a relatively minor one, fell vacant without any suitable new holder of it being immediately available, it was sometimes filled merely by a casual volunteer.
Thus in 1786, on the death of Sir Horace Mann, the British envoy to the grand duke of Tuscany, the post was filled for over six months by his nephew, who had no recognised diplomatic status at all.
In 1793, in a more striking case, a boy of seventeen was left at the beginning of the struggle with the French revolution as the sole British representative at the military headquarters of the king of Prussia.
On an even higher level of importance, the Habsburg representative at the Teschen peace negotiations with Prussia in 1779, Count Philip Cobenzl, owed his position to the accident of his cousin Ludwig, Maria Theresa's first choice, being crippled by gout when the time came to set out.
 "Couldn't I go instead?" ,
Count Phillip asked.
"I've never worked in diplomacy, but I've worked in other affairs.
I can use my cousin's servants, his furniture and his carriages, it's not even necessary to send an announcement.
Cobenzl has been announced and a Cobenzl will go."
This happy-go-lucky attitude, with its underlying assumption that diplomacy was not a career in itself but an interlude in other and often more attractive ones, was slowly dying as system, method and organisation became more pervasive in all branches of government.
This change can be seen in several ways.
In the first place, by the eighteenth century a hierarchy of diplomatic ranks more clear-cut than ever before had emerged, though this process was still incomplete.
Until the mid-seventeenth century the essential distinction (oversimplifying somewhat) was that between ambassadors, either ordinary ones resident for some length of time or extraordinary ones sent for some special and limited purpose, and lesser diplomatic representatives referred to by a variety of different titles — resident, minister, agent, etc.
It was still widely accepted that only major rulers (kings and the republic of Venice) could send and receive ambassadors; and it was not clear until at least the later sixteenth century that the status of a diplomat depended on his position in this still embryonic hierarchy of ranks and not, irrespective of his title, on the standing of the ruler he represented.
The French writer Charles Paschal, in his Legatus…
Accessit Graecarum dictionum interpretatio  (Rouen, 1598), appears to have been the first theorist to state clearly what now seems so obvious a fact.
In any case many rulers were for long reluctant to send ambassadors to foreign capitals if a lower-ranking representative would suffice.
This was partly to save money (since an ambassador had to live in a style and with an expense which was not expected of lesser mortals) and partly to minimise the risk of quarrels over precedence.
As late as 1779 Russia maintained a full ambassador (posol) only in Warsaw: in all the other European capitals she had only "ministers of the second rank" .
By the age of Louis XIV, however, the diplomatic ladder was acquiring more rungs and they were more clearly defined.
There was by then a growing feeling that the title "resident" conferred a higher status than the older term "agent" which was in any case dropping out of use.
More important, "envoy" (known from the fifteenth century in its Latin form ablegatus) was beginning to be widely used.
It was usually taken, particularly when combined as it often was with the adjective "extraordinary" , as indicating a status superior to that of the resident: it became rapidly in many states during the later seventeenth century the most widely used of all diplomatic titles.
The action of Louis XIV in sending for the first time, in 1679, an envoy extraordinary to the imperial court in Vienna probably helped to accelerate this process.
William III in England, for example, appointed during his reign forty-two envoys extraordinary, as opposed to twelve ambassadors and a mere six residents.
At the same time, the distinction between ambassadors resident and those who were genuinely extraordinary, in the sense in which that term had hitherto been used, began to break down.
More and more they were now given the title of "extraordinary" , even when they remained for long periods at the courts to which they were sent: increasingly the term, applied to either an ambassador or an envoy, became a mere title of honour.
In the eighteenth century it was more and more usual for an ambassador accredited to any of the greatest European courts to be given it, irrespective of how long he stayed there or what his duties were.
The term "plenipotentiary" , which by the later seventeenth century was also being widely used in diplomatic titles, mainly in the form "minister plenipotentiary" , was even more of a verbal decoration.
As the eighteenth century went on the combination of the two into "envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary" became the most usual way of  designating diplomatic representatives of the second rank, those below that of ambassador but still having the right of audience with the rulers to whom they were accredited.
These changes were complex and often confused.
Different courts had different customs and traditions in these matters which they usually changed only with reluctance.
As the eighteenth century drew to a close, however, the situation was undoubtedly clearer and more regulated than in earlier generations.
By the time of the French revolution three main classes of diplomat were generally recognised: the ambassador, with or without the title of "extraordinary" ; the envoy or envoy extraordinary, often with the additional designation of "minister plenipotentiary" ; and the resident, or now more commonly minister resident (the term "minister" as a somewhat vague diplomatic title went back to at least the mid-sixteenth century).
The humble agent had now virtually disappeared, and where he survived was not seen as having any diplomatic status; but relatively new categories of chargé d'affaires and secretary of embassy or of legation were appearing.
Already in the later seventeenth century, moreover, the designation of chargé d'affaires had begun to be given to secretaries who thus acquired a representative character, either on appointment or on the death or departure of the head of the mission of which they were part.
It would be a mistake to follow early modern Europe in the importance it attached to titles; but the emergence of a more clearly defined diplomatic hierarchy had some significance, both as cause and result, for the parallel emergence of diplomacy as at least a kind of profession.
The same growth of professionalism can also be seen in the increasingly regular and systematic payment of diplomats.
In the seventeenth century they were still often paid very irregularly.
When a government was poor, as for example that of Stuart England almost always was, its representatives abroad often had great difficulty in getting what it owed them.
In 1612 the ambassador in Paris took the desperate step of writing directly to James I to ask for money and persuaded the duc de Bouillon, one of the greatest French nobles, to back his request.
A year or two later his colleague at The Hague asked his friends in London to bribe an Exchequer official to obtain more regular payment of what he was owed.
More than half a century after that, Sir William Temple, one of the outstanding English diplomats of the seventeenth century, had to struggle repeatedly in the 1660s and early 1670s to obtain arrears of salary  and repayment for the expenses he had incurred, and he is merely the best-known of many similar cases.
By 1679 it was estimated that such payments were six or seven years in arrears; and in the 1690s English diplomats were still very often paid merely in Exchequer tallies which could be cashed only after long delay and at ruinous discounts to their face value.
Even before the end of the century, however, the situation, which was near its worst in England, was improving in many states.
Already in 1669 there had been an effort to systematise the payment of salaries to English diplomats; and a fixed scale based on formal diplomatic rank (ambassador, envoy, minister or resident) was adopted in 1690 and remained largely unchanged for the next hundred years.
In Sweden, again, there was a series of efforts during the eighteenth century to regulate more rationally the salaries paid to different ranks of diplomat, though there as elsewhere it was easier to do this than to pay the salaries regularly.
None of this meant that diplomats were well paid, if the financial demands still often made on them by their position are considered.
The expense allowances they received often failed, sometimes by a long way, to cover the costs they had to meet.
It was still easy, particularly in a post where lavish public display and expensive entertainment were essential, for them to incur heavy personal debts.
In the eighteenth century at least one French nobleman refused the offer of the St Petersburg embassy because of the warning example of others who had ruined themselves by accepting it.
Of the Catholic states, that in Rome, in spite of the rapid decline in the political importance of the papacy, was still the pre-eminent example of such a post.
In the later seventeenth century a French duke turned it down on the grounds that his father, by holding it, had accumulated debts of 200,000 livres.
Several decades later another French ambassador had in Rome a male staff of 145, including "a theologian from the Sorbonne, two French secretaries and two Italian, eleven gentlemen of the chamber, a surgeon, sixty-two valets and lackeys of various kinds, four trumpeters, a French chef and his minions, plus coachmen, postillions and pages" .
His successor spent immediately on appointment almost half a year's salary on  table-linen alone.
These were exceptional cases.
But it remained true, as a very experienced commentator pointed out, that "any man filled with an excessive desire of fortune or riches should abandon the calling of negotiator" , while the most successful English diplomat of the eighteenth century claimed that after fourteen years in several highly important posts he found himself £20,000 worse off.
Nevertheless, the general direction of change is unmistakable.
Salaries were now arranged in a more systematic hierarchy and paid more regularly than in the past.
In this respect again, diplomacy, if not yet clearly a distinct profession, was on the way to becoming one.
The slowly growing organisational efficiency of most European states in the conduct of foreign policy can be illustrated in yet other ways.
From the beginning heads of missions had had secretaries who often played an important role; but these had been recruited and paid by the diplomats themselves and had been merely their personal servants.
This arrangement had obvious disadvantages.
A secretary inevitably had access to highly confidential information: as Pecquet wrote in the early eighteenth century, "silence, loyalty and secrecy should reign in every secretariat" .
Yet a disgruntled secretary, or one left unemployed by dismissal or the death or recall of his master, might easily be tempted to profit by the information he had acquired in his work.
Under Louis XIV, when the reputation of French diplomacy was at its height, a good many of those employed by French diplomats betrayed secrets and sold cyphers.
One at least, abandoned in Madrid at the end of a mission, was immediately engaged by the representative of one of the states then leagued against Louis.
The best way to avoid such dangers was to make the secretary a government appointee and give him some official status and the modicum of job security which it brought.
It could also be argued that this would help to build up a body of men with substantial diplomatic experience from which the diplomats of the future might be drawn.
Moreover, a secretary attached to a legation or an embassy and not to an individual minister or ambassador, and remaining at his post over a fairly long period, could become a valuable source of information about local conditions: this might be of great help to a new head of mission coming to a strange country of which he knew little.
These arguments were not  universally accepted.
In particular most French diplomats continued to appoint their own secretaries until the end of the old regime.
In 1710 the marquis de Torcy, the reforming last foreign minister of Louis XIV, managed to secure that six should be paid annual pensions of 1,000 livres while they were unemployed between missions, and thus given some financial security; but this was a gesture with limited effect.
Even in 1788 there were only eight such appointed and paid by the government.
In some other states, however, the movement towards greater system and central control in this respect was more marked.
In Sweden secrétaires de commission began to be appointed to some missions in foreign capitals from 1669 onwards, mainly it seems to provide for greater continuity in the event of the death or recall of the head of the mission.
This arrangement was made more systematic in 1688; and after 1719 there was a good deal of discussion of the status and powers of secretaries of this kind.
They were normally attached, however, only to the more important Swedish missions abroad: a mere minister resident, if he needed a secretary, had still himself to find and pay him.
None the less, they could on occasion have considerable importance.
Sometimes at least they seem to have reported to Stockholm independently of the chief under whom they served; and in the later years of the eighteenth century Gustavus III sometimes tried to use them in this way as agents of a secret personal diplomacy.
In Great Britain change was later and perhaps less systematic; but by the reign of George III British ambassadors were always provided by the government with a secretary of embassy, while by the later 1780s the more important legations were also being included in this arrangement.
From the 1760s, moreover, some of the British secretaries of embassy in Paris and Madrid were also accredited as minister plenipotentiary: they could thus carry on the business of the mission quite effectively in the absence of its head.
Training and its limitations
Perhaps the clearest of all criteria of a true profession is the requirement of some systematic training for entry to it.
By this test old-regime diplomacy never approached professional status.
The early eighteenth century saw a number of assertions that its quality could be raised substantially by providing suitable training.
Pecquet even claimed that good diplomats needed to be prepared from childhood for the work.
There was  general agreement that the education provided by schools and universities, mere book-learning, was of little use here.
The qualities a diplomat needed — quickness of wit, courtly manners and an impressive appearance, social polish and savoir-faire — were not to be acquired in classrooms and libraries.
A British ambassador expressed a widely accepted attitude when, in 1779, he dismissed his Neapolitan colleague at St Petersburg as "merely a man of letters, unacquainted with and unfit for business" .
Proposals for the training of diplomats therefore took in the main two forms.
Young men with such ambitions should, it was universally agreed, travel widely and thus gain a personal acquaintance with at least some of the major European states, their problems and resources.
The best way of doing this was by attaching themselves to one of their country's missions abroad, serving in it in a junior and normally unpaid capacity and thus acquiring experience of diplomatic methods and routines as well as of a foreign country.
This on-the-job training might be supplemented (though here agreement was less widespread) by study of past negotiations and of the achievements of successful diplomats and statesmen: the best way of doing this was by analysing the despatches and memoranda these had written.
For this purpose suitable young men, it was sometimes proposed, might be attached for a period at the beginning of their careers to their country's foreign ministry.
All proposals for any kind of training, however, were subject to severe limitations; and the most important of these was rooted in the nature of old-regime society.
It was a society completely dominated by inherited rank and status.
There was, therefore, a strong and general assumption that the highest diplomatic appointments, and particularly those in the major capitals or in which a strong ceremonial and symbolic element was still involved (notably the embassies of the Catholic powers to the papacy) should normally be given to great aristocrats.
But such men were totally unwilling to embark on a diplomatic career by doing humdrum routine work or studying documents, and then rising step by slow step through a hierarchy of ranks.
For them a progress of this kind might be acceptable, at least to some extent, in the army.
Fighting, after all, was by its very nature a noble occupation.
It was no disgrace to a great nobleman to serve even in a junior capacity in a good regiment.
But if he entered diplomacy at all he expected to do so at or near the top.
To him an important embassy was a perquisite of birth rather than the culmination of years of painstaking effort.
The strength of these attitudes varied considerably between different countries.
The aristocratic grip on the most important diplomatic appointments was weaker in Great Britain, and probably in  Russia, than in France, Spain or the Habsburg territories.
But everywhere it was still a factor inhibiting the growth of systematic training and the professionalism it symbolised.
On the desirability of travel as a preparation for diplomacy there was virtual unanimity.
Callières urged that young Frenchmen, if they could not meet the cost themselves, should be able to see other countries as members of the entourages of French ambassadors or envoys "according to the practice of the Spaniards and Italians who look upon it as an honour for them to accompany the ministers of their master in these sorts of voyages" .
But few governments made any systematic or sustained provision for helping young men to travel abroad and gain a knowledge of foreign language and countries.
Russia, from the first years of the eighteenth century onwards, is the most important exception to this generalisation.
In 1697 Peter I sent groups of Russian nobles to Venice, the Dutch republic and England, essentially to study seamanship; but though their training was intended to be purely technical they none the less provided when they returned home a nucleus of mainly young men with experience of foreign countries and a grasp of foreign languages.
This was an asset of a kind which Russia had never hitherto possessed.
These men supplied many of the first generation of Russian permanent representatives in western Europe: of the twelve of these accredited in the first decade of the eighteenth century five had been members of the group of students sent to Venice in 1697.
Moreover, the initiative of that year was followed up.
When A.A. Matveev went as Russian minister to The Hague in 1699 eight young Russians were attached to his mission to gain the experience which would fit them for future diplomatic careers; and during the next decade members of several important noble families studied in Europe for this purpose with government backing.
In the last years of Peter's reign a considerable number of students of lower social standing were sent to Königsberg, the United Netherlands and elsewhere to learn foreign languages, though not all of these were destined to become diplomats.
By 1724, just before the tsar's death, Count A.I. Ostermann, the head of the new college of foreign affairs, could even hope that in future adequate teaching of the main west-European languages might be provided within the college itself.
The process which Peter had set in motion persisted to a considerable extent after his death.
In mid-century the college of foreign affairs had 139 employees (not counting those engaged in minor routine clerical work).
Of these  forty-five had received some sort of special training for a diplomatic career, and a good many had studied outside Russia.
Another twenty-seven had been students in the imperial cadet corps, the naval academy, the mathematical-navigation school or the Slav—Greek—Latin academy.
It is notable, however, that although titled nobles were very prominent in the highest ranks in the college it still had to make extensive use of commoners, since even in the 1750s it was impossible to find enough dvoryane (members of the privileged landowning class) with an adequate knowledge of foreign languages.
Under Catherine II the sending abroad of budding Russian diplomats for study and experience was placed on a more formal and permanent footing than hitherto.
The official table of appointments in 1779 for the college of foreign affairs, which lasted until it was slightly modified by Catherine's son Paul in 1800, provided for each mission abroad to have two students regularly attached to it for these purposes.
No other state went so far as this; but then none needed to, for none started from the same position of isolation and estrangement from the outside world.
In England in the early part of the eighteenth century the crown occasionally gave some help, in a haphazard way, to suitable young would-be diplomats to travel in preparation for a career in government service.
The writer Joseph Addison is the best-known of the few who benefited from this.
But nothing sustained and organised of this kind was ever contemplated in London.
The French government gave similar help to some young Frenchmen, but on the same unsystematic basis and small scale.
In Sweden the new post of secrétaire de commission was intended in part to provide opportunities of this sort; but its holders also were few.
In Spain, in the later 1780s, the foreign minister, Count Floridablanca, began attaching youths in their late teens to missions abroad to be given there some grounding in diplomatic skills: this again does not appear to have gone very far.
In Brandenburg-Prussia Frederick II suggested in 1776 that young men fitted for a diplomatic career be sent, on leaving university, as secretaries to the Prussian missions in Vienna, London, Stockholm and St Petersburg (in that order of preference).
This would give them a period of study and experience abroad after which it could be decided whether to offer them permanent appointments.
But these were to be men of non-noble birth or at best only from minor junker families, destined merely for posts such as Warsaw or The Hague where real aristocrats were  not needed.
Again the same point emerges: high social standing and systematic training did not mix.
Linguistic ability posed special problems where one particular geographical area was concerned.
This was the Near East.
Several states felt the need for a supply of men with a knowledge of Turkish to ease the conduct of diplomatic, and still more commercial and consular, relations with the Ottoman empire.
As early as the 1550s the Venetian government had begun sending young men to Constantinople to learn the language: this seems to have continued for about a century but then faded away.
In 1670 Colbert, the greatest of all the finance ministers of Louis XIV, organised the despatch to the Turkish capital of a number of very young French boys for the same purpose, while Greek Christian youths were brought to Paris to be educated in the Collège de Louis-le-Grand.
Some of the jeunes de langue, the young Frenchmen sent to Constantinople in this way, played a role of some significance in the slender intellectual contacts between the two countries: the first book printed in Turkey in the Latin alphabet, the Turkish grammar compiled by the Jesuit priest J.B. Holdermann (Constantinople, 1730) was intended for their use.
The Austrian Habsburgs had made efforts in the same direction from the end of the sixteenth century, when the custom developed of sending with each internuncio to Constantinople a small number of boys (Sprachknabe) to learn Turkish.
From the 1640s onwards one of the functions of the Habsburg representatives in the Turkish capital was to oversee their training; and by the early eighteenth century a number of these representatives were themselves former Sprachknabe.
In 1754 this system was changed when the Empress Maria Theresa set up in Vienna the Orientalische Akademie to train young men for consular and diplomatic work in the Near East.
This was the first effort by any European power to provide systematic training at a relatively high academic level for the conduct of relations with any part of the non-European world; and the academy became an element of some significance in Habsburg diplomacy as a whole.
Before the end of the century one of its graduates had risen to be chancellor (Baron Thugut, who succeeded Kaunitz in 1793) and in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries several others (Haymerle, Burian and Czernin) reached similar heights.
Russia, to whom the Near East was almost if not quite as important as to the Habsburgs, also made considerable though less systematic efforts to provide herself with men competent in Turkish.
The Russian minister  sent to Constantinople in 1724 was ordered to choose four students to be attached to his staff to learn the language; while the establishment of 1779 for the college of foreign affairs, which provided for two students to be attached to each Russian mission abroad, allowed that in the Turkish capital to have as many as eight.
Even in England there were occasional signs that the usefulness of having available at least a few men with a knowledge of oriental languages was understood.
In 1699 the government began to pay the professor of Arabic at Oxford an annual allowance of £100 to enable him to train "young students in the modern Arabick and Turkish languages" who could translate letters from Muslim rulers.
However, the money was used (rather typically for the English universities of this period) to help finance an additional chair of Arabic rather than an increased number of students.
For most of the eighteenth century a translator of oriental languages was attached to the office of one of the secretaries of state; but to obtain an English version of a letter in Turkish or Arabic was often far from easy.
One to George II from the pasha of Tripoli in the 1750s had to be sent to the Netherlands to be translated; and another from the sultan of Morocco to George III in 1779 was still awaiting translation several months after reaching London.
Oriental languages, however, were a special and limited problem.
Except to some extent in the Habsburg territories, the men who gained a knowledge of them were destined to remain translators, interpreters or at most consuls, auxiliaries rather than actors at the centre of the diplomatic stage.
The languages which the young aspirant to diplomacy needed to acquire were those of western Europe, of which French was now by far the most important.
Travel and practical experience abroad were not the only possible ways of preparing for a career in diplomacy.
There were also efforts to train suitable young men at home.
The best-known example of this, and probably the most ambitious, was the political academy set up in Paris in 1712 by the Marquis de Torcy.
Cramped accommodation was found in the Louvre for six students, each of whom was to be paid an annual stipend of 1,000 livres, a director and later a secretary.
These, with a further six unpaid students who joined in 1714, constituted the academy.
It was from the first bound up with the establishment of a foreign ministry  archive.
Torcy had himself been prepared to succeed his father, Colbert de Croissy, as foreign minister, by studying the diplomatic correspondence of Richelieu, Lionne and several of the most successful French diplomats of the early seventeenth century.
The students of the academy were therefore to begin by arranging and cataloguing the papers of the foreign ministry as well as studying foreign languages and history.
From this they would graduate to reading and summarising the records of past negotiations and finally to preparing detailed memoranda on various aspects of French foreign policy.
There were regular seminars at which these papers were discussed and at which Torcy, whose personal interest in the scheme is clear, was sometimes himself present.
This was an interesting and well-designed experiment; but its practical results were small.
The academy was handicapped from the beginning by shortage of money; and Torcy's fall from office in October 1715 dealt it a severe blow.
By 1721 it had been abolished as useless.
However, the idea that archive work might be used in the training of embryo diplomats still surfaced from time to time in France.
The Abbé Leroy, a former pupil of the academy, put forward suggestions of this kind to Chauvelin, the foreign minister, in 1737.
Pecquet made others in the following year.
About 1770 there was quite an elaborate proposal to create at Versailles another school for diplomats with thirty-six pupils, while others were to be given practical training by travel abroad or work, in preparation for careers as consuls, in the main French ports.
Nothing came of any of these suggestions.
Occasionally young men with diplomatic ambitions were allowed, if strongly enough recommended, to study in the foreign ministry archives.
Pierre-Michel Hennin, later as premier commis an important figure in French foreign policy, was given such permission in 1749.
Moreover, by the 1780s each of the two departments of the ministry handling correspondence with French diplomats abroad included two or three men being trained for diplomatic work, though the training seems to have been more directly practical than anything Torcy had had in mind.
But none of this had much importance.
Elsewhere in Europe achievements were modest.
In England the creation in 1724 of the Regius chairs of modern history at Oxford and Cambridge was meant, at least in part, to provide training for young men with diplomatic ambitions.
Twenty in each university were to be taught modern history and languages and, if they reached the required standard, given suitable employment at home or abroad.
But this scheme very quickly petered out with little result.
Frederick II in Prussia set up in  1747 a "séminaire d'ambassadeurs" where twelve young "hommes de condition" were to study, with the title of counsellors of legation, under the supervision of high-ranking officials.
It does not seem to have been very attractive to young Prussians, however: the king from the beginning envisaged recruiting students if necessary outside his own territories, in Meckleburg or Swedish Pomerania.
In any case it succumbed within a few years to the stresses of the Seven Years War, and was not revived until 1775.
This too was a small-scale and short-lived experiment rather than a serious innovation.
So far as systematic training of diplomats was concerned, therefore, the eighteenth century saw projects and suggestions, but little lasting achievement.
In two other aspects of modernisation more was achieved.
These were the growth of organised and comprehensive diplomatic archives and the publication of the first great printed collections of international treaties.
The first of these went back as far as the second half of the sixteenth century.
Philip II began in 1567 the building up of a great Spanish archive at Simancas, the earliest of all major modern state archives.
In England papers of the secretaries of state began to be deposited in the State Paper Office from 1578.
For generations to come, nevertheless, most collections of this kind remained very patchy and incomplete, largely because ministers and diplomats tended to look on their papers as their personal property and to retain them when they gave up office.
In France, in spite of its widespread reputation for diplomatic skill, the situation was for long more unsatisfactory than in several other states.
When the future Cardinal Richelieu entered government service for the first time in 1616 he found available so little essential documentation on foreign policy that he had to ask French representatives abroad to send him copies of the instructions they had been given: without this he could not know even what the policies of his immediate predecessor had been.
In 1628, now established as chief minister, he drew up proposals for the systematic preservation of official papers of all kinds, including those relating to foreign affairs; but nothing came of this.
The death in 1671 of Hugues de Lionne, the first foreign minister of Louis XIV's personal reign, began a new era.
His papers were at once sealed by order of the king; and in the 1680s Colbert de Croissy built up a large working archive covering the years from 1660 onwards.
Considerable efforts were made to fill the gaps which existed for earlier  decades, notably by the acquisition of a large collection of Richelieu's papers in 1705, while in 1710 Torcy had most of the archive moved from Versailles, where it had hitherto been, to the Louvre (the papers covering the years since 1698 remained at Versailles to be used in the daily business of the ministry).
In 1763 the now very substantial collection in the Louvre (even in 1715 it had amounted to 2,000 bound volumes) returned to Versailles to be kept there in a new foreign ministry building.
By then it amounted to 8,000 volumes; and by 1792, at the outbreak of war between revolutionary France and most of Europe, this figure had risen to 12,000.
The archive still left a good deal to be desired.
In 1779 the correspondence relating to the Family Compact agreement of 1761 with Spain could not be found there, so that copies of it had to be obtained from Madrid, though the comte de Vergennes, as foreign minister in 1774–87, seems to have made efforts to achieve greater efficiency.
But this was by then certainly one of the finest collections of its kind, if not the finest, in existence.
Elsewhere the eighteenth century saw developments of comparable importance.
In Vienna the Haus-Hof-und Staatsarchiv was founded in 1749, while in Russia the new college of foreign affairs had an archivist from 1720, almost the moment of its foundation.
In 1724 Peter I ordered that all papers relating to foreign policy should be brought together in the college archive; and work on this continued for the next two decades.
In Spain the Archive of the Indies, which had great importance for some aspects of foreign policy, was set up in Seville in 1781.
None of these collections was well catalogued or well arranged by present-day standards, and none was accessible to the general public.
But their creation meant that a foundation was being laid upon which the detailed and scholarly study of diplomacy could later be built.
Very many of the disputed questions in international relations in old-regime Europe contained large elements, larger than would be the case today, of history and law.
Generations of intermarriage between ruling families had covered the continent with a web of dynastic ties which generated numerous and complex claims to territories, titles and rights of all kinds.
These had always bulked large in the history of diplomacy.
Now, from the mid-seventeenth century onwards, they were more than ever in evidence, as pamphleteers and propagandists ready to justify them grew in numbers.
International law, even though much of  the writing about it was still almost a form of antiquarianism, was developing.
Public interest in it, and in international relations in general, was growing over much of Europe.
All this produced a growing demand for printed collections of the treaties between the European states on which so many claims and counter-claims were based.
Many early treaty collections, nevertheless, were not intended to be available to the general public at all.
They were for use by statesmen and diplomats, working aids for the men engaged in the conduct of international affairs.
The earliest of all were no more than small collections of handwritten copies of the agreements concerned.
The peace-treaties of 1648, however, were published in three separate editions, two in Germany and one in the United Netherlands; and from the end of the seventeenth century large collections began to appear.
One, published in Paris in 1693, brought together in six volumes all the treaties made since 1435 by the kings of France, while simultaneously Leibniz, the most complete intellectual of the age, tried in his Codex Juris Gentium Diplomaticus (1693) and Mantissa Codicis (1700) to provide collections which would form the legal basis for improved international relations and a more united society of states in Europe.
Clearly the need for works of this kind was now being felt in foreign offices.
It was proposed that the students of Torcy's academy should be employed in making "a more complete and exact collection of peace-treaties" , with an accompanying commentary; while the largest such enterprise hitherto, the Corps universel diplomatique du droit des gens of J. Dumont de Carlscroon (twelve volumes: Amsterdam—The Hague, 1726), an assembly of documents reaching back to the age of Charlemagne and drawn from sources all over Europe, was designed mainly as a help in policy-making and a kind of portable archive for the use of diplomats.
Works of this kind were another aspect of the way in which diplomacy was slowly becoming more systematic and institutional.
They were also, since they were increasingly used by a small but important educated public, a link between diplomacy and the wider social world in which it operated.
DIVISIONS AND UNITIES: FRONTIERS AND LANGUAGE
By the eighteenth century, therefore, the machinery of international relations in Europe combined old and new in the way inevitable in any form of organisation undergoing slow and unplanned change.
The  traditional elements were still very important.
But side by side with them had now appeared other and forward-looking ones.
Moreover, the intellectual environment in which diplomacy functioned was also changing.
Governments were becoming increasingly unwilling to tolerate many of the ambiguities, compromises and uncertainties which in the fifteenth, sixteenth and even seventeenth centuries had often been the essence of relations between them.
This blurring of distinctions which to modern eyes seem self-evidently clear-cut was most evident in the lack of clearly-defined linear frontiers between states; and the two or three generations before the French revolution saw growing pressures for greater clarity in this respect.
Until the seventeenth century many, even most, European frontiers were very vague, zones in which the claims and jurisdictions of different rulers and their subjects overlapped and intersected in a complex and confusing way.
This was especially true in eastern Europe, where many states were larger and central governments usually less effective at the peripheries of their territories than in the west.
The most striking example of this is perhaps the frontier in the Danubian plain between the Ottoman empire and the Habsburg territories in central Europe.
After the Turkish conquest of most of Hungary in the 1520s and 1530s the Hungarian nobles who had then fled westwards often still maintained claims to their former lands and even asserted their right to live tax-free on them for a limited period and to levy feudal dues in them.
On their side the Turks taxed when they could areas which were formally outside their territory but which were accessible to the border-guards which they, like the Habsburgs, maintained all along this hazy frontier.
Claims and counter-claims of this kind were to figure prominently for generations in Ottoman–Habsburg negotiations.
Even in western Europe it was normal for boundaries between states to be overlain by a mass of traditional rights, claims to exercise jurisdiction or to collect dues and taxes of various kinds, which made the modern idea of a frontier scarcely applicable.
The importance of such rights, and the feeling that they were fundamental to the workings of society, is reflected in the fact that when one ruler ceded territory to another it was usually defined in terms of jurisdictions and local administrative divisions (on the French frontiers, for example, baillages, prévotés, sénéchaussées or communes) and not, as would now be the case, in those of lines laid down in precise geographical terms and illustrated by a map.
Indeed, until cartography had reached a certain level of development it was very difficult to think of frontiers at all in  these linear terms.
There was a general assumption that traditional rights of all kinds were too fundamental to be overridden by a mere change in formal political allegiance.
When territory changed hands, therefore, existing privileges and immunities were very often explicitly confirmed by the ruler under whose sway they had now fallen.
In this way the territorial gains in the Spanish Netherlands and Franche Comté made by Louis XIV in the 1660s and 1670s were careful to leave private and corporate rights there untouched.
Sometimes, as with the French annexation of Lille and Tournai, the king took an oath to respect the rights of the newly acquired cities even before their magistracies took one of allegiance to him.
In the same way many of the cities of the Swedish Baltic provinces, such as Riga and Dorpat, received promises to respect their existing position and rights when they were conquered by Russia in the second decade of the eighteenth century (though these promises were not always kept).
The most complex of all major west-European frontiers, and the one most studied by historians, was the eastern and north-eastern boundary of France.
This was the product of centuries of historical accidents: indeed until the treaties of Madrid in 1526 and Cambrai in 1529, which ended for several generations to come any vestiges of French sovereignty over Amiens and the Vermandois, it is hardly possible to speak of a state frontier at all between France and the Low Countries.
Even in 1659 the Peace of the Pyrenees still left 350 terres contentieuses scattered along it, with isolated enclaves on both sides, little islands of French or Spanish territory in a surrounding sea of foreign-ruled land.
By the outbreak of the revolution in France this confused situation with all its potentialities for dispute and conflict had been largely rationalised.
A series of agreements in 1769, 1770, 1772 and 1779, for example, ended by a process of exchange many of these enclaves on both sides of the border with the Austrian Netherlands.
The same was true of the French frontier on the east with the territories of the Holy Roman Empire.
There a long series of rectifications, again often based on exchanges carefully adjusted to make sure that neither side too obviously gained or lost by them, meant that by 1789 the boundary was essentially a modern linear one.
The growing need for a clear dividing-line of this sort was often explicitly mentioned in eighteenth-century treaties between France and her eastern and north-eastern neighbours, while the detailed work of rectification  and tidying-up absorbed much time and energy in the French foreign ministry: in 1734, as part of the frontier settlement at the end of the war of the Polish Succession, a premier commis des limites was appointed to handle the complex legal and other details involved.
Fifteen years later a treaty ended French frontier controversies with the city-republic of Geneva, while in 1760 another signed in Turin (which incorporated a series of eight maps) greatly simplified in the same way France's south-eastern frontier.
The French case was merely the most striking example of a general process.
Elsewhere also there was an increasing tendency to demarcate frontiers on the ground more clearly than ever before, as when at the end of the Thirty Years War that in Pomerania between Swedish and Brandenburg territory was marked out with boundary-stones.
Seventy years later the treaty of 1718 between the Emperor Charles VI and the Dutch republic, which fixed the boundaries of their territories in the southern Netherlands, provides what is probably the first example of a frontier being defined not merely in the text of a treaty but also on a map attached to it.
Negotiations in the middle years of the eighteenth century clarified the frontier between the Habsburg lands and the Venetian republic.
Even the Ottoman empire began for the first time in its history to acquire some more or less clearly defined boundaries when, after the treaty of Carlowitz of 1699, joint commissions were set up to demarcate its frontiers with Habsburg territory.
By the end of the eighteenth century the idea of the clear-cut linear frontier was accepted not merely by governments but by peoples as well.
In 1789 the cahiers (statements of grievances) submitted to the newly summoned States-General from the Béarn and Bigorre areas in the Pyrenees included demands for clearer delimitation of the frontier with Spain, and those from Bresse, in south-eastern France, for further tidying-up of the boundary with Savoy.
In part such changes of attitude were the outcome of military necessities: as early as 1673 the great French military engineer Vauban had urged strongly that France's frontiers be rationalised to make them easier and cheaper to defend.
They were probably helped also by the progress of cartography and a growing general familiarity with  maps: the great Cassini one of France, begun in 1750, was completed at the outbreak of the revolution.
But most of all they were underlain by an intellectual transformation, by the victory of the modern idea of territorial sovereignty over the far older one of feudal dependence.
The feeling that Europe was bound together, in spite of all its internal rivalries, in some kind of underlying unity, was strengthened by the increasing predominance in the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries of French as the language of international relations.
Its status in this respect as the successor of Latin had by then already been developing for generations.
By the end of the fifteenth century Louis XII was already using French in his letters to other monarchs (the only significant exception was Poland, whose ruler he wrote to in Latin), while at the same time it was the language of the imperial court under Maximilian I. The century or more which followed saw a tendency for it to be used increasingly as the language of diplomacy.
Though most of the negotiations of 1558–59 which culminated in the peace of Cateau-Cambrésis were still conducted in Latin it is clear that French was also extensively used.
The fact that a growing proportion of diplomats were now laymen whose fluency in Latin was often limited helped to accelerate this process, as did the fact that different nations pronounced the same Latin words in markedly different ways; but as the language of treaties, especially those which involved a large number of states or in which the German states were concerned, Latin survived longer than as the language of negotiation.
The first half of the seventeenth century was in this respect a period of somewhat confused transition.
A listing made in Paris in 1640 shows that by then the rulers of England and Savoy, the States-General and many German princes, especially those of west Germany, corresponded with Louis XIII in French.
But the king of Spain wrote in Spanish and almost all the Italian rulers in Italian, while the Scandinavian states, Poland, the Holy Roman Emperor, the Hanse cities and the elector of Saxony used Latin, and the Protestant Swiss cantons wrote in German.
In the protracted negotiations at Munster in 1645–48 the French representatives had their credentials drawn up in French and always used their own language in discussion.
In May 1647 they even prepared a draft peace-treaty in French; and if this had been accepted by the other powers involved it would have marked an important stage in the establishment of the language as that of international relations, at least in western and central Europe.
In fact, the treaty of Munster was in Latin  and in the negotiations "Latin, French, Spanish and Italian seem to have been indiscriminately used…often in the same conversation" .
But the triumph of French was delayed by only one or two decades.
The Franco-Spanish treaty of 1659 was drawn up in both French and Spanish versions; but that of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668 was in French alone, as was the Franco-Dutch peace settlement of 1678 (though the treaty of the same year between France and Spain was in both French and Spanish versions, and that of 1679 between France and the Holy Roman Empire was in Latin).
In June 1682 Louis XIV, now at the height of his power, explicitly asserted his right to correspond with all foreign sovereigns in French and not to use Latin; and though the treaty of Ryswick between France and the Holy Roman Empire in 1697 was still in Latin most of the discussion which produced it was in French, as was the Franco-Dutch agreement of the same year.
The Anglo-French treaty of Utrecht in 1713 was in Latin (the British copy) as well as French (the French one), but that of Rastadt in the following year in French alone.
From the Aix-la-Chapelle peace of 1748 onwards every major international agreement involving the states of western and central Europe was in French; and from the peace settlement of 1763 the hitherto frequent provision that this was not to be taken as a precedent was dropped.
The victory of French was still not total.
Callières at the end of the seventeenth century could still speak of "Latin, ignorance of which would be a disgrace and a shame to any public man, for it is the common language of all Christian nations" .
But this was now an outdated view, or on the verge of being so.
In relations between the German states, in which legalistic considerations so often bulked large, Latin held its ground longer than in Europe generally.
In the Near East Italian remained until as late as 1820 or so the most important diplomatic language, though there interpreters and translators were indispensable as nowhere else.
The treaty of Kutchuk-Kainardji was drawn up in 1774 in both Russian and Turkish versions but with a master copy, which was to be authoritative in case of dispute, in Italian.
However, these were relatively minor qualifications to the pre-eminence of French.
More and more it came to be used in relations between states which were not themselves French-speaking: in 1664 the new imperial ambassador to England addressed Charles II in it at  his first audience and in 1677 the king of Denmark, when addressed by a Polish ambassador in Latin, replied to him in French.
By the later seventeenth century, therefore, it was clearly becoming the language of diplomacy in general, though perceptibly more slowly in eastern Europe than in the west.
Its emergence as the pre-eminent international language was not something forced by France upon a reluctant continent.
When in 1665 Charles II complained that his ministers did not understand French the ambassadors sent to London by Louis XIV at once offered to negotiate in Latin.
In 1714 Louis himself was ready to sign a treaty with the Holy Roman Empire drawn up in Latin: French was chosen by the imperial representatives as a time-saving device.
It was the immense prestige of French culture and the status of the French monarchy as a model for much of Europe which gave the language its dominant position in diplomacy.
As its great historian pointed out, "French became the language of states because it had become the language of courts and aristocracies" .
The nineteenth century was to see its status as the language of diplomacy grow still further as it became even more a symbol of some underlying European unity which, however vague, was genuinely felt to exist by most of those who decided the continent's destinies.
Coming to Terms with a Changing World, 1789–1919
THE STRUGGLE TO MODERNISE
Between the outbreak of the French revolution and the meeting of the Paris peace conference Europe's diplomatic organisation changed in many ways more radically than in the preceding 300 years.
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the continuation of trends already clearly visible — a consolidation of the network of diplomatic links between the European states and a further growth and elaboration of foreign offices.
It also saw one very important new development; its extension far more than in the past to bind Europe to other continents.
Some issues which had bulked large in previous generations now faded into the background.
Ceremonial and precedence notably lost most of the power to agitate rulers and governments which they had hitherto possessed.
Most significant of all, diplomacy by the later nineteenth century was beginning radically to change its character.
It was ceasing to be overwhelmingly political in a narrow sense and acquiring new dimensions which, even well before the First World War, were clearly destined soon to become very important.
The character of international relations was now broadening and their essential nature altering.
The changing diplomatic map
Between the peace settlement of 1814–15 and the death of the old monarchical and aristocratic Europe after 1914 there was some growth in the size and a more marked one in the geographical scope of diplomatic services; but this was slow and largely confined to the major states.
The continent approached the cataclysm of 1914 with a formal apparatus for  the conduct of international relations which now seems strikingly small.
Just before the outbreak of war the British diplomatic and consular services numbered only 446 in all, and of these fewer than 150 were career diplomats.
Though there had been some growth during the previous hundred years this was slow and unspectacular.
The twenty heads of British missions abroad in 1816, when the effects of the country's long political isolation during the Napoleonic wars were still being felt, had increased to thirty-seven by 1860 (mainly because of the emergence of new independent states in Latin America); but the changes of the 1860s swept away many of the smaller legations in Germany and Italy, and the establishment of diplomatic representatives in China, Japan and one or two other non-European countries in the second half of the century did not compensate for these losses.
The same small numbers and slow increase in them can be seen in the services of the other major powers.
The 250 or so French diplomats of all ranks of the 1860s, for example, had increased surprisingly little by 1914, though from the 1880s their numbers began to grow rather more rapidly.
Many important missions still functioned with what now seem tiny numbers: in 1860 those of Prussia in London and St Petersburg each had only six salaried employees in all, and those in Paris and Vienna only four apiece.
Moreover, any growth in numbers was often much less apparent, sometimes totally lacking, in the smaller states.
The half-century after the Vienna settlement saw the development in several of them — Holland, Denmark, Sweden and the Swiss cantons — of a psychology of neutrality, a deliberate avoidance of involvement in international disputes and controversies, which became steadily stronger.
This led to a feeling that while representation abroad for trade purposes was desirable and indeed essential, this could be achieved satisfactorily through consuls alone.
Diplomats and diplomatic representation, it could be argued, were for these states a doubtfully necessary luxury and perhaps even a dangerous one.
Thus Denmark, which had forty-four career diplomats in its service in 1797, had only twenty-eight fifty years later, and a mere twenty in 1914.
In Holland opposition to the ambitious and unsuccessful foreign policy of King William I meant that in the quarter-century 1825–50 the number of missions abroad was reduced by five, while four others were downgraded and the salaries of Dutch diplomats cut by an average of a quarter.
Until the era of revolutions which began in the 1780s these secondary states had sometimes carried real weight in international affairs.
In the seventeenth  century at least both the Dutch republic and Sweden could claim to rank as great powers in their own right.
Their increasing withdrawal from the mainstream of European politics was a significant aspect of one of the most important changes of the nineteenth century — the clear emergence of a group of great powers in whose hands alone the political future of the continent was recognised to lie, and the relegation of all the other European states more clearly than in the past to varying degrees of political unimportance.
Not only did diplomatic services grow slowly in size: there was also none of the inflation of titles and wholesale upgrading of missions which was to develop after 1918 and still more after 1945.
Already in the eighteenth century all the European states had shown themselves reluctant to appoint full ambassadors without substantial reasons of expediency or tradition.
In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries this attitude still held sway.
In 1914 Britain maintained only nine embassies; and two of these were outside Europe and had been upgraded from legation status relatively recently (Washington in 1889 and Tokyo in 1905).
There had been no British embassy in Rome until 1876 and none in Madrid until 1887.
France, which had seven embassies in 1871, had still only ten in 1914.
Even in Berlin the French legation was not raised to an embassy until 1862; and in the aftermath of the defeat of 1870–71 it was seriously proposed to save money by appointing only ministers and no ambassadors at all in future, though nothing came of this.
That nineteenth-century diplomatic services should have remained small and unambitious, confined until late in the century to traditional functions and with no desire to expand their horizons or the scope of their activities, is not surprising.
Foreign policy was in some ways still remarkably simple.
The number of states actively involved in international relations was very small by the standards of the present day and the relationships between them relatively clear-cut.
There was much less to be known about the broader background against which policy had to be made.
Reasonably complete and reliable economic statistics of any kind became available only slowly even in many of the more developed European states; and in any case economic issues usually played only a subordinate role in policy-making.
Public opinion, whatever that vague and difficult term may mean, was not often a serious consideration until very late in the nineteenth century, if then.
International organisations, though on a bread-and-butter level becoming from the 1860s rapidly more important and active, were still very much on the fringes of conventional diplomacy.
In international relations, in a broader sense of  the term, they were beginning to play an increasing part, and one with immense potentialities for the future; but even in 1914 they had only a secondary role in the thinking of diplomats or foreign offices.
By the 1880s this situation was beginning slowly to change.
The demands of a more and more complex economic life, and of an increasingly vocal and often volatile public opinion within each nation-state, were beginning to make some impression on the structure of traditional diplomacy.
Great changes were in prospect in the way in which for four centuries the states of Europe had been formally linked together.
But at the outbreak of the First World War these were only in their early stages.
The essence of European diplomacy was still political, still what it had been to Metternich or even to Richelieu.
The mechanism could still be operated satisfactorily by diplomatic services which were small and content to remain so.
Certainly the geographical scope of European and European-style diplomacy expanded strikingly during the nineteenth century.
The growth of empires in Africa and Asia, and of Europe's trade with the rest of the world, underlay a process which, by its later decades, had begun to bring China, Japan, Persia and even one or two independent or quasi-independent parts of Africa into what was now becoming a world system of diplomatic contacts.
At least in Britain, the greatest of the imperial powers, this development was visible to some observers relatively early in the century.
 "An English minister" , wrote a pamphleteer in 1836, ought never to forget that the map of the British empire is the map of the world, and that if the ministers of other countries have only to study surrounding nations, he has to know the wants and interests of every people under the sun, from the savage Caffres of the Cape, to the civilized inhabitants of France and Germany.
The significance of this should not be exaggerated, however.
Until the end of the nineteenth century, or even later, most foreign offices adapted their internal structures, for so many generations designed to meet demands which were entirely European, only slowly and reluctantly to cope with new problems which increasingly embraced the entire world.
One important non-European or only partly-European state whose position had long been ambiguous, the Ottoman empire, was now finally and firmly incorporated into European diplomacy.
The resident Turkish missions sent to the major European capitals in 1793 by Selim III rapidly lost most of what practical significance they had ever possessed.
From  1811 onwards they were in the care of mere chargés d'affaires, all of whom were Greeks, and controlled only skeleton staffs.
The outbreak of the struggle for Greek independence in 1821 dealt them a death-blow: soon after it began they ceased to exist.
However, the advantages for an increasingly enfeebled and menaced Ottoman empire of representation in the capitals of Europe were now too obvious to be disregarded.
In the eighteenth century it had still been possible for Turks to feel that the empire, inherently superior to the infidel states which threatened it, had no need to stoop to such devices; but such an attitude was now no longer practicable.
In 1835 a permanent Ottoman embassy reappeared in Paris.
In the following year others appeared in Vienna and London.
A legation was set up in Berlin in 1837 and another in St Petersburg twenty years later.
In 1847 the ambassador in Vienna was sent on a special mission to the papacy.
Perhaps an even more significant index of changing attitudes was the sending of a Turkish ambassador to Teheran in 1849: this formed part of "probably the first exchange of permanent diplomatic missions by two Muslim states" .
By the end of the century there were fifteen Ottoman missions abroad and the empire was an integral (and in a negative sense, because of its growing weakness, important) part of the European system of international relations.
But with the non-European world in general, with Asia and whatever independent states could be said to exist in Africa, with Latin America and even to a large extent with the United States, Europe's relationship was still very largely an economic one based on the increasing flows of intercontinental trade.
Diplomatic relations with states outside Europe and the Near East were needed (with the important exception of Anglo-American ones, in which territorial questions often bulked large) mainly to provide suitable conditions for the growth and security of that trade.
Such a relationship could be fostered effectively and relatively cheaply by efficient consuls.
It is significant that in the mid-century the French government paid its minister in Washington less than a seventh (20,000 francs against 150,000) of the salary of its ambassador in London.
There was thus from the 1850s a sharp growth of European consular representation in the outside world, particularly in Asia.
But for decades to come the countries in which this happened were politically important as fields for the rivalries and ambitions of the European imperial powers rather than in their own right.
Not until the Sino-Japanese war of 1894–95, perhaps not until the Russo-Japanese one of a decade later, did any Asiatic state become a true actor on the stage of world affairs, a  subject rather than an object in international relations at the highest level.
The growth of consular representation in Asia, however, was striking, especially in the crucial generation 1840–70, which saw the effective "opening" of both China and Japan.
France, for example, which also equipped herself with consuls in India and Malaya (Singapore, 1839; Calcutta, 1846; Bombay, 1866) established one in Canton, after some earlier unsuccessful attempts, in 1843 and others in Hongkong, Hankow and Tientsin from 1862.
She had one in Bangkok from 1857 and in Tokyo from the following year.
The importance of east Asia in the general consular picture is especially marked in the case of Britain: by the end of the nineteenth century, when there were rather less than 200 salaried members of the British general consular service spread across the world, the more specialised and highly trained one which operated in China alone numbered seventy-five (including student interpreters and assistants).
On the diplomatic level the picture was less impressive.
In Persia, the first purely Asiatic state to attract serious European political attention, a British legation was established in Teheran in 1809, a Russian one in 1828 and a French one in 1855.
But the main function of the British and Russian ministers was to observe and counter each other 's activities; it was the rivalries of these two great imperial powers which kept alive their interest in Persia and made them establish and maintain relations with it.
Though its ruler, Nasr-ed-Din Shah, visited Europe several times from the early 1870s onwards, and also established diplomatic representatives there, until the end of the nineteenth century Persia was not really part of the contemporary world.
An English scholar who visited it in 1887–88 found that the atmosphere was mediaeval; politics and progress were scarcely mentioned, and the talk turned mostly on mysticism, metaphysics and religion; the most burning political questions were those connected with the successors of the Prophet Mohammed in the seventh century of our era; only the most languid interest in external affairs was aroused by the occasional appearance of the official journals.
In China the situation was not altogether dissimilar.
Britain and France were able in 1860 to force the government to receive their representatives in Pekin; and Russian and American ones immediately followed.
China, after some tentative experiments and with a good deal of reluctance, sent ministers of her own to London in 1877 and to Washington, St Petersburg and Tokyo in the following year.
But the country remained for long a backwater in international relations.
Western trade and investment there were rapidly growing; but the duties of western diplomats in Pekin remained essentially those of fostering these economic interests and seeing that no imperial power stole a march on its rivals in this respect.
Chinese envoys in Europe and America did little negotiating: they were concerned mainly with the protection of Chinese abroad and with the collection of information and the purchase of guns, ships and machinery for their government.
Japan was a different matter.
At first her potentialities were quite unseen in Europe.
After the series of treaties in 1854–58 which helped to launch her on a rapid and irreversible process of change it could even still be questioned whether full-scale diplomatic representation there was worth what it cost.
The French government tried to save money by accrediting the consul-general it sent to Japan in 1858 also as chargé d'affaires(a device quite often used outside Europe, mainly in minor Latin-American states where it was expected that political relations would be very much subordinate to commercial ones).
In London there were doubts as to whether the likely trade justified the expense of full diplomatic representation: it still seemed possible that Japan's ports would be used mainly by whaling ships in the north Pacific rather than by merchantmen.
Japanese adaptability and dynamism soon ended such doubts; and this ability to adjust to new demands and enter the modern world was before long visible on the diplomatic level.
By 1873 there were already nine Japanese legations abroad, in Washington and the major capitals of Europe.
In 1906, in a sign of growing national confidence in the aftermath of victory over Russia, seven of these were raised to the status of embassies.
Simultaneously several of the European powers upgraded their Tokyo legations to embassy rank — Britain and France in 1905 and Germany in the following year.
Japan was now clearly a great power, at least in the Pacific.
But apart from the United States she was the only non-European state which could claim anything like this status.
The growth of western power and activity in Asia had done a good deal to extend the geographical scope of European-type diplomacy.
So, in a very minor way, had similar activity in Africa; the first continuous French and British representation in Addis Ababa began in 1897 and 1898 respectively.
Of the forty-one states in which Britain had permanent diplomatic representation in 1914 only twenty-two were in Europe  (twelve others were in the Americas, four in the Middle East and three in the Far East).
The distribution for France and Germany was not very different, though that for the Habsburg empire and to a lesser extent Russia showed a greater preponderance of European interests.
But the major posts, with very few exceptions, were still European ones.
When the First World War broke out diplomatic services were still markedly concentrated in Europe and still thought predominantly in terms of European problems and rivalries.
Foreign offices and their organisation
Foreign offices were also growing larger, though, like the diplomatic services they controlled, only gradually.
Most of the growth was concentrated in the later decades of the nineteenth century and still more in the first years of the twentieth.
Thus the French foreign ministry, which had in 1814 some seventy employees with functions directly related to foreign policy (i.e. excluding messengers, doorkeepers, etc.) had still only ninety in 1870; but by 1914 this figure had grown to 170.
In the Habsburg dominions the Staatskanzlei in 1848, the last year of its life, had thirty-nine officials with some degree of authority — departmental heads, ministerial advisers, departmental counsellors, ministerial secretaries and clerks.
The foreign ministry which took its place in that year had fifty-one in 1895, ninety-two in 1911 and 146 when the monarchy collapsed in 1918.
In Russia a proposed reform of the ministry in 1910 suggested that there should be 187 established posts in all, an increase of forty-nine on the number fixed only thirteen years earlier.
Even in the small and neutrally-minded states the same process of growth in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries can be seen.
The staff of the Dutch foreign ministry swelled from twenty-three in 1849 to forty-five in 1914; and the tiny Danish one grew from a mere nine in 1848 to twenty-one in 1900 and a remarkable fifty-eight in 1919.
In Sweden an even more striking increase in face of the intensified pressures and dangers of the early twentieth century took place, from nineteen in 1905 to eighty-eight in 1918.
These were still everywhere small numbers, especially if they are compared with the very much bigger ones in the other great ministries of all the major states.
In 1870 the ninety serving in the French foreign  ministry, for example, were dwarfed by the 1,500 employed in the ministry of finance, the largest of all French central government departments.
In one or two cases there were even sharp reductions in staffs which had been inflated by patronage and the need to provide posts for young members of the ruling class.
The emerging Turkish foreign ministry, a case in point, had about 200 salaried officials working in it in the early 1870s, at the end of the Tanzimat period of attempted administrative and legal reform.
But the whole Turkish diplomatic and consular establishment, which was further swollen for political reasons by Sultan Abdul Hamid in the 1880s and 1890s, was considerably reduced by the revolution of 1908–09 which overthrew him, so that by 1914 the foreign ministry staff had fallen to probably no more than 150.
Russia until well into the second half of the nineteenth century is a more striking example.
The foreign ministry in St Petersburg was in the first decades of the century ludicrously overstaffed: under Alexander I it gave ostensible employment to well over 700 people (including the poet Pushkin), many of whom had no real duties whatever.
A former Russian ambassador in London complained in 1803 that it had "more people than the offices of all the secretaries of state in Europe combined" .
Even in 1868 when the foreign minister, Count A.M. Gorchakov, sharply reduced the numbers, there were still 306 established posts: he cut this figure to 134.
The essential conclusion, however, is clear.
In 1914 or even 1918 foreign ministries everywhere were still by present-day standards very small institutions staffed by socially homogeneous élite groups but the pressures making for growth, and in the decade or more before 1914 rapid growth, were now irresistible.
As the scope of foreign policy expanded to embrace areas hitherto regarded as unimportant or completely ignored, and as the geographical scope of the diplomatic network widened, the sheer amount of business to be handled grew correspondingly.
The recognition in the 1820s of the new Latin-American republics as independent states is said to have increased the workload of the British foreign office by a half, while in the later decades of the nineteenth century commercial and economic diplomacy and the need to influence the new force of mass public opinion were making new and unprecedented demands.
In the mid-1820s the total number of  despatches sent and received each year by the foreign office was about 12,000.
Little more than a generation later, in 1857, it was almost 60,000.
By 1916, the busiest wartime year, over 265,000 documents were entered in the central registry and over 90,000 more in that of the new foreign trade department.
Comparisons of this kind are difficult to make with accuracy over long periods of time; but the direction and size of the change are beyond doubt.
A roughly similar pattern, especially as regards the rapid growth in business in the years before 1914, can be seen everywhere: the unit of the Russian foreign ministry which duplicated papers concerned with relations with the European states, for example, trebled its output in 1893–1906.
In their internal organisation the foreign offices of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, in spite of frequent changes in detail, had a general similarity.
Everywhere the most important element was a department or more usually a series of departments divided along geographical lines, which handled correspondence with missions abroad, of which those in the major European capitals were by far the most significant.
There was usually a good deal of flexibility in the organisation of these political departments: their number and scope altered easily and often to meet changing demands.
The British foreign office, for example, had in 1835–41 a short-lived China department, the result of the ending in 1833 of the East India Company's monopoly of trade with China and of the growing tensions which erupted in the "Opium War" of 1839–42.
By the 1880s it had three main departments of this kind: Eastern, Western and American (the last also covering China, Japan and Siam).
By 1900, however, a Far Eastern department had been created and most of the business relating to African questions had been given to a new African department: in other words the administrative subdivisions were adapted to the changing political importance of different parts of the world.
Much the same adaptability can be seen elsewhere.
The German foreign ministry, for instance, set up in 1890 a colonial department in response to the Reich's acquisition a few years earlier of a largely valueless empire in Africa and the Pacific.
Around this central structure of political departments others were grouped.
Often there was a consular and commercial one.
This reflected the fact that although in almost every country men moved between the diplomatic and consular services the latter was still everywhere distinct from the former, with different duties and a much lower status.
Usually again there was a department which controlled the internal administration  of the ministry and its finances; sometimes this was also involved in the appointment and promotion of diplomats.
Even the Turkish foreign ministry, very belatedly, acquired one such in 1871.
Frequently, as the nineteenth century went on, there was also a department concerned with essentially legal issues such as naturalisation and extradition, and international legal disputes; the French ministry had such a bureau des contentieux for much of the century and the Sardinian and later Italian one had a consiglio del contenzioso diplomatico from 1856 onwards.
As a movement in the same direction the German foreign office set up a legal and commercial department in 1885 and the British one acquired a legal adviser in 1893 (a post of Legal Assistant Under-Secretary had already been created in 1876).
In several states the personal staff of the foreign minister, chosen by him and handling his correspondence and interviews, was a formally distinct entity.
This often acted as his main link with and control over the permanent officials of the ministry and could have great practical importance in its day-to-day running.
In France the cabinet du ministre throughout much of this period and in Italy the gabinetto particolare set up in 1855 were often extremely influential.
That in France, about which most information is available, had at various times responsibility for a wide variety of technical services — couriers, diplomatic bags, codes and, much more significantly, personnel and appointments.
To give details of the internal organisation of each of the foreign offices of Europe, and of the endless changes in detail which took place over more than a century, would be wearisome and repetitive.
There was, however, a clearly marked tendency for this organisation to become more complex as time went on.
The number of departments within each major foreign ministry grew with the growing complexity of the work to be done.
That of the Habsburgs in Vienna had five such departments in 1849 but seventeen by 1914, while by 1918 the division of the French foreign ministry which now handled both political and commercial policy was split into eleven sub-divisions.
Even the German Auswärtiges Amt, the organisation of which was always relatively simple, was divided into five main departments in 1919 as against only two in 1871.
The growing professionalism of both diplomats and foreign office officials during this period is seen most clearly in changes in the ways in which they were recruited.
Now, for the first time, fixed though often not very stringent criteria for appointment began to play a significant role.
But apart from this an increasingly professional tone can be  detected in two other ways.
A consciousness of belonging to a coherent professional group was both expressed and strengthened by the appearance, from the mid-nineteenth century onwards, of guides and yearbooks which for the first time listed the diplomats and foreign office officials in the service of most of the European states.
This also gave the general public for the first time some information, though in a summary and superficial way, about the men who carried out their country's foreign policy.
At the same time diplomatic archives, inevitably growing in size, became better organised, as did some of the libraries which were now a part of all major foreign offices.
More and more, in other words, these now possessed the means not merely to carry out foreign policy but also to study foreign policy questions in some depth.
In the eighteenth century none, with the possible exception of that of France, had carried out much that could be called research.
Now all the larger ones were beginning to have at least some capacity of this kind.
Of the first of these developments one of the earliest examples was the publication in Sweden from 1824 onwards of a list of the country's consuls and vice-consuls.
Until 1860 this was the work of the college of commerce; but in that year it was taken over by the foreign ministry and ten years later replaced by an annual list of Swedish diplomats and ministry officials.
In Britain the Foreign Office List made its first appearance in 1852, while France began to produce its Annuaire Diplomatique from 1858.
Italy first published a similar list in 1865, and from 1888 a bulletin in which the foreign ministry provided information on promotions and transfers of officials and diplomats as well as condensed versions of consular and diplomatic reports.
Publications of this sort broke sharply with the anonymity and complete immunity from public scrutiny which had hitherto marked foreign offices, and were therefore at first greeted in them with doubt or hostility.
When the Foreign Office List made its first appearance "it was strongly objected to in certain quarters, as likely to afford information to the general public with regard to the office, which they thought it advisable they should not possess, and much information was for a time withheld" .
But the wave of publications of this kind which began in the 1850s could only gather strength as the century went on and public interest in foreign policy questions grew.
The development of organised diplomatic archives and of foreign office libraries is perhaps best seen in Britain.
There, from January 1801 onwards, correspondence covering the years since 1780 was systematically assembled from the State Paper Office and elsewhere and taken to the  foreign office — an obvious response to the need frequently to refer to it in the conduct of daily business and the resulting inconvenience if it were stored anywhere else.
The first foreign office librarian had been appointed in 1800: when he retired a decade later he had organised this mass of papers into a systematic and usable collection.
The library itself was less lucky.
Until the move in the 1860s to a new building with adequate space, it was dispersed on shelves scattered all over the old one, with the books crowded three rows deep on the shelves so that only those in the front row were visible, and no catalogue of it existed.
Yet the office now had as never before the means to produce serious analyses and discussions of foreign policy questions, and to use large masses of materials in the process.
When in 1850 a radical member of parliament, J.A.
Roebuck, moved a famous and extremely detailed vote of censure on Palmerston's foreign policy over a period of two decades, 2,000–3,000 volumes of manuscript correspondence were consulted by officials in the government's attempt to produce a convincing rebuttal.
An effort of this kind would have been quite beyond the office's powers at any time until well into the nineteenth century.
Everywhere diplomatic archives were becoming more complete and more carefully arranged.
Even in Constantinople the creation of one was begun in the 1850s (though in this case it was very poorly organised), while a Records Director was appointed at the end of the 1860s in an effort to control the tide of paper which, in the Turkish foreign office as in all others, was now flowing more and more strongly.
In many ways, then, Europe's machinery for the conduct of international relations was moving into a new era.
It now had to use new resources to meet new challenges.
But the past and its legacy still bulked very large in many ways — in the aristocratic and socially exclusive makeup of both diplomatic services and foreign offices, in their continuing smallness and in their concentration on traditional and narrowly political aspects of policy.
More specifically, in most offices the interception and reading of correspondence which seemed a possible source of useful information still continued.
Public opinion, in an age which increasingly liked to think itself morally superior to its predecessors, was sometimes less willing than in the past to tolerate activities of this kind.
In Britain the revelation that the correspondence of Mazzini, the Italian nationalist leader then a refugee in London, was being opened and read in this way produced strong criticism in parliament and the press.
The result was the  abolition in February 1844 of the Secret Office which for generations had been intercepting letters of possible interest to the government.
A few months later the decyphering organisation which had existed for not far short of two centuries also disappeared.
In the second half of the century British governments seem to have gathered no intelligence at all in this way.
Indeed so high was their reputation for self-denial in this respect that in the first years of the twentieth century the brothers Paul and Jules Cambon, French ambassadors in London and Berlin respectively, entrusted their private correspondence regularly to the British diplomatic bag rather than sending it through the French ministry of foreign affairs or the French post office: if either of these channels had been used it would almost certainly have been opened and read.
Such rectitude, however, was very much the exception rather than the rule among the great powers.
In Vienna the interception of letters became under Metternich more frequent than ever before.
The head of the decyphering branch of the foreign ministry there claimed in 1823 that he had personally broken eighty-five foreign codes, at a time when eighty to a hundred letters were being opened on each working day.
The Austrian revolutionaries of 1848, flushed with liberal and democratic idealism, swept away the entire organisation.
But this fit of morality hardly survived their short-lived victory over the old regime.
By the end of the century France, Russia and the Habsburg empire all had flourishing cabinets noirs.
Under the Third Republic coded diplomatic telegrams were passed as a matter of course to the French foreign office by the postal authorities to be decoded and read; and this activity reached a climax in the first years of the twentieth century.
In 1902 the letters of Lord Lansdowne, the British foreign secretary, to the ambassador in Paris were clearly being opened in this way.
But in spite of all this it seems likely that during much of the nineteenth century this subterranean aspect of international relations was less important, and less prominent in the minds of both diplomats and policy-makers, than at any time in the last 300 years.
By the beginning of the twentieth century the attitudes and ambience of many foreign offices were altering quite rapidly.
Far-reaching organisational changes were being forced upon many of them by the sheer growth of business, the sharpening of international rivalries and the accelerating pace of events.
In Britain a considerable reorganisation got under way in 1903.
Three years later the introduction of a new  registration system for despatches and telegrams played a crucial role in changing the position of the more senior officials, the first-division clerks, and giving them, far more than in the past, a share in policy-making.
The British foreign office also showed itself more forward-looking than almost any other in the adoption of the typewriter: it appointed its first typist in 1889 and had eight by 1900.
In France also, in 1907, there was an effort to reorganise work more rationally and effectively, in particular by bringing political and economic diplomacy together in a single direction.
But adjustment to changing circumstances went deeper than formal organisation.
The spirit too was often changing.
Methods were becoming more businesslike.
Officials worked harder, or at least more consistently.
New technical aids were increasingly used.
A young Frenchman, when in 1896 he entered his country's diplomatic service, found himself trained as in the past, largely by being made to copy as models of style despatches dating from the pre-revolutionary monarchy.
No typewriters were as yet in use, and the young recruits were taught the "diplomatic" style of handwriting, designed for maximum legibility.
As a member of one of the two departments into which the direction politique of the foreign ministry was then divided, he found that he and his colleagues spent much of their time playing draughts and that there was considerable rivalry between the two as to which could make the better "five o'clock tea" .
But when he returned to the ministry in 1913, after a long spell of service in Rome, a great deal had changed.
Work was much harder.
Tea was taken, if at all, at one's desk.
Each office now had a telephone.
Female typists and even female secretaries were now employed.
Only the building on the Quai d'Orsay was inadequate and the old lift often refused to work.
Similarly a young Russian diplomat, serving in a junior post in London during the very first years of the twentieth century, found that the embassy possessed only one typewriter, and that so old that it was difficult to use.
However, when he returned in 1908 to the foreign ministry in St Petersburg he was struck by finding there a considerable number of women typists who "filled the offices, walked arm in arm in the corridors, and flirted with everybody" .
This spirit of change was not universal.
The Italian foreign ministry and diplomatic service remained among the most overstaffed and inefficient in Europe.
One foreign ministry clerk in the early years of the twentieth century "soon decided that it was not worth the trouble to go to the office to sleep when I could sleep more comfortably in my own bed or pass my  time in more interesting or more amusing tasks" , while an Italian ambassador is said to have spent only fifteen days of a year in residence in a post which he disliked.
But in many of the major foreign offices of Europe things were changing very perceptibly in the years before 1914.
They were ceasing to be the almost monastic institutions of the past.
Their efficiency was growing, their outlook becoming wider and less bound by tradition.
The increasing amount of business to be handled meant that more and more decisions were now taken by officials, even merely middle-ranking ones: it was no longer possible for almost every question to go to the minister himself for final decision, as had hitherto been normal.
Increasingly officials helped to make policy, sometimes with decisive effect.
The vast amount of routine clerical labour which had made up so much day-to-day activity in the past had been lightened by the coming of the woman typist and sometimes also of clerks recruited specifically for this sort of work.
In 1890 all foreign ministries had been, to varying extents, tradition-bound and backward-looking.
By 1914 some at least were becoming modern policy-making organs with efficient administrative and clerical underpinnings.
Whether, as is sometimes asserted, the development of more rapid communications, above all the telegraph, greatly increased the control of foreign ministries over diplomats in the field is at least debatable.
Certainly the telegraph was more and more relied on.
The first use of it in British diplomacy seems to have been by the Paris embassy in December 1852: by the middle of the following year the missions in Vienna, Berlin and Florence could also communicate in this way with London, and from 1878 British diplomatic telegrams were numbered in the same way as despatches.
However, for long their cost helped to restrict their number.
In 1860 the foreign secretary urged British diplomats not to use unnecessarily "this very costly channel of communication" , and until at least the end of the nineteenth century the ministers in China and Japan, to save money, were still guided, except in serious emergencies, by despatches which took five weeks to reach them via the Suez Canal, or four if they were sent across Canada.
Quite soon, none the less, complaints began to be heard that the coming of the telegraph had tilted the balance dangerously towards inflexible central control of all diplomatic activity.
What one old-school diplomat called "the telegraphic demoralisation of those who formerly had to act for themselves and are now content to be at the end of the wire" had, it was claimed, given  greater effect to the instinctive dislike felt by all foreign ministries for diplomats who showed initiative and were not afraid of responsibility.
It is doubtful whether such charges were justified.
One foreign secretary argued in the 1860s, with some force, that the coming of the telegraph meant that often diplomats were no longer sent, as in the past, long and detailed despatches with full instructions.
This, he claimed, meant that they sometimes had to act more rather than less on their own initiative.
It was growing uniformity of organisation, the growth of more professional diplomatic services with the relatively fixed standards and procedures which are the essence of any true profession, which were the main force limiting the independence and personal initiative of diplomats.
The more highly organised and consciously efficient foreign offices became, the less scope there was for the individual who did not fit easily into these bigger and more complex machines.
Even in pre-telegraph days, when instructions could be sent no faster than a horse could trot or a ship sail, it is far from clear that this meant greater independence for diplomats.
Very often slow communications meant merely a slowing-down in the whole pace of events, an acceptance of the fact that important negotiations were bound to be protracted.
It is also relevant here that in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries meetings between rulers were exceedingly rare (Louis XIV never met William III, the Emperor Leopold I or Charles II of Spain, the rivals against whom he struggled for so long) and negotiations between them had therefore to be conducted entirely through their diplomats.
In the nineteenth century, on the other hand, there was a significant amount of direct personal contact between them, or at least between their chief ministers.
The congresses of 1814–21 are the most obvious example of this; but Napoleon III negotiated directly with Cavour at Plombières in 1858 and with Bismarck at Biarritz in 1865, while the peace preliminaries of 1871 were settled face-to-face between Bismarck and Thiers and the first Dreikaiserbund alliance of 1872–73 took shape from personal meetings between the rulers of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia.
Any move of this kind towards the "summit diplomacy" of our own day was likely to undermine somewhat the position formerly enjoyed by the heads of great diplomatic missions.
Recruitment and training
Diplomacy remained throughout this period, especially in the major states, an aristocratic pursuit.
In its higher reaches in particular it was still, as generally in the eighteenth century, the preserve of a social élite.
It was also a profession, or quasi-profession, in which family connections, sometimes verging on downright nepotism, counted for much.
There was  a strong hereditary element in its recruitment patterns.
A high proportion of diplomats everywhere still began their careers, until well into the second half of the nineteenth century, by serving as unpaid attachés; and it was not unusual for the head of a mission to ask for a son or a nephew to be assigned to it in this capacity.
Few could go so far as Musurus Pasha, who during his thirty-five years as Turkish ambassador in London staffed the embassy entirely with his sons, nephews and sons-in-law; but even in the most developed states of western Europe and on the eve of the 1914 conflict family influences could still be important.
Foreign offices were affected by them just as much as service abroad.
In the Habsburg empire, under the most snobbish and conservative regime of all, "once a new family had gained a foothold in the foreign ministry it was almost a rule that the sons, and even the grandsons, remained in the profession" .
In London successive generations of the Hertslet family served in the foreign office continuously for well over a hundred years from 1795 onwards.
Aristocratic influences were at their height during the first half of the nineteenth century and in any diplomatic service were always most marked at the highest levels.
Of the twenty-three men who achieved the rank of British ambassador in 1815–60 twenty were aristocrats.
Of the remaining three, George Canning, the future prime minister, was only briefly ambassador in Lisbon in 1814–15, when his political career at home was at a low ebb; and the two others, Robert Liston and Stratford Canning, represented Britain in Constantinople, a very important post but one in which high social rank was not the advantage it was in the other great capitals.
Of the sixty-six British envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary during the same period forty-seven can be classed as aristocrats; while of the sixty-four French ambassadors and ministers who served in 1814–30 (admittedly a period when aristocratic influences were untypically strong in France) only ten were non-noble.
Even in the early twentieth century, except perhaps in France, now a republic formally at least grounded in a history of revolution, the tradition of a diplomacy conducted by aristocrats was still dominant.
The German empire, down to the collapse of 1918, continued to give very marked preference in diplomatic appointments not merely to noblemen but to members of old Prussian families.
It was also a distinct advantage there to have been, in one's university days, a member of an aristocratic student fraternity.
The  few non-noble heads of German missions abroad were nearly always tucked away in very minor capitals far from Europe.
At one point there were as many as four of them; but these were stationed respectively in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru and Siam.
There is nothing surprising in this continuing emphasis on noble birth and high social rank.
There was still a general assumption that the self-confidence and savoir-faire they conferred were essential in any aspirant to one of the major embassies.
Even in 1914 there was still widespread agreement with Drouyn de Lhuys, one of the foreign ministers of Napoleon III, that aristocratic diplomats were "very useful if not indispensable for the éclat of our embassies, provided that merit is not altogether absent" .
Society in every great state of Europe was still dominated, to varying degrees, by landowning aristocracies.
Everywhere inherited rank and titles were still an integral part of social life.
Usually diplomatic services and foreign offices in this respect merely reflected the societies they served.
This was not invariably the case.
Both the Habsburg monarchy and the Bismarckian empire were represented by services more snobbish and restrictive than the societies which employed them.
But it is pointless and unhistorical to condemn the absence of "democracy" in the recruitment of diplomats when Europe in general was still so far from being democratic.
High and assured social status helped to keep diplomats, especially high-ranking ones, as in the past distinctly cosmopolitan in outlook.
The aristocracies which ruled so much of Europe could still see themselves even in 1914 as in some sense parts of a social order which transcended national boundaries.
They were united across these dividing-lines by fundamental similarities of outlook and often of education.
A diplomat who spent most of his working life in foreign capitals could easily feel himself part of an aristocratic international to which national feeling was hardly more than a vulgar plebeian prejudice.
These attitudes were far from new; but in the nineteenth century, in an age of increasingly strident nationalism, they stand out more clearly than ever before.
They are seen most clearly in the marked tendency for diplomats to acquire foreign wives (and sometimes with them significant amounts of property in foreign countries).
Thus, under the Second Empire, at least three heads of important French diplomatic missions had British wives, and others had American, Italian and Polish ones.
In the German service in 1891 there was only one ambassador (Prince Reuss in Vienna) who had a German wife.
In Britain Sir Horace Rumbold, who ended his career as ambassador to Vienna in 1896–1900, is a striking individual case of the same  cosmopolitanism.
Born in India, brought up mainly in France and speaking both French and German perfectly, he thought seriously as a young man of entering Habsburg service and married an American, while his brother took a Russian wife, one of the Nelidov family which was prominent in tsarist diplomacy.
Sir Robert Morier, perhaps the most successful British diplomat of the later nineteenth century, was partly French: in 1870 he had six cousins fighting in the French army.
Many other such examples could easily be found.
Side by side with aristocratic influences went, at least in the great states of continental Europe, often very significant military ones.
The use of soldiers as diplomatic representatives was far from unknown before the nineteenth century.
During the great cycle of wars in 1689–1713 both Louis XIV and his English opponents employed military men to fill many of the most important diplomatic appointments, while under Napoleon I they were even more extensively used.
In 1789–1814 twenty French missions abroad were headed by generals.
But during the nineteenth century soldiers were perhaps more continuously prominent in this way than ever before.
The militarism which had begun to take root in Europe during the eighteenth century was now steadily gaining strength.
In the great conservative monarchies of Prussia, Russia and the Habsburg empire military influences, reflected in such small but highly significant things as the habitual wearing by their rulers of army uniforms, pervaded the atmosphere of the court and many of the upper reaches of government.
Very often in them high-ranking officers had easier and more direct access to the ruler, and sometimes more influence over him, than any civilian minister, however important.
Quite frequently therefore a soldier might be appointed to head a mission in Berlin or St Petersburg in the justified belief that military men were especially welcome there and likely to be effective representatives.
Even in France soldiers often received high diplomatic appointments, especially under a regime in which military influences were strong, such as the Second Empire.
Napoleon III sent a soldier, Baragueys d'Hilliers, as ambassador to Constantinople in 1853 and another, Pélissier, to London in 1858, though neither of these achieved much.
More important was the appointment of one of his aides-de-camp, General Fleury, as ambassador in St Petersburg in 1869; and his successors, Le Flô and Chanzy, were both soldiers as well.
In Italy also high diplomatic posts were often filled by generals and occasionally admirals.
The military influences which were so strong in diplomacy in central and eastern Europe were therefore by no means unknown in the great western states as well.
In the later decades of the nineteenth century these influences were being institutionalised in the new appointment of the military attaché; but this was merely one aspect of their significance.
At the highest diplomatic level they were now more consistently important than ever before.
By the middle decades of the century the "old diplomacy" as it had evolved over the last three hundred years, with its easy-going and cosmopolitan atmosphere, its often short hours of work, its extensive use of unpaid or inadequately paid diplomats, its almost complete immunity from effective public scrutiny, was under increasing pressure.
More and more governments now demanded diplomatic services systematically and even rigidly organised, in which efficiency carried more weight and merit could expect to be rewarded more effectively.
If heads of mission were allowed largely to choose their own subordinates central control was weakened.
If young attachés were unpaid this made it more difficult to treat them as cogs in a bureaucratic machine.
As one of them wrote in retrospect: "The…taxpayer could owe them no grudge: they were unpaid.
Society could expect nothing of them but amusement and a disposition to enjoy themselves; and they had no responsibilities unless it was that of not misleading the chief by wrong deciphering or an incorrect translation."
If promotions were decided largely by social rank or family connections this impeded the growth of an efficient service.
By mid-century, therefore, almost every European government was making efforts to control more effectively the recruitment and promotion of its diplomats.
In this respect again diplomacy was becoming more organised and efficiency-minded.
In Britain from the 1820s all attachés had to have a letter of appointment signed by the secretary of state; and from 1815 a number of them began for the first time to be paid.
These were only small and tentative steps, however, towards more effective central selection and control of young diplomats.
Even in 1860 well under half the seventy-eight attachés in the British service were paid, however inadequately; and the unpaid ones were still regarded as being scarcely real members of the service at all.
Nevertheless, a beginning had been made.
Another way of improving quality and excluding obviously unsuitable candidates was to insist on some minimum formal academic qualification.
Thus in France decrees of 1853 and 1856, which repeated an earlier one  of 1844, demanded that recruits to the diplomatic service hold a licence en droit, while the Belgian government in 1858 made a university degree essential for admission.
But the most effective way of controlling recruitment was by an officially-organised entrance examination; and from the 1850s this device was being used by more and more states.
Spain tried as early as 1852 to establish the principle of entrance by competitive examination.
In 1856 qualifying examinations were introduced in Great Britain for both the foreign office and the diplomatic service; and in the same year the Sardinian government specified a similar test (three written papers, one of them in French, and three oral examinations).
From 1860 young Frenchmen without a licence en droit could also gain appointment by taking an examination in diplomatic history, international law and languages.
In the same year the Dutch government began to subject would-be diplomats to a test of this kind: a year earlier Gorchakov had tried to establish something similar in Russia.
In Greece recruits to the diplomatic service, who had already to hold a law degree, were subjected, at least in theory, to a competitive entrance examination from 1868 onwards.
In Japan a qualifying examination (which seems to have worked well and produced very good recruits) began in 1894, a minor but significant aspect of the extraordinary process of change which the country was now undergoing.
Even in the Ottoman empire a commission was set up in 1885 to examine candidates for entry to Turkish diplomacy.
The immediate effect of these changes can be easily exaggerated.
In some cases — Spain and Greece for example— the examinations were very irregular in their application and for long existed largely on paper.
In Russia that introduced in 1859 had been sat two years later by a mere five candidates in all.
Sometimes examinations, where they did take place, were not a very searching test of ability.
This was at first the case in Britain, though the entrance examination for the foreign office was made considerably tougher in 1871 and that for the diplomatic service became more competitive from the 1880s onwards.
Often there was a marked persistence of the traditional tendency to regard external polish and savoir-faire, good appearance and manners, as much more important than the ability to do well in examinations.
This attitude remained strong in Germany, where the entrance examination was formally quite strict; and in Russia it was even stronger.
There"the entrance examinations were a simple formality.
Entrance into the service and the whole subsequent diplomatic career depended entirely on the connections of the man in the ministry itself and at Court.
As a result there were many badly prepared and incompetent people in the diplomatic service."
In the 1890s a well-connected young man could still enter the Russian foreign ministry on the strength of "an oblong letter signed by a well-known titled name" and a short interview with Count Kapnist, the head of the Asiatic department of the ministry: there was no examination of any kind.
Moreover, even in states where entrance examinations were testing and strictly applied, many of the highest diplomatic posts continued to be given to men who were not professional diplomats.
France, a striking case of this, had from 1880 onwards a compulsory examination for all entrants to its diplomatic and consular services which was hedged around with precautions against favouritism or unfairness (all scripts were anonymous and double-marked; the five-man jury which ranked the candidates contained two members from outside the foreign ministry).
This was followed by a three-year trial period for successful candidates, who had then to sit a second examination (examen de classement).
Only after surmounting this final hurdle were they given permanent appointments.
No other state imposed tests of such severity; of the sixty-six candidates who sat the entrance examination in 1913 only five achieved permanent posts.
Yet this did not prevent a considerable proportion of headships of French missions going to outsiders — senators, prefects, colonial governors, soldiers (again notably in the case of appointments to St Petersburg) and even journalists.
Most important of all, diplomacy remained an expensive and, except in the highest ranks, underpaid profession, one which only the well-to-do could hope to enter.
This, coupled with its socially exclusive ambiance, restricted it as effectively as in the past to a small group at the top of society.
Many states specified a minimum private income which recruits to their diplomatic services had to have (for example the 6,000 lire demanded by the Sardinian government in 1856 which continued to apply in the new united Italy, or the £400 required in Britain).
But formal requirements of this kind were merely a recognition of reality, of the fact that few diplomats could hope to live on their salaries.
That for an income of 10,000 marks as a condition of entry to the German diplomatic service was abolished in 1908; but this left the real position completely unchanged.
In 1912 the foreign ministry calculated that a minimum of 15,000 marks was needed.
The First World War thus engulfed a Europe in which diplomatic services were still very far from being meritocracies.
None the less, much of the inheritance of previous centuries was clearly being discarded.
Extraordinary embassies of an essentially ceremonial kind, so frequent in the past, involving the sending of a great aristocrat on a mission of  congratulation or condolence or to represent his sovereign at a coronation ceremony, were now becoming rare.
Perhaps the last occasion on which they figured at all prominently was at the coronation of Alexander II of Russia in 1856.
When they did take place they could still be very costly to those who undertook them: Earl Granville, who represented Britain in Moscow on that occasion seems to have paid £7,000 out of his own pocket for the privilege.
But by the middle of the nineteenth century they had lost most of even the symbolic importance they had had in earlier generations.
The giving of often lavish presents to diplomats when they left a court to which they had been accredited, when a treaty was signed between two states or a special embassy of congratulation or condolence was sent, still a widespread practice in the first years of the nineteenth century, fairly soon became unimportant.
In 1834 British diplomats and consuls were forbidden to accept presents from any foreign government, an abandonment of one of the oldest of diplomatic traditions.
The belief that lavish entertainment was an indispensable part of successful diplomacy was not quite dead by the mid-century: a generation earlier the vicomte de Chateaubriand on his appointment to London had been careful to take with him Montmirel, reputedly the best cook of the age.
But this old-world assumption was clearly dying.
When in 1850 Sir George Hamilton Seymour, then representing Britain in Lisbon and with thirty years of diplomatic experience behind him, told a parliamentary select committee that"Certainly I consider that giving dinners is an essential part of diplomacy; I have no hesitation in saying so.
I have no idea of a man being a good diplomatist who does not give good dinners', he provoked widespread ridicule.
An attitude which had for generations seemed common-sense now appeared archaic, part of a vanishing world.
More importantly, but in a not altogether dissimilar way, in the lower and middle ranks of diplomacy at least seniority gained ground as a reason for promotion at the expense of nepotism and favouritism.
In 1856 French secretaries of embassy and legation were divided into three classes and it was ordered that no one was to reach the third and lowest class without having already served as an attaché for three years, while everyone must spend at least three more in each class before being promoted to a higher one.
This put promotion by seniority on a more regular basis than ever before in any major European diplomatic service.
In Britain Lord Clarendon in the 1860s seems to have been the first foreign secretary to apply systematically the principle of seniority in the appointment of  attachés; and from that decade onwards heads of British missions abroad were expected to report each year on the conduct and abilites of those under their control.
Even at the highest level, where politics and family connections still so often determined appointments, there were signs that the claims of mere ability were beginning to be heard.
Lord Lyons, who was given the Paris embassy in 1867, has been called "the first major British diplomat who owed his appointment to professional rather than political considerations" .
The scattered efforts made during the eighteenth century to develop some form of systematic training continued; but they were almost as desultory and short-lived as their predecessors, and little more effective.
In France the later head of the foreign ministry archives, the comte d'Hauterive, set up in 1800 a school for this purpose which, like its predecessor almost a century earlier, stressed heavily the study and analysis of diplomatic documents.
It was clearly meant to provide serious training, and d'Hauterive even cherished the vain hope of being able to admit students to it by competitive examination.
In fact most of its pupils were young men seconded from the conseil d'état and admitted through family influence.
By 1815 there were only four of them left and the school was moribund: by 1830 it had ceased to exist.
Like the earlier effort by Torcy it left no real legacy.
D'Hauterive, nevertheless, was both persuasive and persistent.
In 1825 he induced the then foreign minister, the comte de Damas, to experiment with an essay competition as a means of choosing the most able young attachés for promotion to secretary of embassy or legation; and in 1830 the Prince de Polignac, who had succeeded Damas, was persuaded to set up another training course.
This was to last two years and to be focused on public law and, once more, the study and analysis of diplomatic documents: the pupils were also to have a knowledge of either English or German.
But it remained a paper exercise.
D'Hauterive died only three months after the new regulations were introduced.
Other schemes for the training of diplomats were less ambitious and even less effective.
In Russia a proposal of 1802 to set up an institute which would offer an elaborate course extending over eight years to prepare young men for a diplomatic career led  nowhere.
The same is true of a more modest suggestion put forward in 1820.
The training school in the Sardinian foreign ministry which was seriously considered at the end of the 1840s never came into existence.
Other efforts were too limited in scope to have much effect.
In Britain there were occasional complaints about the complete absence of any sort of organised training for diplomats.
In 1836 one pamphleteer urged the creation of a "Diplomatic College" for this purpose (though significantly he assumed that it would produce only attachés, secretaries and consuls and that ambassadors and ministers would always be appointed on grounds of "rank and property" ).
Palmerston tried to ensure that attachés in the missions to the German courts should at least be able to read German script; and in the 1840s and 1850s there were efforts to send students of oriental languages from Oxford and Cambridge to Constantinople, where they were to form a new class of oriental secretaries and replace the Greek and Levantine dragomans who had for decades acted as translators and interpreters there.
In France the now outmoded system of jeunes de langue created by Colbert was gradually replaced by the more up-to-date teaching provided by the Ecole Spéciale des Langues Orientales Vivantes set up in 1795.
But all this was very small-scale and ineffective.
Efforts to train diplomats remained as unsuccessful, the real value of such training as open to question, as a hundred years earlier.
NEW TASKS AND WIDENING SCOPE
International relations in Europe from the middle of the nineteenth century to the First World War were more and more influenced by several factors which, if not always new, were growing rapidly in importance.
From the 1850s and more particularly the 1870s onwards military considerations — new weapons, the importance of rapid and effective mobilisation in case of war, the balance of military and to a lesser extent naval power in general— were more prominent and pervasive than in the past.
The fostering of trade was preoccupying foreign ministries as never before.
Cultural diplomacy, efforts to spread in other countries  knowledge of a particular national language and sympathy for an allegedly distinctive national culture, was beginning to show itself.
And the indefinable element of public opinion, of the need of governments to present their policies in a form which gained popular support, was making itself felt.
New dimensions: military and naval attachés, economic and cultural diplomacy
The first of these forces underlay the emergence of a new type of quasi-diplomatic post, the military and naval attaché.
It is hardly surprising that the reign of Napoleon I, an era of warfare on an unprecedented scale, should have seen the first tentative moves in this direction.
Armies of unheard-of size, fighting on a scale never before known, generated an unprecedented demand for military information.
From at least 1805, therefore, there existed within the French foreign ministry a bureau which collected details of foreign armies and navies and their movements.
In 1806 a captain was attachéd to the French embassy in Vienna specifically to collect and send back to Paris information about the Austrian army, while other officers were sent to Berlin for similar work in anticipation of the war which broke out in that year.
Indeed, under Napoleon I, French diplomats in general, and sometimes also consuls, were expected to provide information on foreign armed forces to an extent never seen before.
In 1830 Prusssia posted a captain to her legation in Paris, her first true military attaché, while in the later 1830s four French army officers were seconded to the diplomatic service, working sometimes in Paris and sometimes abroad.
Another was attachéd to the French embassy in Madrid in 1841; and there is some record of a corresponding Spanish appointment in Paris three years later.
It was from the 1850s, however, that these tentative beginnings crystallised into a new post which rapidly became generally recognised.
The French government began from 1851 regularly to appoint a military attaché to its Berlin legation, while the first British ones were sent to Paris, Turin and Constantinople in 1855 (though they were not officially described as military attachés until two years later).
The transformation of the European balance of power by the wars of 1854–71, the revelation in 1866 and 1870 of what sheer military efficiency could achieve, ensured that the new institution spread rapidly.
Sweden appointed her first military  attachés, to Paris and St Petersburg, in 1858.
By the early 1880s, if not earlier, Italy had hers in Vienna, Paris, St Petersburg and Berlin, as well as naval ones in Paris and London.
The British government had naval attachés in Paris and Washington from 1860, while a French one arrived in London in the same year.
The rapid progress of military and naval technology, organisational changes, the sheer growth in the size of armies and navies, meant that states scrutinised each other 's progress in these respects with increasing care, while the few serious armed conflicts of 1871–1914 became laboratories in which new weapons and methods could be studied and their effectiveness tested.
During the Russo-Japanese war of 1904–05, by far the most important of these struggles, there were twenty-seven foreign officers acting as official observers with the Russian armies in Manchuria, as well as a considerable number on the Japanese side.
By 1914, it has been estimated, the world's diplomatic services included some 300 or so such attachés.
These men were not diplomats.
They were a new and foreign element which a changing international situation had superimposed on Europe's existing diplomatic machinery.
Military and naval attachés usually regarded their appointments merely as interludes in their service careers and often had little sympathy with the outlook and preoccupations of professional diplomats.
In the military monarchies of central and eastern Europe, however, soldiers in posts of this kind could play roles of great importance outside the normal diplomatic channels, uncontrolled by diplomats or foreign offices.
From the later 1830s the rulers of Prussia and Russia maintained at each other 's courts military plenipotentiaries, high-ranking officers whose role in relations between the two monarchs was often more important than that of any diplomat.
They reported directly to the ruler they represented, often using their own cyphers: it was quite possible for neither the foreign nor the war minister ever to see their reports.
Their importance, though difficult to evaluate exactly, could be very great.
General von Schweinitz, the Prussian military plenipotentiary in St Petersburg, seems to have played in 1866 a crucial role in explaining and justifying to an at first hostile Alexander II Bismarck's policy in Germany.
His successor, General von Werder, who served almost continuously as military plenipotentiary in 1869–87, and later as ambassador in St Petersburg in 1892–95, was a key figure in Russo-German relations.
The rapid worsening of these relations after 1890 meant that no such Prussian representative was sent to the Russian capital after 1891 (though the post was later revived, ineffectively, in 1906) and that the last Russian one left Berlin in 1892.
But the influence of military attachés in general on  German policy was growing in the generation before 1914.
From about 1883, when Field-Marshal von Waldersee, the chief of the general staff, developed an active interest in foreign policy, they began to report directly to the general staff and, encouraged by Waldersee, to the emperor himself.
Bismarck, who saw in Waldersee a serious rival, disliked this development, but was powerless to reverse it.
In 1900, on the initiative of William II, it was made clear that military attachés were subordinate not to the head of the mission of which they were formally members but only to the kaiser himself.
Their reports could be commented on by the head of mission; but they might well not be seen at all by the imperial chancellor, who had formal responsibility for the conduct of German foreign policy.
In no other state was the influence of military attachés so great and so formalised as in Germany; but in others it could on occasion be significant.
The Russian attachés in Sofia and Belgrade, Colonels Romanovskii and Artamonov, a good case in point, did much by their belligerent attitude to give the Balkan alliance of 1912 against the Ottoman empire a more aggressive and expansionist slant than it might otherwise have had.
Military and naval attachés were essentially a product of an increasingly tense and competitive international situation; but in some instances at least their activities helped to deepen tensions and intensify competition.
The growing international importance of economic and particularly commercial forces now influenced diplomacy in a number of ways.
There was a growth, notably from the middle decades of the nineteenth century, in the collection and publication by governments of information about trade and trade opportunities.
Economic information from French consuls about the countries in which they were stationed had begun to be published in various forms from about 1829 onwards, notably in the Annales du commerce extérieur from 1843, while the Bulletin consulaire français began publication in 1877 and the Moniteur officiel du commerce in 1883.
In Italy a roughly similar consular bulletin on trade relations with foreign countries and means of developing them appeared from 1862, though irregularly and often in rather skimpy issues.
Belgium produced a Receuil consulaire, intended for merchants and industrialists, from 1855 onwards.
In Britain the founding of the Board of Trade Journal in 1886 did something to improve the hitherto often dilatory and irregular publication of consular reports, while the Russian government published such material regularly from the 1890s.
The same pressures — the sharpening of international trade competition, a growing fear of being left behind by more  enterprising or better-organised rivals — underlay the efforts increasingly made by foreign offices to adapt their structures to a new situation.
In Britain the scanty government services provided to the nation's merchants had come until the 1860s almost entirely from the board of trade.
From 1865, however, the foreign office had for the first time a department concerned entirely with commercial affairs.
In France the direction des consulats et des affaires commerciales which had been set up some years earlier was reorganised in 1882.
More importantly, the amalgamation of consular with diplomatic services, the ending of the inferior status to which the former (and therefore by implication all commercial considerations) had traditionally been relegated, had for long been a favourite panacea of reformers in several countries.
As early as 1842 Disraeli had moved a House of Commons motion calling for union of British diplomats and consuls in a single service.
In France, where already in 1793 the revolutionaries had placed consuls, hitherto supervised by the ministry of marine, under the control of the foreign ministry, the questioning of the country's institutions which followed the catastrophe of 1870–71 produced a series of such suggestions.
But change of this kind proved difficult and aroused much resistance.
The quality of consular services was improved in a number of cases, notably in Britain where a departmental committee of 1903 introduced for the first time recruitment of consuls by limited competition (instead of as hitherto purely by nomination of the secretary of state for foreign affairs) and a rationalised salary structure.
But in every major state consular and diplomatic services remained separate entities.
In all of them commercial and economic affairs continued to have an aura of inferiority, of boring drudgery; and this attitude was often reflected in the organisation of foreign offices.
Of the correspondence received by the French foreign ministry in 1893, for example, over 70 per cent dealt with commercial and consular affairs: but this had to be coped with by a staff of only twenty-one against the twenty-nine who handled the much smaller number of political despatches and telegrams.
Everywhere interchange between the consular and diplomatic services, though possible, remained relatively rare (though, interestingly, probably less so in Russia than in any other of the great states).
Perhaps the most obvious illustration of the extent to which trade was  forcing itself upon the often unwilling attention of traditional diplomacy was the creation of a new type of diplomat most clearly typified by the commercial attaché.
The first significant appointment of this kind was that of Joseph (later Sir Joseph) Crowe as British commercial attaché in Paris in 1880.
He was expected, quite unrealistically, to foster British trade throughout Europe; but by the first years of the twentieth century the attaché in Paris had been supplemented by others in Berlin, Vienna, Constantinople, Madrid, Pekin and Yokohama.
Germany also began during the first years of the twentieth century to make some patchy and sporadic provision of much the same kind for her trade interests abroad.
In France intermittent discussion from 1879 onwards, in which the advocates of change often pointed to Britain and Germany as models, bore fruit at last in the sending in 1904 of a commercial attaché to London at the special request of the embassy there: by 1908 the French diplomatic service included six such appointments.
Commercial attachés were not a complete answer to the problem of coping with the increasing volume and importance of economic diplomacy.
In 1914 they were still few in number and often had impractically large geographical areas to deal with.
The British attaché in Berlin was expected to cover Holland and the Scandinavian countries as well as Germany, while his French counterpart was responsible not only for the Reich but for Holland, Belgium and Switzerland, and another had the whole of the Far East as his sphere of activity.
Moreover, the fact that they usually did not come from commercial backgrounds and were stationed in political capitals rather than commercial or industrial centres also tended to limit their effectiveness.
Nevertheless, something had been achieved.
Other new appointments made in response to the changing balance in international relations between economic and political considerations were less significant.
A British experiment in the first years of the twentieth century with commercial secretaries, diplomats detailed for a few years to make a special study of the trade of the area in which they were stationed, had little effect.
The appointment from 1899 onwards of a number of short-lived commercial agents intended, in ways which were never clearly defined, to supplement the work of the consuls, had even less.
In 1913 France broke new ground with the appointment to some of its missions abroad of technical counsellors, officials seconded from the ministry of public works to help French industry gain orders in areas such as the QQChinese and Ottoman empires in the building of railways and port QQfacilities; but this initiative was immediately overtaken by the outbreak of war.
Well before the cataclysm of 1914, however, it was clear that the narrow boundaries of the "old diplomacy" as Richelieu, Metternich or even Bismarck had known it, had been permanently expanded.
This  process accelerated during the struggle as economic warfare and blockade, and the complications they created in relations with neutral states, became increasingly important.
The Comité permanent international d'action économique set up in 1916 by Britain, France, Italy and their smaller allies was one of the more obvious illustrations of this; and it was supplemented by a wide range of other inter-allied bodies, including executives for the control and distribution of individual products such as wheat, sugar and nitrates.
In 1917 the British government set up a new department of overseas trade designed to bring commerce and foreign policy into more effective contact: its head was to be responsible to both the foreign secretary and the president of the board of trade.
Two years later a new commercial diplomatic service was created.
Neither of these innovations had much success; but they showed more clearly than ever how a changed international situation was now being reflected in institutional change.
In Germany the most important aspect of the reorganisation of the foreign ministry after the war was the creation of a new department to foster and supervise foreign trade, the Aussenhandelstelle, so large that it occupied over 120 rooms.
In France the same consciousness that an increasing proportion of international relations now lay completely outside the scope of traditional diplomacy was reflected in the fact that of the country's entire delegation to the Versailles peace conference the ministry of foreign affairs provided only about a quarter.
Cultural diplomacy was still only a very minor factor in the international picture of the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Where it existed it was characteristic of states which, although they had long and proud cultural traditions, had suffered serious setbacks or for some reason lacked self-confidence.
Of these France was much the most important example, though in many ways Italy fell into the same class.
In both of these there can be seen by the 1880s and 1890s an anxious defensiveness, a feeling that the nation's value and importance must be asserted in the face of more successful rivals.
This was to be done not merely by political means but also by fostering its cultural influence and emphasising its cultural achievements.
Most important of all, its language, now more and more generally accepted as the ultimate badge of nationality, must be supported and a knowledge of it spread as widely as possible.
These ends were to be achieved not by direct government action but rather by government support of unofficial or semi-official bodies such as societies and religious missions.
In France the Third Republic inherited  from the old monarchy and the Second Empire a long tradition of such support for Catholic missions in the Near East and China and showed itself as willing as its predecessors to shoulder what it felt to be its obligations in this respect.
There was an obvious paradox here.
The republican regime which had taken shape in France by the later 1870s was deeply disliked by many devout Catholics; and the increasingly acute conflicts between church and state culminated in 1902 in a brutal severing of the links between the two forged by Napoleon I's concordat with the papacy exactly a hundred years earlier.
Yet even at the height of this bitter struggle the foreign ministry made a considerable effort to foster Catholic missions in the Near East as vehicles of French influence there.
Government support of this kind in fact increased substantially during the generation or more before the First World War, when the foreign ministry trebled its spending on cultural relations in general.
Nor was official support and encouragement limited to Catholic organisations.
Others which were non-Catholic, non-Christian or indifferent to all forms of religious belief — the Alliance française (1883), the Mission laique française (1902), the Alliance israelite universelle (1860) benefited in this way.
Indeed the effectiveness of policies of this kind depended largely on their flexibility and willingness to use a wide variety of instruments.
In particular considerable attention was paid to fostering French educational enterprises abroad, predominantly in the Near East.
Here there was a powerful tradition of French interest and influence tracing back to the Crusades, and some history of earlier French educational effort.
In 1842, for example, the government had provided twelve bursaries for the education in France of the sons of sheikhs or emirs of the Lebanon; and a Jesuit seminary had been founded in Beirut a year later.
But in the first years of the twentieth century the scale of such efforts sharply increased.
Lycées were established in Cairo and Beirut in 1909 and in Alexandria in the following year.
On the other side of the Atlantic the consul in New Orleans even attempted in 1907, with some success, to secure government finance for the teaching of French in Louisiana.
It was not until 1911 that all this activity received some formal expression within the foreign ministry, with the creation of a bureau des écoles et des oeuvres françaises à l'étranger, and this was on a very modest scale.
France, however, clearly led the world in the development of what was to become an increasingly important element in international relations.
Elsewhere activity of this kind was much less important.
In Italy a touchy and often aggressive nationalism, a feeling, rather as in France, that a great cultural tradition was being undervalued and might be in danger, was coupled with vociferous territorial demands in the Trentino, the Adriatic and Africa.
These forces combined to produce considerable pressures for a spreading of the national language and culture.
The most important vehicle for this, the Dante Alighieri Society, founded in 1889, soon became a semi-official purveyor of cultural propaganda, notably in the Trentino, the most important focus of its activities in its first years.
By 1911, when Italy's newly launched first Dreadnought battleship was significantly named the Dante Alighieri, it claimed 50,000 members; but although it enjoyed considerable official support it had little influence on government policy.
Elsewhere cultural diplomacy scarcely existed before 1914 in any significant way.
In Germany in 1906 a department was set up in the foreign ministry to administer the Reichsschulfonds, money destined for the support of German schools abroad: there, as in Italy, there was a strong feeling that the national language must be kept alive among the large emigrant communities now established overseas.
But the states for which the nineteenth century had been a success story, Germany and still more Great Britain, showed little or nothing of the desire for officially-backed dissemination of their culture and advertisement of their intellectual achievements which was so noticeable in France.
Newspapers, public opinion and pressures for more open diplomacy
Cultural diplomacy was a force which worked, if at all, slowly and in ways which were difficult to measure.
Of more immediate concern to governments and, it seemed, likely to produce much quicker and more clearly identifiable results, were the growing efforts which many of them were now making to use for their own purposes the new or greatly strengthened force of the newspaper press.
Cheap newsprint; new technology which made it possible to attract readers by printing illustrations relatively cheaply; growing mass literacy, at least in western Europe; mass newspaper readerships; a resulting growth of mass public feeling, often emotional and volatile, on international questions: all these were now adding another element to the changing picture of relations between the European states.
 "Each day" , asserted a French newspaper in 1900, "the press becomes…more of a diplomatic force of the first order" .
This was a highly exaggerated estimate.
Nevertheless, contemporaries were well aware that a potentially important new force  was at work and governments were anxious to use it to their own advantage.
There were several ways in which this could be done.
The first of these was essentially passive: the press, and particularly the foreign press, might be closely scrutinised, and clues thus obtained to the movement of public feeling in the different states on the international questions of the day.
In France the cabinet du ministre in the foreign ministry included from 1886, under a number of slightly varying titles, a section which translated and analysed articles from the foreign press: by 1907 it was drawing on 175 newspapers for this purpose.
This sort of activity could be paralleled in many other states.
By 1910 the equivalent unit in the Russian foreign ministry was scrutinising more than 150 Russian and foreign newspapers, while even the Ottoman empire had equipped its foreign ministry as early as 1869 with a rudimentary press office whose duties included monitoring the foreign-language papers published on Turkish soil.
More important, though their practical effects are debatable and difficult to measure, were the active efforts made by many governments to influence the content and tone of newspapers, both within their own territories and abroad.
This had been first attempted in the early years of the nineteenth century.
Under Napoleon I the French government published for several years, until its suppression in 1810, an English-language newspaper, the Argus, in an effort to undermine British influence in continental Europe.
Simultaneously French diplomats, as part of a sustained propaganda offensive, distributed the bulletins of the Grande Armée, set up a newspaper in Poland, and in Germany influenced others in favour of France and struggled to suppress those considered hostile to the emperor.
Contemporaries were impressed, indeed overimpressed, by these efforts.
 "The daily published bulletins of the French army with which Germany and all Europe are flooded" , wrote Metternich in 1805, as Austrian minister in Berlin,"are a new invention and deserve the most serious attention.
The gazettes are worth an army of 300,000 men to Napoleon.
Public opinion is the most powerful of weapons".
Such direct methods were hardly possible except with the backing of military power.
But the possible advantages of influencing foreign public opinion, as that mysterious entity slowly evolved during the nineteenth century, were never lost to sight.
In 1815, during the making of the Vienna settlement, both the Russian and the Habsburg ambassadors in  London tried to use British newspapers to arouse opposition to Castlereagh's policies and weaken his position in the negotiations.
In the following year the duc de Richelieu, the French chief minister, sent an agent to Switzerland, Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands to report on the press there and the possibility of France influencing it in her favour.
Under the Second Empire at least one French foreign minister, Drouyn de Lhuys, had at his disposal a bureau which sent to French embassies and legations abroad would-be opinion-forming articles translated into the main European languages and ready for publication in their areas.
In the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries such methods were more difficult to use; but the press bureaux with which more and more of the foreign offices of Europe were now equipping themselves (the Habsburg empire in 1879, Russia in the first years of the twentieth century, Sweden in 1909) were used increasingly to channel information to foreign journalists and news agencies and thus, it was hoped, create a favourable climate of opinion.
Even in Britain in the last years of the nineteenth century a high foreign office official had fairly frequent interviews, on the instructions of Lord Salisbury, the prime minister and foreign secretary, with Reuter's agent in London and gave him selected information considered helpful to British policy.
A few years later William Tyrell, private secretary of the foreign secretary from 1908 onwards, "went out of his way to cultivate relations with the Press" .
Efforts to manipulate newspapers were often not very effective.
Press bureaux, where they existed, were small; and the fact that they were usually headed by officials rather than experienced journalists did nothing to increase their efficiency.
In 1910 the German one was a tiny organisation with a staff of only three; while in 1913 the head of its Italian equivalent pressed strongly for it to be run by journalists rather than diplomats, since the latter usually stayed too short a time in Rome to establish the necessary good relations with newspapers and correspondents.
Straightforward bribery seldom played a role in these efforts to manipulate public perceptions of international questions.
There is, however, one well-known case of a major state attempting to influence attitudes in another by this means.
This is the relatively lavish spending of the Russian government from about 1897 onwards on payments to French newspapers, editors and journalists.
In 1904–06 particularly, and  again after an interval in 1913, considerable sums were dispensed in this way, sometimes through distinctly shady intermediaries.
In May-October 1905, when expenditure of this kind was at its height, 200,000 francs of Russian money was being paid each month to about fifty French newspapers, periodicals and press agencies, some of them important opinion-formers — Le Figaro, Le Temps, Le Petit Parisien and the Havas agency.
The successful negotiation of a large French loan to Russia in April 1906, a matter of supreme importance to statesmen in St Petersburg hard-pressed by defeat and revolution, immediately reduced the need for such payments; and it is very doubtful whether in any case they made any real difference to the course of events.
Both Nelidov, the Russian ambassador in Paris, and Kokovtsev, the minister of finance, thought they did not.
Control of the flow of official information to newspapers and agencies and the giving of carefully orchestrated interviews to foreign correspondents were now usually more likely to be effective in moulding opinion than the mere spending of money; and France, with its plethora of small, financially insecure and often venal newspapers, was something of a special case.
Moreover, the high estimates of press influence on international relations which were widespread by the beginning of the twentieth century, and which have been repeated by some historians, were much exaggerated.
Certainly the attitude of newspapers could sometimes be significant.
The bitter attacks on Germany by the fledgling but rapidly developing Russian press, after the Berlin settlement of 1878 had so disappointed Russian hopes in the Balkans, helped to push Bismarck towards the alliance with the Habsburg empire which took shape in 1879.
Press campaigns on both sides did something, though just how much is still debated, to worsen Anglo-German relations in the two decades before 1914.
Newspaper attacks brought down two French prime ministers, Ferry in 1885 and Caillaux in 1911, in both cases with considerable international repercussions.
Yet on the other hand governments were quite willing to disregard clearly expressed public feeling when this seemed in the national interest.
Serious negotiations were opened by the British government for an alliance with Germany in 1901, at a time when much opinion in both countries was markedly hostile to such an idea.
Successive French governments maintained the alliance with Russia which had taken shape by 1894, in spite of the hostility to it of the powerful  socialist and radical parties and the great body of French opinion they represented.
Nevertheless, during these years many statesmen placed a higher value than ever before on public feeling as voiced by newspapers, and made unprecedented efforts to court and shape it.
In Germany notably, where the government was a good deal less influenced by domestic opinion than in France and Britain, there was marked official sensitivity to the comments of foreign newspapers and an anxiety to present the best possible face to the outside world.
Prince von Bülow during his tenure of the imperial chancellorship in 1900–09 took a higher view than any of his predecessors of the importance of the press and gave frequent newspaper interviews, while the German government, and William II himself, reacted strongly to the hostile attitude of the Times and its Berlin correspondent, George Saunders.
The coming of war in 1914 quickly gave new impetus to the hitherto rather limited and amateurish propaganda efforts of governments.
In Britain the foreign office acquired a news department almost at once; later two improvised bodies staffed largely by journalists and created for particular purposes, the Neutral Press Committee and the War Propaganda Bureau, were set up.
This led to a good deal of overlapping and interdepartmental rivalry, notably between the foreign and war offices: propaganda in the neutral states which it was most important to influence was in fact carried on largely by the British diplomatic missions there, often supported by groups of expatriates and local anglophiles.
Early in 1917 control was more efficiently centralised in a new department of information with its headquarters in the foreign office; and finally in February 1918 a fully-fledged ministry of information was created.
Underlying these organisational changes, and more important, was an explosive growth of the whole official information-controlling and opinion-forming effort.
Traditional propaganda techniques centred on the newspaper press were used on an unprecedented scale: by 1917 four chateaux were being used as hotels for journalists and influential visitors to the front in northern France.
Simultaneously a dozen Greek newspapers were being financed by British money, which was also used in the same year to set up a pro-British magazine in Japan.
Illustrated newspapers were produced in a variety of languages for distribution abroad; and from late  in 1915 films began to be used as a propaganda medium.
All this reflected a recognition at the highest political level that the country's foreign relations must include, at least for the time being and probably permanently, an unprecedented effort to shape and direct opinion abroad.
The fact that David Lloyd George, who became prime minister in December 1916, had a well-developed taste for publicity and a personal interest in the potentialities of propaganda strengthened this change of attitude.
Lord Beaverbrook, who headed the new ministry of information in 1918, saw it as "a second Foreign Office at home with a new set of representatives abroad" and thought and spoke of propaganda as "the popular arm of diplomacy" .
The new aspect which foreign policy had been acquiring for two or three decades had suddenly grown to startling dimensions.
Elsewhere similar processes were also to be seen.
In France a new press bureau for war purposes was set up in the first days of fighting.
It was not, however, until the beginning of 1916 that any official French propaganda organisation on a large scale came into existence.
This was the Maison de la Presse, the creation mainly of a very able foreign ministry official, Philippe Berthelot.
This was reorganised and changed its title in the following year, and again in May 1918: like its British counterparts it drew its manpower from a variety of sources — the universities, the army and the professions — as well as from diplomacy.
As in Britain, again, the French wartime propaganda effort was improvised and its full potentialities seen only slowly; but in France also the growth in the sheer amount of activity was striking.
The money which the French government allocated for propaganda purposes at the outbreak of war had grown fivefold by 1917.
In Germany, too, a new situation brought forth new institutions and a vast expansion of what had been hitherto a limited and rather ineffective opinion-forming effort.
Very early in the war a new body, the Zentralstelle für Auslandsdienst, was set up to influence neutral opinion, a vital propaganda target of all the major belligerents.
Later the press bureau of the foreign ministry, so small before the war, was greatly enlarged and became the Nachrichtenabteilung.
As in Britain and France, new methods and techniques were exploited with effect: Germany used films and the cinema as part of her war effort earlier than Britain.
A democratic diplomacy?
These efforts by foreign offices to influence opinion in part reflected an increasing feeling among sections of the public, visible well before 1914, that diplomacy was now too important to be left to diplomats.
More and more the assertion could be heard, long before the guns began to fire, that the "cabinet diplomacy" of the eighteenth century, of Metternich or even of Bismarck, no longer met the needs of a changing world.
This can be seen in the demands for some form of parliamentary control of the making and carrying-out of foreign policy which became more frequent in one or two European states from the end of the nineteenth century and which reached a peak during and just after the First World War.
Some opening of diplomacy to parliamentary and even public scrutiny had by the later nineteenth century a considerable history in Britain, though it was by no means one of steady or continuous growth.
During his short tenure of the foreign office in 1807–09 George Canning had published official correspondence relating to foreign affairs on a markedly larger scale than any of his predecessors, though what appeared in print was still limited in scope and carefully edited.
Nevertheless, contemporaries realised that the tradition which made foreign policy one of the most arcane aspects of government was being breached: a well-informed former diplomat noted that the laying of so much diplomatic correspondence before parliament was a "sort of new habit" .
During his second and more important period as foreign secretary in 1822–27 Canning went considerably further in this direction.
He hoped thus both to strengthen his hand in the cabinet, several of whose members were by no means convinced supporters of his policies, and to counteract the influence at court of the hostile Austrian and Russian ambassadors, who could usually count on the sympathy of George IV.
Nevertheless, parliamentary influence over or even interest in foreign policy was still slight, and that of the general public even less.
The Vienna settlement of 1814–15, the foundation of international relations for two generations to come, received strikingly little parliamentary discussion: only one or two aspects of it aroused any real public interest.
In the 1830s and early 1840s Palmerston was able to handle both the Belgian question and the Near Eastern crises of 1832–33 and 1839–41 with little interference from parliament, so that in 1839 an acute observer of British politics could say with much justification that "foreign affairs are never discussed except at the House of Lords" .
The 1850s and 1860s saw, however, a marked growth in parliamentary interest and influence.
Parliamentary papers (Blue  Books) relating to foreign policy were now published much more freely than ever before.
Often they were detailed and informative; and many were published under pressure from the House of Commons rather than by the free decision of the government, though the fact that they normally related to negotiations which had been concluded rather than to any still in progress inevitably limited their usefulness as a weapon of parliamentary control.
More fundamentally, this was a period when British political parties were fragmented and governments correspondingly unstable.
This tended to increase the influence of parliament; and in 1858, for the first time in British history, a government was driven from office on a foreign policy question.
By the 1870s and 1880s, however, the pendulum was swinging in the opposite direction.
Party structures were solidifying and governments more securely based and less at the mercy of House of Commons votes.
By the 1880s Blue Books almost always originated from the government and not in response to parliamentary demands.
The marked tightening-up of the hitherto very lax standing orders of the House of Commons from 1881 onwards (a response to organised obstruction by Irish members) tended to limit parliamentary control over foreign policy as over other aspects of government.
Critics might complain of what one of them called "the mysterious and irresponsible manner in which foreign politics are arranged" ; but there was little they could do to change the situation.
Finally, the rise of the new Labour party helped to ensure that the House of Commons from 1906 onwards had an increasing proportion of members whose interests lay primarily or exclusively in domestic issues and who knew little of those in the outside world.
None the less, the obvious and growing dangers of the international situation in the decade before 1914 brought increasing demands, at least from the left of the political spectrum, that foreign policy be brought under more effective parliamentary control.
This, it was argued, could be achieved by the establishment of a parliamentary standing committee to supervise its conduct; the Foreign Relations Committee of the American Senate was often quoted as a possible model.
The idea was not new.
In 1858 Lord Clarendon, as foreign secretary, had feared that the vocal group of radical liberals in the House of Commons might be able to force the creation of such a body, and the idea surfaced occasionally in the decades which followed.
But by the early years of the twentieth century such proposals were receiving more serious and widespread attention than ever before.
In 1911, when the second Moroccan crisis had shown how easily  Europe might now be engulfed by war, it was discussed by parliament for the first time.
At the end of the same year an unofficial foreign affairs committee was formed within the ruling Liberal party to mobilise public opinion in favour of fuller discussion of foreign policy in parliament, though it never represented more than a minority of Liberal members.
Pressures and activities of this kind were a facet of the increasingly active discussion of problems of international peace, and the ways in which it might be preserved, which were preoccupying many radicals and idealists in western Europe during the last decades before the war.
Pressures for some "democratisation" of foreign policy and for weakening the dangerous grip on international relations of allegedly cynical and reactionary foreign offices were not confined to Britain.
In revolutionary France the Legislative Assembly set up in October 1791 a permanent diplomatic committee before which the foreign minister could be called to account; and this process was pushed to its logical conclusion when in April 1794 the Convention abolished the ministry of foreign affairs and replaced it with a Commission of Foreign Relations subject to the Committee of Public Safety.
The vagaries of French history in the following decades meant that the principle of parliamentary control was ignored or rejected by successive regimes.
But it was never totally forgotten.
Napoleon III carried on an active personal diplomacy, not merely without the knowledge of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, but behind the backs of his own ministers.
Republicans after 1871 therefore believed, with some justification, that the country's diplomatic service was dominated by royalist and Bonapartist influences and that it must be made more responsive to republican ideas.
A writer in the 1880s described it as "this old refuge of creatures from the former régimes" .
By the end of the nineteenth century there had been considerable changes.
The French Yellow Books now performed some of the functions of Blue Books on the other side of the Channel.
The Chamber of Deputies was now beginning to use its power of the purse to scrutinise the foreign ministry and its doings and to attack what it saw as inefficiency and conservatism there.
In France, as in Britain, the crisis of 1911 gave new strength to demands for more "open" diplomacy and greater parliamentary control, though with as little practical result.
In Germany, too, pressures for the Reichstag to be given a greater say in the conduct of foreign policy could be felt.
The imperial constitution and the prevailing political temper of the country made them even less effective than in  Britain or France; but the Daily Telegraph incident of 1908 and its effect in undermining the authority of William II helped to intensify them.
In Germany as in Britain and France they tended to focus on demands for a standing committee of the legislature with powers to enquire into, and supervise the conduct of, foreign policy; and here too there were radicals and peace campaigners who called for diplomacy to be made more open and its processes easier for the public in general to understand.
It would be wrong, however, to imagine that the liberals, socialists and democrats of various colours who pressed for more open diplomacy and greater parliamentary control of foreign policy represented a powerful, still less a dominant, force.
Even in Britain and France these pressures had no practical effect.
Neither in Germany nor in the Habsburg empire did they make the slightest difference to the way in which foreign policy was decided and carried out.
In all the major states of Europe it was still made not even by the government as a whole but by a small group within it — the chief minister and foreign minister, supplemented according to circumstances and personalities by those for war, colonies or other concerned departments — with the support or at least the acquiescence of the monarch.
In the great continental monarchies the influence of the ruler over foreign affairs was still powerful and sometimes decisive.
In Vienna, almost to the end of his long reign, Francis Joseph could have very real control.
When in 1911 the fire-eating chief of staff, Marshal Conrad von Hötzendorff, complained that the attitude of the foreign minister, Baron Aehrenthal, was too pacific, the emperor replied firmly that"I make policy; it is my policy.
My policy is a policy of peace…my minister of foreign affairs carries on my policy in this sense".
Nor was this an empty boast.
Two years later Francis Joseph showed that his controlling influence was a reality when, during the Balkan crisis of 1913, he ignored the demand of the entire council of ministers for the presentation of an ultimatum to Montenegro.
In Berlin William II interfered repeatedly with the conduct of German diplomacy in a way which helped to conceal the extent to which his effective authority in many areas was ebbing away.
In 1912 he insisted, against opposition from  the foreign ministry, that Prince Lichnowsky be appointed to the London embassy, saying "I send only my ambassador to London, who has my confidence, obeys my will, fulfills my orders with my instructions" .
In Russia most of all the making of foreign policy had been, throughout the nineteenth century, the exclusive personal prerogative of the ruler, in practice as well as theory.
An official report of 1837 on the work of the foreign ministry was uncompromising on this point.
The ministry, it declared, had been for over a generation "merely the faithful executor of the intentions" of Alexander I and Nicholas I, so that "its every action was carried out under the orders and instructions of the tsars themselves" .
Under Alexander II, Count (later Prince) Gorchakov, who headed the foreign ministry for a quarter of a century after 1856, wrote that "in Russia there are only two people who know the policy of the Russian cabinet: the emperor who makes it and myself who prepares and executes it" .
This view of the foreign minister as a mere official, an instrument in the hands of his master, was fully shared by the tsars themselves.
 "Who does not know" , said Alexander III in 1886 of Gorchakov's successor, "that the pitiful Giers (N.K. Giers, foreign minister 1881–94) is nothing more than an executor of my will?" , while almost two decades later an even more self-effacing foreign minister had no doubt that "my duty consists in telling the emperor what I think about every question, and then when the Sovereign decides I must obey unconditionally and try to see that the Sovereign's decision is executed" .
The status of the foreign minister as merely a high-ranking bureaucrat meant that the diplomats whom he directed, and in particular the heads of the more important Russian missions abroad, often looked on him as more or less an equal and hardly as a superior at all.
In the years just before 1914 Count A.K. Benckendorff, the ambassador in London, or A.P.
Izvolskii, his counterpart in Paris, addressed the minister, S.D. Sazonov, in an offhand and sometimes directly critical tone which no British diplomat of the period would have used to Sir Edward Grey.
Nor did the constitution of 1906 and the Duma which it created do anything to bring the foreign ministry and Russian diplomacy under any effective parliamentary control.
The Duma discussed foreign policy only once a year, when the ministry's budget came under scrutiny: it has been estimated that it spent less than 1  per cent of its time on foreign affairs.
In 1906–14 successive foreign ministers were authorised by the tsar to report to it on only five occasions.
In pre-1914 Europe, therefore, almost as much as at any time in the past, the making and, to a lesser extent, the conduct of foreign policy by the great states remained in the hands of a small, sometimes very small, number of individuals who were effectively uncontrolled by the peoples for whom they acted.
Even in the most politically advanced parts of the continent foreign affairs still attracted, for the most part, much less attention than internal problems.
There is no reason at all to suppose that the policies of these states would have been more intelligent or less influenced by fear and ambition if they had been decided by parliaments elected on the widest and fairest franchise possible and carried out by diplomatic services freed from social distinctions.
But there was, in any case, no possibility of the ideals of radicals and democrats being put to the test.
The unheard-of losses and strains of the war years greatly strengthened, at least in Britain, the pressures for a new order in foreign policy and diplomacy, for policies more democratically decided and diplomacy more openly conducted by men more representative of society in general.
 "Potentates, diplomatists and militarists made this war" , claimed the most important and vocal British radical group of this kind only a few weeks after the outbreak of the conflict.
 "They should not be allowed to arrange unchecked and uncontrolled the terms of peace and to decide alone the conditions which will follow it." 
Other radicals demanded that foreign policy should no longer be at the mercy of "the ideas, valuations and methods of a sporting aristo-plutocracy" or "the obscure convolutions of diplomatic staffs" , that "there must be an end of the secret diplomacy which has plunged us into this catastrophe" and that the working classes should "lay down our own terms, make our own proclamations, establish our own diplomacy" .
In this storm of righteous indignation few commentators made the important but disheartening point that, except in moments of obvious crisis, the man in the street was as a rule little interested in foreign policy questions.
In spite of so many hopes of a new order the old one proved tough enough to survive essentially  unchanged.
Even the Russian revolution of 1917 could not escape its clutches.
The first efforts of the Bolsheviks were directed to overturning the traditional system of international relations, by the publication of the secret treaties signed during the war by the tsarist regime and by direct appeals, over the heads of their governments, to the peoples of the world for support.
But the revolutionaries very soon found that they could not turn their backs completely on the methods of the past.
Under G.V. Chicherin, who became head of the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs (Narkomindel) in March 1918, Soviet diplomacy rapidly readopted many of the methods of the old regime.
Chicherin himself had roots in pre-revolutionary diplomacy.
He had been employed before 1917 in the archives of the foreign ministry and one of his ancestors on his mother's side had been Russian ambassador in Vienna during the 1814–15 congress.
He urged that Soviet diplomats should improve their understanding of the foreign policy problems of a communist Russia by studying the diplomatic history and traditions of the tsarist empire.
For several years after 1918 the Bolsheviks maintained contact with the outside world through such channels as trade missions, the Red Cross, academic and scientific bodies and the Communist International founded in 1919, rather than through conventional diplomatic ones.
But this was because the outside world insisted on ostracising them at least as much as by any choice of their own.
The Versailles conference of 1918–19 took place against a background of intense public feeling and excited mass emotion in France, Britain and, to a lesser extent, the United States.
The statesmen who made the settlement could not ignore the pressures this placed upon them: to that extent public opinion was a significant element in the process of peace-making.
But in most of the specific decisions they took the Allied leaders wielded a personal power which the makers of the settlements of 1648, 1713 or 1814–15 had never tasted.
Wilson, Lloyd George and Clemençeau, wrote an observer a year or two later, "were in the conduct of public affairs more imperious than any Caesar had ever dared to be in any empire, pagan or Christian" .
The dream of a "new diplomacy" remained, in spite of the outburst of hope generated by the creation of the League of Nations, no more than a dream.
The diplomats of 1919, many of the methods they used and the ways in which they were instructed and controlled, even many of the policies they attempted to carry out, would have been clearly recognisable to their predecessors in the age of Metternich or even of Louis XIV.