

The Glorious Revolution
The reign of James II appeared to confirm the prediction made by the exclusionists that a Catholic King would mean popery and arbitrary government.
James did prove determined to promote the interests of Catholics, and he did so largely through recourse to the prerogative powers of dispensing with or suspending the penal statutes.
He upset the Tories, who had so vigorously defended his right to the succession, by attacking the Anglican monopoly in worship and education, and then by punishing recalcitrant Anglicans in a specially erected Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes; he enlarged his standing army, appointing a number of Catholics to prominent positions of command; and he interfered with local franchises and borough corporations in order to try to secure the election of a Parliament which would be subservient to his wishes.
When the birth of the Prince of Wales in June 1688 raised the prospect of a never-ending succession of Catholic Stuart Kings, Whigs and Tories united to invite William of Orange, the husband of James's eldest daughter Mary, to come to England to secure her liberties and religion.
In the face of foreign invasion, James panicked and fled the country in December 1688 (though it took him two attempts before he finally escaped to France), and in February 1689 a specially convened Convention Parliament established William and Mary as joint King and Queen and debarred all Catholics from the succession in the future.
This was the Glorious Revolution.
It seems that the policy of Exclusion, which had first been raised in 1673, and which had been a major political goal of the first Whigs, had at last come to fruition.
A crucial question to consider about the Glorious Revolution, therefore, is the extent to which it can be seen as a victory for Whig principles.
The old Whig historians tended to see the Revolution as being the climax of the great struggle of the seventeenth century between the absolutist pretensions of the House of Stuarts and the cause of Parliamentary constitutionalism.
Thus Macaulay thought that the Revolution "finally decided the great question whether the popular element…should be destroyed by the monarchical element, or should be suffered to develop itself freely, and to become dominant" .
Modern scholars have tended to see the Revolution in a more conservative light, stressing the key role of the Tories in bringing about the Revolution and maintaining that the powers of the Crown were not significantly redefined in 1688–9.
Most recently, however, there has been a reaction against this conservative interpretation.
Lois Schwoerer, for example, believes that the constitutional settlement of 1689 was an emphatic, though qualified, victory for Whig principles, since it established limited monarchy with ultimate sovereignty residing in the House of Commons.
And although disagreeing in significant respects with Schwoerer, W. A. Speck concludes that significant inroads on the royal prerogative were made by the Revolution settlement, and that "the debate on the nature of the monarchy did end decisively in 1689 with the victory of those who argued that it was limited and mixed" .
The Glorious Revolution is best seen not as a victory for one party, but as a compromise.
The settlement which was worked out had to be palatable to all the leading protagonists: Whig and Tory politicians in the Lords and Commons; the Church Establishment and the Protestant Nonconformists; and the new monarchs themselves, William and Mary.
There was a sense in which both Whigs and Tories made the Revolution, and could claim it as their own; but because of the compromises which had to be worked out, both were left feeling dissatisfied with the eventual outcome, something which helps to explain why partisan strife continued to grow in intensity after 1689.
Yet part of our confusion over how to understand the Revolution stems from the inappropriate conceptual approach most scholars have adopted when assessing its significance.
When considering whether the Revolution should be seen as a victory for Whig principles or not, historians have tended to take a constitutional frame of reference — the more a particular historian believes the Revolution settlement limited the constitutional powers of the Crown, then the more Whiggish the Revolution is said to be.
The problems with such an approach should by now be apparent.
We have already seen that there were times when the High Anglican interest, supposedly the natural allies of strong  monarchy, sought to challenge the powers of the Crown in order to protect the interests of the established Church; we have also seen that Nonconformist and Whig politicians, who during the Exclusion Crisis became the champions of Parliamentarianism, had at times shown themselves prepared to defend the royal prerogative against Parliamentary limitation when it was being used to protect the interests of the Dissenters.
Any assessment of the significance of the Glorious Revolution, therefore, must give due weight to the ways in which the tensions between the Church and Dissent interacted with the constitutional conflicts that shaped Restoration politics, and once we do this, the Revolution appears in a fundamentally different light.
If we ask who was responsible for defeating the drift towards popery and arbitrary government under James II, the answer has to be the Tory-Anglican establishment.
The Whigs, as a political force, had been largely destroyed by the time of James's accession, and were in no position to mount an effective challenge to his rule.
What needs to be explained is why Tory Anglicans, who had so strongly defended James's right to the succession during his brother's final years, and who have normally been seen as the Crown's allies in an attempt to establish royal absolutism in the early 1680s, should have turned so quickly against the King.
The solution requires a reassessment of the nature of Toryism at this time; rather than seeing the Tories as royal absolutists, it is better to see them as conservative legal-constitutionalists, deeply committed to the rule of law and the Anglican Church.
When James challenged both of these, Tory Anglicans inevitably sought to oppose him.
In a sense, the Glorious Revolution began as an attempt to vindicate Tory principles.
Unfortunately for Tory Anglicans, things got out of hand, and they had to concede much more than they would have wanted (most obviously on the central issue of the transfer of the Crown).
But they also salvaged much, so that the new regime was established upon principles which were much more conducive to Toryism than is normally thought.
THE TORY REACTION AND THE ACCESSION OF JAMES II
Few English monarchs have come to the throne in as strong a position as did James II.
Charles's failure to call Parliament after 1681 removed the Whig challenge in the Commons, and a series of purges of local  corporations, livery companies, and lieutenancies effectively destroyed the local bases of Whig power, both in London and in the provincial towns.
There was also a purge of the bench and of juries, which enabled the government to take legal recriminations against a number of leading Whigs, whilst their Nonconformist allies were harassed through a rigorous enforcement of the penal laws.
These measures, collectively known as the Tory Reaction, meant that by 1685 the opposition alliance which had given rise to the first Whig party had largely crumbled.
Many leading Whigs were dead: Shaftesbury had fled to Holland at the end of 1682, only to die in exile in January 1683; Sidney and Russell were both executed for their part in the Rye House Plot, whilst another conspirator, the Earl of Essex, killed himself in the Tower (although some suspected he had been murdered).
Other Whigs had gone into exile, as too had some Nonconformists; those who remained in England were either in jail or under such close government surveillance that they were in no position to offer a serious challenge to the new King.
Although the Duke of Monmouth and a number of other exiles did lead a rebellion in the west country in 1685, the rebels were unable to gain the support of any men of substance, and the ease with which the rebellion was crushed provides further testimony to the strength of the government's position at this time.
When Parliament met in May 1685 it proved to be overwhelmingly Tory in sympathy, there being only fifty-seven Whigs in a House of Commons totalling 513 members.
It is true that the government used all the influence it could to secure the return of loyal members, and the purges of borough corporations at the end of Charles II's reign certainly had an electoral impact, but the election of such a loyal Parliament appears to have been more the result of a genuine reaction against the Whigs amongst the electorate than it was of Court manipulation.
Thus we find that the Tories did best in the larger boroughs and in the counties, where they won over 90 per cent of the seats.
At his accession, James was not just powerful, but also popular.
When he was proclaimed King in February, there was popular rejoicing throughout the realm.
 "It is harde to be expected" , wrote one newsletter writer, "with what great joy and satisfaction his majesties have been proclaimed in most of the Citties" , whilst the Earl of Peterborough thought that never had a King been "proclaimed with more applause than he that raignes under the name of James the Second" .
At some of the elections in the spring there were anti-Whig demonstrations, such as at Newcastle, where crowds burnt the Bill of Exclusion and Shaftesbury's Association.
There were "unspeakable expressions of joy" on St George's Day that year (23 April), the day of the coronation, in many parts of England and Wales, including an elaborate celebration at Lyme Regis, soon to be the place where the Monmouth rebellion would begin.
The King's birthday in October was also greeted with extravagant displays of loyalty, such as at Norwich, where church bells rang all day and bonfires blazed all night.
The Crown was in such a strong position in 1685 because Charles II, in his last years, had taken a stance in defence of the Church of England as by law established, and was able to exploit the anti-Nonconformist prejudices of the Anglicans.
The Tory Reaction is sometimes seen as the beginnings of the attempt to revive royal absolutism in England, and certainly in the years following the defeat of Exclusion supporters of the Crown encouraged an exalted view of monarchy.
Anglican clergymen busied themselves with preaching up theories of divine right and non-resistance.
In July 1683 the University of Oxford issued a judgment condemning certain doctrines thought to be "destructive to the kingly government" , amongst them the views that "civil authority is derived originally from the people" , that resistance to tyrants was legitimate, and that England was a mixed monarchy, with sovereignty vested in the King, Lords and Commons.
But it is better to see the ideology of the Tory Reaction as authoritarian rather than absolutist, since those who stressed obedience to the Crown typically also urged the need for obedience to the laws — the laws, that is, which had been established to protect both Church and State from the challenge of subversives.
As John Allen, chaplain to the Bishop of Chester, put it in an Assize Sermon preached at Chester in April 1682: "Let us be as zealous and couragious and industrious too, to support, and preserve the Government both in Church and State, as they [the Whigs and Nonconformists]are stubbornly bent, and furiously acted to demolish and destroy it: While we have good Laws, for God's sake, let us live and act according to them; and let them have their course upon All those, that do violate, affront, and defie them" .
The aim during the Tory Reaction was to use the full weight of the law against those who were perceived to be enemies of the Church and State.
Undoubtedly there was some bending of the law.
In 1684, for example, the Whig conspirator Sir Thomas Armstrong, who already stood condemned as an outlaw, was peremptorily executed without a trial.
There were also some dubious legal procedures used in dealing with the Rye House plotters of 1683, the Monmouth rebels of 1685, and other Whig dissidents who faced legal recriminations in the 1680s, and all of these legal "abuses" were complained about in the Declaration of Rights of 1689.
But the rhetoric  of those who defended government policy in the early 1680s was explicitly legalist in nature.
In their sermons — and particularly the ones they delivered at the Assizes — Anglican clergymen continually stressed the need for judges, magistrates and juries to enforce the laws against the Nonconformists.
John Standish, a royal chaplain, concluded his Assize sermon at Hertford in March 1683 by imploring his auditors to "Govern according to Law; and make it your care, that our wholesome Laws be vigorously and impartially executed" .
The drive against corporations was carried out in the same spirit; the only reason why the Whigs and Nonconformists had grown so influential in corporation politics was because the Corporation Act of 1661 had not been properly enforced.
Charles was acting quite legally in initiating the quo warranto proceedings against borough charters, and his primary aim appears not so much to achieve royal control over the borough electorate — boroughs which did not return MPs were also subject to attack — but rather to drive Nonconformists and their sympathisers out of the local magistracy and to secure the empanelment of juries who would be prepared to act against the Dissenters.
Another important feature to note about the ideology of the Tory Reaction is that it was as fiercely anti-Catholic as it was anti-Nonconformist.
As had been the case during the Exclusion Crisis, Tories and Anglicans repeatedly argued that the Nonconformists were acting on popish principles in seeking to destroy both Church and State.
In a sermon on 9 September 1683 (the day of thanksgiving for deliverance from the Rye House Plot) Richard Pearson, rector of St Michael, Crooked Lane, London, told his congregation that there was no great difference between the principles of the fanatics and the Jesuits, since both were against the King (although Pearson, in fact, thought the fanatics were worse).
Edward Pelling, rector of St Martin, Ludgate, in a sermon given earlier that year on the anniversary of the execution of Charles I, spelt out how the Nonconformists had derived their resistance theories and king-killing principles from Catholic writers such as Mariana, Bellarmine and Azorius, a point also made by the Oxford Decree of 1683.
It has been suggested that during the last four years of his reign Charles "at last emerged as an unfettered sovereign" , and that "instead of having to solicit the support of his subjects, he now commanded their obedience" .
Such a view seems highly questionable.
The strength of the Crown during the Tory Reaction was to a large degree dependent on the fact that Charles II was at last prepared to wear the mantle of King of the Anglicans, and he was very careful in soliciting their support.
The Court was eager to use the legalist justification of  the reaction.
After the Oxford Parliament, according to Lord Worcester, Charles promised to"stick to that that is law, and maintain the Church as it is now established…
I will not be for the lessening of it, and if I do I know I less my crown, for we must march together".
The combined effect of the purges and the anti-Nonconformist propaganda was to put power in the localities into the hands of people who were determined to protect the Church and State from both popery and fanaticism through a strict adherence to the rule of law.
There was a genuine enthusiasm for the campaign against Dissent from many sections of the English population, an enthusiasm which grew greater after the revelations of the Rye House Plot in 1683.
Magistrates, jurors and local constables showed themselves increasingly willing to prosecute the laws against the Nonconformists.
Yet the very success of the Tory Reaction placed fetters of a different kind on the Crown.
Tory Anglicans believed they had nothing to fear from a popish successor whilst those in control of the mechanisms of local government were determined to enforce the laws designed to protect the Church.
There was no way that James's supporters in 1685 were going to help him promote Catholicism by undermining the laws.
Even during the height of enthusiasm for the monarchy in the first half of the 1680s, Anglican polemicists offered hints that their loyalty to the Church came before their loyalty to the Crown.
In an Assize Sermon delivered at Leicester in 1682, Thomas Ashenden, rector of Dingley (Northants), even went so far as to accuse the King of being too soft on Dissent: "our present divisions, and our manifold menacing mischiefs" , he argued, "we may chiefly date from the late Toleration" , which "allowances proceed from Royal mercy" , and he claimed that the strength for rebellion had come "from the Breasts of Royal Indulgence" .
The loyalty which Anglicans professed to the Stuart monarchy was quite specifically "a church of England-Loyalty" , as William Sherlock put it in his sermon to James II's first Parliament on 29 May 1685.
To be "true to our Prince" , he insisted, "we must be true to our Church and to our Religion" , for "it would be no Act of Loyalty to accommodate or complement away our Religion and its legal Securities" .
TORY-ANGLICAN OPPOSITION TO JAMES II
At the beginning of his reign, James issued a number of assurances that he would "preserve this Government, both in Church and State, as it  is now by Law established" .
Yet he soon showed that his word could not be relied upon.
Shortly after his accession, he ordered the release of Catholics who had been imprisoned for refusing to go to church or for not taking oaths, and ordered the Exchequer to repay their fines.
He used the Monmouth Rebellion as an excuse to increase the size of his standing army, from the 8,565 troops inherited from his brother, to a total of 19,778 by the end of the year.
He also commissioned a number of Catholic officers, in violation of the 1673 Test Act, which required commissioned officers to take the Anglican communion and abjure transubstantiation.
James maintained that he could issue dispensations from the provisions of this Act by the royal prerogative, an opinion which was upheld by the judges in the test case of Godden v. Hales in June 1686, although it required a purge of the judicial bench to achieve a verdict favourable to the Crown.
Armed with this decision, James proceeded to promote more Catholics to offices under the Crown, not just in the army but also in civilian posts.
In July, for example, five Catholics were appointed to the Privy Council.
He also encouraged his Catholic subjects to worship openly.
At all stages James met with opposition from Tories and Anglicans.
On 27 May 1685, only a week after Parliament had convened, a grand committee of the House of the Commons (comprising some 330 members) agreed to address the King calling for the enforcement of the laws against "all Dissenters whatsoever from the Church of England" , including Catholics.
This time, in the face of opposition from the Crown, the Commons eventually drew back, and rejected the committee's recommendation.
The second session of Parliament, which began on 9 November, saw an attack on the standing army, the Commons refusing to vote supply for the additional forces that had been raised over the summer, and instead resolving to bring in a bill to reform the militia.
Since some historians see the anti-standing army platform as essentially a Whig position before the Glorious Revolution, it is worth stressing the Tory dimension to the opposition in 1685.
In the Commons, Sir Thomas Clarges moved that "a standing Army is destructive to the Country" , whilst his fellow Tory, Edward Seymour, declared that "the safety of the Kingdom doth not consist with a standing force" , adding (in a way which anticipated Tory arguments used after 1689) that "all the profit and security of this Nation is in our Ships, and had there been the least ship in the Channel" , Monmouth could never have landed.
Seymour also condemned the commissioning of officers "not taking the Tests" , alleging "it is dispensing with all the laws at once" , whilst in the Lords speeches against the employment of Catholics in the Army came from staunch Anglicans  such as Nottingham and the Bishop of London.
On 20 November, after a stormy session lasting less than two weeks, James prorogued this Parliament, never to call another one.
Following the prorogation of Parliament in November 1685 it was the Anglican establishment which took the initiative in opposing James's policies.
The London clergy, led by their bishop, Henry Compton, met frequently to co-ordinate an anti-Catholic propaganda campaign, and virtually once a week some new book or sermon appeared against popery.
When James issued his Directions to Preachers in March 1686, ordering the clergy to steer clear from such controversial topics in their sermons, they refused to comply.
As a result, the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes was established to deal with recalcitrant clergy, its first act being to suspend Henry Compton from his bishopric for refusing to discipline John Sharp, Dean of Norwich and rector of St Giles in the Fields, for preaching against popery.
Compton, it is worth noting, had voted against Exclusion in the Lords in November 1680.
Whilst the Anglicans campaigned against popery, the Dissenters remained largely quiet, much to the disgust of the exiled Nonconformist divine, Robert Ferguson.
James met with similar intransigence when he attempted to use his dispensing power to break the Anglican monopoly over education.
When he tried to force the trustees of Charterhouse school to give a scholarship to a Roman Catholic, the trustees, headed by the staunch Anglican Tories such as Danby, Ormonde, Sancroft and Compton, refused.
The Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford, refused James's attempt to foist a Catholic President on them in March 1687 (electing one of their own fellows instead, whom James immediately deposed), and when they subsequently refused to accept James's nomination of Samuel Parker, Bishop of Oxford, the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes was used to deprive twenty-five of them of their fellowships.
James also met with opposition from Tory magistrates.
At the end of April 1686 the Tory lord mayor of Bristol took it upon his own initiative to disturb the celebration of the mass by a group of English Catholics, committing the priest and all those present to prison.
When those arrested threatened the lord mayor that they would inform the King how they were dealt with, he defiantly replied that he would save them the trouble and do it himself.
In London, the Tory lord mayor tried to stop work on the construction of a Catholic chapel in Lime Street, and when the eventual opening of the chapel provoked rioting, he was reluctant to take action to suppress the disorders.
The trained bands, which were under the control of the Tory-Anglican lieutenancy, and which during the Exclusion Crisis had been efficient  in suppressing the activities of Whig and Nonconformist crowds, refused to act against the crowds who gathered to prevent people from attending the mass, believing that since the professed purpose was "only pulling down Popery" , they could not "in conscience hinder" .
Such opposition from his former Anglican and Tory allies persuaded James to try to forge an alliance with the Dissenters, in the hope that the disabilities under which they suffered would give them common cause with the Catholics to support the removal of the penal laws.
Moves towards toleration began during 1686, when James used his prerogative powers to grant a large number of pardons and remissions of fines (especially to Quakers), and even allowed individuals to obtain dispensations from the penal laws.
In April 1687 he issued a Declaration of Indulgence, whereby in one fell swoop he suspended all the penal laws, the Test Acts and the Corporation Act.
He then started to purge corporations and commissions of the peace, replacing Tory Anglicans with Catholics, Dissenters and former Whigs, and began a drive to secure the return of a Parliament which would formally repeal the Test Acts and penal laws.
James's initial attempts to woo Dissenters and erstwhile Whigs, it is now being recognised, were more successful than we used to think.
It is true that some Nonconformists were suspicious of the King's motives, and were concerned about the legality of the suspending power.
The Presbyterian, Daniel Williams, persuaded a meeting of London Dissenting ministers not to present an address of thanks to the King for the Indulgence, and argued that "it was better for them to be reduced to their former hardships, than declare for measures destructive of the liberties of their country" .
Yet most Dissenters did avail themselves of the relief afforded by the Declaration, and some eighty addresses of thanks were presented by various Nonconforming ministers and churches; addresses even came in from the Quakers, who had refused to have anything to do with Charles's Indulgence of 1672.
From the diocese of Norwich Archbishop Sancroft learned that the Dissenters had "greedily swallowed the bayt" , and had celebrated the news of the Indulgence "with bells and bonefiers" .
A number of Whigs showed themselves prepared to collaborate with James.
Amongst them were Henry Care (a Presbyterian, and author of the Exclusionist periodical, the Weekly Pacquet of Advice from Rome), who became James's chief propagandist in promoting the cause of religious toleration, and Sir William Williams, who became James's solicitor-general (and who was to lead the prosecution of the seven bishops in 1688).
Other Whig collaborators included prominent exclusionists such as Silius Titus, Lord Brandon, James Vernon, Ralph Montagu, Sir Francis Winnington, and William Sacheverell, several  erstwhile members of the Green Ribbon Club, such as Henry Trenchard, Edward Nosworthy, Nathaniel Wade, and Henry and William Trinder, several Nonconformist divines, such as Stephen Lobb and Vincent Alsop, and some Quakers, notably William Penn.
In London, the Nonconformist Sir John Shorter became lord mayor, whilst outside the capital, many Whigs and Dissenters who were intruded into the remodelled corporations co-operated with James's policies.
In Wales, old republican soldiers and even some of the former disciples of the Fifth Monarchist, Vavasor Powell, accepted places on the remodelled bench in 1687–8, much to the horror of local Tories, who portrayed the new magistrates as "the old gang" of 1641.
James hoped that Anglican principles of passive obedience would induce members of the Church establishment to stand by him.
Few in fact did.
Some bishops, notably those who owed their promotions to James (such as Thomas Cartwright of Chester and Samuel Parker of Oxford), supported the Indulgence, and encouraged their clergy to deliver addresses of thanks for that part of Declaration in which James promised he would continue to protect the Church of England.
They did not always meet with success, however; Parker's clergy, for example, refused to sign the address.
Most of the bishops did their best to dissuade their clergy from subscribing any such addresses.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft, composed a lengthy statement of "Reasons against Subscription" , in which he condemned the Indulgence for "endeavouring to abrogate Lawes for their [the Dissenters']sake" , laws which, he added, "perhaps cannot be repealed" .
One government pamphlet complained how scarcely any of the Anglican clergy could find it in their hearts to thank the King, "and those Few that pretend to do it, have proceeded so Awkwardly in their Acknowledgments, as renders them of very little Value, since in the same addresses they also pressed for" the continuance of those Penal Laws, which diametrically oppose…the Royal Indulgence".
James had no better luck in securing the acquiescence of the Anglican gentry.
In late 1687 he began polling the deputy lieutenants and JPs to see if they would assist him in obtaining the election of a Parliament committed to the repeal of the penal laws and the Tests.
Only about one quarter of those asked said that they would, and many of these were Catholics or Nonconformists.
About a third said unequivocally that they would not support the repeal, and even the doubtfuls expressed their opinions in such a way as to leave no doubt about the strength of their reservations.
The result was particularly disappointing, given the fact that the magistracy had already been purged by both Charles and James.
There were even attempts by Anglican groups to  prevent the Dissenters from enjoying the toleration they were offered after 1687.
At Mildenhall in Suffolk in the spring of 1688, a parson threatened to bring a Nonconformist minister before a JP for preaching a sermon, saying that it should cost him £20 (the fine for preaching at a conventicle under the terms of the 1670 Act, whose operation had just been suspended).
On another occasion he brought with him a constable and several others, saying "I shall make you leave your Singing" .
We also have reports Anglican crowds at York and at Sandwich in Kent riotously disturbing Nonconformist meetings.
The issuance of James's second Declaration of Indulgence on 27 April 1688 brought the impending crisis to a head.
This time James instructed the bishops to order all their clergy to read the Declaration from the pulpit on two successive Sundays.
Seven bishops — Sancroft (of Canterbury), Trelawny (Bristol), Lloyd (St Asaph), Turner (Ely), White (Peterborough), Ken (Bath and Wells) and Lake (Chichester)— petitioned the Crown asking to be excused from reading and distributing the Declaration.
The bishops were sent to the Tower on the grounds that their petition was seditious libel.
As a result of their stance, very few clergy read the Declaration.
At their trial, the bishops were found not guilty, and the decision was greeted with popular demonstrations throughout the country.
In short, James faced a concerted campaign of civil disobedience from his Anglican subjects in response to his undermining of the laws protecting the Church of England.
What is remarkable is that the initiative here was taken by the High Anglican clergy, who should have been the natural allies of the Stuart monarchy, and who had staunchly defended James's title to the throne during the Exclusion Crisis.
In contrast, most Whigs and Nonconformists (who had remained in England) either kept quiet or actively collaborated with James.
Indeed, Anglicans were forced to engage in a propaganda campaign to try to prevent the Whigs and Nonconformists from falling too much in line with government policy.
The case of the seven bishops was an important turning point in the development of events leading up to the Revolution, marking the defeat of James's attempts to win Nonconformist support for his policies of toleration.
Anglican polemicists had promised that they would allow the Dissenters some degree of toleration, if they helped them protect the Church of England from the Catholic onslaught, whilst the bishops in their petition affirmed that they did not act "from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters, in relation to whom they are willing to come to such a temper as shall be thought fit, when the matter shall be considered and settled in Parliament and Convention" .
Most Dissenters decided to rally behind the bishops in their opposition to the second Declaration of Indulgence, proclaiming that they wanted "liberty by law" .
A delegation of ten Nonconformist ministers even visited the bishops in the Tower on 10 June, saying "they could not but adhear to them as men constant in the Protestant faith" .
Whig lawyers, such as Treby and Somers, served as counsel for the defence in the bishops' trial, a curious development considering the mutual antipathy between bishops and Whigs during the Exclusion Crisis.
The situation was further transformed by the birth of James's son on 10 June, which raised the spectre of a never-ending succession of Catholic monarchs.
It was on the day that the bishops were acquitted, 30 June, that the famous seven — Bishop Compton, the Earl of Danby, Lord Lumley, Edward Russell, Henry Sidney, and the Earls of Devonshire and Shrewsbury — sent an invitation to William of Orange pledging their support if he brought a force to England against James.
Whilst the invitation came from men who represented both Tory and Whig opinion, most of those who conspired with William in Holland were in fact outlawed Whigs.
Yet William was made well-aware that the crisis in England which had led to his invitation had been brought about mainly by the opposition of the Anglican interest, something he implicitly recognised in his invasion propaganda.
Radical Whigs in William's circle wanted to limit William's appeal to Whigs and Dissenting groups, and John Wildman urged that the invasion manifesto be couched in these terms.
But most realised the tactical disadvantages of doing this, and insisted that the manifesto would have to appeal to the nobility, the gentry, most of the clergy, and "all the high church party" .
In the end, William's invasion manifesto, which was based to a large extent on a draft sent to him from England by Danby, emphasised grievances that had a special appeal for Anglicans and Tories.
Thus his Declaration of Reasons for Invading focused on the violations of the Test Act, the creation of the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes, the suspension of the Bishop of London, the affair of Magdalen College, the dispensing and suspending powers, and the attack on the corporations in 1687–8.
If the key role in opposing James's pro-Catholic policies came from the Anglican establishment, and in particular from the clergy, how did they justify doing this, given their professed attachment to the principles of non-resistance and passive obedience?
Supporters of James repeatedly charged the Church with hypocrisy.
As one satirical poem put it: "Though of Passive Obedience we talk like the best," Tis prudence, when interest sways, to resist".
Yet Anglicans had always allowed for passive resistance, in the sense of non-compliance with the  ungodly commands of the sovereign, so long as one peacefully accepted the punishments for one's disobedience.
In a sermon preached at the Reading Assizes in July 1681, John Okes, whilst stressing the need for obedience to magistrates, also stated that if the magistrate commanded something "that is manifestly impious, and contrary to the know will of God" , we should not obey.
Similarly, as we noted earlier, Tory-Anglican writers during the Exclusion Crisis had typically stressed that obedience to the monarch was due in "all lawful things" .
A broadside written towards the end of the 1680s defended the Church of England against the charge that their stress on obedience and subjection had been pressed so far as "to set up arbitrary Power, and the Will of the Prince, above Law" .
This was "a misrepresentation of the true Doctrine of Obedience taught in our Church; which was oppos'd to Faction and Sedition, not to a Legal Government: For Obedience is a Duty owing to setled Governments, administered by Legal Methods…but does not extend, nor was ever so intended, to the subversion of Laws, and our civil and religious Rights, at the Will of the Prince" .
The way the Anglicans responded in James's reign was in perfect conformity to their principles.
The Magdalen College affair, for example, provides a classic example of passive resistance.
As the fellows told the King in September 1687, "the Electing the Bishop of Oxford" was "directly contrary to their statutes, and to their positive oaths" , and although "they were as ready to obey the K. in all things that lay in their power" , they "could not apprehend it in their power to obey him in this matter" .
But they nevertheless peacefully suffered the consequences of their action — the ejection from their fellowships.
Likewise the bishops stood prepared in 1688 to accept the penalties for their non-compliance.
In such cases, non-compliance was not so much an option but, many felt, an obligation, since Anglican clergymen were duty-bound to protect the Church from the attacks of an heretical King.
As George Hickes wrote in May 1687, in reference to the Magdalen College affair, "non r[esistance] is always a duty, and noncomp[liance] very often is" .
But if many Anglicans thought passive resistance to James II both proper and necessary, they certainly had no intention of seeking to dethrone a legitimate, hereditary monarch.
They hoped that under pressure James would make concessions.
In a meeting with the King on 3 October 1688, the bishops asked James to dissolve the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes, and promise never to erect "any such court again" , to "desist from the Exercise of such a Dispensing power as hath of late been used" (the determination of which was to be left to Parliament), to restore the corporations and the universities, and to  give office only to those who were legally qualified.
In short, they wanted to "set all things back upon the foot they were at his coming to the crown" .
They did ask the King to call a free Parliament, in which provision could be made for a "due liberty of conscience" for all Protestants, although they linked this with the demand that the Church of England should "be secured according to the Act of Uniformity" , suggesting that "due liberty of conscience" was to be very limited indeed.
This attempted Anglican Revolution very nearly succeeded.
The Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes was abolished on 5 October, some of the corporations (including London) recovered their charters, and the old fellows of Magdalen College were restored.
James also promised free elections.
These developments, however, were pre-empted by William's invasion preparations and his eventual landing on 5 November, which forced James to delay his plans to call Parliament.
Most Whigs welcomed William's invasion, but the reaction of Tory Anglicans was more mixed.
Two prominent Tories, Danby and Compton, had been involved in the invitation to William, the bishops refused to bow to pressure from James to issue a repudiation of the invitation, whilst in the provinces a number of leading Tories rallied to William's cause.
There were some, however, who thought that the invasion came too close to the active resistance which Tories and Anglicans had for so long condemned.
The Earl of Nottingham, a Tory who was to make his peace with the Revolution, nevertheless opposed the invitation, condemning it as "high treason, in violation of the Laws…and that allegiance which I ow'd to the Soveraigne and which I had confirm'd by my solemn oath" .
When William arrived in England he met with pockets of resistance in various parts of the country from Tory groups.
Even those Tory Anglicans who welcomed William's assistance had no desire to see him gain the Crown.
In his invasion manifesto, William had made no mention of intending the throne for himself, and had avoided any attacks on James, but instead had blamed the King's evil counsellors, and promised to call a free Parliament to settle the affairs of the Kingdom.
Danby later insisted that he had never intended things to go "so far as to settle the Crown on the Prince of Orange" .
During the last weeks of 1688 James's regime began to disintegrate.
Faced with desertion amongst his nobility and gentry and within his army, and with the outbreak of violent anti-Catholic rioting in London, James panicked, and decided to try to flee the country on 11 December.
Even his last act of desperation proved a failure; James was ignominiously stopped by fishermen at Faversham, Kent, who recognised his travelling companion, Sir Edward Hales (Governor of the  Tower), but failed at first to recognise the King.
James was brought back to London on 16 December, where the enthusiastic reception he received from the crowds who lined the streets, made the King think that the people's anger "was not at his person, but at his religion" .
James's attempted flight, however, effectively destroyed any hope that a settlement might be reached which would enable James to preserve his throne.
William of Orange, whatever his initial intentions might have been when coming to England, was now determined to obtain the English Crown for himself, and he secured James's second, and this time enforced, removal from his Kingdom on 23 December.
The interregnum produced by the King's removal facilitated a sudden and dramatic resurgence of the Whigs.
On 26 December William summoned an irregular assembly of commoners, comprised of the surviving MPs from Charles II's last Parliament, the lord mayor and Court of Aldermen, and fifty representatives of the Common Council of London.
The Tory members of James's Parliament of 1685, however, were deliberately ignored; as a result, William obtained a predominantly Whig assembly.
At least temporarily, William had established himself as regent of the realm, whilst the Tories had lost the initiative which they had possessed until very recently in the campaign against James.
THE REVOLUTION SETTLEMENT
The Revolution settlement was worked out in the Convention Parliament which assembled on 22 January 1689.
The Convention not only transferred the Crown to William and Mary, but also laid down certain terms for the new rulers in the document known as the Declaration of Rights, and if the offer of the Crown was not strictly speaking conditional upon William and Mary's acceptance of these terms, it was clear that everyone expected that they were to abide by them.
The Declaration of Rights was eventually given statutory force with the passage of the Bill of Rights in December, which included a further proviso that no Catholic could inherit the Crown.
The elections to the Convention were the least contentious of any of the general elections held under the later Stuarts: few of the contests which did occur were fought along party lines, and a number of constituencies returned one Whig and one Tory unopposed.
As a  result, the two parties ended up being fairly evenly matched.
In the House of Commons there were 174 known Whigs to 156 known Tories, along with 183 new members.
The Whigs perhaps enjoyed an overall majority, since the House chose as its Speaker Henry Powle, who had generally sided with the opposition during the Exclusion Parliaments, over the Tory candidate, Sir Edward Seymour.
If so, it was a majority of moderate Whigs.
Powle himself had not been an exclusionist; he voted against the first Exclusion Bill in 1679, and consistently favoured the policy of limitations on a popish successor.
The Whigs dominated the two Commons' committees established to consider the terms upon which the Crown should be offered to William and Mary: of forty-three men involved in drafting the Declaration of Rights, twenty-nine were Whig and fourteen Tory.
The Tories, however, enjoyed the ascendancy in the upper house.
What sort of settlement did this balance of forces achieve?
The most radical act of 1689 was the break in the succession, and this can unquestionably be seen as a victory for the Whigs.
Throughout the crucial weeks of the winter of 1688–9, Tory Anglicans had done their best to prevent a transfer of the Crown.
The bishops wanted to keep James as King, by "binding him to the Church by Laws" .
The Bishop of Ely, Francis Turner, suggested that James should surrender for his life all powers of war and peace, and his ecclesiastical and civil patronage, although such a proposal met with little support in the Convention.
Most Tories favoured the establishment of a regency, with Mary exercising the regal powers on James's behalf, but this was defeated in the House of Lords on 29 January by the narrow vote of fifty-one to forty-eight.
If James had to go, some Tories would have preferred to make Mary Queen, on the argument that the Crown had demised with James's flight and therefore passed to the next in line of succession.
(Such a theory involved denying the claims of James's son, but doubts had been raised as to whether the Queen had really conceived the child, it being widely believed that the baby had been smuggled into the bed-chamber in a warming-pan.)
This proposal was defeated largely by William, who insisted that he would not be his wife's "gentleman usher" .
The Declaration of Rights itself was couched in the language of political conservatism.
It accused James of endeavouring "to Subvert and extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Lawes and Liberties of this Kingdome" , and simply asserted that a number of things recently done by the King had been illegal: such as dispensing with and suspending laws, erecting a Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, prosecuting subjects for petitioning the Crown, and keeping a  standing army in peace time.
It also made a number of exhortations, for example that Parliaments ought to be held frequently, elections ought to be free, and that free speech ought to be guaranteed.
But the authors insisted that they were doing no more than "vindicating and asserting…antient rights and liberties" .
This was not strictly speaking true.
The Declaration undoubtedly broke new constitutional ground when it stated that "the raising or keeping of a standing army within this kingdom in time of peace unless it be with the consent of Parliament is against the law" ; the Militia Acts of 1661 and 1662 had invested control of the armed forces in the hands of the monarch alone with no suggestion that Parliamentary consent was needed to maintain an army in peace time.
In other respects, the Declaration settled a number of issues which had been points of contention between the Crown and Parliament, and settled them in Parliament's favour.
The first two clauses asserted the illegality of the suspending power and the dispensing power "as it has been assumed and exercised of late" , when used without the consent of Parliament.
In fact, it is highly questionable whether the royal use of these powers had been illegal.
Indeed, James had won legal recognition for the way he used the dispensing power in the test case of Godden v. Hales of 1686.
The question of the suspending power was more complicated, since the House of Commons had resolved in 1673 "that penal statutes in matters ecclesiastical cannot be suspended but by act of Parliament" .
Yet resolutions of the lower House do not make law, and arguably the royal supremacy established over the Church by Act of Parliament during the Reformation had vested the monarch with the power to suspend penal statutes.
In short, the Declaration of Rights can be said to have confirmed the legal sovereignty of Parliament.
Nevertheless, most of the Crown's powers were left intact in 1689.
The monarch remained the chief executive in the state: he alone continued to determine all matters of policy (foreign and domestic); he had the right to choose his own ministers; he retained the right to veto legislation; and he was left with the power to determine the summoning, proroguing and dissolution of Parliament.
It used to be thought that the Revolution assured regular Parliaments, and it is certainly true that since 1689 there has not been one year without the meeting of Parliament.
Yet the Declaration of Rights made no provision for regular Parliaments; it merely stated that "Parliaments ought to be held frequently" , and even then it was the last demand made in the document, suggesting that it was not a particularly high priority.
During the crisis which preceded the Civil War, an attempt had been made to tie the Crown to regular Parliaments with the Triennial Act  of 1641, but this Act had been repealed in 1664 and it was not until 1694 that an Act guaranteeing triennial Parliaments was passed.
What ensured regular Parliaments after 1689 was not any legal constraints imposed by the Declaration of Rights, but rather the Crown's chronic shortage of money and its dependence upon Parliament for taxation.
In this, the makers of the Revolution can be said to have played some part.
From the opening of the Convention a number of MPs were determined to restrict the Crown's revenue as a way of keeping the monarchy more dependent upon Parliament, and the fact that the revenue eventually settled on the Crown in 1690 was deliberately kept well short of anticipated peace-time expenditure has led one historian to conclude that the financial settlement "created a new type of monarchy" .
If so, we should not assume this was a Whig victory; the policy of using the powers of the purse to restrict the Crown's independence was pursued not only by radical Whigs, such as Colonel John Birch and William Sacheverell, but also by a significant number of Tories, led by Clarges and Seymour.
However, the crucial factor in the Crown's becoming financially dependent upon Parliament was England's involvement in foreign war after 1689.
To raise the enormous sums required, the government learned to float long-term loans, which Parliament agreed to underwrite by appropriating the yield of specific taxes for the payment of interest.
The establishment of the Bank of England in 1694 meant that the government was now assured of loans at favourable rates, but always on a Parliamentary basis, since the Bank was forbidden to lend without Parliament's approval.
It was the financial revolution, and the establishment of the national debt, rather than the Glorious Revolution, which guaranteed the frequent meetings of Parliament.
Some perspective on just how limited the reforms laid down in the Declaration of Rights were is provided by comparing them with the proposals for reform which had been made by opponents of the government since Charles II's reign.
For example, the Whigs of the Exclusion Crisis, those involved in the Rye House Plot of 1683, and the Monmouth rebels of 1685 had all demanded annual Parliaments and that Parliaments should not be prorogued, dissolved or discontinued before petitions were first answered and grievances redressed.
Radical Whigs in the early 1680s had challenged the Crown's control of the armed forces and of appointment to office: the Rye House Plotters wanted the militia placed "in the hands of the people" ; Monmouth had insisted that judges should not hold their commissions at the King's pleasure but rather "during good behaviour" .
In 1688–9 a number of radical Whigs took the line that James's flight had brought about a  dissolution of the kingship and a suspension of the constitution, and therefore the people (through their representatives in the Convention) were free to restructure the constitution as they thought fit.
John Wildman, who sat in the Convention as member for Great Bedwin, produced a tract in which he argued that the King's legislative veto and power to dismiss Parliament be removed and that control over the militia, the declaration of war and the appointment of judges should be transferred to Parliament.
The initial committee appointed to consider the terms on which to offer William and Mary the Crown, which contained a Whig majority of twenty-eight to twelve, drew up a list of twenty-eight Heads of Grievances which, if all remedied, would have gone some way to satisfying the radicals' desires.
These included the resolutions that Parliaments not only "ought to sit frequently" , but that "their frequent sitting be secured" , that there should be "no interrupting of any sessions of Parliament till the affairs that are necessary to be dispatched at that time are determined" , that the militia acts were "grievous to the subject" , and that judges should hold their commissions "during good behaviour" .
However, William made it clear that he was opposed to limitations, and not only was it doubtful whether such far-reaching reforms could have passed the Lords (where the Tories held the ascendancy), but even the moderate Whigs showed themselves unprepared to support them.
A second committee, headed by the Williamite Whig, John Somers, and which contained sixteen Whigs to only six Tories, deliberately removed the radical proposals found in the Heads of Grievances, reducing it to the much more conservative document which became known as the Declaration of Rights.
In fact, assessing the degree to which the powers of the Crown were limited at the Revolution may not be the most appropriate way of measuring the extent to which 1689 was a victory for Whig principles.
In a debate in the Convention on 29 January it was a Whig, Thomas Wharton (the son of the Puritan peer), who moved that the throne be filled by making William and Mary joint sovereigns, without demanding that the rights of the people be secured first, and he was seconded by a Tory, Sir Duncombe Colchester.
They were opposed by Anthony Cary, Lord Falkland, a Tory, who argued that the throne should not be filled until Parliament had decided what powers to give the Crown, so that "we may secure ourselves from Arbitrary Government" , although in this he was supported by radical Whigs such as Wildman.
Falkland's intervention can in part be seen as a delaying tactic, in the hope that by forestalling the offer of the Crown to William and Mary some arrangement more in accord with Tory  principles might still be able to be worked out.
But in part it reflected a genuine belief on the part of many Tory Anglicans that the Church was still inadequately protected against possible attacks from a non-Anglican monarch, and needed better legal securities.
Anxiety here was generated by the fact that William was a Calvinist, hardly more attractive as head of the Anglican Church than a Catholic.
If the Tory Anglicans were going to lose the argument about the transfer of the Crown, they were determined to ensure that the Church would be safe under a Calvinist successor.
In many respects, the Declaration of Rights satisfied Tory-Anglican anxieties very well.
As we have already seen, none of the demands of the radical Whigs found their way into the Declaration.
On the other hand, virtually all the demands which the Anglicans had been pressing for in their attempts to come to terms with James, such as those made by the bishops in their meeting with the King on 3 October, did.
Thus the Declaration confirmed the illegality of the suspending power and dispensing power, it abolished the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes, and it defended the right of subjects to petition the Crown (a defence of the bishops' action in opposition to the second Declaration of Indulgence).
Even the most innovatory feature of the Declaration — the proviso against keeping a standing army in peace-time without Parliamentary consent — can be seen to have been a Tory concern in James's reign.
This is not to suggest that the Declaration of Rights should be seen purely as a vindication of Tory principles.
From the time of James's second Indulgence, most Whigs and Nonconformists had come out against the suspending power, on the promise that if they stuck by the Church, they would be given some measure of toleration.
A few of the clauses in the Declaration appear to have referred to what could only be Whig grievances.
These were the clause condemning the impanelling of partial, corrupt and unqualified jurors (a reference to the Rye House Plot trials of 1683), the clause condemning excessive fines (a reference to the crippling fines levied on Whig dissidents during the Tory Reaction), and the clause condemning "Grants and promises made of fines and forfeitures before any Conviction and Judgment of the same against the persons upon whom the same were to be levied" (a reference to James's dealings with the Monmouth rebels).
Yet these were minor victories compared to the more sweeping demands for reform made by the more radical Whigs which did not find their way into the Declaration.
If the Declaration of Rights gave the Tories the sort of legal assurances they wanted, to what extent were they able to accommodate  themselves to the break in the hereditary succession?
What mattered here was how contemporaries chose to describe the events that happened in 1688–9.
Many Whigs took the line that James had been deposed because he had broken his original contract with the people.
Of 139 pamphlets which were published between 1689 and 1694 to vindicate the transference of allegiance from James to William, half of them defended the position of contractual resistance, and all without exception were Whig pamphlets.
Several Whigs in the Convention also took such a line.
However, the Convention eventually eschewed any notion of deposition, and settled on the view that James had abdicated, a decision that met with approval from Whigs as well as Tories.
It is true that the House of Commons agreed on a resolution on 29 January that linked James's abdication with his breaking of the original contract, but the Lords objected to this.
As a result, no hints of James having broken a contractual obligation found its way into the Declaration of Rights, which simply concluded that James had "abdicated the Government" and that the throne was "thereby vacant" .
The question was, whether the presumption of James's abdication was enough to allow the scrupulous to transfer their allegiance to William and Mary.
Many Tories and Anglicans were worried about whether their oaths to James could be abrogated, and whether they were free to swear new oaths not just to Mary, who possessed an hereditary claim, but also to William.
Those who had greatest scruples were precisely those High Anglican clergy who had led the opposition to James, and especially the bishops.
Yet by the end of 1690 most prominent laymen and clergy had come to take the oaths to the new regime, and only a tiny minority persisted as Jacobites or Nonjurors.
How had this been achieved?
Many took comfort in the fact that the oaths to the new rulers made no reference to their right or title.
It was therefore possible to swear allegiance to William and Mary as de facto rulers, whilst still recognising James II as King de jure.
Some saw the Revolution in providentialist terms.
Others had recourse to the ius gentium tradition associated with Hugo Grotius.
Thus it was argued that William had a legitimate title to the throne because he won it by right of conquest in a just war.
Such a theory could enable Tories not only to by-pass James, but also the next heir, Mary, whilst maintaining all along that they had never broken their principles of non-resistance.
And the reason why the war was just, was because James had attempted to defraud William of his hereditary property rights, by presenting the supposititious heir to the throne — so the theory was thus compatible with hereditary succession.
Such an argument proved powerfully attractive; both the Whiggish Burnet and the Williamite Tory, Edmund Bohun, believed that arguments from conquest had the greatest effect in bringing people over to the new government.
But people fought over their interpretation of the Revolution — and this became an issue of party strife in the next reigns.
Perhaps the most difficult problem that had to be sorted out in 1689 concerned the settlement in the Church.
Sherlock wrote at the time of the calling of the Convention,"there are no Contentions so fierce as those about Religion…
Those of the Church of England are very glad to get rid of Popery, but they will not be contented to Part with their Church into the bargain…
The several sects of Dissenters are glad to be rid of Popery also; but now they expect glorious days for themselves".
Some of the more extreme Whigs in the Convention pressed for the removal of the sacramental tests for office-holders as provided for under the Corporation Act and Test Acts.
The repeal of these measures was opposed not only by the Tories, however, but also by moderate and staunchly Anglican Whigs such as Lord Devonshire.
Something had to be done to help the Dissenters, since the bishops had promised them "a due liberty of conscience" .
The scheme proposed by the Earl of Nottingham was to broaden the basis of the national Church by comprehending the more moderate Dissenters, whilst conceding a very limited toleration to those who remained outside.
Nottingham believed that once Nonconformists realised how easy it would be to conform to the established Church, few would wish to suffer the inconveniences that Dissent still brought with it, so that the integrity of the Anglican Church would be preserved, without running the risk of a perpetual Protestant schism.
Things did not work out as planned.
A Toleration Bill went through Parliament fairly quickly, being backed by William and Mary, and agreed to as a necessary concession to the Nonconformists.
Even then the provisions under the Act were fairly limited: the penal laws were not repealed, but Protestant Dissenters were merely given immunity from prosecution if they held their own religious services, provided their meeting-houses were licensed and the doors were left open when they met.
When comprehension came to be discussed by Convocation, the High Anglican clergy proved unwilling to make the sort of concessions needed to comprehend the more moderate Dissenters.
What was achieved in 1689 was certainly not what Anglicans such as Nottingham wanted, toleration without comprehension.
This would encourage separatism, and thereby undermine the whole integrity of the Church of England, which it had been the aim of the Tories all  along to protect.
The Nonconformists also had reason to feel disappointed, since the relief granted was considerably less than the civil and religious liberty which they had enjoyed towards the end of James's reign.
CONCLUSION
The Glorious Revolution in England was a compromise between the two parties.
Its moderate nature is further highlighted by a comparison with events in Scotland, where the Revolution was a much more radical affair.
The Scottish Jacobites withdrew themselves from the Scottish Convention which met on 14 March 1689, and as a result the settlement north of the border was worked out predominantly by Whigs.
The Convention scorned the suggestion that James had abdicated, and instead maintained that he had "forefaulted" the Crown through misgovernment, implying that the King of Scotland held his throne contractually.
It presented William and Mary not only with a Claim of Right — a statement of basic constitutional principles akin to the English Declaration of Rights — but also with various Articles of Grievances demanding changes in the law, and clearly intended the transfer of the Crown to be conditional upon the acceptance of the terms of these documents.
The Claim of Right also condemned prelacy as "a great and insupportable grievance and trouble to this Nation" , and the following year, with the Scottish bishops refusing to acknowledge the new rulers, episcopacy was overthrown and Presbyterianism established.
It was a settlement which was to have significant ramifications for British politics, as we shall see later when we come to consider the issue of Jacobitism.
If the changes wrought by the Glorious Revolution in England seem, by contrast, much more limited, it would be wrong to react too far and suggest that very little of significance was achieved by the events of 1688–9.
The Revolution certainly marked a belated victory for the policy of Exclusion, and finally established the legislative sovereignty of Parliament.
However, it is difficult to agree with those historians who see 1688–9 as a major watershed in early modern English history, which altered the basic issues of political life at both the national and local level.
In many respects the Revolution did little to settle the issues which had caused such bitter political division in Restoration England.
The fact that so few of the Crown's powers were  redefined in 1688–9 meant that neither the old conflicts between Court and Country, nor those between advocates of limited versus strong, autocratic monarchy, had reached any satisfactory resolution.
The parameters of the religious issue might have been changed somewhat by the grudging toleration granted to Protestant Nonconformists in 1689, but the religious settlement can scarcely be said to have provided a satisfactory solution to the issue of Dissent which had been such a source of tension in Restoration society.
Even the compromises that were worked out in 1689 became a source of partisan divide, as rival groups came into conflict over just how to interpret what had happened at the Glorious Revolution.
Party strife continued after 1689 precisely because the Revolution did not witness a victory for any one party.
It was certainly not a victory, in any clear sense, for Whig principles.
In fact, James II fell only because of the opposition he met from the Tory-Anglican interest, and although most Tory Anglicans were determined to prevent the Revolution from running the full course that it did, the eventual constitutional settlement was in much greater concordance with their principles than historians have usually recognised.
Indeed, it is notable that many contemporaries saw the Revolution as being mainly a Tory achievement.
It is true that the High Anglican cleric, Charles Leslie, wrote in 1694 that "the Presbyterians and Common-wealth-men,(with some Atheists and Latitudinarians…) were at the bottom of the whole Contrivance of the Revolution" .
Yet Leslie was a Nonjuror and a Jacobite, and this way of thinking was peculiar to that group.
Besides, even Leslie, writing in happier days under Queen Anne, repeatedly denied that the Revolution could be seen as a victory for Whig principles.
And although Whigs under Anne liked to claim that James had been deposed for breaking his original contract with the people, they found it a credible way of embarrassing their political opponents to argue that it was the Tories who had been responsible for James's downfall.
A Whig tract of 1711 argued that "The Revolution was almost entirely owing to them [Tories]" , whilst the Nonconformist Daniel Defoe repeatedly replied to the charge made by High Churchmen in Anne's reign that the Dissenters had been responsible for the murder of Charles, by reminding them what they "did to his Son" : "if they will go back to 48, and provoke us to Recriminate, by telling us of Killing the Father; let us bring them back to 88, and tell them of Deposing the Son, and sending him Abroad to beg his Bread" .
Whilst we should be sceptical of rhetorical strategies adopted for tactical reasons, the opinions of prominent Tories expressed at the time of the Revolution itself deserve to be given more weight.
Thus  Sir Thomas Clarges argued in the House of Commons in December 1689 that William "came in by the Church of England, their pens, sermons, and sufferings" .
Likewise Danby, in a debate in the House of Lords over Comprehension and Toleration in the spring of 1689, said "That at the beginning of this Revolution only Church of England men were Ingaged in it" , although "now he perceived other persons fell in with it" .
The second half of Danby's remarks alludes to the revived party tensions which were already becoming apparent in the early months of 1689, especially over the religious issue.
By early 1690 such tensions had again come to a head.
The Parliamentary elections of the spring proved to be bitterly contentious, and were fought largely on the old party lines, centring around the issues of Dissent and/or loyalty to the new regime.
The Anglican clergy campaigned actively on behalf of Tory candidates, denouncing their Whig rivals as enemies to the Church and State.
The Whigs responded in predictable fashion.
In Suffolk, for example, the Tory gentry were called "papists" or "church papists" , whilst the clergy were termed "black-coated Rogues" .
One Whig voter, after "running violently against a clergyman" , said "stand out of the way passive obedience" .
An examination of electoral propaganda shows how little had changed since the Exclusion Crisis.
Roger L'Estrange produced a pamphlet condemning the Whigs and Nonconformists as republicans, accusing them of wanting to "pursue their Revenge on us [the Church of England]" , and he asked "Whether the Clergy of the C. of E. are not concern'd to be as diligent against Phanaticism now, as of late against Popery" .
A typical Whig piece accused the Tories of seeking to promote popery and arbitrary government: despite "a pretence of Zeal, for the Church of England by Law Established, and the Monarchy" , they "have shewn that their Church is that which was Established by Magna Carta before the Reformation, and their Monarchy, the French Tyranny, or King James his suppos'd Divine Right" .
The perpetuation of the old sources of strife goes a long way towards explaining why party conflict continued after the Glorious Revolution, which will be the theme of the following chapter.
High Politics and Party Ideology under William and Anne
We have seen that there were two main forms of political alignment in Restoration England: the Whig–Tory one, which came to the fore during the Exclusion Crisis, and an earlier tradition of strife between Country and Court, which fed into, but did not directly overlap with, the subsequent party divide.
The nature of this partisan strife, and the precise relationship between Whig, Tory, Country and Court, was bound to be transformed to some extent as a result of the Glorious Revolution.
If many of the key issues which had divided the Whigs and the Tories during Charles II's reign had not been resolved by the events of 1688–9, their context had certainly been altered.
As one contemporary, writing at the end of William's reign, put it, "One would have thought that the Distinction of Parties was quite worn out, when the Church had quitted the Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance" , and had joined with the Whigs and Dissenters to call James to account for his maladministration and establish a liberty of conscience.
The Revolution also changed the earlier status of the Whigs as a party of opposition and the Tories as the party of government, as some Whigs found themselves increasingly drawn into the new royal administration, and as Tories became more and more alienated from the new regime.
Party alignments were further affected by the fact that the executive powers of the Crown were not significantly limited by the Glorious Revolution, which meant that the monarch continued to play a crucial role in shaping the pattern of politics after 1689.
Neither William nor Anne wanted to become the prisoner of party, and both used "political managers" who were prepared to work with men of either  party in order to further the interests of the royal government.
William, in his early years, experimented with mixed administrations, and even after the rise to political predominance of the Whig Junto in 1694, a number of Tories continued to serve in the government (notably the followers of the Duke of Leeds, the erstwhile Earl of Danby).
Although Anne's sympathies lay strongly with the Tories, she too was determined to maintain the political independence of the Crown.
Her administrations were headed first by the "duumvirs" , Godolphin and Marlborough, and from 1710 by Robert Harley (soon to be Earl of Oxford), none of whom were conventional party men (although Harley, a former Whig, can essentially be regarded as a Tory by Anne's reign), and her governments often contained men from both sides of the party divide.
As a result, there were two important cross-currents which could influence the political stance taken by any particular member of Parliament under William and Anne.
An individual's allegiance could be shaped by questions of party principle and party loyalty, but it could also be shaped by one's relationship to the central government, or Court, and one's attitude towards the power of the executive.
Contemporaries often appear to have been uncertain as to how best to describe the political structure of their day.
It is true that they frequently spoke in terms of a division between Whigs and Tories, especially in Anne's reign; yet there were times when they rejected this language in favour of a distinction between Court and Country parties or even some multi-party formulation.
For a long time historians were happy to talk in terms of a basic struggle between Whigs and Tories during the reigns of William and Anne, whilst recognising that this occasionally broke down, and that for certain periods political battles were fought out along Court–Country lines.
Such a view was challenged in the middle of this century by Robert Walcott, who argued for a more sophisticated understanding of the nature of the party structure under William and Anne.
Walcott suggested there was a three-fold division in the House of Commons at this time: the government interest, which comprised placemen, pensioners and those who in other ways were dependent upon the Court for their position; a large body of independent back-bench MPs; and a middle group of professional politicians, which could be divided into seven "connections" , each tied together by family and personal relationships and electoral interests, and which were caught in a struggle for power between the "ins" and "outs" .
Walcott admitted that the middle group of professional politicians tended to be Whig or Tory in general, but he insisted on the need to add a Court–Country axis to the traditional  frame of reference.
Thus at times one of the Whig connections might work together with a Tory connection in the service of the administration, and they would be opposed by a combination of Whigs and Tories who were out of office and who sought to mobilise the independent back-benchers to put pressure on the government.
Since the mid-1960s Walcott's views have come under fierce attack.
He has been accused of misinterpreting the data and of generalising from untypical examples, whilst new evidence brought to light by subsequent research suggests that he was wrong in denying the existence of a two-party system, at least under Anne.
William's reign remains more problematic; here scholars are prepared to concede a more significant role to Court–Country tensions, although it seems to be the case that at least from 1696 political strife can be understood essentially in terms of a struggle between Whigs and Tories.
It will be the argument of this chapter that a two-party system did exist under William and Anne, although there was a temporary blurring and realignment in the early years of William's reign.
The key political battles in Parliament centred around issues on which there were distinctive Whig and Tory positions, such as the question of the security of the Church, the nature of England's role in the European wars, and diverging attitudes towards the Glorious Revolution itself.
There was also a highly partisan press, which flourished after the final lapsing of the Licensing Act in 1695, and an examination of the war of words between the two parties suggests significant continuities with the party conflict of the Exclusion Crisis.
Nevertheless, the parties did undergo some transformation as they adapted to a changing political climate.
In particular, we shall see that with time the Whigs became increasingly identified as a party of the Court and the royal executive, whilst the Tories, by the end of Anne's reign, had essentially become a Country party.
THE STRUCTURE OF POLITICS
The obvious way to start testing the pattern of political allegiances under William and Anne is by examining how MPs voted in Parliamentary sessions.
A number of division lists proper survive, which record how MPs voted on specific issues.
To these can be added management lists, or forecasts of how people were likely to vote on a particular measure, and marked election return lists, which record gains  and losses for a party.
All of these lists have their problems.
Neither forecasts nor election return lists record how people actually voted; indeed, part of their purpose was to identify possible waverers who might change sides if the right type of persuasion were applied.
Often Parliamentary lists record only one side of the division, some of them contain errors, and because division lists were often published for propaganda purposes, sometimes errors were deliberately introduced in order to mislead the people about how a particular member had voted.
Careful analysis of these lists, however, suggests that party allegiance was the most crucial determinant of political identity at this time.
For example, W. A. Speck's work on division lists for Queen Anne's reign shows that the vast majority of MPs voted consistently either Whig or Tory, with a mere 12.2 per cent wavering in their allegiance, whilst in a similar analysis of division lists for William's reign, usually regarded as a period when party conflict was less clearly defined, Henry Horwitz found that only 14 per cent of MPs voted across party lines.
Nor was it only on the great party issues of the day that Whig–Tory divisions emerged in the House; the same was true even on more mundane matters, where no great issue of party principle was at stake.
Unfortunately no division lists survive for the Commons for the years 1691–5, and there are strong grounds for believing (as will be discussed later) that it was precisely in this period when party lines became most blurred.
Nevertheless, an extensive analysis of the surviving evidence concerning Parliamentary divisions suggests that voting behaviour after 1696 and up to 1714 was governed almost entirely by party allegiance.
Division lists for the Lords suggest that definable parties existed in the upper chamber, although the pattern here was slightly less pronounced than for the Commons.
In his study of Parliamentary politics under William, Horwitz examined four Lords' divisions lists — from 1689, 1696, and two from 1701 — and found that 76 per cent of those peers voting twice or more voted consistently Whig or Tory.
However, recently ten new Parliamentary lists have been discovered among Lord Ailesbury's papers, and they reveal the existence of more extensive cross-party voting on certain issues in the early 1690s.
Six division lists and two detailed forecasts enable us to assess the consistency of voting patterns in the Lords in Anne's reign.
On six of the eight issues there was a recognised Whig and Tory position, to which the majority (some 77 per cent) of the peers conformed.
The remaining two divisions did involve a significant breach of party lines — the division over the disqualification of the Duke of Queensberry from voting in the election of Scottish representative peers in 1709, and the  division on the motion disabling the Duke of Hamilton as an hereditary British peer in 1711.
Both these divisions, however, appear to have been exceptions to the normal pattern, since they raised issues concerning the Union with Scotland, complex legal technicalities, as well as personal questions of sympathy for or antipathy towards the individuals concerned, all of which placed strains on the normal political sympathies of the different peers.
An analysis of the Lords' Proxy Book, a study of the tellers in divisions in the Commons, or a consideration of the way the Commons dealt with cases of disputed elections, all reinforce the conclusion that most Parliamentary business — with the exception of purely private legislation, local economic issues, or social and moral questions — was conducted along party lines.
Although certain qualifications will need to be made to this picture, it seems best to think in terms of a basic two-party system, with certain exceptions, rather than seek another explanatory model for political conflict under William and Anne.
 "Connection" does not help explain those occasions when the normal party alignment broke down.
It is, of course, true that politicians sought to exploit their family and territorial ties for political ends, Godolphin and Marlborough being two important cases in point.
However, many of those connections which Walcott thought he had identified appear to have been tied together by little more than familial relationship; he was not able to show that they acted together as a cohesive political force.
In fact, politicians who deviated from the party norm were seldom able to carry many of their relatives with them.
Both parties had their own organisations to co-ordinate the activities of their followers and ensure party unity.
This was particularly true of the Whigs, under the leadership of the Junto lords: John Somers, Edward Russell (who became Earl of Orford), Thomas Wharton, Charles Montagu (who became the Earl of Halifax), and later also Charles Spencer, the third Earl of Sunderland.
The Junto was a group of moderate Whigs, who had first come together in 1693–4 in the service of the central administration to support William's war effort.
From the autumn of 1696 at the latest, the Junto held almost daily meetings during Parliamentary sessions, usually at a cabinet minister's house.
Other leading Whigs were invited to these meetings as necessary, whilst larger meetings were convened at the Rose Tavern when tactics needed to be communicated to the party faithful prior to activity in Parliament.
When Parliament was in recess, the Whig leaders continued to keep in close touch, usually by gathering at their country houses, though occasionally holding more formal councils at Newmarket.
Then there was the Kit-Cat Club, founded by Jacob Tonson in 1700, which became a place where Whig politicians and men of letters met together on a regular basis.
The Tory party was more loosely structured: there were tensions between the Highflyers and the more moderate wing that emerged under Anne, and which came to be led by Robert Harley, whilst even the High Church chieftains — the Earl of Rochester, the Earl of Nottingham, and Sir Edward Seymour — worked much less closely together than the Whig Junto.
Nevertheless the Tories did have established methods for ensuring co-ordination between the high command and the rank and file.
From the late 1690s and during the reign of Queen Anne it was common for leading Tory commoners to hold briefing sessions for backbenchers, normally immediately before or just after the beginning of a new session.
For many years the Fountain Tavern in the Strand was the favourite venue for these "general meetings" , which at times would witness the gathering of some 150 to 200 members.
Both sides used a system of circular letters and regional whips to co-ordinate the activity of their rank and file, and both possessed fairly well-developed electoral organisations in the localities, responsible for selecting candidates and planning tactics.
THE ISSUES
The chief reason for the perpetuation of party strife was the fact that politics continued to be dominated by issues which divided members of Parliament along Whig–Tory lines.
The issue of Dissent survived as a major source of conflict.
Although the so-called Toleration Act of 1689 meant that Dissenters were no longer being persecuted for their beliefs, they were still denied full civil rights, since the continued existence of the Test and Corporation Acts technically banned them from holding political office.
The Tories, however, were convinced that the Toleration Act had encouraged not only the growth of Dissent, but also of heresies such as Deism and Socinianism, and of irreligion in general.
A newsletter writer of August 1692 complained that it was impossible to distinguish between those who did not come to church because they were attending conventicles and those who did not worship God at all, and he predicted the result would be the downfall of the Church of England followed by the triumph of popery.
There was also alarm about the practice of "occasional conformity" (whereby Nonconformists were able to evade the provisions  of the Test and Corporation Acts and qualify themselves for civil office through the occasional attendance at Anglican communion) and the growth of Dissenting academies (which trained future generations of Nonconformist ministers and thus helped to perpetuate the religious schism).
From the mid-1690s, High Anglicans began to rally around the cry of the "Church in Danger" .
In 1696 the Whig cleric, William Stephens, observed that in the "sermons Preached at Visitations, and the constant ordinary Discourses of the Clergy…the Church of England is always represented, as at this time, in greater danger than ever it was" .
Debate over the security of the Church found a focus in the Convocation controversy, largely triggered by Francis Atterbury's famous tract, Letter to a Convocation Man of late 1696, where he argued that the only way to stem the growth of heresy and blasphemy was through Convocation, the Church's own deliberative and legislative body.
Traditionally Convocation had met whenever Parliament assembled, but the institution had been largely dormant after 1664, when the clergy relinquished their right to tax themselves in return for the vote in Parliamentary elections, and had met only once since then, namely in 1689.
The controversy hinged around whether Convocation could be summoned only by the King or had to be convened as of right when Parliament sat, and thus raised questions concerning the autonomy of the Church and the extent of the Crown's ecclesiastical prerogatives.
When the Junto ministry collapsed in 1700, and William was forced to admit into office the Tory Earl of Rochester and his High Church followers, they were able to demand that Convocation be allowed to sit.
Under Anne, High Churchmen became preoccupied with trying to eradicate the practice of occasional conformity.
Three unsuccessful bills against occasional conformity were introduced during the early years of Anne's reign, culminating in the famous attempt in 1704 to tack the third bill on to a Land Tax Bill.
The "Church in Danger" became a recurrent theme in pamphlets and Parliamentary speeches.
Sir John Packington, speaking in the Commons on 8 December 1705, identified a number of causes of this danger: the liberty allowed to pamphleteers to attack the Church and the clergy, the growth of Dissent and of Dissenting academies, and the practice of occasional conformity.
Packington believed that the "greatest cause of the Church's danger" , however, came from the Presbyterian establishment in Scotland, reflecting the fact that many Anglicans felt deeply disturbed by the overthrow of episcopalianism north of the border after the Glorious Revolution.
Indeed, concern about the security of the Church  was a major reason why High Tories were opposed to the Union with Scotland, which the Whigs eventually brought to fruition in 1707.
A treaty of union which required the English monarch and Parliament to guarantee the security of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, many felt, would serve only to encourage Dissent and undermine further the integrity of the Anglican Church.
It was the Sacheverell affair which brought the conflict over the Church to a head.
Dr Henry Sacheverell was a High Anglican cleric who had been delivering violent attacks on Dissenters, occasional conformists and Low Churchmen for several years.
When he sought to do this from the pulpit of St Paul's on 5 November 1709 (the anniversary of the gunpowder treason plot, when preachers usually reserved their invective for Catholics), and combined it with a defence of the doctrines of passive-obedience and non-resistance, the Whig ministry of the day decided to use the opportunity to try to discredit the Church in Danger platform.
The sermon was regarded as an attack on the Revolution, since it implied that James II should not have been overthrown, and Sacheverell was impeached for a "malicious, scandalous and seditious libel" .
But the Whigs had miscalculated how much sympathy there was for the High Church position.
Sacheverell's trial the next spring sparked off widespread rioting in London, and although Sacheverell was eventually found guilty, he received the mild sentence of three years' suspension from preaching.
A fierce reaction followed, which resulted in the downfall of the Whig ministry, and a massive victory for the Tories at the subsequent general election.
The High Church backlash which followed in the wake of the Sacheverell affair eventually enabled the Tories to pass the Occasional Conformity Bill in 1711 and Schism Bill (against Dissenting academies) in 1714.
In contrast, the Whigs were the "Low Church" party, as they now came to be called: they continued to be critical of High Anglican religious intolerance, and in general remained consistent to their beliefs in liberty of conscience and religious toleration for all Protestants.
They championed measures for the relief of Quakers in 1696 and after 1710, and vigorously opposed the Occasional Conformity Bills of 1702–4 and the Schism Bill of 1714.
They were also the party of international Protestantism, believing that England should open its arms to foreign protestants who had fled their own country on account of their religion, and were prepared to allow them not only complete freedom of worship but also the advantages of naturalisation.
The Tories stringently opposed the Whigs on this front, partly on the grounds that foreign immigrants posed a threat to national security and took away jobs from native workers, but also because they were  concerned that a great influx of non-Anglicans would further undermine the Church of England.
In March 1704, when the Whig House of Lords proposed a Naturalisation Bill for subjects of the principality of Orange, it was strongly opposed by the Tory-dominated House of Commons, and eventually dropped.
A greater furore developed over the bill to naturalise the Palatines in 1709.
The bill passed what was now a Whig-dominated Commons, although the Tories did try to introduce an amendment to make the foreigners take the sacrament in accordance with the rites of the Church of England, and when the Tories gained power after the 1710 General Election they repealed the Act.
There were limits, however, to what the Whigs were prepared to do on behalf of Protestant Dissenters.
Few wanted to see the repeal of the Test Acts, which required that all office holders take the sacrament in accordance with the rites of the Church of England, since these measures had in part been designed against Catholics (an important consideration when many Whigs still feared the possibility of a Stuart restoration).
After their success in the General Election of 1708 there was speculation that the Whigs would try to abolish the sacramental test, but such plans, if they were ever made, were soon shelved.
Indeed, in January 1709, when the Commons were discussing a recently published Nonconformist tract calling for the repeal of the Test, it was a Whig, Sir James Montagu (brother of the Junto chief), who moved the House to vote it a seditious and pernicious libel.
A more startling development occurred in 1711, when in order to win Nottingham's support against the peace policy of the new Tory ministry, the Whigs abandoned the Nonconformists and supported the Occasional Conformity Bill.
This can be seen as an example when the Whigs compromised one party principle in pursuit of another (the Whig hostility to the Tory peace proposals are discussed below); moreover, the Junto were worried that the ministry was about to bring in a far tougher Occasional Conformity Bill to appease its High Church supporters in the Commons, and therefore thought it better to let a less stern one pass, especially if other political advantages could be reaped thereby.
Yet many party supporters were outraged by this betrayal of the Whig tradition, and the very fact that the issue of liberty of conscience could now be given a low priority in the party agenda is perhaps indicative of the beginnings of the process whereby Whiggery was to divorce itself from the cause of Dissent.
Although the Whigs repealed the Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts after the Han-overian Succession, they took their time in doing so, and the party became bitterly divided on the issue.
The Whigs also modified their stance on episcopacy, for the basic reason that they managed to capture a number of key positions within the Church hierarchy.
There were an unprecedented number of vacancies following the Revolution, and many of the new appointments went to Low Churchmen who tended to be Whig in sympathy.
John Tillotson became Archbishop of Canterbury, to be succeeded by Thomas Tenison from 1695, whilst other latitudinarians such as Gilbert Burnet, Edward Fowler, Richard Kidder, Simon Patrick and Edward Stillingfleet also received bishoprics.
The Low Church bishops proved to be valuable Parliamentary allies to the Whigs.
Tenison and thirteen of the bishops voted against the Occasional Conformity Bill in the Lords in December 1702, playing a crucial role in defeating a measure which was lost by seventy-one votes to fifty-nine.
As a result of this new alliance with the bishops, we see little of the anti-episcopalian rhetoric which had been such a prominent feature of the Whig platform during the Exclusion Crisis.
John Tutchin, himself a Nonconformist and someone who had been involved in Monmouth's rebellion, frequently attacked the High Church lower clergy in his Whig periodical, The Observator, but was prepared to defend the Church hierarchy, saying that we had "the best set of Bishops that ever England yet knew" .
Likewise the Whig Junto chief, John Somers, defended "The Archbishop, and those of his worthy Brethren" against those who would "traduce the Governors of the Church, as Enemies and Betrayers of it, and to make zealous Churchmen and others believe, that there are some men who are better Pastors, and truer Friends of the Church than the Bishops are" .
In contrast we find the Church party attacking the Church hierarchy.
In 1694 the High Tory journalist Charles Leslie complained that "we see among the newmade Bishops those who were formerly Fanatical Preachers; and those who, of all our Number, are least Zealous for the Church, and most Latitudinarian, for a Comprehension of Dissenters, and a Dispensation with our Liturgy and Discipline" .
The role of defending the Church was assumed by the lower clergy, their chief spokesman being Francis Atterbury.
In February 1704 the Lower House of Convocation presented the Upper House with a representation of the grievances of the clergy, which was fiercely critical of the way the bishops were running the Church: canons were being disobeyed, discipline unenforced, whilst everywhere episcopal administration was inefficient and corrupt.
However, it must be stressed that the High Anglicans reserved their contempt for the Whig bishops; they recognised that there were some sound bishops (though not as many as they would like), and they remained committed to the defence of the institution  of episcopacy.
Indeed, in traditional High Church fashion, they were not ashamed to announce their belief in the divine-right nature of bishops.
Thus in 1702 the Lower House of Convocation issued a declaration in which they denied that they were "in Opposition to Episcopacy" , asserting "that we acknowledge the Order of Bishops…to be of Divine Apostolical Institution" .
It is often suggested that the succession issue was a major source of controversy between Whigs and Tories.
Such a statement is misleading, because it seems to imply that the Tories were Jacobites at heart; in fact, most Tories were able to accommodate themselves to the break in the succession which had taken place in 1688–9.
It is true that the Whigs did their best to exploit the Jacobite "bogey" , and their demands for an oath requiring peers, MPs and office-holders to abjure allegiance to James II and then the Old Pretender caused some embarrassment to those Tories who had only been prepared to recognise William as de facto King.
Yet most Tories were as concerned as Whigs to protect the Protestant succession, and virtually all supported the Act of Settlement of 1701, which guaranteed the security of the Protestant monarchy in England by passing the descent of the Crown to the House of Hanover after the deaths of William and Anne.
The crisis over the succession which emerged at the end of Anne's reign did not so much divide the parties, but split the Tories.
Nevertheless, Tories did remain committed to the principles of passive obedience, non-resistance and indefeasible hereditary right, but they were to argue that none of these had been compromised by the Glorious Revolution.
A main source of disagreement between the parties, therefore, was over their interpretation of Revolution principles.
For most Whigs, it was axiomatic that resistance had taken place at the Revolution; the logic of their position at Sacheverell's trial rested on this basic belief.
Although few adopted a fully-fledged Lockeian position, most believed in the idea of a contract between rulers and ruled, the breaking of which had cost James II the throne.
Thus in 1702 Daniel Defoe wrote of a "mutual Compact between King and People" , and defended the right to alter the succession "in case of Tyranny and Illegal Governing" .
Whig writers frequently upheld the right to depose tyrants; as one author argued, Kings "receive their Kingdoms upon Conditions from the Hands of the People" and "one who has broke thro" all Laws…forfeits his Right to the Crown [and]releases his Subjects from their Obligation".
It is true that the establishment Whigs found it increasingly necessary to downplay the original contract and the right of resistance, and came to argue that resistance was only allowable in exceptionable circumstances, such as those of 1688.
Yet essentially Whigs agreed that the hereditary succession had been broken by the Glorious Revolution and that henceforth the monarch had a Parliamentary title to the throne.
Most Tories denied that resistance had taken place in 1688.
A few did this by appealing to a providentialist explanation.
The majority, however, did so by appealing to the view of the Revolution offered by the Convention, that James had abdicated the throne.
Charles Leslie condemned the Whig identification of the deposing power with "Revolution-Principles" ; the actual Revolution Principle, that is, the principle upon which the Convention proceeded, "was the Vacancy of the Throne, and Abdication, And not the Deposing Doctrine" .
The Tory clergy repeatedly reasserted this doctrine in their sermons.
For example, six of the nine sermons delivered before the House of Commons on 30 January (the anniversary of Charles I's execution) between 1688 and 1700 explicitly condemned the deposition of kings.
Such arguments enabled Tories to continue to pose as defenders of hereditary succession.
According to one author, James II's abdication involved no abdication of his children's right, and therefore Anne inherited the Crown "as Queen of the Royal Succession, and not of the Revolution" .
Passive obedience was still the rule, and rebellion was directly contrary to the laws of the gospel.
A minority of Tories were prepared to concede that there could be exceptions to the theory of non-resistance in extremis, and in this they admittedly came close to the doctrine of some of the more conservative Whigs.
But there was an important difference, not only in the primacy of stress placed on the doctrine of non-resistance, but also in the fact that the concept of resistance upon breach of contract nowhere entered the language of Tory limited non-resistance.
This is well illustrated by a Tory tract of 1710.
The author states that "the church-men hold an absolute passive obedience to be the duty of the subjects" , though he concluded that "at the same time they allow, that in cases where the ruin of the nation must otherwise ensure, the necessity dispenses with the duty, and self-preservation takes place before any other law" .
But this was different from the doctrine of resistance, which was not only Whiggish, but popish.
For "the modern Whigs…make the bonds of allegiance so uncertain, press the people so hard to resistance, and pass so lightly over the doctrine of obedience, that they seem to make…the exception the rule" .
Moreover, the "Modern Whigs" say that whenever "the original contract is broken (which breach the Junto of Whigs pretend to be only capable to give notice of) it becomes the indispensable duty to resist" .
A third main cause of contention between the two parties was  foreign policy.
After the Glorious Revolution William was able to commit England to a continental alliance designed to contain the expansionism of Louis XIV's France, and to preserve the balance of power in Europe between the Bourbons and the Habsburgs.
As a result, England became involved in major European warfare, first with the War of the League of Augsburg (1689–97), and then with the War of Spanish Succession (1702–13).
The Whigs were firmly committed to the European alliance, and thought the best way to prosecute the war effort was through a full continental campaign.
They supported the maintenance of a large army in Flanders, to which William and later Marlborough (Anne's commander-in-chief until 1711) gave priority.
The Tories in general were more isolationist than the Whigs, although it would be wrong to suggest that they were not sympathetic to the desire to contain France after 1689.
Thus most Tories supported the war with France in William's reign as both necessary and desirable, whilst it was a House of Commons with a Tory majority which committed England to war in defence of a balance of power in 1701.
The Tories, however, were deeply critical of William and Marlborough's continental strategy, and instead favoured a blue-water policy, with emphasis on maritime and colonial operations.
Few Tories were quite as extreme as the Earl of Rochester, who at the renewal of hostilities in 1702 argued for a strictly limited naval war as the best way to check the power of France, and most recognised the need for some form of combined operations.
Yet all were critical of the commitment to the Flanders theatre, would have preferred to see some land forces redeployed in Spain, and saw the blue-water policy as central.
Thus the Earl of Nottingham, Secretary of State from 1702 to 1704, and a chief advocate of such a strategy, wrote in 1703 that "we shall never have any decisive success nor be able to hold out a war against France but by making it a sea War, and such a sea War as accompanies and supports attempts on land" .
From as early as 1708 most Tories were pushing for peace, so long as suitable terms could be reached with France.
The Whigs, however, remained insistent that there should be no peace until the Bourbons had been driven out of Spain.
A major ground of Tory opposition to Whig war strategy was expense.
High wartime taxation was placing a heavy strain on the nation, and the Tories repeatedly claimed that they could "manage the War with more Frugality than you Whigs" .
The Whigs, however, accused the Tories of being soft on France.
One typical Whig satire of 1710 had Louis XIV thanking the Tories for coming to his rescue just as he was losing the war, saying "your very Principles are agreeable to absolute Monarchy, and Designs of Tyranny; and your Practices are…such as have often reliev'd and supported me" .
Eventually, the Tory ministry elected after 1710 was able to secure peace with the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713.
There seems to be much evidence for believing, therefore, that the bi-partisan model of political conflict holds good for much of the reigns of William and Anne.
Party strife undoubtedly reached a peak of intensity under Anne; the death of Anne's sole-surviving child, the Duke of Gloucester, in 1700 raised once more questions about the security of the Protestant succession; religious tensions achieved a new height with the sitting of Convocation in 1701 and the campaign against occasional conformity; and England's re-entry into war that year renewed conflict on that front.
Yet it is only really for a period in the early 1690s, as will be shown below, that the usefulness of the two-party model can be called into question.
Moreover, the struggle between the Whigs and Tories suggests a large degree of continuity with the period before the Glorious Revolution: the Whigs are still the party of the Low Church and Dissent, of resistance theory, and committed to the need for an aggressive stance against France, whilst the Tories remain the party of the Church, of non-resistance, and more isolationist in foreign affairs.
The war of words between the two parties often reflected this sense of historical continuity, the roots of the divide frequently being traced back to the 1640s.
Charles Davenant observed in 1710, "what near Resemblance there was between the Old Rumper, and the Modern Whig (for a Child will be like his true Father) and how much they agreed in their Insolence to the Throne, Notions in Religion, Principles as to Government" .
The Whigs drew comparisons between the Tories and the Cavaliers of Charles I's reign, a heritage which the Tories were often not coy about acknowledging.
Much of the rhetoric used by both sides was couched in the language of no-popery, and bore a striking similarity to the arguments used during the Exclusion Crisis.
The Whigs saw a dual popish threat: one external (from France), the other internal (from crypto-Catholics within England).
According to a pamphlet of 1704, the present war was about whether England should be a popish or a Protestant country, since Louis XIV was advancing the cause of a popish prince to the throne of Great Britain, whilst at home the strength of the papists was increased "by the Non-Jurors and Disaffected Persons of all sorts" , who were zealous for a popish prince.
By contrast, High Anglican polemicists repeatedly sought to discredit the Whigs and Nonconformists by comparing them to Catholics and Jesuits.
Leslie thought the Presbyterians were Protestant Jesuits: "all the Mobb and Republican Principles, of Power  in the People, etc. were taken from the Jesuits and Popish Doctors" .
Or as he put it elsewhere: "the Deposing Doctrine, and placing the Power in the People, is but the Spittle of the Papists and Jesuits, which our Whigs and Dissenters have Lick't up" .
In a sermon of August 1710, Dr South accused the separatists and Dissenters of being "the Pope's journeymen" who "carry on his work" and"do that for him which he cannot do for himself…
"
Tis their weakening the Church of England by their separation from it and their Invectives against it, that makes the Pope presume he may attack it…with Victory and Success".
COURT VERSUS COUNTRY AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF PARTY
If we accept the essence of the bi-partisan structure, we must recognise that political reality was not quite that simple.
In the first place, divisions existed within the parties.
Throughout Anne's reign we can see splits amongst the Tories, for example, with regard to their attitude towards occasional conformity.
From late 1710 we see the emergence of a distinct faction amongst the Tories, known as the October Club.
The club, which met weekly every Wednesday evening throughout the Parliamentary session (usually at the Bell Tavern, Westminster), was composed of about 150 Tory backbenchers, and its main aim was to function as a pressure group to urge a more Tory policy on the Harley ministry.
Tory unity broke down seriously in the last years of Anne's reign with regard to the Hanoverian Succession.
At either extreme there were committed minorities of Jacobites and pro-Hanoverians, with a majority in the middle whose attitudes were rather ambivalent.
The Whigs, on the whole, were much more cohesive than the Tories, but even here we can make a distinction between Junto Whigs, Court Whigs and Country Whigs.
Nevertheless, the existence of such divisions does not mean that we have to talk of a multi-party system; rather, it seems better to talk of two parties, both representing a broad spectrum of political viewpoints which nevertheless remain recognisable as either Whig or Tory.
In the second place, it is important to appreciate that with time both parties underwent some degree of ideological transformation.
This transformation represented a consistent outgrowth of existing Whig or Tory principles, but the fact that it occurred to a greater or  lesser extent with different individuals helps explain why such a broad spectrum of opinion existed within the two parties.
The most striking change that occurred was with regard to the parties' respective attitudes towards Court–Country issues.
Over time the Country platform became increasingly identified with the Tory party, whilst the Whigs in turn essentially became a Court party.
This transformation started in the early years of William's reign, and was largely complete by 1696.
England's involvement in European warfare after 1689 brought with it a massive expansion of the work of government, as more and more men had to be employed by the executive to meet the demands of war — in the Treasury office, and its dependent bodies the Customs, Excise, Mint and Tax Office, in the Army and Navy, and in the diplomatic service.
Moreover, the establishment of the Bank of England in 1694, and the emergence of public deficit financing, led to the appearance of a new force in politics, that of the "monied interest" , men who had made huge fortunes as a result of investing in the national debt.
These developments greatly expanded the opportunities for political patronage, enabling the government to reward an increasing number of its followers both outside and inside Parliament with offices, pensions, or just straightforward bribes.
Contemporary estimates for the period 1692–98 put the number of placemen at between 97 and 136 (to which would have to be added receivers of unreported Crown pensions or bribes), a figure which may have risen to 200 by 1714.
Although placemen never formed a majority in the Commons, attendance at the House was often low — the average attendance per session during William's reign was 238 — so their significance could be immense if they consistently and unanimously backed the government.
The government interest was even stronger in the upper chamber, where by the end of Anne's reign between 40 per cent to 50 per cent of those peers active in the house held places or pensions from the Court.
Concern about the growth of the executive led to the pursuit of a number of measures designed to limit the power of the Court and to preserve the independence of Parliament.
One way contemporaries sought to curtail the influence of the Court was by securing free and frequent Parliamentary elections, and therefore electoral reform became a key element to the Country platform.
Although proposals for secret ballots and annual elections came to nothing, a Triennial Bill was passed into law in 1694, whilst in 1696 Acts were passed to prevent electoral charges and expenses (to keep the price of a contest within the gentry's means) and to prevent local changes in the established franchise (which were generally thought to be made to the  Court's advantage).
Between 1695 and 1705 four attempts were made to restrict membership of Parliament to men of landed wealth, in the belief that men of such independent means would be less susceptible to Court bribery, until eventually a Land Qualification Bill was passed in 1711.
Bills seeking to exclude various categories of placemen from Parliament were introduced on average once every session between 1692 and 1714, and a general measure banning all placemen from the Commons found its way into the Act of Settlement of 1701 (which laid down the conditions on which the Hanoverians would succeed to the throne), although this provision was subsequently modified before the Act came into effect.
The fact that William's style of governing tended to be rather autocratic also provoked opposition to the Court.
William's suspension of habeas corpus in the early years of the war, his use of the royal veto, and his attempt to retain a standing army in peacetime after the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697, further aroused Country suspicions about the strength of the executive.
It cannot be denied that Court–Country tensions did exist; the question to consider is the extent to which they cut across party, and served to undermine the pattern of political allegiances mapped out above.
In fact, there was only a small nucleus of non-party men who were prepared to support the Court on all occasions — men such as the Secretary of War, William Blathwayt, or Treasury Secretary, William Lowndes, who were essentially civil servants.
There were larger numbers of Whig and Tories who found the pull of Court strong enough to override party loyalty.
The Leeds Tories (the followers of the former Earl of Danby, now Duke of Leeds), stayed in office after the rise of the Junto in 1694, whilst the moderate Whig Dukes of Shrewsbury, Somerset and Newcastle worked with the Tories after the fall of the Whig ministry in 1710.
Yet it is a testimony to the strength of party during this period that the Court, despite the resources of patronage at its disposal, largely failed to establish itself as an independent interest.
Time and again Court politicians found themselves becoming tied to one party as the only way to pursue their policies effectively.
Political disputes between his Whig and Tory ministers forced William to abandon his experiment with mixed administrations and work through the Junto.
During Anne's reign, Godolphin and Marlborough — two old Tories of the pre-Revolution type — found themselves becoming increasingly dependent upon the Whigs, because the Tories were unwilling to back their wartime policies, so that by 1708–10 they were heading a Whig ministry.
Placemen were seldom independent of party, since the bestowal of government favours or jobs became a way through which the governing party of the day was able to reward its  followers.
Thus placemen tended to take their cue from party chieftains rather than from the sovereign or Court, and when a party fell from power there usually followed a purge of its placemen.
The only time it makes sense to talk of a distinctive Country party in Parliament, in the sense of a genuine coalition of dissident Whigs and Tories who were united in their opposition to the government, is for the years 1691–5.
During this period a group of Country Whigs, led by Robert Harley and Paul Foley, separated from their former allies who were in office, and united with Country and out-of-office Tories to promote place bills, triennial bills, and measures against corruption.
An illustration of the complex pattern of cross-party allegiances in the early 1690s is provided by the stance taken on the abortive Triennial Bill of 1693.
The measure was supported by dissident Tories (such as Sir Thomas Clarges and Sir Christopher Musgrave), Country Whigs (such as Robert Harley, Paul Foley, John Howe and Sir Thomas Pelham), as well as some Court Whigs (such as the Earl of Shrewsbury, Thomas Wharton, Sir John Trenchard and Edward Russell).
On the other hand the measure was opposed by some Whig ministers (such as Lord Somers and Charles Montagu), Tory ministers (such as Sir John Lowther, Sir Richard Temple and Sir Edward Seymour), and by some rank and file Tories (such as Sir Gilbert Dolben, Sir Joseph Tredenham and Heneage Finch, the son of the Earl of Nottingham).
What we have, it seems, is a Court–Country division cutting across party, but one that is blurred by the fact that some old Tories (even though backbenchers) opposed a measure which they thought was an encroachment on the royal prerogative, whilst some Whigs (even those close to the Court) felt obliged to support a measure which reflected old Whig principles.
The fusion of a Country coalition in opposition to the Court in the early 1690s was assisted by the common experience of working on the Commission of Public Accounts, which led a number of Tories and Whigs to realise they had more in common with each other than with their supposed party allies at Court.
Yet by 1696, when we can test the voting behaviour through division lists, it appears that the struggle between Court and Country had become largely submerged within the conflict between Whigs and Tories.
Of those Whigs who were elected to serve in the new Parliament of 1690, by April 1691, according to Harley, about 125 were in opposition, and some 85 supported the Court.
In contrast, by the time we get to the division over the standing army in 1699 — normally thought to have been a Court–Country rather than a party issue — there were only 36 Whigs out of a total of 221 on the Country side.
During Anne's reign the number of genuinely Country Whigs grew  even smaller; the vast majority of those who supported Country positions were Tories.
The Country platform came to be supported mainly by Tories for the simple reason that the logic of the anti-executive position as it developed in William's reign was essentially Tory.
It was the war which had led to the great increase in government patronage and hence also the potential for Court influence, and this was by and large a Whig war.
The Country opposition were also deeply suspicious of the influence of the new financial interest, and a significant number of those who had benefited from the financial revolution of the 1690s were Whigs, many of them Dissenters.
The Country was suspicious of an executive headed by a King who not only lacked an hereditary title, but who was also Dutch, employed Dutch favourites (notably William Bentinck, who became the Earl of Portland), and who was a Calvinist.
The death of Mary in 1694, which left William as sole ruling monarch, had the effect of furthering the Tory commitment to a Country platform, whilst at the same time increasing the reluctance of those who normally supported the Whigs from engaging in any criticism of the Crown.
Harley thought that it was from 1694 that the Dissenters acted "against all their principles and the liberties of the nation" by adhering to the ministerial section of the Whig party.
It was the Jacobite conspiracy of February 1696 and the subsequent demand by the Junto that MPs sign an Association asserting that William was "rightful and lawful King of these realms" which most seriously undermined the bi-partisan nature of the Country platform.
Whilst Whigs of all complexions signed with no hesitation, the Country Tories were much more reluctant to swear allegiance in such unqualified terms, although many eventually complied when signing was made compulsory.
A group of Country Whigs certainly remained important "out-of-doors" , in carrying on the propaganda war against the Court.
The anti-standing army campaign was led by radical Whigs such as John Trenchard, Walter Moyle and Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, who held their own club at the Grecian Coffee House in Devereux Court off Essex Street, London.
Of about forty tracts on the standing army issue, only one was written by an identifiable Tory.
These tracts did in part reflect a radical Whig philosophy: for example, the connection was made between a standing army in peacetime and absolutism, and it was also suggested that the right to resist would be nullified by a standing army.
But the anti-army writers also showed a need to appeal to the sensibilities of their Tory allies in Parliament.
Thus when Fletcher argued that England was in no danger from France at this  time, or Trenchard reasoned that, should war occur, England's role should be "to undertake the Sea" , both were making what were essentially Tory points.
From the end of William's reign, when contemporaries talked of a struggle between Court and Country, they were describing what we would more readily recognise as a clash between Whigs and Tories.
Thus when James Drake published his tract of 1702 attacking the strength of the Court interest, he was essentially attacking the Whigs who constituted that Court interest, and developed a "Country" argument which was basically Tory in nature, with a heavy emphasis on the need to defend the interest of the Church of England.
Likewise in January 1702, James Craggs referred to "the Church (or Country) Party" .
The changing positions of the two parties vis-à-vis the Court caused a certain realignment in their respective constitutional positions.
Some Tories came to develop the view that the combined legislative of Crown, Lords and Commons was the sovereign authority in the state.
In the House of Lords on 30 January 1700, when the Tory Archbishop of York, John Sharp, defended traditional Anglican doctrines of non-resistance and passive obedience, he made it clear that the authority which must be obeyed was the law of the land.
In 1701 Sir Humphrey Mackworth maintained that "Absolute Supreme, and Legislative Authority in England…[was]Lodg'd in the King, the Lords and the Commons" .
Sacheverell's defence counsel in 1710 did not deny that their client had defended non-resistance, but tried to define non-resistance as applying only to the Crown-in-Parliament, rather than the monarchy itself.
This seems a far cry from the Tory-ism of the Exclusion Crisis: the Oxford Decree of 1683 had condemned the doctrine that the Crown was one of the three estates.
Some Tories even employed the Whig exclusionist language of the ancient constitution, and suggested that Parliaments predated the Norman Conquest.
In contrast, government Whigs can be found defending the prerogative rights of the Crown — notably vis-à-vis the Church in the Convocation controversy, but also on a number of other issues — and in so doing invoked a vision of England's feudal past similar to that employed by Tories during the Exclusion Crisis.
Contemporaries frequently commented upon this ideological transformation, accusing modern Whigs of acting on old Tory principles, and new Tories of practising the opposite of what they had formerly professed.
In May 1711, Jonathan Swift wrote that the two parties had so shifted their principles since Charles II's time, "that those two fantastick Names of Whig and Tory, have at present very little Relation to those Opinions, which were at first thought to distinguish them" .
The extent of this transformation must not be exaggerated, however.
More extreme Tories continued to attack the theory of co-ordination (maintaining that the monarch was not one of the three estates, which instead comprised the Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal and the Commons) and to uphold the view that "our Kings and Queens are above the Law" .
Likewise, we can still find examples of Tories attacking the theory of the ancient constitution and Whigs defending it.
We also have to recognise that certain rhetorical strategies might be adopted for tactical reasons, especially the ploy of using one's opponents' arguments against them in order to discredit their position.
In his tract justifying the activities of the Commons in the Parliament of 1701, when the Tories had made a number of attacks on the policies of the Court Whigs, culminating in the attempted impeachment of some of the Junto Lords, the High Anglican Tory, James Drake, found it plausible in one place to quote Algernon Sidney in support of his argument about the rights of the lower House; the tract as a whole, however, makes it clear that Drake can in no way be considered a convert to Sidney's particular brand of radical Whiggery.
Moreover, the ideological shifts that did occur can be seen to be consistent outgrowths of earlier party positions; they did not represent, as contemporary propagandists liked to suggest, an abandonment of previous principles.
Tory legal-constitutionalism was nothing new in the early eighteenth century — it is in evidence during the years of the Exclusion Crisis and Tory reaction, and its roots can be traced back to the Clarendonian position at the Restoration.
It is merely that after the Glorious Revolution this element within Tory ideology became increasingly dominant, gradually supplanting the more absolutist tendency within Tory political thought.
But throughout our period the Tories retained an essentially authoritarian ideology.
They denied that subjects possessed inalienable natural rights which would allow them to question the legitimacy of duly constituted authority, and those who maintained that sovereignty was vested in the Crown-in-Parliament did so in order to undermine Whig populist notions that the people could call their rulers to account.
Typical in this respect are the views of Offspring Blackall, who became Bishop of Exeter in 1708.
Blackall rejected the Filmerian claim that only absolute monarchy was legitimate, and acknowledged that God had allowed different forms of government to develop in different places at different times.
Nevertheless he continued to insist that all government was of divine institution, and that political authority was conferred by God, so that resistance to the "powers-that-be" was always a sin, regardless of what form that political authority took.
For the magistrate was God's servant, Blackall  maintained, and was "subject only to God, and [was]not…accountable to the people" .
Subjects therefore had to obey the laws of their earthly governors, in whatever they commanded that was not contrary to divine law.
On the other side, the Whig defence of the executive was not totally new after 1689.
Whigs and Dissenters had in the past shown themselves prepared to defend the prerogative powers of the Crown, especially in the ecclesiastical sphere, as we have seen with regard to the Declarations of Indulgence in 1672 and 1687, and Danby's proposals for limitations on a popish successor in 1677.
Even during the Exclusion Crisis there were many conservative Whigs who saw Exclusion as the only way to preserve strong monarchy in England.
Throughout our period, however, we see that Whigs were prepared to hold up an independent standard by which to assess the legitimacy of authority, that of fundamental law or natural law, and they were willing to challenge the legitimacy of established authority (whether royal or Parliamentary) if power was exercised in violation of people's natural rights.
Magna Carta was frequently appealed to as a fundamental law which imposed limits on the sovereignty of the legislature.
Gilbert Burnet was repeating an old Whig commonplace when he wrote: "It was a maxim among our lawyers, that even an Act of Parliament against Magna Carta was null of itself" .
Some insight into the Whig perspective is provided by the controversy over the Kentish petition towards the end of William's reign.
In May 1701 five Kentish gentlemen, probably with the encouragement of the Whig Junto, had presented the Tory House of Commons with a petition from the freeholders and grand jury at the Maidstone Quarter Sessions demanding war against France.
The peace party in the Commons condemned the petition as "scandalous, insolent and seditious" , and ordered the promoters of the petition into custody.
In a tract written in defence of the petitioners, Lord Somers, the Junto chief, bitterly inveighed against the House of Commons, accusing it of encroaching upon the executive powers of the Crown by seeking to impose punishments without the King's authority.
In a deliberate attempt to embarrass Tories and High Anglicans, he cited Charles II's Declaration of April 1681, which had condemned the then Whig-dominated House of Commons for arresting people for matters not relating to Parliamentary privilege, whilst in defence of the right of petitioning he cited the case of the seven bishops of 1688.
But he also used more populist arguments with a distinctly radical Whig heritage, arguing that the House, by imprisoning the petitioners, had violated both positive law and natural law (citing John Locke's Two Treatises of Government), and had invaded  people's rights contrary to Magna Carta.
The Whigs were concerned that the arbitrary power of a prince was being replaced by the arbitrary power of the legislature.
As John Tutchin was later to ask, "Did our Fore-Fathers struggle so hard to curb the Ambition of their Kings who Invaded their Birth-Rights" , only for us to be "Oppress'd by that very Power with which our Ancestors Defended their Liberties?" 
For both Somers and Tutchin, our representatives were the "Trustees and Guardians of the People's Liberties" ; if"instead of Executing this Trust, they do make a Forcible Attempt upon our Liberties…
They have Betray'd their Trust".
CONCLUSION
The party conflict which had been in the process of emerging in England since 1660, and which had led to the clash between Whigs and Tories during the Exclusion Crisis, continued to develop after the Glorious Revolution, and reached a new height of intensity in the reign of Queen Anne.
The evidence of division lists, voting patterns of peers and MPs, organisational structure, and ideological dispute, all serve to confirm the impression of a basic Whig–Tory conflict in England at this time, at least for the period after 1696; indeed, we can even talk about a two-party system.
Saying this does not mean that the parties were monolithic; there were differences of opinion between moderate and extreme wings then as there are today with our major parties.
Nor should we assume that the parties were static.
Indeed, one of the hallmarks of a living party system is that the parties develop or even modify their positions over time, as they seek to adapt to changing political circumstances.
By the end of Anne's reign we can detect some clear ideological shifts; nevertheless, there are many ways in which the Whigs and Tories were still the recognisable heirs of their earlier namesakes.
In this respect, our longer chronological perspective has been vital to our understanding of the significance of these developments in party ideology.
For example, the stress many Tories came to place on the sovereignty of the law under Queen Anne is easy to comprehend given what we discovered earlier about the profound attachment many Tory Anglicans had to the rule of law even prior to the Glorious Revolution.
What might be called a conservative legal-constitutionalism is a consistent theme within Tory-Anglican thought throughout our period, even though not all Tory Anglicans would  have argued such a position at all times with the same degree of commitment.
Likewise, our earlier analysis of the roots of Whiggery make it possible to appreciate why a Court Whig position developed after the Glorious Revolution; there always existed such a potential for such a development, but it required the right political circumstances to enable it to come to fruition.
By concentra-ting, as we have been, on high politics at the centre, we have so far omitted an important dimension of the story.
Our understanding of what was happening to party politics under William and Anne can only be complete when we consider the wider world outside Westminster, which will be the subject of the following chapter.
The Divided Society under William and Anne
The preceding chapter concentrated on party divisions at the level of the elite, looking at the structure of Parliamentary politics under William and Anne and the nature of the ideological disputes between Whigs and Tories.
It is now necessary to consider how far down the social scale these party tensions permeated.
The conventional view has been that political strife was so intense between 1689 and 1715 because party divisions cut deep into society; all elements of the population, from the gentry, through to the merchants, professionals, artisanal and trading classes, the small farmers, right down to the "mob" , were caught up in the rage of party.
Advocates of such an interpretation have placed particular stress on the role of the electorate in fuelling party conflict at this time.
The electorate was steadily expanding during the course of the Stuart century, so that by Anne's reign perhaps as many as one in four adult males had the right to vote, whilst the passage of the Triennial Act in 1694 meant that those who were enfranchised had the opportunity to make their voice known in frequently contested elections.
Scholars such as Plumb, Holmes and Speck have painted a picture of an independent and politically aware electorate whose voting behaviour was swayed by considerations of party allegiance and their attitudes towards the political issues of the day.
The fact that on the whole constituencies tended to return MPs on distinct party platforms, even on occasion issuing instructions to those chosen advising them how to act once in Parliament, has led to the conclusion that the electorate played a large part in perpetuating the intensity of party strife at Westminster.
Such a view has come under attack in recent years.
Rather than seeing the electorate as independent and politically minded, it has been argued that they were easily susceptible to manipulation from above, and that they tended to defer to the wishes of their social superiors.
Government influence, ranging from direct bribery to more subtle forms of patronage and manipulation, it has been argued, played the key role in shaping the outcome of elections, with the result that, at least under Anne, the ministry of the day never lost a General Election.
J. C. D. Clark has asserted that government at St James's and Westminster was conducted "in terms which usually owed relatively little to a sense of popular pressure or wide accountability" , and although he cannot deny that the electorate was growing in the period c. 1680–1715, he attributes this to the attempts by the party leaders to manipulate the potential electorate for their own purposes: "The parties, in other words, created their electorate in these years (rather than vice versa)" .
The survival of poll books for the reigns of William and Anne has made the analysis of electoral behaviour an attractive method of testing the political attitudes of those below the level of the elite, since a careful tabulation of voting behaviour seems to offer the possibility of a fairly scientific means of assessing swings in public opinion across the nation as a whole.
Without denying the value of this approach, poll book analysis is really the wrong place to start if we are interested in determining the extent to which party tensions existed in society at large.
Elections have to be seen as a product of the political culture which produced them.
We need to analyse the interaction between electors, whose attitudes have already been influenced by a variety of considerations (ranging from their own sense of both national and local political issues, down to whatever perception they might have concerning their need to accommodate themselves to their social superiors), and the party electioneers, who were determined to influence the electorate in whatever way they thought fit (which invariably meant a combination of political propaganda and various forms of manipulation, bribery and intimidation).
We should begin, therefore, not with the elections themselves, but by recreating the contours of the political culture in which they took place.
This chapter will start by looking at the potential for politicisation in later-Stuart England, and show that most of the issues which divided the parties at this time had roots which dug deep in society.
The government's policies — especially in the areas of religion and foreign policy — impinged directly on the lives of a significant proportion of the population, with the result that people could not help but be politicised to some degree.
Much was done by the upper classes to cultivate the political awareness  of the population at large, through various forms of propaganda ranging from tracts, newspapers, sermons, through to public celebrations and civic rituals.
This context having been provided, it will be possible to reassess the significance of electoral behaviour, and although it can be seen that in some areas and in certain types of constituency manipulation and deference were key factors, on the whole the electorate could not be easily controlled from above.
The final section will then examine the socio-economic configuration of support for the two parties.
THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF PARTY STRIFE
It is a truism, but unfortunately one that needs to be reiterated, that politics does not occur in a vacuum at Westminster or the royal Court.
Governments have to govern people, and not only do their policies have a direct impact on the population at large, and are likely to be shaped to some degree by an awareness of what that impact might be, but policies can also be a response to pressures or problems that emerge out of society.
In later-Stuart England nowhere was this more apparent than in the area of religion.
As we have seen, there were already deep religious tensions in society at the time of the Restoration, between separatists who wanted toleration, Presbyterians and moderate Anglicans who wanted a comprehensive Church settlement but no toleration, and hard-line Anglicans who wanted the re-establishment of the Church on their own lines with no concessions to either Presbyterians or separatists.
Pressures for a particular settlement in the Church, in other words, emerged from within society before the establishment of the new regime; the eventual religious settlement worked out did not so much create the religious problem but rather was an attempt to deal with a religious problem that already existed, although in doing so the government inevitably created new religious tensions in the process.
The implications of the Restoration government's religious policy were wide-reaching, and touched many sections of the population.
Not only did Nonconformists suffer severely under the savage penal laws, but a whole range of other people were drawn into the process of enforcing them, which meant that they could be forced to decide whether their sympathies lay with Dissent or with the intolerant Anglican establishment.
During the determined drive against Dissent in the  first half of the 1680s, government directives were issued to judges, magistrates, constables and churchwardens requiring them to enforce the penal laws strictly.
Those who refused to do so could be removed from office or fined for neglect of duty.
Even those who did not have any formal law-enforcement responsibility could be affected by the campaign against Dissent.
Under English law, ordinary passers-by could be required by a constable to come to his assistance in making an arrest, failure to do so being a punishable offence.
The 1670 Conventicle Act had offered financial inducements to people who were prepared to inform against Nonconformist meetings, encouraging local inhabitants to turn against their neighbours in the campaign against Dissent.
Persecuting Nonconformists could have a knock-on effect in a community, hitting those who were loyal to the established Church.
According to one report, some 4,000 men lost their jobs when their employer, one Mr Methuen, a wealthy clothier in Bradford, was forced to "leave off his trade" as a result of his sufferings under the Conventicle Act.
In contrast, Stephen Timewell, mayor of Taunton in 1682–3, a man who prided himself as having "tamed these stubborn Fanatics" during his term in office, nevertheless found that he too had to "leave off my shop trade, for ever since I have done these things not one of a hundred comes near me to buy or sell and they make it their business to persuade people not to come near me" .
Those who suffered most were, of course, the Nonconformists themselves.
Many faced heavy fines and the distraint of goods.
In Southwark in December 1681 fines amounting to £9,680 were imposed on just twenty-two Nonconformist ministers.
In May 1685, Exchequer processes against Quakers for failure to come to church amounted to £33,300 in the county of Suffolk alone.
Those who could not meet such fines could be sent to jail.
At the time of James II's accession in 1685, according to a Quaker petition, there were 1,460 Friends in prison.
Some were to die in jail.
Over one hundred Quakers died in prison in the 1680s, most of them during the harsh winter of 1683–4, and at least 450 Quakers appear to have died for their sufferings during the Restoration period.
Although the plight of the Nonconformists was eased considerably by the Toleration Act of 1689, the intensity of the persecutions under Charles II, and especially those of the 1680s, had left a bitter legacy.
Many communities had become sharply divided as a result of the way the penal laws had been enforced at the local level, and understandably Nonconformists retained a deep distrust of their Anglican neighbours who until recently had been the agents of their destruction.
Tensions were not eased by the grudging spirit in which toleration had been  granted.
Not only did the Dissenters still suffer civil disabilities, but they could still be prosecuted for worshipping outside the Church of England if they did not fulfil certain requirements at law.
When, in late 1709, a Dissenting minister set up a conventicle in Monmouth without taking out a licence, he and some sixteen of his congregation were committed to prison by the mayor for failing to meet the provisions of the Toleration Act.
There was also anxiety that the degree of toleration allowed to Dissenters would be restricted, as indeed proved to be the case in the last years of Anne's reign with the passage of the Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts.
On the other side, the deep antipathy which many Anglicans felt towards Dissent is equally understandable.
In addition to the memory of what had happened to the established Church during the 1640s and 1650s, the repeated reports of Nonconformist plots (both alleged and real) against the government in Church and State from the 1660s onwards encouraged a belief in the need for constant vigilance against a subversive Nonconformist threat.
Anglican fears were heightened as a result of the revelations of the Rye House Plot in 1683 and the experience of the Monmouth Rebellion in 1685, which involved a predominant number of Nonconformists or friends to Dissent.
The fact that Dissent appeared to flourish under toleration became a great cause for concern to those devout Anglicans who throughout the 1680s had been encouraged to believe that the only way to protect the Church and State was by a strict enforcement of the penal laws, and their anxieties were further reinforced by the sermons of the high-flying clergy.
The cumulative effect was that by Anne's reign relations between Dissenters and Anglicans in many communities were no better than they had been in the 1680s.
When Edward Mansell of Swansea and Thomas Davies of Llandaff conducted a survey into Anglican sufferings at the hands of the Puritans, their results revealed the survival of deep and widespread religious resentments in South Wales some fifty years after the Interregnum.
In the aftermath of the Sacheverell affair of 1710, a group of Welsh Anglicans formed "a League to have no Commerce with Dissenters" , imposing fines on those who broke the terms of this agreement.
Similar trading pacts appear to have operated amongst Dissenters.
Charles Lambe claimed that he knew of some Dissenters who"will not touch either Food or Raiment, that was not bought in the Shop of a Fanatick.
They'll send for the least Trifle to the other end of a long Street to one of their own Crew, when the very next Neighbour, a Church-man, has it to sell".
The depth of animosity between Churchmen and Dissenters is most famously illustrated by the passions unleashed by the Whig ministry's  attempt to impeach Dr Henry Sacheverell for his provocative attack on Whigs and Nonconformists in 1709.
When the trial began in late February 1710, huge crowds gathered to escort the doctor back and forth from his lodgings to Westminster Hall, shouting that they wished "God would Bless him and send him a happy deliverance" .
Serious violence first erupted on the evening of the second day of the trial (28 February), when a contingent of Sacheverell's supporters smashed the windows of Dr Burgess's meeting house in Lincoln Inn Fields, and then proceeded to do the same to his house.
The greatest disorders occurred on the night of 1-2 March, as crowds chanting "High Church and Sacheverell" proceeded to demolish a number of large meeting-houses in London's West End.
The rioters appear to have been drawn from a broad cross-section of London society: the majority were wage-earners, small craftsmen and tradesmen, although there was an appreciable "white collar" or professional element, and even some gentlemen rioters.
It would be wrong to suggest that the disturbances were motivated solely by hostility towards Dissent, since they reflected a complex series of political grievances against the current Whig government; yet that is precisely the point being made here, that antipathy towards Dissent had become deeply politicised.
Although Sacheverell was found guilty, the decision by the House of Lords on 21 March to impose the mild sentence of three years' suspension from preaching was widely seen as a moral victory for the doctor over the Whigs, and the news was greeted with (often violent) celebrations throughout the country.
Over the next few months many places drew up loyal addresses to the Queen, defending the Church and monarchy against those they styled republicans and schismatics, and condemning "the new Revived Doctrine of Resistance and other Republican Tenetts that gave rise to the unnatural Rebellion in 41" .
In June, Sacheverell started a lengthy progress through the midlands, on his way to take up a new living in Shropshire, and virtually everywhere he went he received a rapturous reception from the local inhabitants shouting "God Bless Doctor Sacheverell" .
The aggressive reaction in favour of Sacheverell at this time, however, should not obscure the fact that the whole affair merely served to fuel religious tensions which already existed in many parts of the country.
Even during his triumphant progress in the summer, the doctor did not always receive a unanimous reception.
For example, when he was invited to visit Bridgnorth (Shropshire) in early July, rival crowds made alternative bonfires, "where about one they drank Dr Sacheverell's health and the other his confusion" , with the inevitable result that the two groups eventually fell to blows.
A number of communities drew  up counter-addresses in opposition to the High Church ones.
The Gloucestershire Whigs, for example, drew up an address against those who had "showed respect" to Sacheverell on his progress, and although it was eventually rejected by the grand jury, which was dominated by Tory JPs, a number of subscriptions were procured, especially by the local Nonconformist ministers amongst the "spinners and weavers and other mean people under their teaching" .
Religion was the political issue which aroused the most passionate emotions amongst the population at large.
Nevertheless, many of the other sources of conflict between the two parties under William and Anne reached beyond the walls of Westminster, and in their different ways had a significant impact on society.
The wars against France aroused questions of national security and economic interest as well as more jingoistic sentiments.
William's return to London in September 1690, after securing victory over the French-backed Jacobite forces in Ireland, was greeted with bonfires and fireworks throughout the metropolis.
In Covent Garden, Luttrell tells us, "the image of the French king was made and drawn in a chariot, and over his head in capital letters was wrott, Lewis the greatest tyrant of fourteen" , which they eventually committed to the flames.
The government did its best to rally public opinion behind the war effort by encouraging public celebrations to commemorate war victories.
News of victory over the French and the Bavarians at Blenheim was announced to Londoners in early August 1704 by the discharging of guns from the Tower, and in the evening there were bonfires and celebrations not just in the City but, according to Evelyn, "everywhere" .
The official thanksgiving, held on 7 September, saw an elaborate civic ritual in London, with the Queen, the Court, and the great officers of state processing through the streets from St James to Temple Bar in great pomp and splendour, where they were met by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen who then escorted the royal cavalcade to St Paul's.
Again the evening concluded with bonfires and illuminations.
Many people were directly affected by the implications of the French wars.
The negative impact is easiest to demonstrate: the high burden of taxation, billeting of troops, and the press-gang generated increasing resentment over time.
The Tory decision to end the war proved very popular, and it was clearly a decision that was, at least to some extent, predicated upon their appreciation of the general war weariness in the nation in the later years of Anne's reign.
Indeed, there was much celebration throughout the country when the peace of Utrecht was officially proclaimed in May 1713.
Yet there were certain groups who saw either their own or the nation's interests as being  intimately bound up with an aggressive anti-French foreign policy.
In the 1670s and 1680s commercial interests in London had pressed for war on the grounds that French expansionism, if left unchecked, would jeopardise England's trading interests.
There seems to have been much genuine enthusiasm for the renewal of war with France in the early eighteenth century.
For example, after the second election of 1701, the freeholders of Sussex sent instructions to their two newly elected Whig MPs urging them to vote William a sufficient supply so that he could renew the war against the French, arguing that "the power of France" had grown "so formidable" that it posed a threat not just to "our trade and commerce abroad in the world" , but also to "our religion, laws, liberties, properties" .
The Treaty of Utrecht provoked considerable opposition from certain vested interests who were worried about the economic implications of the peace terms agreed with France.
In May and June 1713 various trading and manufacturing groups throughout the country — cloth merchants, woollen and silk weavers, distillers, and gold and silver wire-drawers — petitioned Parliament against the legislation needed to ratify the commercial clauses of the Treaty.
It was the woollen weavers who were most alarmed, fearing that the proposed reduction of import duties on French wines to the same level as those on Portuguese wines would provoke the Portuguese to lay a high duty on English woollen goods, or even prohibit their import altogether, which would be the "Utter Ruin of that Trade" .
(The Portuguese had removed the prohibition on the import of English woollen goods, under the terms of the Methuen Treaty of 1703, only on condition that England admitted their wines at preferential rates.)
The petitioners eventually got their wish; enough Tories deserted the government to enable the Whigs to defeat the Commerce Bill of 1713.
Religion and war are two obvious areas where government policy could have a direct impact on the population at large, and these were the two major sources of party conflict at this time.
Yet the same could be true of other political issues of the day, even if the impact was less universal and more limited to specific sectional interests.
The Whig desire to promote the naturalisation of foreign immigrants, most of whom were petty tradesmen or artisans, was seen as a direct threat to the economic welfare of domestic producers.
A good example of this is provided by the reaction provoked by the influx of the Palatines, fleeing religious persecution in Germany, and the Whig ministry's decision to allow them the benefit of naturalisation in 1709.
The government found it very difficult to persuade communities to help settle the Palatines.
When the Junto leader, the Earl of Sunderland, suggested that some be settled in Canterbury, the mayor refused point blank, arguing that as a result of the recession in the silk-weaving and wool-carding trades, there was not enough work to employ the poor families already living in the city.
The parish of Sundridge in Kent grudgingly decided to accept two Palatine families, up to a maximum of ten people, but their arrival produced angry demonstrations from the local inhabitants, who forced the Palatines to leave the parish.
The public reaction to the German refugees was exploited by the Tory ministry in their efforts to repeal the Naturalisation Act in 1711–12.
The fact that they arranged for a petition from the inhabitants of Southwark, complaining about those who had welcomed the Palatines, to be presented to the Commons on the same day that they brought in the bill of repeal, suggests that contemporary politicians (unlike some modern-day historians) did believe that popular pressure could have a powerful impact on events at Westminster.
Although only a few of the sources of political controversy of the time have been touched upon, enough has been said to demonstrate that people could not be immune from the implications of political decisions taken at Westminster or St James's.
Merely the experience of being governed was enough to provide a political education.
This political education was reinforced in a number of ways.
Two have already been hinted at, namely sermons and public rituals.
The anniversary of the regicide (30 January), of the Restoration (29 May), and of the deliverance from the Gunpowder Plot (5 November), were official days of thanksgiving in the Church calendar, and the sermons delivered on these occasions typically carried pointed political messages, either about the sins of regicide or the evils of popery.
In 1694 Jean Gailhard wrote a pamphlet urging that the annual commemoration of 30 January and 29 May be stopped, arguing that the sermons delivered on that day helped perpetuate the country's political divisions, though it is clear that what he objected to was the fact that these days helped promote a Tory vision of government in Church and State, since he himself did not believe anything done during the reigns of Charles I or Charles II was worth commemorating.
November 5, on the other hand, became the occasion for commemorating the Glorious Revolution, since it was also the anniversary of William's landing at Torbay.
From 1689 a new form of service was established for that day, thanking God for discovering "the snares of death that were laid for us" in 1605, "and likewise upon this day" for bringing King William "safely into this Kingdom, to preserve us from the late attempts of our enemies to bereave us of our religion and laws" .
Gunpowder Treason Day normally concluded in the evening with  more informal festivities in the streets around a bonfire to celebrate the deliverance from popery.
On 5 November 1692, for example, a crowd in Westminster burnt effigies of the Pope and of James II's Jesuit confessor, Father Petre.
Restoration Day, the anniversary of Elizabeth's accession (17 November), royal birthdays (4 November for William III, 6 February for Queen Anne, 30 April for Queen Mary), as well as a number of other commemorative days, provided further opportunities for public display and popular rejoicing.
On 18 December 1689 the anniversary of William's first entrance into London was cele-brated with a huge procession through the City, as crowds carried effigies of James's chief ministers through the streets to Temple Bar, where they ritualistically hanged them at a "triple galloes" set up next to a great bonfire.
All of these anniversaries, however, were politically charged, with the pro-William and anti-popish celebrations of November being Whiggish occasions, and the pro-Stuart commemorations of the spring being more pro-Tory.
In this way, the great ideological divide between the two parties over their interpretation of "Revolution Principles" was acted out annually in public rituals throughout the country.
There was a great intensification of the partisan use of the festive calendar in the final years of Anne's reign.
In 1711 the Whig Kit-Cat Club spent £200 on planning an elaborate procession in London for 17 November, along the lines of those staged by the Green Ribbon Club during the Exclusion Crisis, culminating in burning effigies of the Pope, the devil, and the Pretender.
Fearing disorder, the Tory Secretary of State, Lord Dartmouth, had the effigies confiscated on the night of the 16th, but the Whigs still managed to improvise a makeshift procession and pope-burning.
In contrast, Queen Anne's birthday in 1712 was celebrated "with Bonefires, illuminations and Prosperity to her Ministers and to the Loyal House of Commons" in many parts of the country, notably in Plymouth and Gloucester, and led one newsletter writer to conclude that "there was a fresh spring of Loyalty in the Kingdom after its long discountenances by crying up Revolution Principles" .
The highly-charged atmosphere in the aftermath of the Sacheverell affair meant that the partisan use of public anniversaries often resulted in violent clashes between rival groups.
This was particularly true for the capital.
In London on 4 November 1710, a number of people had their windows smashed by Tory groups "for Illuminating them on K. William's Birth-Day" .
The following year, William's birthday was celebrated with great rejoicings throughout London and Westminster.
In particular, a group of peers, gentlemen and citizens organised an elaborate festival at a bonfire  outside the "Three Tuns and Rummer" in Gracechurch Street, giving beer "to the Mobb" to pledge healths to "the Queen, the House of Hanover, and the memory of King William" .
Some Tories "rais'd an Opposite Mobb, who offering to disturb the Rejoycings round the Bonfire, a Scuffle ensu'd, in which the Aggressors were repuls'd with some broken Heads and bloody Noses" .
Political awareness was further heightened by the press.
The expiry of the Licensing Act in 1695 led to a massive output of printed propaganda, in the form of pamphlets, broadsides and newspapers, and the press proved to be highly partisan in nature.
By 1705 there were twelve newspapers appearing regularly in London, whilst by the end of Anne's reign Bristol, Liverpool, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Norwich, Nottingham, Stamford and Worcester each had their own press.
Some writers worked as independent agents, such as the High Tory, Charles Leslie, who produced his Rehearsal at first weekly, and then bi-weekly, between 1704 and 1709.
Others were in the employ of leading politicians.
John Tutchin, who produced his Observator twice a week from 1702 until his death in 1707, worked for the Junto Whigs, as did for a while that indefatigable pamphleteer, Daniel Defoe.
At various times, Robert Harley employed Charles Davenant, Jonathan Swift, and even Whigs like Defoe and John Toland as part of his government propaganda machine.
The political leaders themselves were often active propagandists; both Somers and Harley, for example, wrote their own tracts.
This literature had a reasonably wide circulation.
It has been estimated that the nine London newspapers in existence in 1704 between them published 44,000 copies per week.
Care was taken to ensure that party propaganda had an impact not just in the capital, but also reached the provinces.
At the time of the second General Election of 1701 we hear of a club of Tory MPs who subscribed a guinea a head for batches of Davenant's papers to be given away among acquaintances "as antidotes against the poison that is spread by the other side, who spare no cost to scatter their libels…round the kingdom" .
The Earl of Jersey noted that in Kent, towards the end of Anne's reign, "Postboys, Examiners, etc. [both Tory periodicals]are the usual entertainments of the country gentry" .
According to John Oldmixon, Swift's Examiner was "distributed…gratis to the poorer Vicars and Curates" across the country.
Journalists believed that their message could reach even the lower orders.
Swift said of his Examiner that he was writing "to the Vulgar, more than the Learned" , whilst Leslie saw his Rehearsal as intended for the "common people" who had been poisoned by the pernicious principles of the Whigs.
Leslie was aware that most people "cannot Read  at all" , but said he had seen them in the streets "Gather together about one that can Read" and listen to a newspaper being read aloud.
Every week the Tory MP for Scarborough, John Hungerford, sent a copy of Swift's Examiner home, which the parson used to carry about with him "to read to such of his parishioners as are weak in the faith" .
And every Sunday after service he invited "a good number of his friends to his house, where he first reads over the paper, and then comments upon the text" .
There were numerous illustrated broadsides and woodcuts which carried their message in visual form.
Even the more sophisticated tracts, which would have been beyond the comprehension of those on the margins of literacy and were unsuitable for reading aloud, could have had a wider impact than their style might suggest, since their purpose was to furnish people who could read them with arguments which would enable them to go away and convince others of the merits of their party's cause.
As the Tory pamphleteer of the Exclusion Crisis, John Nalson, had advised his readers: "If you think, and find I have told you a plain Truth…inform the Ignorant, confront the Impudent, satisfie the Doubtful and Staggering, and unite the Loyal" .
The impression the above evidence leaves is of a fairly sophisticated mass political culture in England under the later Stuarts.
Certainly more research is needed in this area, especially in the provincial context, before we can make confident generalisations.
Yet it is probably fair to suggest that few people could have been immune from the implications of the party struggle at Westminster, since decisions taken by the central government often had a direct affect on ordinary people's lives, and few people could have avoided being exposed to the political controversies of the day through the various media of propaganda.
The potential for political expression was not restricted to those who had the right to vote at General Elections every two or three years, since people of all classes could let their feelings be known through petitions, demonstrations, and riots.
Moreover, the struggles between the two parties were often fought out in the local arena, at the annual elections of town magistrates, sheriffs and parish officials.
In the corporation of London, for example, the fact that local elections were spread across the year (with those for the sheriffs being in midsummer, for the lord mayor in September, and for the common councilmen in December), and were invariably fought out along party lines, meant that political passions seldom had a chance to cool down.
In some towns, party rivalries during Anne's reign become so intense that they resulted in the setting-up of rival Whig and Tory corporations, as was the case for example at Brackley, Buckingham, Camelford, Marlborough and Portsmouth.
The corporation of Devizes swore in two mayors in 1706, both of whom set up their own common councils, with the Whig one meeting at the Guildhall, and the Tories at Weavers' Hall.
The existence of competing bodies claiming to exercise jurisdiction in the town inevitably provoked violent confrontation.
In April 1707, when the Whig mayor and his officers attempted to levy a toll at the cornmarket after the Tories had already done so, they were set upon by an angry crowd egged on by the Tory mayor.
On another occasion a mob smashed the windows of the Guildhall whilst the Whig common council was in session.
The following autumn, rival mayors were again set up, and on the Sunday following the mayor-making, both sought to validate their claim to office by securing occupancy of the mayor's pew in the two local churches.
In the morning, the Whig mayor, John Eyles, arrived at St Mary's at 10 a.m. to find the Tory mayor, Richard Bundy Franklin, had turned up two hours early and was installed in the mayor's pew.
Eyles managed to get his officers to eject his rival, with the result that Franklin stood directly in front of Eyles for the duration of the service.
For the afternoon service at St John's, it was Franklin who arrived late and found the door of the church locked, but he forced an entry, and in a rather childish fracas, "put his legs between [Eyles" s]legs, lifted him up", and attempted to throw him into the next seat.
Party strife also permeated many other levels of local life, such as the enforcement of the law, the administration of parish poor relief, and even the running of charitable institutions.
THE DRAMA OF ELECTIONS
Elections were not the only occasions when those below the level of the elite could give voice to their political inclinations, nor were they the only points of contact between the world "out-of-doors" and that of Westminster.
Nevertheless, they were one of the more important points of contact, since they were responsible for determining the political complexion of the House of Commons.
The reigns of William and Anne saw an unprecedented amount of electoral activity.
Between 1689 and 1715 there were twelve General Elections — in 1689, 1690, 1695, 1698, 1701 (two), 1702, 1705, 1708, 1710, 1713, 1715 — that is, virtually one every two years.
Not all of the 269 constituencies in England and Wales went to the polls every time: indeed, the average  number of contests at each general election was a little under 100.
Sometimes local arrangements were made to share representation between the two parties.
Yet if we take all elections held under the Triennial Act in the twenty year period from 1695, including by-elections, we find that only nineteen constituencies avoided a contest altogether.
A study of electoral propaganda conveys the impression that many of the General Elections were fought out on the great party issues of the day: religion, the war, and the security of the protestant succession.
The most notable exception is the General Election of 1698, when Court–Country issues, centring around the grievances of placemen and high taxation, came to the fore.
Looked at from the ground, however, a rather different picture emerges, since it is clear that in many constituencies local issues were of greater importance, and even where national issues played a role, they were often distinctively shaped by peculiar local circumstances.
The difficult task for the historian is to get the balance right for each General Election, and to assess the various ways in which local and national issues interacted at different times in different constituencies.
Even in the"Court–Country' Election of 1698 the partisan rivalries of Church politics came to the fore in some areas.
In Berkshire and Oxfordshire, for example, the cry of the "Church in Danger" was raised by some "hot heads" who feared the recent attempts by Nonconformists to set up a nationwide "correspondence" to pursue "the reformation of manners" was a plot against the Anglican establishment.
In the 1695 Election support for the war was the major national issue, but most election contests appear to have been dominated by local rivalries and concerns, and in fact there was relatively little controversial pamphleteering at this time, despite the recent expiry of the Licensing Act.
This Election provides a stark contrast with the one of 1690, when there had been a great deal of controversial pamphleteering, and where a significant number of contests had been fought over the issues of the Church and the security of the Protestant Succession.
Partisan considerations generated considerable passion at several of the General Elections of Anne's reign.
The Election of 1705, for example, which occurred shortly after the unsuccessful attempt to tack the Occasional Conformity Bill to the Land Tax Bill, was fought largely over the issue of the Church in Danger, and produced a series of bitter contests throughout the country.
One Scottish observer noted that "both parties are angry to a higher degree than ever I saw them even in the Exclusion time" .
In Suffolk, supporters of the Whigs shouted "No Tackers, No French Shoos; Hear the Queen" , whilst the  Tories replied with the chant of"No Forty Eight.
No Presbyterian.
Save the Queens White Neck".
At Worcester, the High Church Tory Sir John Packington paraded through the streets carrying a banner which showed a steeple crumbling and falling, indicating what the electors could expect if they returned his Whig rival.
At the Middlesex election, held at Brentford, "the Tacking Party cry'd out, No Reformation, no Presbyterian" , whilst at Chester, the Whigs allegedly shouted "Down with the Church!" .
Similar passions can be detected at the Election of 1710, which occurred in the aftermath of the Sacheverell affair.
The slogans of the electors at Westminster typify how the two sides saw each other, with the Whigs shouting "no Pretender" and the Tories "no Managers" and "for the Queen and Church" .
At the Norfolk election, where Robert Walpole, one of the manager's at Sacheverell's trial, was standing for re-election, the Tories' supporters marched behind a picture of Dr Sacheverell shouting "No Manager" , and even"pelted Mr Walpole with Dirt and Stones…
Spoiling his fine Lace Coat, which they told him came out of the Treasury".
The 1713 Election, by contrast, was fought mainly over the issue of ending the war.
At Norwich, where the weavers were upset by the provisions in the commercial treaty with France, the Whigs "adorned their outsides with wool" and drove a flock of sheep through the centre of the city.
Nevertheless, the general war-weariness of most of the electors still ensured a Tory victory.
At the Buckinghamshire contest, the Whigs' supporters put wool in their hats, "saying" twas all going into France, and they were resolved to keep some on't, before "twas all gone" .
The Tories, on the other hand, put oaken boughs in their hats, claiming they did this not merely to commemorate Charles II's famous escape at Worcester in 1651 (where he had hidden in an oak tree to avoid the Parliamentary forces), but also to show "that with hearts of oak at the bottom, they will stand fast to the old English constitution both in church and state, in opposition to the miscellaneous tribe of atheists, deists, republicans…who triumph in their stolen wool" .
It would be wrong to assume that only those who were privileged with the franchise were concerned with the outcome of electoral contests, since those without the right to vote were often able to make their feelings known through demonstrations or riots, which became increasingly common features of electoral contests at this time.
Fierce party rivalry at Devizes, where the electorate numbered less than sixty, led to a double return of two Whigs and two Tories in 1710.
When the Tory-dominated House of Commons predictably decided in favour of the two Tories, "the Mobile" celebrated the news by carrying an effigy of one of the Whig candidates "round the Towne, shouting  and huzzaing, and at last threw him into a Bonefire, and burnt him as a Martyr to the dying Whigg Cause" .
In 1713, at the election for the City of London (where the franchise was vested in the liverymen), "a great Mob of Weavers and such people" (who were presumably not enfranchised) turned up at the Guildhall in support of the Whigs, and "made a disturbance and caus'd much fighting and quarrelling" , although the four Tory candidates eventually carried the day, "notwithstanding the Rabble" .
At Bristol that year, party tensions were so fierce that "the ruder sort went to Blows, breaking one anothers Heads" .
Women were often active at election demonstrations, even though they could not vote.
At Southwark in 1705, the women took exception to the candidacy of a local Tory JP, a bachelor and renowned misogynist, who had once said "that he had rather see a Sow and Pigs, than a Woman and her Children" .
At the election, the women of the borough turned up in large numbers shouting "No Sow and Pigs" .
At Coventry in that year, when the two sitting MPs (both of whom were "eminent Tackers" ) returned to contest the election, they were greeted by a huge crowd of local supporters, lay and clerical, who marched in a ritualistic procession carrying a maypole and a banner with a picture of a church on both sides.
The crowd included a sizeable female contingent, headed by someone called "Captain Kate" .
When the cavalcade finally reached the market cross, Captain Kate made a speech to the crowd and presented one of the Tory MPs with "a Sprig of Gilded Rosemary, stuck into an Orange" , and, slapping him on the back, exhorted "Now, Boys, or Never, for the Church" .
The party elite and the local activists certainly tried their utmost to influence the outcome of elections.
One of the main ways in which they did this was by seeking to rally people behind their cause by appealing to the issues of the day, through the press, pulpit, and the speeches given by the candidates at the hustings.
In the large county constituencies, where some people would have to travel large distances to exercise the right to vote, transport was often laid on to help known supporters get to the poll.
Yet the party leaders also used various forms of manipulation and intimidation in their efforts to secure a victory.
Contemporaries believed that the riots which occurred at elections were frequently caused by "hired gangs" employed by one of the parties to prevent their opponents' supporters from coming to the poll.
Although we should be wary of taking all such accounts at face value, since party feeling often ran sufficiently high amongst local inhabitants that little encouragement was needed for them to come to blows, such practices certainly did go on.
At the Westminster election of 1698, for example, 300 horsemen who were in the service of the  Court Whigs, James Vernon and Charles Montagu, charged at their opponents in Tothill fields, and cudgelled them into nearby ditches.
Other forms of intimidation were widespread.
Landlords might try to coerce their tenants into voting for their favoured candidates, threatening them with eviction if they failed to comply.
Local magistrates also abused their authority in order to influence voters.
At Coventry in 1701, to give one typical example, one Whig alderman threatened to deprive a couple of local alehousekeepers of their licences if they refused to give both their votes to the Whig candidates.
When Admiralty Lord, Sir Robert Rich, stood for Dunwich in 1695, he arranged for three "men-of-war" to anchor off the small Suffolk port during the time of the election, to hold out the threat of the press-gang to any who voted against the Whig candidates.
Bribery, in the form of financial inducements and electoral treats, was another common method employed to "persuade" voters to opt for certain candidates.
The parties also sought to manipulate the structure and workings of the electoral system to their own advantage.
Control over the position of returning officer was crucial, since he was able to determine not only who was eligible to vote, but also how long to keep the poll open.
Following their defeat at the Wiltshire election of 1713, the Whig candidates petitioned the House of Commons, complaining that the under-sheriff, in collusion with the two Tory candidates, had delayed opening the poll until the afternoon, "when many freeholders, who would have voted for the petitioners, were necessitated, by reason of the harvest, to go away without voting" , and also that he had "refused those who voted for the petitioners, and had a right; and polled others amongst them, who had no right" .
Votes were often manufactured by the splitting of freeholds or the creation of new freemen to augment the size of a party's following amongst the electorate.
At Ipswich the fact that both sides were engaged in the practice of manufacturing freemen meant that the number of voters rose from 271 in 1698 to nearly 600 by 1715.
In 1701–2, the Whig mayor of the small corporation of Wilton, Wiltshire, created nineteen new burgesses, all of whom were Dissenters who did not even qualify under the terms of the Corporation Act, with the result that in 1702 he was able to reverse the defeat suffered by the Whigs in the election of the previous year.
At Hertford in 1705, according to Tutchin, when it became clear that the Tackers "could not carry it there by Legal Votes" , the town magistrates created between 100 and 150 "Honorary Freemen, all of the Tackers side" , and managed to ensure a Tory victory.
Undoubtedly the greatest electoral influence was wielded by the government of the day.
The remodelling of commissions of the  peace, and the careful disposal of government offices, had the effect of greatly increasing the ability of the government-backed party to bring pressure to bear on electors to vote in their favour, whilst the mere fact that the Crown was making a clear statement as to where its own political sympathies lay was often by itself a powerful factor in swaying public opinion.
Trying to determine whether political conviction or influence was more important in determining how the voters behaved at the polls is no easy task.
An analysis of poll books for Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, Rutland and Westmorland for the early eighteenth century has revealed a remarkable consistency of partisan loyalties amongst the electorate.
In those constituencies where two Whig and two Tory candidates stood, the vast majority gave both their votes to men from the same party.
Out of 2,560 freeholders voting in Bedfordshire in 1705, for example, only 313 (12.2 per cent ) split their votes, whilst in 1715 a mere 142 out of 2,529 split them (5.6 per cent ).
In Buckinghamshire in 1710 there were 164 split votes out of 4,301 freeholders who went to the polls (3.8 per cent); in 1713, 197 out of 3,957 (5 per cent ).
Similar consistency has been found in urban constituencies.
At Norwich in 1710 96.4 per cent of the electors voted for one or other of the party slates.
When only three candidates stood, cross-party voting was inevitably more common.
Nevertheless, there was a strong tendency in some constituencies for voters to "plump" for one candidate and waste their second vote, rather than give it to someone from the opposing party.
When two Whigs and one Tory stood for Hampshire in 1705, only 201 out of 3,517 freeholders voting split their votes (5.7 per cent), whilst 724 plumped for the single Tory candidate.
The bulk of the electorate also remained loyal to the same party in successive elections.
However, there was a significant minority of floating voters: on average about 20 per cent of the electorate.
In addition, there was also a very high turnover of voters from one election to the next, with the result that the "casual voters" normally outnumbered those who regularly took part in the poll.
This data is open to a variety of interpretations, and can be used to lend weight both to the participatory model and to the deferential model of electoral behaviour.
The loyal voter may have voted consistently out of party principle, or because ties of dependence persistently obliged him to defer to the wishes of committed partisans amongst the local elite.
Likewise, the floating vote might be indicative of some electors making up their own minds on the issues of the day; it might equally reflect pressure brought to bear "from above" , perhaps by those attached to the Court who wanted a change in the complexion of the  House of Commons, to "persuade" those electors to change their allegiances.
Finally, the high turnover at the polls might be indicative of changes in the local population, or prudential calculations amongst particular electors as to whether it was worth one's while trying to exercise one's right to vote (on the logic that people will not bother to turn up to the poll if they believe their preferred candidates have no chance of success); it could equally well be indicative of various forms of electoral manipulation and influence, such as the artificial creation of new electors, the ability of returning officers to prevent one side's supporters from polling, or the ability of some members of the local elite to "persuade" electors not to register a vote in opposition to their wishes.
The only way to determine which of these possible readings best explain the behaviour of voters in different localities is through an in-depth study of all the constituencies in England and Wales, such as is currently being undertaken by the History of Parliament Trust.
Any confident assessment of the precise role of influence at elections, therefore, must await the publication of their findings.
In the present state of research it is probably fair to suggest that although influence did have a powerful impact on the outcome of a number of elections, on the whole the electorate was not particularly easy to control, and that members of the political elite, despite all their efforts, often failed to achieve their ends.
There were some constituencies where the interest of a local patron was so strong that he effectively had the power of nominating MPs.
The Earl of Exeter owned so much property in Stamford (Lincolnshire) that he was able to keep its 2,500 electors firm to the Tory interest without a contest during the reign of Anne.
Patronage tended to be more important, however, in boroughs with smaller electorates: Lord Brooke dominated Warwick's 400 voters, the Whig Earl of Carlisle dominated Morperth's electorate of 120, whilst there were a number of proprietary boroughs with electorates of fewer than 100 where both seats remained safe for a particular party.
The smaller boroughs also tended to be the most vulnerable to electoral manipulation, either through "treating" , as at a number of venal boroughs, or through tampering with the composition of the franchise.
But even the petty boroughs were not always easy to handle.
At Bury St Edmunds the franchise was vested in the thirty-seven members of the corporation, but the complexion of the electorate could only be altered when a vacancy occurred naturally in their ranks.
As a result, the Whig MP John Hervey had to work extremely hard to cultivate the corporation, and although he did use various financial incentives, he found that the best way to keep their support was by serving their  interests both locally and in Parliament.
A recent study of Parliamentary boroughs in the south-west of England has shown that even in urban constituencies with small electorates it was never easy for a narrow elite or wealthy patrons to control elections, and that the voters remained capable of autonomous action and independent choice.
The electorates in the open boroughs and in the counties were much more difficult to control.
At the Bristol election in 1713, the Whig candidate, Sir William Daines, spent large sums of money "in procuring the freedom of the city for many hundreds of poor people to vote" and gave "many hundreds to the mob" in the form of direct bribes and alcoholic refreshment.
Bristol had been dominated by the Whigs since 1695, and had fallen to the Tories only in 1710 in the Sacheverellite backlash, so Daines had good reason to believe that a careful cultivation of the electorate could pay dividends.
Yet despite all his efforts, the election, which was conducted amidst scenes of almost continuous rioting, went in favour of the Tories.
In some counties, great landed magnates seemed able to rely on the support of the freeholders residing in the vicinity of their estates.
In Buckinghamshire, for example, 60 per cent of those who lived in areas where the Whig peers Lord Wharton, the Dukes of Montagu, Bedford and Devonshire, and the Earl of Bridgewater owned lands voted Whig in the election of 1705; by 1713 this figure had risen to 66 per cent .
Yet the fact that up to 40 per cent felt under no compulsion to oblige the local magnates with their votes is revealing, and makes us wonder whether those who polled for the Whigs really did so out of deference or as a result of political conviction.
The Buckinghamshire freeholders who lived in the immediate neighbourhood of the Tory local landowner, Sir John Verney, in fact also tended to poll in favour of the Whigs.
Electoral magnates often experienced severe setbacks at the polls.
When Wharton had to relinquish his seat in Buckinghamshire on his elevation to the peerage in 1696, he was unable to replace himself with a suitable man, and the by-election went in favour of a local Tory, Lord Cheyne.
In the 1698 General Election, Wharton's candidates fared relatively badly in several Buckinghamshire constituencies, including the county, whilst in Oxfordshire, where Wharton was Lord Lieutenant, his candidates were defeated by two Tories.
It is sometimes suggested that it was the government, rather than the electorate, which determined the outcome of elections, and that any ministry which enjoyed the full weight of the Crown behind it was unlikely to lose a general election.
Certainly government influence had a powerful impact, and could normally secure the return of favoured candidates in constituencies where there were significant  government installations (such as the postal service at Harwich, or the dockyards at Plymouth, Portsmouth and the Cinque Ports).
Yet there were limits to what the government could achieve.
The Whig ministers lost the General Election of 1698, although it is true that William had not thrown his support wholeheartedly behind them.
Even under Anne, when the ministry of the day never did lose a General Election, it was not always able to get the type of Parliament it wanted.
The efforts of the newly established coalition ministry in 1705 to secure the election of a moderate House of Commons balanced between the two extremes proved to be largely unsuccessful.
It is true that the elections resulted in a House fairly evenly balanced between the two parties, but the fact that the elections came to be fought over the issue of the Church in Danger meant that those Tories who were returned were in no mood for compromise, with the result that the new House proved extremely difficult for the ministry to manage.
In 1708 Godolphin hoped to obtain "a Parliament for the Court, a Parliament that may be guided" but the public reaction to the Jacobite invasion scare of that year produced "the most Wig Parliament…since the revolution" .
The new Tory ministry under Harley may have been successful in changing the previous Whig majority in Parliament into a Tory one in the General Election of 1710; but the furore unleashed by the Sacheverell affair meant that a Parliament dominated by High Tories was returned, which was much more extreme than a moderate like Harley would have wished.
The conclusion seems inescapable that the electorate did have a significant impact in determining the composition of the Commons, and therefore the very nature of party strife at Westminster itself.
THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONTOURS OF THE DIVIDED SOCIETY
English society during the great rage of party under William and Anne divided primarily on religious grounds, with the Nonconformists siding overwhelmingly with the Whigs, and High Church Anglicans with the Tories.
Dissenters were visibly active in support of Whig candidates at the polls, and their electoral impact was often significant, since they might have comprised one-fifth of the total electorate, whilst in some constituencies the proportion of voters who were Nonconformists was much higher.
The Anglican clergy, on the other  hand, tended to rally behind the Tories, often marching to the polls en masse to give their support for the Church and Queen candidates.
In the small county constituency of Rutland, of forty-three beneficed clergymen who polled in the election of 1710, thirty voted for the two Tories, four split their votes, and a mere nine voted for the two Whigs.
At the Suffolk elections of 1705 and 1710, 80 per cent of the clergy voted for the two Tory candidates.
As these figures suggest, however, there was always a small minority of Low Church clergy who sided with the Whigs, whilst the Low Church bishops, of course, often used whatever influence they could to frustrate the election of Tories.
In the 1702 election for Worcestershire, for example, the local Whig Bishop, William Lloyd, tried to rally his clergy and his tenants into forming an interest against the High Tory, Sir John Packington.
In the Sacheverellite election of 1710, we find Lloyd "strenuously" promoting "the Whig interest" in many parts of the south, including Surrey, Hampshire and Cornwall.
The split between the Whigs and Tories is normally thought to have corresponded to a fundamental economic cleavage amongst the English upper classes, between the monied and the landed interests.
A fall in the price of land and in the value of rents meant that the reigns of William and Anne were difficult times for the landed classes, and their plight was exacerbated by the fact that they were being hit by a tax on land of four shillings in the pound to finance the wars against France.
By contrast, those who were involved in the new machinery of public credit which had been set up as a result of the financial revolution were doing remarkably well, through their investments in institutions such as the Bank of England and the New East India Company, and from the interest they received on loans to the government.
Tory propagandists repeatedly alleged that the war policies of the Whigs were designed to promote the interests of the new monied men at the expense of the gentry.
In a satire of 1710, Charles Davenant had his character of a Court Whig say to a country squire: "Let us eat out all your Lands and Tenements with Taxes of our devising; let us have the sole Management of a long protracted War, and gather our wonted Fruits from it" .
Likewise in 1711 Jonathan Swift complained that "we have been fighting…to enrich usurers and stockjobbers; and to cultivate the pernicious designs of a faction, by destroying the landed interest" .
Although party polemicists (especially the Tories) frequently referred to the existence of a fundamental conflict between a Whig monied and a Tory landed interest, recent research has warned us to be cautious of accepting such remarks as an accurate description of  social and political realities.
There were Tory monied men; indeed, before the financial revolution, the monied interest in the City of London had been predominantly Tory.
Tories opposed the new credit system set up in the 1690s not because they objected to this type of economic enterprise, but because the benefits to be accrued from it largely passed them by.
The new financial institutions, established by the Whig Junto in William's reign, came to be dominated by Whigs.
Only three Tories served as directors of the Bank of England between 1694 and 1715, compared to a total of thirty Whigs, whilst of the known directors of the New East India Company in the period 1698–1708, again only three were Tories, as opposed to thirteen Whigs.
Yet Tory directors of the Old East India Company and the Royal African Company continued to outnumber Whigs directors by two to one during this same period, and Tories rushed to invest in the South Sea Bubble Company, set up by Harley in 1711.
Likewise it would be wrong to assume that economic difficulties worked to push the gentry increasingly into the Tory camp.
In the first place, we should not paint too pessimistic a view of what was happening to the landed classes, since the experiences of this group varied considerably from region to region.
In some counties, the land tax was relatively lightly assessed; in Cumberland and Westmorland, for example, landowners might have been paying less than 5 per cent of the true value of their rents.
Secondly, if gentry support for the Whigs had really begun to disintegrate, then they would have soon collapsed as a political force, since the bulk of the political nation comprised the landed interest.
In many areas, Whigs clearly continued to hold their own amongst the squirearchy.
Philip Jenkins has shown that in South Wales at the turn of the century Whig and Tory gentry were equal in terms of wealth and numbers, and further that a number of once firm Tory gentlemen converted to Whiggery after the Glorious Revolution.
We should not go too far and argue that the alleged conflict between the monied and landed interests was nothing more than a propagandist's fiction.
Propaganda, if it is to have any effect at all, must have some basis in truth.
The conflict of interests was certainly a significant factor in the south-east, where the land tax was relatively highly assessed and where the new monied men had made a noticeable intrusion into local economic life, though it could also possess some degree of reality in more remote parts, such as South Wales.
Moreover, the economic cleavage that was perceived to be developing in this society did appear to correspond to the religious tensions that were generating party strife, and to anxious High Church Tories seemed to be yet  another part of the process whereby Dissenters were thriving in the changed political climate after the Revolution at the expense of the Anglican interest.
The fact that Nonconformists were so prominent in the new financial institutions became a source of deep concern, both for the landed classes, who had by now largely severed any ties they had once had with Dissent, and also for the old Tory financial interests in the City, who saw their former economic ascendancy being eclipsed.
At least 43 per cent of those who served as directors of the Bank of England between 1694 and 1715 were either Dissenters or from Dissenting backgrounds, whilst persons from the Dissenting interest also figured prominently as holders of Bank stock and as directors of the New East India Company.
To judge from election results, the Tories appear to have become the more popular party by the early eighteenth century.
Tory success in the elections to Anne's first Parliament in 1702 led Dr Henry Sacheverell to boast that "the Majority of the People are for the Church of England" .
The Whigs had recovered somewhat by 1705, giving the Tories a good run for their money, and they actually won the Election in 1708, although this was to be the only General Election they were to win under Anne.
The Election of 1710 gave the Tories a majority of 151 in the Commons; after the Election of 1713 it was increased to 213.
Other evidence, such as the demonstrations in favour of Sacheverell in 1710, or in favour of peace in 1713, seems to reinforce the view that by the end of Anne's reign public opinion was overwhelmingly behind the Tories.
This is in stark contrast with the Exclusion Crisis, when both the electorate and, at least initially, "the crowd" , appear to have been largely in favour of the Whigs.
The reasons for this shift in public opinion from the Whigs to the Tories are not hard to discern.
A general war weariness, grievances over high taxation, and a deep fear amongst the Anglican majority of the population that the Church was now in greater danger from Protestant Nonconformists than it was from popery, all worked to the Tories' advantage.
Under Anne, it was only in 1708, which saw an attempted Jacobite invasion of Scotland, that the Whigs were able to play the "no popery" card with any success.
The fact that by the early eighteenth century the Whigs had become to all intents and purposes a Court party, whilst the Tories were increasingly associated with Country concerns, also helps explain the relative shift in the support base for the two parties.
Several contemporaries suggested that the reason why the modern Whigs were losing support was because they had deserted old Whig principles.
As the Whigs gradually began to retreat from their erstwhile espousal of populist causes, the Tories  increasingly appeared to be the party with more to offer ordinary people.
This process of transformation can be seen most dramatically in London.
Whereas during the 1670s and 1680s the City Whigs had argued for an extension of democratic rights within the Corporation, they abandoned this position after the Glorious Revolution and instead became increasingly identified as defenders of the oligarchical forces within the City's government.
The old Whig platform for constitutional reform was slowly taken up by the London Tories, with the result that by the last years of Anne's reign they had largely absorbed their opponents' former libertarian rhetoric.
The Tories had also come to steal the Whigs' former following amongst the petty craftsmen and mechanic tradesmen.
In the early 1680s, although the liverymen of the substantial City companies had not noticeably favoured one party, the Whigs had attracted more support from the lesser companies than the Tories.
By the end of Anne's reign, in contrast, the majority of the substantial companies were Whig in sympathy, whilst the lesser companies were predominantly Tory.
Whilst there is much truth in the view that the Tories were gaining popular support at the expense of the Whigs, care must be taken not to exaggerate the shift in public opinion that was occurring during this time.
Lower-class support for the Whigs did not evaporate completely during Anne's reign, even in London, and in particular there were many poor Nonconformists who remained loyal to the party of Low Church and Dissent.
Thus the London weavers, an economically depressed group, but one which nevertheless contained a high preponderance of Nonconformists, rallied behind the Whig government at the time of the Sacheverell affair and helped the trained bands suppress High Church crowds in the City.
The transformation of political sympathies identified for London might be exceptional, being directly linked to particular developments within the Corporation, and therefore a poor indicator of shifts in public opinion in the nation as a whole.
A recent analysis of voting behaviour in Norwich in 1710, for example, has shown that the Tories were strongest amongst the more well-to-do types: the gentry and professional classes, retailers and merchants.
The craftsmen, however, were more evenly divided, even at the high point of Tory fortunes in the City, with the majority still favouring the Whigs.
Whiggery was strongest in those parishes which had a heavy concentration of weavers, and virtually unassailable wherever weaving was combined with Nonconformity.
Moreover, an exaggerated impression of the growth of popular support for the Tories is conveyed by comparing Anne's reign with the period of the  Parliamentary Exclusion Crisis.
The years between the calling of the first Exclusion Parliament in the spring of 1679 and the meeting of the Oxford Parliament in March 1681 was the time when the Whigs were at the peak of their popularity, but this was a rather untypical situation, even for the Restoration era.
At the time of the Restoration itself Anglican-Royalist sentiment was strong not only amongst the gentry but also amongst the population at large, whilst there was a marked reaction against the Whigs and in favour of the Tories following the defeat of the Parliamentary Exclusion movement.
It is by no means clear that the Church and Queen position of 1710–14 was any more popular in the nation at large than had been the Church and King position of either 1660–2 or 1681–5.
We also need to be cautious before asserting that the Tories became a populist party, in the sense of championing the interests of the less privileged classes within society.
Again, we should not assume that developments amongst the London Tories, at the level of corporation politics, were typical of developments amongst Tories as a whole.
Most Tory propagandists continued to hold a rather contemptuous view of the populace.
No-one was more anti-populist than Charles Leslie, admittedly a rather extreme Tory, but whose Rehearsal was nevertheless a powerful vehicle for the propagation of Tory ideology for the middle years of Anne's reign.
Leslie thought the voice of the people was the "Voice of the Devil" , and that the people were "Always in the Wrong" .
His elitism is well brought out in his description of the elections of 1705, where he claimed that "the Principal Gentry, both for Estates and Reputation" , supported the Tory candidates, and "the Refuse and Scum, the Beasts of the People" , supported the Whigs; he went on to recommend changing the franchise qualification from forty shillings worth of freehold land to "10 Pounds at least" .
Even in the aftermath of the Sacheverell affair, Francis Atterbury could still maintain that "the Voice of the People is the Cry of Hell" , and that "The People are by the Voice of Heaven declared Foolish, Sottish, void of Understanding, wise for Wickedness; and senseless for Good" .
Indeed, most Tories sought to distance themselves from the actions of their own supporters amongst the rank and file.
Charles Lambe denied that the Tories had been responsible for raising the Sacheverell mobs, and blamed the Whigs for instilling into people the idea that "they are the original of government" .
It was no surprise, Lambe maintained, that the people acted in accordance with the doctrines they had been taught, though it happened "that this Mob rose with Inclinations perfectly different from what was expected from them" .
Lambe concluded by saying that "All tumultuous Assemblies are  against my Principle" , and that he hated "Mobs and Insurrections, though they favour my side" .
Tory propagandists were certainly prepared to argue that the people's interests were not being protected by the Whigs.
In a tract written shortly before the 1715 General Election, Atterbury maintained that "the People" had been "fleec'd so often" by the heavy taxes imposed by the Whigs to fight their wars, that "they have scarce enough to keep them from Perishing" .
But if we are to generalise, it is better to characterise the Tory position as paternalist, rather than populist.
Tories remained fiercely critical of Whig arguments about popular sovereignty, and tended to argue that the people would be better off if they accepted their place in society and allowed the Tory elite to attend to their welfare.
As Leslie put it, "No Evils" were "of such Hurtful Consequences to the People, as those of Anarchy and Confusion" , which were the inevitable consequences of "Mobb Principles" ; the "Miserably Deluded People" should "Recover their Senses" , and "Adhere to the Laws and Constitution" (which for Leslie meant divine-right monarchy).
CONCLUSION
Party rivalry was so intense in England under the later Stuarts because it affected not just the political elite at the centre, but cut deep into society.
A wide range of people throughout much of the country — from the local gentry, through to the professional and mercantile classes, down to the middling and lower sorts of town and countryside — were actively caught up in the partisan controversies of the time.
People became politicised because many of the issues of the day affected them directly, and they often had the chance to give expression to their political feelings through petitions, demonstrations, riots and, for those with the right to vote, at the polls.
More still needs to be learned about politics "out-of-doors" for the reigns of William and Anne; in particular, we need to find out more about the ways local and national issues interacted in specific localities, and we are still in the process of discovering about the dynamics of electoral politics.
It is clear, however, that political historians cannot afford to confine their attention to the goings-on at Westminster or St James's, and that the history of party under the later Stuarts is as much about the divisions that emerged in society at large as it is about what happened in Parliament  or at the royal Court.
Not only did the existence of a divided society help fuel party tensions under William and Anne, but taking the longer perspective covered by this book as a whole, it might even be fair to suggest that the emergence of the party divide amongst the political elite was itself a symptom of the bitter divisions that already existed in this society, divisions which we have traced back to the Restoration in 1660.
A wide range of factors shaped how people aligned themselves politically — from personal considerations or considerations of economic self-interest through to political or religious conviction — and the way these factors interrelated could differ over time to produce shifting patterns of popular allegiance.
One theme that has emerged throughout this book, however, and which has been reinforced by the analysis presented in this chapter, is the importance of religion in determining people's political identity.
Throughout the first age of party, Nonconformists (together with those sympathetic to Dissent) tended to identify strongly with the Whigs, whilst High Anglicans identified overwhelmingly with the Tories.
The party struggle, whether in- or out-of-doors, was never solely about the conflict between the Church and Dissent; nevertheless, this conflict was a powerful and central feature of that struggle, which we see present throughout most of the period.
Jacobitism
Not everyone was reconciled to the breach in the succession that occurred with the Glorious Revolution.
There were a number of Jacobite plots throughout the 1690s, as various attempts were made to help James II recapture his Crown, including a plot to assassinate William III in 1696, and in 1715 there was a rebellion in Scotland and the north of England on behalf of his son, James Francis Stuart (the Old Pretender).
Jacobitism was a continual destabilising force in British politics under the later Stuarts, so it is vital to consider precisely what impact it had on partisan strife during this period, and exactly how widespread sympathies for the exiled Stuarts were amongst the general population.
This is a subject over which there has been much controversy.
Some believe that Jacobitism was a fairly significant force both within the Tory party and in society at large(especially north of the border), so that at the time of the Hanoverian succession there was a realistic chance that a Jacobite coup might succeed.
Others see the Jacobites as a small minority of rather cranky dissidents, who included amongst their ranks not just extreme Tories, but also professional plotters and even some outré Whigs, and would maintain that a Jacobite rebellion never stood any realistic chance of success.
Jacobitism is not an easy subject to study, because of the problems inherent in the sources.
Since Jacobite activity was by definition treasonous, every wise Jacobite presumably did his best not to leave incriminatory evidence behind.
There is plenty of material about Jacobite activity from those hostile to a Stuart restoration, but since this was a time when immense political advantage was to be gained by tarnishing one's opponents with the stigma of loyalty to the exiled  royal family, such sources must be treated with immense scepticism.
Some of the correspondence sent to the Jacobite Court in St Germain-en-Laye has survived, although few original letters have come down to us, and we are heavily reliant on copies and draft translations into French.
The main source for the history of Jacobitism is the Stuart papers, but they have survived only in part for the period before 1715, since the Stuart papers kept at the Scots College in Paris were almost totally destroyed by fire during the French Revolution.
Even without these source difficulties, identifying who the Jacobites were would be an extremely difficult task.
For obvious reasons, few people were likely to admit to being Jacobites.
Yet what degree of commitment should we expect from someone before we decide to label them a Jacobite?
Should we include anyone who just wished James II or the Old Pretender well?
Or should we limit ourselves only to those who were prepared to engage actively on behalf of the cause?
A Jacobite agent writing towards the end of Queen Anne's reign thought that there were people in England who "wish the King [i.e." James III "]well, who would not hazard their estates for him" .
The test of being an active rebel is clearly inappropriate, since it would exclude the likes of William Shippen, a notorious Jacobite MP who nevertheless avoided being implicated in the"Fifteen.
On the other hand, we cannot assume that all people accused of Jacobite activity were guilty as charged; some fell victim to the false allegations of professional perjurers.
The issue is further complicated by the fact that many people remained inconsistent in their Jacobitism.
Some drifted towards a Jacobite position as others moved away from it.
Then there was what might be-called "fire-insurance Jacobitism" : in the 1690s a number of leading politicians — amongst them Tories such as Marlborough and Godolphin and Whigs such as Shrewsbury and Edward Russell — thought it wise to maintain some contact with the exiled Stuarts so that their own political security would be guaranteed should there be another Stuart restoration.
There were some people who might show sympathy towards the Jacobites even though they were not Jacobites themselves.
There was treachery even in the executive branch of William's government: as Paul Hopkins has shown, Jacobites received constant information from the secretaries' clerks on warrants and charges against them, and the messengers who made arrests and detained prisoners were often not reliable.
Non-Jacobites might have close contacts with people who were Jacobites.
John Ellis, who was Under-Secretary of State to William, had one brother who was a Secretary to James and another who was a Catholic bishop.
The brother of the  loyal Lord Bath joined the Court at St Germain.
The Earl of Nottingham, an entirely loyal minister of state, was nevertheless subsidising William Lloyd, the deprived Bishop of Norwich, who was in regular contact with those who were trafficking with France.
It will be the argument here that Jacobitism was not a coherent movement.
A Jacobite solution could be attractive to different people for different reasons at different times.
This chapter will begin, therefore, by examining the different dimensions of Jacobitism, and then proceed to a consideration of how extensive Jacobite sentiment was in British society at large.
It will be suggested that those who became Jacobites because of a deep attachment to the principles of divine-right monarchy and Stuart legitimism were relatively few; most who turned to Jacobitism did so because of disillusionment with developments after the Glorious Revolution.
Jacobitism became an ideology of opposition, and Jacobites tended to unite around negatives; there was much less support for the positive alternative represented by either James II or his son, the Old Pretender.
Hostility towards the policies and corrupt practices associated with the Court Whigs might have caused more and more people to look on the possibility of a Stuart Restoration with increasing sympathy; the fact that the Stuarts never renounced their Catholicism and remained closely identified with France explains why this growing sympathy was never translated into an effective challenge to the Protestant succession as guaranteed by the Glorious Revolution and the Act of Settlement.
THE DIMENSIONS OF JACOBITISM
A small group of people, known as the Non-Compounders, desired an unconditional restoration of James II.
Their following was probably quite small in England, but the Jacobite Court which was established at St Germain-en-Laye near Paris was dominated by them, many of whom were former Catholic servants of the King.
Those at St Germain never questioned the validity of James II's acts as King, and for them the Revolution remained totally unjustifiable.
They put their trust in a military solution to right the wrong that had been done in 1688, and looked to France for help.
They also co-ordinated the Jacobite organisation, had spies and correspondents in England, and directed propaganda.
The Court at St Germain, however, was riven with personal rivalries and intrigues, which weakened Jacobite organisation  considerably.
There were also religious differences between Catholics and Protestants, as well as tensions between English, Scottish and Irish factions.
Those at the exiled Court became hopelessly out of touch with political realities in post-Revolutionary England; many of them were living in the world as they thought it had been in the late 1680s, and their platform increasingly appeared to have less and less relevance to the new problems facing England.
By contrast, the majority of English Jacobites desired a conditional restoration of James II, with firm guarantees for the security of the Protestant religion and certain limitations placed on the power of the Crown.
They therefore disagreed with St Germain over a number of fundamentals: their view of the Revolution; their view of the constitution; the advisability of an attempted military solution; their attitude towards France; and, perhaps most importantly, their attitude towards Catholicism.
Many English Catholics remained deeply committed to the Stuart dynasty, for obvious reasons, although they were only a tiny minority of the population.
Besides them, support for Jacobitism in England stemmed from two main sources.
There were those whose attachment to the principles of divine right and hereditary succession was so strong that they felt that James and his heirs could be the only legitimate Kings of England, whilst others turned to Jacobitism out of disillusionment with political developments since the Revolution.
Of the two, historians normally attach greatest significance to the former.
Jacobite propaganda repeatedly rehearsed the principles of Stuart legitimism.
Such a belief did not necessarily entail an uncritical acceptance of everything James II had done as King.
Nevertheless it was the King's ministers, the argument ran, who should be held accountable for the misdeeds of the Crown, not the King himself.
As Alexander Irvine put it in 1694: it is a Maxim in our Law, "That the King can do no Wrong" ; the Meaning whereof is not, that nothing can be done amiss that he does in point of Government, but whatever there is amiss to it, is not to be imputed to him, but to those by whose Advice and Ministry he acts; and consequently, that not he, but they are punishable for them.
In this instance, however, Irvine believed, "the case is quite inverted" , for "the King himself is charged with all the Faults of Government, and…punished for them" , and his ministers "not only suffered to escape Punishment, but…highly preferr'd and rewarded" — a reference, in particular, to the favour shown by William to James's former chief advisor, the second Earl of Sunderland.
The group who were the most uncompromising in their attachment  to divine and hereditary right were the Nonjurors.
They were not numerous: only a minority of lay office-holders refused the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary (although they included ten peers and sixty-one present or former MPs), as did a little under 400 clergymen (3.5 per cent of a total clerical estate of at least 12,000).
But the significance of the Nonjurors was much greater than their numbers might suggest.
Nearly half of the episcopal hierarchy refused the new oaths, and as a result opened up a schism in the Anglican Church.
Moreover, the Nonjurors included some of the best scholars of the day, skilful and productive polemicists who made a powerful intellectual impact: well over one hundred political pamphlets are attributable to them.
In one sense, the Nonjurors were Jacobites by definition, since they refused to accept that as a result of the Revolution William and Mary were now rightful and lawful rulers instead of James.
However, only a few Nonjurors became active Jacobites, in the sense of being agents or conspirators.
The second Earl of Clarendon was involved in the Preston Plot of 1690, as was Bishop Turner of Ely, whilst at various times Charles Leslie and George Hickes worked for the exiled Court.
Some Nonjurors, though never implicated in Jacobite intrigue, nevertheless were committed to the principle of a Stuart restoration — for example the cleric, Jeremy Collier, or the lawyer, Roger North, who had been attorney-general to the Queen in James II's reign.
Yet there were others who clearly did not relish James's rule, having actively opposed him when King, and who did their best to distance themselves from the Jacobite cause after the Revolution, Archbishop Sancroft being the most famous example.
It was not so much Jacobite principle that led to Nonjurism, but rather a sincerely held belief about the inviolable nature of oaths.
Some lay Nonjurors returned to communion with the Church of England after the death of James II, feeling that now they were relieved from the oaths, as did some of their clerical counterparts after the demise of the last Nonjuring bishop in 1710.
In contrast, Jacobites often showed few scruples about taking oaths.
In a pamphlet of 1693, the Nonjuror Jeremy Collier, himself a Jacobite, rebuked those Jacobites who had submitted to the oaths in order to further their cause.
John Lade, later to be MP for Southwark, shortly after the passage of the Abjuration Act of 1702, said "that his friends, meaning the Jacks, were milksops for kicking at oaths, asserting they should never be able to do anything if they, his friends, did not take all the oaths that could be imposed" .
Those Nonjurors who remained committed to a Jacobite restoration were often at odds with St Germain, being both anti-French and anti-Catholic.
Whigs often liked to suggest that all Tories were by definition sympathetic to a restoration of the Stuarts, because of their belief in indefeasible hereditary right.
However, most historians would agree that, at least until the Hanoverian Succession, only a minority of Tories were Jacobites.
As we have already seen, Tories were largely able to accommodate themselves to the Revolution; most could accept William at least as de facto ruler, and some, following Edmund Bohun, were even able to rationalise the events of 1688–9 in such a way as to conclude that William was also monarch de jure.
Most Tories supported the Act of Settlement of 1701.
The latest study of Jacobitism within the Tory party at the end of Anne's reign has identified only fifty-one probable and a further fifteen possible Jacobite MPs during the period 1710–14, when Parliamentary Jacobitism was at its strongest.
There were at most twenty-two Jacobite peers in the House of Lords, ten of whom were Scottish representative peers, who owed their places to the Union of 1707 (under the terms of which, the Scottish peers as a whole elected sixteen of their number to sit in the upper chamber at Westminster).
Moreover, unlike their counterparts at St Germain or amongst the Nonjurors, these Jacobite MPs were not "archaic unreconstructed upholders of Divine Right" , but Country Tories.
They were concerned about the threat to English liberties posed by corruption, placemen and the growth of the executive, and championed not Stuart absolutism, but mixed monarchy, the ancient constitution and the liberties of Parliament.
Indeed, it should not be assumed that Jacobitism was based solely — or even primarily — on the legitimist principle.
Jacobitism often grew out of disillusionment with developments which had happened since the Revolution, rather than out of opposition to the Revolution itself.
Jacobite literature from the early years of William's reign commonly rehearsed Country arguments, complaining about the arbitrary style of William's rule (the suspension of habeas corpus, the vetoing of Parliamentary bills), the mismanagement of the war, heavy taxation, the decay of trade, and the influence of Dutch favourites.
One anonymous poem from these years, for example, stated that…now we're come to count our gains Wee fynd wee did but shift our chains, The Tyrant's gon, the Tyranny remains.
Country Jacobitism and legitimism were not necessarily incompatible.
Propagandists could always argue that the fact that so many misfortunes had befallen England since the Revolution confirmed how  wrong it had been to dethrone the rightful sovereign.
Country-Tory Jacobites in Parliament, whilst critical of what James II had done as King, nevertheless maintained that a restoration of the ancient constitution required a restoration of the right line.
Yet a number of those who became Jacobites had no particular attachment to the legitimist principle, including several former Whigs.
Some MPs who had previously voted for the Exclusion Bill turned Jacobite, amongst them Sir William Whitlock (a former member of the Green Ribbon Club) and Edward Harvey (though in the process they also became High Tories).
So too did a number of James II's Whig collaborators of 1687–8: the Quaker, William Penn; Penn's associate, Charlwood Lawton; the Independent divine, Stephen Lobb; and the Presbyterian lawyer, Edward Nosworthy, another erstwhile member of the Green Ribbon Club.
The Quakers, in particular, had obvious reasons for continuing to support James, for the toleration they enjoyed towards the end of his reign was far more extensive than that allowed under the Toleration Act of 1689.
Yet we also have the example of Robert Ferguson, the Whig plotter who had been mixed up in the Rye House intrigues and Monmouth's Rebellion.
Ferguson, in fact, had been fiercely critical of those Dissenters who had taken advantage of James II's Declaration of Indulgence of 1687; by 1690, however, he had turned Jacobite.
These "Whiggish Jacobites" , as they referred to themselves, produced a number of pamphlets in which they argued that William, through various acts of despotism, had broken the contract he had made with the nation in 1689, and thus forfeited his right to obedience.
In a tract of 1695, Ferguson complained that William had "departed from our known Laws…utterly Impoverished us" , and had attempted to bribe "so many Members of both Houses to sell their Country" that it amounted to "a direct subversion of the Constitution" .
In typical Whig language, Ferguson concluded that the Sovereign having no other Ground of claim to any Power or Prerogative, save what he hath from the Constitution which hath settled and vested them in him, That Prince who goes about to overthrow this, does all he can to cancel his own Right.
An anonymous tract of February 1691 started with the premise that "Government as ordained by God, has for its End or Object the Common Good" , and argued that the heavy taxes, the decay of trade, and the oppressions of war suffered under William meant that his Government was "not an Upholder of the common good; and consequently …no more a Government" .
Many of these Whig Jacobite tracts can be said to reflect commonwealth principles, in the sense that they argued for a monarchy which would be severely limited.
One author denounced the Convention for making William King without making it "impossible for that king to be like the kings that went before him" ; another condemned the members of the Convention because
They did not mend the Constitution…
Had we our Annuall Parliaments Settled, the Negative Voice Restrained, a Committee of Lords and Commons to be the Privy-Council, no Officers of the King to serve in Parliament, the Revenue Appropriated, all Eminent Offices had upon good Behaviour and Election of Members to Parliament secured, the Work might have deserved a better Character".
What the Whiggish Jacobites wanted, therefore, was a conditional restoration of James II.
As Charlwood Lawton put it in 1693, there were Jacobites for reformations, "That think it Lawful for Kings, and their Parliaments, to limit and explain the Nature of Prerogatives" , and he went on to advocate certain legal reforms, reform of the militia, the frequent sitting of Parliament (Lawton was writing before the passage of the 1694 Triennial Act), and Parliament's right to scrutinise and punish ministers of state.
The attempt to build a broad Jacobite alliance of disaffected Whigs and Tories around Country principles met with some degree of success in the early 1690s.
When a proposed Abjuration Bill was defeated in the House in December 1692, it was reported that "the Jacobites and Comonwealths men joyn'd together" to oppose it.
Some Whigs were implicated in Jacobite activities, amongst them John Wildman, Charles Mordaunt (third Earl of Monmouth), the Earls of Dorset and Shrewsbury, and the Duke of Bolton, although whether we should see their alleged intrigues as much more than fire-insurance Jacobitism is unclear.
Jacobite pamphlets often reflected an awareness of the mixed nature of their support.
Lawton, for example, claimed to speak for the Whiggish Jacobites, the Church of England Jacobites, and the Roman Catholics.
James II even issued a Country Jacobite declaration in April 1693, promising to do "more for their Constitution, than the most renowned of our Ancestors" , by instituting free elections and frequent Parliaments, and by allowing Parliament to determine the limits of his dispensing power.
The Country Jacobite coalition, however, did not last.
There were too many internal contradictions which prevented the different constituencies from working effectively together.
If Country Jacobitism had for a time in the early 1690s represented an alliance of disillusioned Whigs and Tories, it nevertheless ended up  as a platform which drew support almost exclusively from Tories.
JACOBITISM IN SOCIETY
Jacobite polemicists sought to target a mass audience.
Much of their propaganda was produced in a popular idiom, such as poems and broadsides, clearly designed for people who might lack the sophistication to cope with the lengthier, more intellectual justifications of Jacobitism.
There were even Jacobite ballads, some of them performed by itinerant singers; in this way, the Jacobite message could be transmitted even to those who could not read.
One way we can examine the nature and extent of Jacobite sympathies amongst the populace is by looking at those who got into trouble with the law for Jacobite disaffection.
Beyond investigating who engaged in actual plotting, we can examine riots and demonstrations which seem to have had Jacobite overtones, and also look at more individual statements of Jacobite sympathy such as the uttering of seditious words.
Most cases of seditious words expressed a belief in the principle of Stuart legitimacy.
In November 1691, for example, Clemens Storey, a London woollendraper, expressed his belief that King James was "the right and lawfull King" , whilst in September 1695 George Dent, a Southwark glover, allegedly said that "King James hath more right to the Crowne than King William and that King William is not Lawfull King, and that he is a Nasty Little Fellow" .
Sometimes the principle of legitimism was voiced in an explicitly Anglican context.
Towards the end of May 1689 one Londoner said that "the Crowne and Kingdome was King James proper right" , and "that King James had promist to settle the Church as now by law Established" .
After James II's death, and during the reign of Anne, Jacobites usually claimed that James Francis Stuart was the rightful heir to the throne, who should succeed his sister: it was not until after the Hanoverian succession that we find him being hailed as James III.
Yet such evidence, taken at face value, perhaps gives a misleading impression about the significance of legitimism as a determinant of Jacobite disaffection.
What else should we expect to find from such a source?
Jacobite seditious words, by their nature, express the belief that James should be King and not William; often the speeches recorded in the legal documents are short and cryptic, and do not offer a full explanation of how that belief came to be arrived at.
There is  sufficient evidence to suggest, however, that Jacobite disaffection might commonly have arisen out of dissatisfaction with William.
Some of the speeches were more anti-William than pro-James.
Charges that there had been no good times in England since William came in, or that William had ruined the nation, were fairly common.
Sometimes seditious speeches complained about the various injustices suffered under William, reflecting a Country Jacobite position.
John Owen was a Bristol gentleman who, as he admitted in 1692, looked to James's return as a way of getting relief from the burdens of the customs and excise.
There was also resentment against the Dutch.
William Pennington, a London labourer, allegedly said in December 1689 "God damne King William and Queene Mary for a Dutch Dogg and a Dutch Bitch" , whilst in the summer of that year George Smith, after drinking a pot of ale in an alehouse in Coleman Street, had said"God Damn all the Dutch Men…
Bake them in An Oven and Broile them on a GridIron".
James Weenes, in a conversation he had with the wife of a London weaver in September 1690, expressed his opinion that William was "a Dutch Dogg and an Usurper" , who "like a Villain came and took the Crowne from the head of his Father" , and also that"the nobility was a parcel of Rogues and all of them lived as high as Kings.
And that the nobility did not vote in King William for the good of the Commonwealth nor for religion but to preserve their riches and honours' — a curious speech which combined legitimism with Country Jacobitism and even a sense of class hostility.
Although the evidence of seditious words can tell us something about the range of motives which led people to Jacobitism, it can tell us little about how prevalent such sympathies were.
Often, the words alleged against the accused were spoken in an alehouse, and although alcohol might help loosen one's inhibitions, we surely have to be sceptical about the depth of commitment of someone whose only Jacobite statement was made in a drunken stupor.
We also have the problems of erroneous accusation and malicious prosecution.
Most charges of seditious words occurred during times of Jacobite scares and tended to be levied at those groups suspected of Jacobite sympathy: Roman Catholics, the Irish, Nonjurors, and the high-flying clergy and gentry.
Given the fact that less than 30 per cent of charges brought resulted in successful conviction (when the rate for most other crimes was about 50 per cent), we may wonder how much substance there was in many of the accusations, or whether at times of political anxiety certain types of people were likely to be vulnerable to false accusations because they conformed to the popular stereotype of who a Jacobite was.
There are only a few isolated examples of Jacobite riots or demonstrations in England during the 1690s, perhaps suggesting that Jacobite sentiment was not particularly widespread.
In Bristol there was much revelry on the occasion of Queen Mary's death in 1694, as people celebrated to refrains of "The King shall enjoy his own again" .
The decision by the Whig House of Commons to overturn the election of Samuel Swift in February 1694 to serve as MP for Worcester in favour of the man he had defeated, who happened to be brother-in-law to the Junto chief, Lord Somers, provoked demonstrations in the city, with crowds shouting"A Cheat, A Cheat, A Presbiterian Cheat.
All honesty was taken away with K[ing] J[ames]".
When Swift returned to Worcester a few days later, he was greeted with the ringing of bells, illuminations and bonfires, at many of which could be heard the tune of "The King shall have his own again" .
However, other Jacobite demonstrations from this time appear to have lacked much genuine support.
There were disturbances in Drury Lane on 10 June 1695, when a number of people gathered at the Dog Tavern to celebrate the birthday of the Prince of Wales.
In the evening they constructed a bonfire outside, where they drank the healths of James II and his son, forcing passers-by to do the same, and offering insults to those who refused.
The Dog Tavern was a notorious Jacobite haunt, and the demonstration appears to have been staged by Jacobite agents as a way of testing popular sympathies.
The result was disappointing, since the effect was to prompt the appearance of a Williamite crowd, who managed to drive away the Jacobites.
In November 1697 a group of men in Carlisle committed a riot on the day that the conclusion of the peace was announced, "threatening to break the windows…being illuminated upon that occasion, causing the Candles to be put out, and offering mony to drink King James's health" .
Yet what seems to have upset them was the fact that many of the townsfolk were celebrating William's peace.
Although there was a flurry of Jacobite plotting and conspiracy in the period 1689–97, none of it stood much chance of success.
Jacobitism as a movement was as yet too incoherent and badly organised, and lacked a firm social base.
Support for the exiled King was greatest amongst Catholic recusants and immigrant Irish in the north, who played a prominent role in the plots of the 1690s.
There were pockets of disaffection in other parts of the country, amongst Anglicans and even Quakers, but these were thin on the ground; the memories of the 1680s were still too powerful to make many people seriously wish to see the Stuarts back on the throne again.
Despite the existence of a certain amount of disaffection towards William's regime, the attempts  by Jacobite agents to turn this into a more positive commitment to the Jacobite cause were largely unsuccessful.
Indeed, Jacobite activity was more likely to provoke the wrath of the common people.
There was a riot against suspected Jacobites in London in early August 1690, at the time of the Jacobite insurrection in Ireland, and the prospect of a French-backed invasion across the channel in May 1692 led to talk of a further rising by Londoners against those suspected of disaffection.
If James II were to recapture his throne, it would have to be by force, as the result of a successful foreign invasion, but William's government proved more than a match, putting down the Jacobite rebellions in Scotland and Ireland, and defeating the prospect of a French-backed invasion with victory at La Hogue in 1692.
Jacobitism seemed to be growing more widespread in England towards the end of Anne's reign.
A greater distance from the events of 1680s made it easier for people to develop a nostalgic longing for the return of the exiled Stuarts as the solution to the nation's ills.
War weariness was increasing the unpopularity of the Whigs, and although the Tories were happy with Queen Anne, the prospect of the succession of the House of Hanover, foreign Lutherans who were known to be sympathetic to the Whigs, was not particularly appealing to them.
Jacobite candidates did well in the elections to Anne's last two Parliaments, although it must be remembered that Tory candidates in general did well, so that the absolute rise in the number of Jacobite MPs did not necessarily reflect a relative rise in the strength of Jacobitism within the Tory party as a whole.
But electoral success gave the Jacobites a greater visibility at the centre of politics, and perhaps encouraged fellow travellers in the localities to become more open about their political convictions.
Jacobitism was noticeably strong in parts of Wales, and seemed to develop under Anne because of the strength of the High Church there.
The major bastion of Welsh Jacobitism was the north-east, where Watkin Williams Wynn (who was to be MP for Denbighshire from 1716 to 1749) established a Jacobite club called the "Cycle of the White Rose" on 10 June 1710.
Some of the gentry in South Wales also had Jacobite leanings, and looked for leadership to Lewis Pryse of Aberystwyth and the Duke of Beaufort.
There was extensive Jacobite unrest throughout much of England in the years following the Hanoverian Succession.
There were riots in London, throughout much of the midlands and the north-west, in parts of the west and of Wales, and also in cities such as Bristol, Oxford, Cambridge, and Norwich.
These disturbances typically evinced a High Church and Country Tory brand of Jacobitism.
The Hanoverian succession per se does not appear to have been what triggered  most of the unrest.
It is true that cases of seditious words brought before the courts at the time of the disturbances show that disaffection was often expressed in terms of a belief in Stuart legitimism: in early 1715, Londoner Phillip Hide cursed King George and said "he had no right to the Crowne of England" , whilst on 29 May 1715, during the Jacobite demonstrations in London, John Burnoist was noticed to be wandering the streets shouting "James the third is right and Lawfull King of England" , the "protector of the protestant religion" , and "George is a Usurper to the Crown" .
Yet it seems to have been the realisation of what the Hanoverian succession would mean — namely Whig supremacy — which provoked the disturbances.
The proclamation of George as King in August 1714 provoked little discontent, although some observers did notice that the celebrating was not that extensive either.
There was unrest in some twenty-six English and Welsh towns on 20 October, the day of George's coronation, by which time the new monarch had already begun to turn out the old Tory ministers and replace them by Whigs.
But the disorders really began to escalate after the spring of 1715, which saw the consolidation of the Whigs in power as a result of their success in the General Election of March, achieved with the full weight of royal patronage behind them.
Whig political supremacy aroused not only High Church anxieties about the security of the established Church, but also fears about Whig warmongering and the concomitant high taxation, which were intensified when the new administration began impeachment proceedings against those responsible for the Tory peace of 1713.
Even Thomas Hearne, a Nonjuring Jacobite who himself was convinced that James III was the legitimate King, nevertheless thought that the reason why people were becoming more sympathetic to a Stuart restoration was a result of the favour George I had shown to the Whigs: He hath turned the Tories out, and filled all places with those of the Whiggish party.
This hath justly caused Abundance of Discontent, and"tis from hence that we have heard of so many Tumults and Riots.
Those that were before against K. James are now zealous in his Behalf.
Most of the riots followed a similar pattern.
Angry crowds would curse George I, Whigs and Dissenters, the Duke of Marlborough (a warmonger, and the man widely believed to be responsible for encouraging George I to show all his favour to the Whigs), and often even William III, whilst reserving their cheers for James III, the Duke of Ormonde (the Tory who had replaced Marlborough as  Captain-General of the Land Forces in 1712), Dr Sacheverell, and the Church of England.
Public anniversaries normally provided the cue for unrest.
Important days in the Jacobite calendar were 23 April (the anniversary of the coronation not only of Queen Anne, but also of Charles II and James II), 29 May (Restoration day), and 10 June (the Pretender's birthday).
Days from the Whig or Hanoverian calendar of celebration — such as 28 May (George I's birthday), 1 August (George I's accession day), 20 October (George I's coronation day), 30 October (the birthday of George, Prince of Wales), and 4 and 5 November (the birthday of William III and the dual anniversary of Gunpowder Treason day and William's landing at Torbay)— could often provoke Jacobite counter-theatre of mockery and subversion.
But there was also unrest on other occasions, as in the summer months of 1715 and 1716.
All of the riots evinced deep hostility towards the Nonconformists (and especially the Presbyterians), and would typically reach a climax with the demolition of the local meeting-houses.
One correspondent, seeking to explain the motives behind the attack on the meeting-houses in the west midlands in the summer of 1715, informed Staffordshire MP, William Ward, that the rioters have got a Notion, that the Ministry and Dissenters have ruined Trade, on Purpose to make the Nation out of Love with the late Peace, and Peace-makers; and because the Ministry, and secret Committee, and their Friends, will not let the Country have Peace and Trade, they resolve (if they can hinder it) the Dissenters shall not have a quiet Toleration.
Some of the disturbances were triggered by the provocative actions of local Whigs and Dissenters.
At Dorchester on 20 October 1714, the day of George's coronation, it was the decision of the Dissenters to burn an effigy of the Pretender that provoked the wrath of the Jacobites, who armed with clubs proceeded to set about"those who carried him about the Town…
Crying out "" Who dare disowne the Pretender?! "" …drinking Dr Sacheverell's health and insulting the Meeting House".
The riots in Bristol on that day were triggered by rumours that the Whigs were going to burn an effigy of Dr Sacheverell.
In other places we find Whig crowds retaliating to a Tory initiative.
At West Bromwich in the west midlands the Dissenters defended their meeting-house with guns and swords, some of them even being mounted on horses.
In London Whigs and Dissenters not only organised counter-demonstrations, where they burnt effigies of the Pope, the Pretender and Tory defectors, but they also engaged in vigilante activity, as they sought to suppress the activities of the Jacobite crowds.
An analysis of those involved in the Jacobite disturbances shows that most came from the petty trading and artisanal classes of the towns and industrial villages.
These were the groups which had suffered most from the dislocations of the war, and an element of class antagonism can perhaps be detected in their hatred of wealthy Whig financiers and rich local Dissenters (especially the Presbyterians).
The class dimension should not be pushed too far, however.
Jacobite crowds sometimes attacked poor Dissenting groups, such as the Baptists.
Moreover, some of the riots were incited by local High Church clergy and gentry.
There is a certain amount of evidence to suggest that local Tory leaders played a part in inciting the unrest.
The Dorchester crowd that sought to rescue the Pretender's effigy from being burnt by the Dissenters on George I's coronation day were encouraged by a certain gentleman who gave them half a hogshead of beer.
The riot at Bristol on that day was instigated by an organisation known as "the Loyal Society" .
The Jacobite riot at Newcastle-under-Lyme in July 1715 was a well-planned and carefully staged affair, and one of the patrons seems to have been Ralph Sneyd, MP for Staffordshire.
This is not to suggest that all the anti-Hanoverian crowds were encouraged from above; as Nicholas Rogers has shown, patrician involvement seems to have become less common after the early stages of unrest, and increasingly the riots in most areas appear to have been led from below by more lowly types.
And although Whig observers typically suggested that Jacobite agents had "animated the mob" , there is little evidence to suggest that this was the case.
It seems that the unrest should be seen as an authentic expression of High Church hostility towards Whigs and Dissenters, shared by plebeians, gentry and clergy alike.
Such an interpretation is reinforced by an analysis of the geography of protest.
The riots occurred in places which were strongholds of Tory Anglicanism, but where there was a highly visible and influential Dissenting presence.
There was extensive unrest in the west midlands, and in particular in Staffordshire, and these were the areas which had rapturously received Dr Sacheverell on his triumphant progress following his trial of 1710.
The Jacobite unrest in Bristol, Norwich and London was symptomatic of the bitter political tensions which existed in these communities between Tories and High Church Anglicans on the one hand and Whigs and Nonconformists on the other.
Historians have been more dismissive of the evidence of Whig crowds at the Hanoverian Succession, on the grounds that these appear to have been deliberately manipulated from above.
We know that in London, for example, the anti-Jacobite crowds were organised by loyal societies (or "mug-houses" , as they were known) run by Whig  politicians and members of the urban elite.
Yet given the strength of Dissent in the capital and the depth of religious tensions, there is no reason to doubt that the rank and file who followed the leaders of the mug riots were genuinely anti-Tory.
The fact that several provincial towns reported pope-burnings in November 1714 and 1715 should make us question how extensive support for the Jacobite position was at this time.
And it should be remembered that the Whigs did much better than the Tories in the open and more popular constituencies in the elections of early 1715, largely because the Jacobite scare and the fear of popery worked to their advantage.
All this should remind us that it would be unwise to read the Jacobite unrest of 1714–17 as being a typical reflection of public opinion; the public were divided, and a significant number remained pro-Whig and pro-Hanoverian.
SCOTTISH JACOBITISM
Jacobite sentiment was most widespread north of the border.
This is not to say that James II (or VII as he was in his northern Kingdom) was any more popular in Scotland at the time of the Revolution than he had been in England.
His rule had managed to alienate most of the traditional elites in both town and countryside, and few people were prepared to stir themselves on James's behalf when the crisis came.
Although there was a Jacobite rebellion in the summer of 1689, led by John Graham of Claverhouse, Viscount Dundee, and supported by some of the Highland clans, it was not joined by any of the major regional magnates.
However, there was also little positive support for William, except from the Presbyterian extremists, who wanted a radical constitutional and ecclesiastical settlement.
Although William would have been happy to keep bishops within the Kirk, the Scottish episcopal bench, led by Bishop Alexander Rose of Edinburgh, refused to accept the legitimacy of the new regime.
As a result, episcopacy was abolished and a Presbyterian settlement established.
The Church settlement was bitterly resented amongst the Scottish nobility, and also amongst many of the established clergy, more than half of whom refused to accept the abolition of episcopacy.
Although more than 650 Scottish clergymen were deprived in theory, in practice it was difficult to find staunch Presbyterians to replace them, and many continued to be active.
In contrast to the English Nonjurors, whose Jacobitism tended to be lukewarm at best, the Scottish episcopal clergy actively  preached the divine right of the Stuarts to real power.
Episcopalianism, combined with legitimism, therefore, became the major ground for Scottish Jacobitism.
Support for the Jacobite cause grew further as a result of the insensitive way the new regime in England began to govern Scotland.
William's attempt to achieve a pacification of the Highlands turned into a disastrous tragedy, when the dreadful massacre at Glencoe was carried out in February 1692 because MacDonald of Glencoe accidentally missed the deadline imposed by the government for swearing the oath of allegiance to William by five days.
William also upset the political classes of lowland Scotland.
He kept his Secretary of State for Scotland in London.
He ignored the demand for frequent Parliaments in the Scottish Claim of the Right, instead keeping the Convention Parliament sitting in Scotland for nine consecutive sessions.
The post-Revolution wars placed a terrible burden on the Scottish economy, exacerbated by the fact that the 1690s in Scotland saw a major crisis of subsistence.
The final act of betrayal by William's ministers was committed when they failed to call Parliament within twenty days of his death (a violation of the Act of Security of 1696), so that the Privy Council would have time to declare war on France without facing opposition from the Scottish Parliament.
Increasingly the Scots were coming to feel that they had benefited little from the establishment of the new regime in 1689, and as a result Jacobitism north of the border took on nationalistic overtones.
To quote Bruce Lenman, "a very substantial and apparently growing section of the Scottish ruling class was prepared to embrace Jacobitism as an expression of a complex of resentments against their English masters" .
The developments of the 1690s could be as upsetting to Presbyterians who had supported the Revolution as to Episcopalians.
The growing Country opposition to William's ministry in the Scottish Parliament consisted mainly of men who stood on a Revolution and Presbyterian foot, but whose exclusion from office exacerbated their disillusionment and allowed them to indulge their nationalist sentiments.
Although this Presbyterian nationalism did not normally lead to Jacobitism, we do see a brand of Scottish Whig Jacobitism during William's reign, centring around the person of James Montgomerie of Skelmorlie.
He had been the leader of the "Club" which had sought to impose a radical, Presbyterian settlement on William in 1689–90.
Even before the final settlement was reached, Montgomerie, disillusioned by William's stalling tactics and by the fact that his own personal political ambitions had been frustrated, turned to plotting, attempting to build up an alliance of Club members and Jacobites who would be able to  "bring home King James in a Parliamentary way" .
After the collapse of the plot Montgomerie fled to London, but he continued to engage in Jacobite intrigue, and in late 1691 he tried to encourage a rising of Presbyterian extremists in the south-western lowlands.
In September 1692 he produced a Whiggish Jacobite tract in which he rehearsed all the traditional charges against William (adding to the list the recent massacre at Glencoe), and argued that "If it was to preserve our Liberties from the insults of King James, we placed the Prince upon the Throne, we have certainly either mistaken the Disease or the Cure" .
He was to end his days at St Germain in 1694.
Whig Jacobitism, however, appears to have been of minimal significance in Scotland.
Most historians see Montgomerie as a rather unstable figure, motivated more by ambition than political principle.
Moreover, Presbyterian nationalism was given the kiss of death by the Act of Union of 1707, which most of the influential Presbyterian politicians and clergymen supported.
The episcopalians, by contrast, strongly opposed the Union, which proved to be deeply unpopular.
Politically, Scotland seemed to have sacrificed her independence by giving up her own Parliament in exchange for a very limited representation in that of England.
The supposed economic benefits were slow to materialise, and the immediate consequences seemed to be a loss of trade to France and increased taxation.
The Jacobites were quick to assume the leadership of nationalist sentiment in Scotland, by portraying the restoration of Scotland's ancient dynasty as the only way to undo the Union.
By the end of Anne's reign, disaffection north of the border was fairly widespread.
Jacobitism's main base was in the north-east lowlands, an area where it had been difficult to insert Presbyterian ministers after the Glorious Revolution, and where Stuart loyalism continued to be nurtured by an active episcopalian clergy.
The political allegiances of the Highland clans present a complex picture.
Some of the clans, such as the Campbells of Argyll, were staunchly Whig, others were divided amongst themselves, and many were not really committed strongly one way or the other.
However, by the time of the 1715 rebellion Jacobitism seems to have been particularly strong amongst the ruling class of the Grampian highlands.
The lowland south remained predominantly pro-Hanoverian, but even here Jacobite sentiment was in evidence.
For example, there were riots at Edinburgh and Leith on James's birthday in 1712, with people singing "the King shall enjoy his own again" .
It was only really in the south-west (a predominantly Presbyterian area) that the Whig interest seems to have enjoyed overwhelming support.
THE JACOBITE CHALLENGE OF 1714–15
The potential for a successful Jacobite restoration was probably greatest at the time of the Hanoverian Succession.
In the last years of Queen Anne's reign Jacobites became hopeful — and Whigs fearful — that the Tory ministry, with the connivance of the Queen, might undo the Act of Settlement and establish the Old Pretender as the next in line to the throne.
The Elector of Hanover was known to hold little sympathy for the Tories, whom he felt had betrayed the Allies at the Peace of Utrecht, and few doubted that when George I became King the Tories would lose the political ascendancy they had enjoyed since 1710.
Nevertheless, the number of committed Jacobites in Parliament, although greater than at any other time in Anne's reign, was still a small minority, and most Tories appear to have been committed to the Hanoverian Succession, though with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
The view that Anne was a sentimental Jacobite who secretly wished her brother-in-law to succeed her has now been debunked as myth.
It is true that Robert Harley (now Earl of Oxford) and Viscount Bolingbroke seemed to flirt with Jacobitism in the period 1710–14, but they were never sincere, and their actions must be set in the context of their attempts to rally disparate groups of Tories behind them in their own personal struggle for dominance within the party.
Faced with a growing number of desertions from within Tory ranks over the peace negotiations of 1711–13, Oxford needed to court the support of the Scottish Jacobite peers and Jacobite MPs to maintain his majority in Parliament.
By promising the Jacobites that he would seek to get James Francis Stuart acknowledged as Anne's successor, he not only won Jacobite support at home, but was also able to neutralise the Jacobite threat abroad, by making it appear that there was no point in St Germain or the French attempting an invasion.
Oxford's bluff worked for some time, but when by late 1713 the Jacobites finally realised they had been taken for a ride, they began to look to Bolingbroke for support.
Bolingbroke could not resist the opportunity to control such a crucial bloc of Parliamentary votes, and decided to play them along, but primarily with the aim of strengthening his own position within the party.
At the same time he was busy courting his supporters amongst the Country Tories by playing on the theme of the "Church in Danger" , and his strategy appears to have been to unite the various dissident Tories behind him in order to oust Oxford from power, and then try to ensure that Tory political dominance was so unchallengeable that when George I became King he would be forced  to work with them.
In fact the policy backfired disastrously; when Anne died the Tories were still bitterly divided, and in no position to offer a credible alternative to George I's own preference for a Whig ministry.
The situation of 1715, however, was very different from that of 1714.
Political proscription drove more Tories into the arms of the Pretender (amongst them leading figures such as Bolingbroke, Ormonde and Sir William Wyndham) as their only hope of political salvation.
As seen above, the accession of George I provoked widespread unrest throughout much of England and Wales, and given the extensive discontent in Scotland, it seemed that the time might be ripe for a Jacobite rebellion.
The challenge came on 6 September, when the Earl of Mar raised James III's standard at Braemar in Scotland.
Yet after a few weeks, during which time only parts of the north of England and the borders had risen on the Pretender's behalf, the rebellion was put down.
In accounting for the failure of the"Fifteen, historians sympathetic to Jacobitism tend to stress how difficult it is to launch a successful invasion, and that all the trump cards lie with the government of the day.
Although this is undoubtedly true, on two occasions during the period covered by this book (1660 and 1688) an invading army (one from Scotland, the other from Holland) had been able to exploit a severe domestic political crisis and widespread popular disaffection in order to bring about a change of political regimes.
That Mar failed where Monck and William of Orange had succeeded is partly related to military factors, but also reflects the fact that neither the domestic political crisis was so severe nor popular disaffection so widespread in 1714–15 as it had been in either 1659–60 or 1688–9.
The government of George I and the Whigs never lost its credibility, but retained the support of a substantial proportion of the traditional ruling class and probably a higher proportion of the mass of the population than is usually realised.
It never showed any sign of collapsing from within in the way that the governing regimes did in 1659–60 and 1688.
The rebels can be blamed for tactical military mistakes.
Mar was initially joined by eighteen lords, bringing with them some 5,000 men, which should have been more than a match for the 1,500 regular troops stationed in Scotland.
An immediate offensive might have given victory in Scotland and enabled him to march into England, where Thomas Forster and the Earl of Derwentwater were trying to raise the northern shires on behalf of the Jacobites.
However, Mar delayed in an attempt to raise more men, which allowed the British government time to build up concentrations of its own troops and collect  reinforcements from its foreign allies.
Yet the failure of the"Fifteen tells us much about the nature and limitations of the Jacobite position.
Jacobitism was always more powerful in the negative, as an expression of disaffection; positive commitment to the restoration of the exiled Stuarts was less strong.
Many Tories who had flirted with Jacobitism developed second thoughts in 1715.
Thomas Forster was the only English Tory MP who actually took up arms for the Pretender.
Sir William Wyndham was implicated in a design to raise the Tory-Anglican interest in the west country, but this was frustrated by the government.
Some Tories were obviously nervous about converting their disaffection into active treason once it became clear that France, the Jacobites' main European ally, was in no position to back an expeditionary force.
But there were others who, despite their disaffection to Hanover, had little desire to risk their necks for the positive alternative the Pretender represented.
With the failure of Wyndham's efforts, the rebellion in England became essentially a movement of Catholic recusants in the north, which few Anglicans could have wanted to see succeed, especially since the Pretender had refused to renounce his religion.
The Anglican gentry of Cheshire, who had allegedly been ready to rise in August, narrowly voted not to join the rebellion in the north.
In many parts of the country, leading Tories were not far behind the Whigs in sending in loyal addresses deploring the threat which the rebellion posed to their religion and liberties.
Whereas in 1660 and 1688 the alternative to the existing regime seemed positively attractive to a wide range of people, the same simply was not the case in 1715.
CONCLUSION
Jacobitism was a complex phenomenon, and generalisations about its nature and significance are difficult.
As we have seen, there were a variety of different types of Jacobitism, whilst the serious source problems involved in studying this subject will always limit our understanding and inevitably mean that there will continue to be much room for interpretative disagreements.
Most scholars have tended to stress the principle of Stuart legitimism as being fundamental to Jacobitism, and certainly this was a significant element.
However, this chapter has emphasised that Jacobitism was more potent as a negative force, as an ideology of opposition, a way of expressing dissatisfaction  with various post-Revolution developments, rather than as a positive commitment to a Stuart restoration.
Jacobitism became attractive to a variety of different groups in the 1690s, including commonwealth Whigs, although at this time it still had little support in society at large.
Jacobite sentiment had become more widespread by the end of Anne's reign, and also more distinctively Tory in nature, but it was an attachment to Country ideology, and a deep hostility to the Whigs and Dissenters (and what they stood for), which was its main defining characteristic.
It was precisely the power of Jacobitism as a negative ideal which explains the strength of the Jacobite challenge at the time of the Hanoverian succession, but also its ultimate failure, since there were few people who were really committed to the positive alternative which the Stuarts represented.
This analysis sheds much insight into the place of the succession issue in party politics under the later Stuarts.
Undoubtedly the succession was an important issue; the terms Whig and Tory had been coined in the first place to describe different sides taken during the Exclusion controversy, whilst for a long time after the Glorious Revolution Whigs continued to be able to embarrass the Tories by alleging that their attachment to the divine-right, hereditary succession meant that deep-down they were Jacobite sympathisers.
But the party conflict had always been about more than the succession.
Indeed, as this book has argued, party identities were being forged before the succession issue came to the fore, and even during the Exclusion Crisis, party conflict was not solely — or even mainly — about the Catholic succession.
Most Tories — whatever the Whigs might charge — were not Jacobites, and could genuinely continue to remain Tories after the Glorious Revolution without wishing to see James II or his heirs restored to the throne.
That is because the deeper issues of the party divide lay elsewhere — in the political, constitutional and, in particular, the religious tensions which have been explored in this book, many of which dated back to the Restoration.
Conclusion
When considering the first age of party politics in England, it makes sense to treat the years 1660–1715 as a coherent whole.
In several respects this period witnessed a working out of the legacy of the Civil War, and many of the issues which were to cause political division in English society under the later Stuarts stemmed from problems which had been left unresolved by the Restoration of 1660.
Political parties themselves cannot be said to have existed before 1679.
This is not just because the terms Whig and Tory were not to become current usage until the Exclusion Crisis, but because the political polarities which were emerging in the 1660s and 1670s — between Court and Country — did not predict the Whig–Tory split that was to emerge after the Popish Plot.
Nevertheless, the issues which created the divide during the Exclusion Crisis were not new; concerns about the prospect of a popish successor, the growth of popery and arbitrary government, and the nature of government in both Church and State, had been creating tensions long before Titus Oates made the revelations which were to precipitate the political crisis at the end of Charles II's reign.
The degree of organisation developed by both Whigs and Tories during the Exclusion Crisis was probably sufficient to allow us to describe them as parties, although opinions on this matter will vary depending upon how strong a definition of "party" one chooses to adopt.
On the other hand, we cannot talk about a party system prior to the Glorious Revolution.
The Whig and Tory groupings had come into existence over a particular crisis, and although that crisis was not about just one issue — Exclusion — it was the case that the parties polarised over how they thought the crisis could be resolved.
The battle was  fought out in three short Parliaments which met between 1679 and 1681, after which politics was driven out-of-doors for the rest of the reign, whilst during the period of the Tory Reaction a successful campaign of legal recriminations taken against the political enemies of the Court meant that the first Whigs as a political movement were almost destroyed.
It is only after the Glorious Revolution — with the emergence of regular sessions of Parliament, when much of the ordinary business of government (as opposed to just crisis situations) came to be conducted along party lines, when Parliamentary divisions over a range of issues allow us to see the consistency of party allegiance amongst MPs, and when the parties came to develop fairly sophisticated organisational structures for the pursuit of their political goals — that it is possible to talk of a two-party system.
Throughout this period contemporaries continued to describe partisan conflicts in terms of Civil War allegiances.
As late as the end of Anne's reign we still find Whigs and Tories calling each other Cavaliers and Roundheads.
Even more common was the language of religious rivalry, with the Tories being styled the High Church or episcopalian party, and the Whigs Presbyterians or fanatics — rivalries which, as protagonists on both sides were quick to point out, had their origins in the religious upheavals of the 1640s and 1650s.
Indeed, religious tensions appear to have been at the root of the party divide — not the sole cause, it should be stressed (indeed, much of this book has been concerned with documenting the complex ways constitutional and religious issues interacted), but perhaps the most potent source of conflict, with attitudes towards Dissent (whether one was sympathetic or hostile to Protestant Nonconformists) being one of the strongest predictors of partisan allegiance.
These religious tensions go a long way towards explaining why the party divide cut so deep into society: political strife during the first age of party did not just affect the political elite at the centre and a minority of the more affluent and better-educated classes in the localities, but all sorts of people, including those of fairly humble backgrounds, women as well as men, were caught up in the party divide.
Once more, in searching for the roots of this divided society we are forced to go back to 1660, and to start with the legacy left by the Civil War and republican experiments.
Stressing these elements of continuity is not to imply that nothing changed.
Certainly there were new developments after 1660 which created new sources of political tension and which fed into the emergence of party, whilst over time the parties modified and adapted their positions to cope with new problems, issues and contingencies.
The context of the partisan struggle was altered as a result of the Glorious  Revolution of 1688, which modified the relationship between the Crown and Parliament, created new issues for the government as England became involved in major European warfare, and transformed the relationship of the two parties towards the Court as the Whigs came to hold political power for the first time and the Tories discovered what it was like to be in opposition.
Under William and Anne a certain degree of ideological adjustment can be detected for both parties, as the Whigs shed their Country wing and became to all intents and purposes a Court party, whilst the Country platform came to be absorbed within Toryism.
Nevertheless such changes can be seen as consistent outgrowths of earlier party positions; the Whigs and Tories of Anne's reign remained the recognisable heirs of their namesakes of the Exclusion Crisis.
If it makes sense to see the period 1660–1715 as a coherent whole, what was it that changed with the Hanoverian Succession and the failure of the Jacobite rebellion?
It used to be argued that party strife declined rapidly under the first two Georges; that political stability was finally established under Sir Robert Walpole during the 1720s, and by 1733, as Plumb once put it, "the two-party system was at an end" .
Such a view can no longer be so confidently held.
Much of the latest research points to the survival of party rivalries well into the 1740s, and even to the survival of an organised Tory party.
It would be foolish here to enter the debate over the survival of party under the early Hanoverians: such a subject would require extensive treatment in a separate book.
Nevertheless, a number of factors can be briefly identified which explain why it makes sense to stop our account of the first age of party in 1715.
Tory proscription following the Hanoverian Succession and the failure of the"Fifteen fundamentally changed the context in which political strife was fought out.
Although Toryism might have survived as a distinctive ideology, and although a Tory party with its own organisation might have continued to exist, the fact of the matter is that single-party government was established under George I and George II, and there was no swinging back and forth between Tory- and Whig-dominated administrations such as had happened under William and Anne.
Moreover, political supremacy and the absence of a strong Tory challenge led to a breakdown in Whig unity; as a result, many of the Parliamentary struggles under the first two Georges saw Court Whigs being opposed by a combination of out-of-office Whigs, Country Whigs, and Tories, to an extent that had never been the norm during the rage of party under the later Stuarts.
In such a situation, it was inevitable that political disputes tended to be expressed in  the language of Court versus Country rather than in terms of the old party ideologies — even if the use of such rhetoric was forced on people for tactical reasons, and a Tory who espoused Country arguments in order to make common cause with opposition Whigs still remained recognisably Tory at heart.
After 1715 we see a sudden and dramatic shift in the leadership of both parties.
The Tories were in some disarray after the association of some of their leaders with Jacobite intrigue: Oxford was impeached and sent to the Tower in 1715, and although eventually acquitted in 1717, his political power was effectively destroyed; Bolingbroke fled abroad, and although he returned in the 1720s to play a leading role in the propaganda campaign against Walpole, he was not allowed to resume his seat in the House of Lords.
The Tories did not really begin to recover as a party until Sir William Wyndham's accession to the leadership from about 1724.
The Whigs, likewise, lost their great Junto leaders shortly after achieving political ascendancy: Halifax and Wharton died in the spring of 1715, Somers in the spring of the following year.
Control of the party passed to a new generation — the third Earl of Sunderland (the most experienced, but somewhat erratic), James Stanhope, Charles Viscount Townshend, and Sir Robert Walpole — who soon fell to competing amongst themselves for political dominance.
These new men showed they had neither the time nor the political inclination to instigate a programme of Whig reform; indeed, partly reacting against the Jacobite challenge of 1715, they introduced a number of measures designed to ensure their and the new dynasty's political security which seemed to represent an abandonment of what Whiggery had traditionally stood for.
The passage of the Riot Act of 1715, which made assembling for political (as well as other) purposes potentially a capital offence, reveals how far the Whigs had come from the early days when they had actively promoted political demonstrations and deliberately sought an alliance with "the crowd" .
In the following year they passed the Septennial Act, which extended the life of Parliament (including the present one elected under the terms of the Triennial Act) to seven years, a deliberate attempt to shield themselves from the electorate.
Again this provides a strong contrast with the first Whigs, who had pressed for frequent Parliamentary elections.
Hanoverian Whiggery also became more divorced from association with the cause of Dissent.
The Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts, it is true, were repealed in 1719 (although there was some division in the party over this), but the sacramental test for office-holders remained, and the new Whig leadership developed a strong alliance with the Church establishment, which they ensured  would be dominated by Whig clergy.
We should be careful not to exaggerate the suddenness of the change within Whiggery after 1715; some of these developments — such as the decline of Whig populism, or the association of the Whigs with the Low Church bishops, did have earlier roots.
It nevertheless seems clear that the brand of Whiggery we associate with the Walpolean ascendancy of the 1720s and 1730s was very different from that which had been predominant for much of the later-Stuart period.
The argument of this book has forced us to question the appropriateness of seeing either 1660 or 1688 as significant watersheds in English history.
Does this mean that we should instead see 1715 — or perhaps 1725 — as the key divide?
This search for watersheds is to a large extent misguided; where we place the transformation will depend on the precise question we are asking and what we are seeking to explain.
When tracing the various political, constitutional and religious developments which made the age of Walpole very different from the Restoration, we shall discover not one watershed when everything changed at once, but rather a series of discrete chronologies of change.
In many respects the Glorious Revolution was a significant landmark: it did alter in certain ways the relationship between the Crown and Parliament, it did guarantee the legislative sovereignty of Parliament, it did establish some limited degree of religious toleration for Protestant Dissenters, and the fact that after 1689 Parliament came to meet on a regular basis each year did significantly alter the context in which politics operated.
On the other hand it is difficult to argue that the Revolution resolved the major issues that had been sources of political tension since the Restoration, and it certainly did not restore the political consensus that had eluded the nation in 1660.
If we are asking when the issue of who were England's legitimate rulers was resolved, then the answer can clearly not be 1660 or 1688; 1715, with the failure of the Jacobite rebellion might have a strong claim, although there are some scholars who would maintain that Jacobitism continued to be a significant threat thereafter, so that the succession did not finally disappear as a political issue until after the failure of the rebellion in 1745.
If we are asking about the growth of political stability in England, and how and when it was established, a multi-layered explanation of different factors — each with their own chronologies — would be required.
As Geoffrey Holmes has suggested, the demographic and economic underpinnings of stability were emerging in the second half of the seventeenth century — a stagnant population, years of agricul-tural plenty and a more buoyant economy meant that there was not the same pressure on resources and scarcity of food and employment  which had caused such social distress and serious unrest in the late-Elizabethan and early-Stuart period.
The fiscal and institutional roots of stability might be traced back to the 1690s, with the financial revolution (which meant that England's ruling elite finally worked how to finance government effectively) and the growth of bureaucracy (which laid the foundations for firm executive control by the central government which emerged in the eighteenth century).
An account of the decline of partisan and religious strife, by contrast, would take us past the Hanoverian Succession — indeed, perhaps a long way past it.
It would also take us into a political world which, despite some continuities, was significantly different from that in which party politics first developed, came to fruition, and reached a climax under the later Stuarts.