

Working methods
This chapter starts by examining small group work, then looks in detail at four particular strategies:
forum theatre still images games and exercises teaching in role.
For the sake of clarity each of these is dealt with separately.
They should, however, be seen as interactive working methods.
The second half of the chapter proposes that whole group work is a working method which develops out of small group work and gives greater coherence to it.
SMALL GROUP WORK
There are frequent occasions in a drama session when children are divided into groups and asked to work on a task.
Here are some simple guidelines on the organisation and monitoring of small group work.
The nature of the task
They can be asked to: Improvise spontaneously — in which, for example, they are given a starting point and asked to develop a scene in role.
Prepare a short play, or scene from a play — during which the children will be working both in-role, as the people in the play, and out-of-role, discussing how they are going to tackle the task.
Create a still image — in which they work out of role to create an image like a statue or three dimensional photograph.
Do some written work — such as writing in role.
Discuss in or out of role — with the results of the discussion later fed back into the whole group.
Organisation of the work
In setting up the work you need to pre-plan:
Time limits
How long are the groups going to need for the task?
If no time limit is set the work tends to be unfocused.
For many tasks they will need no longer than two or three minutes, and frequently as little as 30 seconds.
If, as you're monitoring the work, you think that all the groups are engaged in the tasks and working well, you can give them a little longer.
But it's important not to say they've only got two minutes for something, and then let them go on for ten.
Children learn the "hidden" curriculum very quickly — in this case that you don't mean what you say!
If possible, it's a good idea to build a time limit into the dramatic narrative itself — something has to be accomplished before time runs out.
This increases the urgency of the task, and raises dramatic tension.
Group size and allocation
It must be appropriate for the task.
Do you let children work in "table" groups, with friends in groups of their own choosing, or do you select the groups?
There are no hard and fast rules here.
In some classes friendship groups are very productive, but there are times when you might want to keep certain children apart because they frequently distract each other, or maybe you want to make sure that boys and girls work together.
It's often easier for children if you make the choice on their behalf, and it saves time if they know the groups they're going to work in before they get to the hall or drama space.
One way of allocating groups quickly and randomly, ensuring a good mix, is to ask the children to sit in a circle, allowing them to sit where they want, and then counting round the circle, giving each child a number — one to eight, then starting again.
 "All ones here, twos here, threes here etc." 
Thus, with a group of 32 children you'll have eight evenly balanced groups of four.
What if you have a class of 32 and you want them working in groups of four, but today there are only 30 in school?
Five groups of four and two of five, or six of four and two of three?
Or seven groups of four and two doing something different?
The answer will depend on the nature of the work, but have it ready before you divide them into groups.
Clarity is all important.
The task should be specific, interesting and within the group's capability.
With experience and goodwill it's remarkable what people of all ages can achieve in drama, but remember that a good many children will be anxious.
 "Fooling around" in drama is often symptomatic of misunderstanding and embarrassment.
Setting up the tasks
Pre-requisites for spontaneous improvisation
As with still image work, aim for gradual progression.
And as in any drama, make sure that the context for the drama is clear.
When you give out the task clarify Who?
What?
Where?
1.
Who is involved in the situation?
What roles are they to take on?
2.
What is the situation?
What has happened, what is the "back story" ?
What's the problem?
What's at issue?
3.
Where, and when, is this happening?
The first and the last of these are relatively straightforward but the "What?" is more complex.
It's often more exciting not to preplan what's going to happen in the scene, but we do need to know what has happened up to now.
It's also very important for there to be a problem of some kind, an issue which needs to be resolved, otherwise there's no sense of the outcome mattering.
This "issue" could range from — "How do you teach your little sister to tie her shoelaces?" through — "How will you persuade the Pied Piper to release our children?" to — "Can you encourage this reluctant old man to give a radio interview about the way the community used to be 60 years ago?" 
Examples
1.
The Castle Banquet Year One.
Four per group.
Who?
All of the group are cooks What?
The King and Queen (who like very special and unusual food) are returning to the Castle.
A banquet is needed; the cooks have to prepare a menu and the food.
Issue: Will it be ready in time?
Where?
In the Castle kitchens  2.
From Arabel's Raven by Joan Aiken — see Appendix Year Two.
Three per group.
Who?
Arabel (a seven year old child) Arabel's mother and father What?
Arabel has found a very friendly and very mischievous raven.
She wants to bring it home.
Her mother and father are worried about the mess it will make in the house, how to look after it, etc.
Issue: Will Arabel persuade them to let her look after it?
Where?
In the kitchen — with the (imaginary) raven on the window sill tapping at the window outside.
3.
The Borrowed Bike.
Year Six.
Three per group.
Who?
Three school friends: A, B and C. What?
A has a new bike which s/he thinks has been "borrowed" by B
B doesn't know anything about the bike
C does know who borrowed it (it is not B)— but is frightened of being bullied if s/he says anything about it.
Issue: Can C be persuaded/encouraged to tell the truth.
Where?
After school, in the playground.
They have to sort out the problem before the caretaker locks the school gates.
This information — the Who/What/Where — can be conveyed to the children in a number of ways: 1.
They can all be divided into groups and the whole class can be told "All A's are…; all B's are…" , etc.
2.
Information can be given to each child separately (either verbally or in writing), so that no-one knows what the others' information is.
(This would work well with the third of the examples above.)
3.
They can be told some of the pre-requisites, and have to work out the others out-of-role before starting — perhaps they are told who they are and what has happened, and they have to agree where and when the situation is taking place.
4.
Every group can be tackling the same problem, or different groups can be working on different improvisations.
5.
As is indicated in the chapter on teaching in role, it's possible to set up the pre-requisites through carefully chosen opening lines.
For example, "Mum, can I go out to play?" indicates that the two people in the improvisation are mother and child and that the issue is whether or not the child is allowed out.
This could be made much more complex, but there's certainly enough to get started if at least one of the participants has some previous experience.
The problems of small group work can be summarised as follows: Organisation.
The groups themselves need very careful organising if the work is to be anything more than structured play.
It is difficult to work for development and progression in the tasks at a level appropriate to each group.
Control can be difficult if there is a range of different tasks being undertaken at any one moment.
It is difficult to offer positive and constructive feedback to groups without ignoring others.
Only a limited amount of reflection is possible.
Competitiveness tends to creep into the work in ways which frequently blind the participants to the real issues being worked on.
There is sometimes a tendency for one or two children to dominate the work and this can be destructive and intimidating for others.
Audience.
It is difficult to share the work without each group showing what they have done — which can be unproductively time consuming.
These are serious problems, which need to be addressed carefully.
We can deal with most of these problems, however, by examining and tackling the central problems of monitoring, intervention and audience/performer relationship.
Monitoring and intervention
1.
Warn the children that you will be going round and "freezing" work in progress, looking at it as it's happening — sometimes called "spotlighting" , so that the group doesn't show what they have done, but continues with their spontaneous improvisation from where they are.
This enables you to comment on the content of what they're doing.
With the Castle Banquet, for example, you might say,"Look at this wonderful cake they're baking over here .
I never thought you could get icing in so many different colours of…"
2.
Instead of performing the whole of their improvisation for the others, one child can report back on what has happened — either in or out of role.
3.
The teacher can enter the small group improvisation in role, using the role to focus and challenge the work.
This technique of working in role with a group (however large or small) is discussed at the end of this chapter.
4.
The teacher can work in the classroom with one group at a time while the rest of the class are engaged in something needing minimal supervision.
This allows you to monitor the work very carefully and help a group with a task that they might find very difficult if unsupervised.
Audience
1.
Find an overall fictional context for the creation of the small group "plays" , so that the audience are encouraged to comment on the content, rather than the lack of specific theatre skills.
This might, for example, be that the overall drama is about the making of a television documentary (with a real video camera or an imagined one), in which people are being canvassed for their opinions about a new relief road.
When we look at each of the small group "scenes" we can accord them much higher status; instead of commenting on the changing position of the door handle, we can discuss which moments from each of the "interviews" we will keep in the documentary; we have an informing context in which to discuss what each of the interviewees said.
2.
Develop a sense of the audience having a responsibility, not simply being passive.
Still image work is particularly useful for encouraging an audience to become active (see also the discussion of "Forum theatre" which follows, and Chapter 7 — "Developing the work towards presentation" ).
3.
Set up situations in which there is a larger place within which the small group work takes place: a castle, for example, within which there are various small groups, each involved in different activities — cooking, cleaning armour, building new fortifications, growing food, etc.
Now when you "freeze" and "spotlight" the work the groups have an interest in other people's work, they want to know what's happening.
This is what we should be working towards when work is being shared: creating a desire to see other people's work because it matters within the drama; because everybody's work affects everybody else's in some way.
This strategy of setting up interactive and interdependent small groups is effectively what is happening in whole group drama.
FORUM THEATRE
Forum Theatre can usefully be seen as small group work which involves the whole group as active spectators.
As we have seen, three of the commonest problems associated with small group work can be summarised as follows: 1.
Difficulties for the teacher in providing appropriate and useful feedback to individual groups.
2.
Difficulties in showing or sharing the work.
How do you ensure that those children who are watching are actively engaged in the "performance" , and not simply whispering about the scene they have prepared?
3.
Difficulties experienced by the children in commenting on the work of their peers in a constructive way.
So often this can tend towards"It wasn't very good, Miss.
They all opened the door different ways!"
At its simplest two people (or a small group) enact a scene or a drama while the rest of the group watch.
The spectators, however, become interactive participants in the drama.
This can be done in one of three ways: 1.
The spectators can become advisers to one or more of the performers.
2.
The spectators can take over the performers' roles.
3.
The scene can be "replayed" in ways suggested by the spectators, as if the spectators not only have access to the rewind button of a video recorder, but can also change what is enacted before them.
The initiative to stop the scene and try it in another way can come from spectators, performers or the teacher.
The strategy gives the audience a stake in what is going on.
Here is a simple example of it at work in practice.
Class divided into threes.
A, B and C in each group.
As are to play the Pied Piper, Bs the Mayor of Hamelin and Cs the parent of a child held captive by the Pied Piper.
Each group is to try to negotiate for the release of a child.
It might help in advance to give certain additional information to each of the three groups independently of the others (see above section on small group work): perhaps the Pied Piper is prepared to let the children free if s/he can get a good deal; perhaps the mayor is unwilling to use any public funds to buy off the Piper.
The groups play out their scene for themselves in small groups, but only for a couple of minutes.
The teacher should intervene before the children reach their own resolution to the problem.
A volunteer A, B and C (not from the same original group) are then asked to play out the scene centrally.
All the other As (i.e. the Pied Pipers) position themselves behind their "representative" (with Bs and Cs similarly arranged).
The three now play out the scene.
The teacher stops the scene as soon as it looks as if any of the "performers" are finding it difficult.
But instead of simply struggling in embarrassment they can turn to their advisers and ask for help: "What do I say now?" ,
 "How do I react to that?" 
Once the children are familiar with this method of working they can manipulate it for themselves — e.g. the performers can ask for advice whenever they need it; the performers can "Tag" an adviser to take over from them.
Strict parameters and rules do need to be built into the system early on, whether it is the children or the teacher who sets them.
In particular consider time limits — both for enacting and for advising, perhaps the performers have to spend at least a minute improvising before they can request advice.
One of the great joys of forum theatre is that it is extremely flexible.
Once children have seen it at work they often suggest ways of adapting it.
Remember that the principle is that the audience is given a stake in what is performed; they are an interactive part of the drama.
Here are some further ways in which the method can be used: 1.
The teacher, introducing a drama which is going to be based on the Pied Piper story, might ask the class how they want the Pied Piper to be played.
The teacher (in role) will be the Pied Piper, but s/he wants the class to have a say in the characterisation — so the children "construct" the character: perhaps Teacher: In the drama I'll play the Pied Piper, but I need your help.
I want you to tell me how you want the Pied Piper to be.
What does he look like?
Class: He's rather shifty.
Teacher: How do you want me to do that?
Child demonstrates.
Class: He's very clever.
Teacher: Does that mean he shows people he's clever, or does he keep quiet about it?
Class: He keeps quiet about it.
Teacher: Tell me some other things that will help me play him.
2.
Perhaps this has now developed as a whole group drama, with the children playing the townspeople of Hamelin.
Instead of having the children go through the small group work suggested above, the teacher remains in role as the Pied Piper and the children are asked to elect two or three representatives who will seek out the Pied Piper and try to bargain with him/her.
As they bargain they can now stop the drama and turn (out of role) to their peers and ask for help.
The teacher could come out of role, saying"This doesn't seem to be going very well for you.
Would you like to start again and try a different way?"
Children seem to have little difficulty accepting this convention because it is so like the action replays they will frequently have seen on television.
When first introducing the idea it might be helpful to refer to television.
Chapter 7 contains two storyboards of the Pied Piper story, showing how the story might be told from very different view points.
GAMES AND EXERCISES
Many teachers begin their drama lessons with a game and then an exercise, arguing that this warms the children up, shifts them from thinking in set ways, encourages them to collaborate, to concentrate, to trust each other.
There are others who insist that games and exercises per se have no place in the drama lesson, that the best way to learn about drama and to learn how to use it is by doing it, that if the drama itself is powerful and effective there is no need to prepare children for it by doing something else.
There is a danger of becoming too dogmatic.
Whilst games are not of themselves drama, many do contain important dramatic elements: ritual, role play, narrative, symbolic action and symbolic use of space for example.
If you want to use a game it's important to give careful consideration to its purpose and/or function.
The advantages of using games
Games can be non-threatening be fun to play indicate clearly to the children that a different kind of thought process is going to be required of them in the drama session introduce collaborative ways of working focus and channel energies which might otherwise become distracting create useful opportunities for the teacher to assess the mood and interests of the class.
In my own drama teaching I rarely use games with a class that I know well, but when I'm working with a class that I've not met before I often begin the session with a short concentration exercise and then a simple game.
Certainly, the activities do focus concentration and energy, but I also use these activities diagnostically, to give myself time and space to assess the class, to learn about their social health; they help me feel comfortable with the class, and that is important.
We need to challenge ourselves, to move ourselves on, but we need to give ourselves a safe framework in which to do so.
The disadvantages and dangers of using games
1.
Playing an active game can over-excite children to the point that all they want to do is play the game.
Playing the game takes over the drama session and becomes a means for the children (and sometimes the teacher) to avoid the drama.
2.
There is frequently a hidden agenda in the use of games.
If we come up with a different game each time we do drama, what are we teaching the children?
Among other things that it is the teacher who has all the good ideas, thereby making it difficult to hand over responsibility for decision making to the children.
3.
While games may be useful, and it may well be that there should be time in school devoted specifically to playing games, games are not of themselves drama.
And it is important that children do not get the impression that they are.
Trust games
There is also a danger of overestimating and misperceiving the value of a game per se.
We should be clear, for example, that what people learn from a "trust game" is that they can trust the person/people they are working with at that moment.
There is no magical osmosis whereby children somehow become more trusting and trustworthy as individuals through playing a game — nor simply by the action of doing drama, it should be added.
Although we would want the children we work with to become more trustworthy, it is dangerous to teach children to become unquestioningly trusting.
We might, however, usefully make "trust" the focal point of a drama in which, for example we examined when it is appropriate to trust someone, or how we might learn to trust someone in difficult circumstances, or how we can gain someone's trust — but this is very different from the worryingly naive claims sometimes made for "trust games" .
Using games productively
If you do want to start your drama sessions with a game, don't feel you have to come up with a different one each time.
You are not an entertainer at a children's party.
If there is a game which you find effective, use it on a regular basis for a short period, perhaps five minutes at the beginning of each session.
Whatever games you use, give children the opportunity to get better at them.
You don't need a vast repertoire of games in order to be a highly effective drama teacher.
Games don't have to be the starter or warm-up activity.
They can become part of the drama itself — "Keeper of the Keys" , for example(described in detail below) can be used as a test of skill, part of the dramatic fiction, as a preparation for a great quest.
If you are using a game or an exercise at the start of a session, choose something appropriate.
If they've had to stay indoors for a wet break they'll want to do something physically very active.
A game of tag (see below) may well be just the thing; but if they've just come in from the playground and that's what they've been doing for the last fifteen minutes, it would be a bit of a waste of time.
Ask yourself: Do they need warming up?
Mentally or physically?
The idea of a "warm-up" , as practised by professional actors is as much to get blood flowing to the brain, to get energised mentally, as to limber the body.
Are they already very excited?— in which case they'll need something calming.
What sort of activities are they going to be involved in during the session?
A lot of verbal discussion?
Non-verbal communication?
Movement work?
Something involving ritual?
Choose a game or exercise which leads into or complements this work.
Is it appropriate sometimes to finish the drama session with a game or an exercise which calms and focuses?
It's possible to use a game as a way of demonstrating to children how they can begin to take responsibility for their own learning.
How can you give them the opportunity to make alterations to the rules to give them "ownership" of a game?
Games can be used very productively by thinking about the dramatic elements within them and using the game to lead directly into other work.
What are the dramatic elements in the game you are using?
Developing games and exercises into drama
A lengthy description of how one game can be developed into drama follows together with a couple of brief indications.
Example: Keeper of the Keys
This illustrates how one might use a game: 1.
To create a "back story" as a basis for drama; and as a stimulus for creative writing.
2.
To demonstrate dramatic tension.
3.
To introduce ideas of symbolism.
4.
To encourage and develop listening skills.
5.
To develop roles and narrative within a game and expand them into a drama.
This account of the various uses of the game also gives several examples of starting points with teacher in role.
 "Keeper of the Keys" is one of many games which have been used by drama teachers over the years.
It is sometimes known as "Hunter and Hunted" .
There are many versions; and, as with any game, the rules can be changed or adapted to suit the participants.
Description of the game
Children all sit in a circle.
Two volunteers (A and B) are blindfolded, or are trusted to keep their eyes shut.
A set of keys is placed in the circle by the teacher.
A, the "Keeper of the Keys" is in the circle, armed with a rolled up newspaper.
B has to try to find the keys and get them out of the circle before being hit by A. If the Keeper hits B s/he wins.
If, on the other hand B succeeds in removing the keys from the circle without being hit, B wins.
Simple variations include: Neither A nor B knowing the whereabouts of the keys.
B allowed to continue if hit, but without the use of that part of the body — i.e. if hit on arm — cannot use arm; if hit on head — dead!
A has keys tied very loosely on a string to his/her foot.
A sits on a chair with the keys beneath.
Only A is blindfolded.
B has to remove the keys in a given time limit.
Playing the game is not in itself drama, though a great deal of dramatic tension arises when it is well played.
The following questions, which effectively treat the game as if it were a ritual, can turn it into drama: I wonder who the "Keeper of the Keys" is?
And who, or what, is trying to get the keys?
Neither of them can see.
They are blindfolded.
If we are making up a play about the "Keeper of the Keys" , why do you think that neither of them can see?
So what does the blindfold represent?
Example continued What does the circle mean in this play?
What does it represent?
What is the "Keeper" looking after?
Who is the "Keeper" ?
What does the newspaper represent?
Who, or what, is B, the thief?
And why does the thief want or need to take the "keys" ?
Providing the teacher retains an open mind, an extraordinary drama can evolve from this.
Here are two examples of the beginnings of stories which evolved from questions like the above: l.
Class of Year Three children The "Keeper" is a guard who has been blinded to stop him ever setting eyes on the magic jewels.
He is armed with a silver sword, and spends most of his life in the dungeon beneath the castle where the jewels are kept (the circle of children being the walls of the dungeon).
The "thief" is the rightful owner of the jewels who wants to get them back in order to free the prisoners in the castle.
2.
Class of Year Six children People take it in turns to guard the key to the spaceship.
If you are the guard you have to wear a blindfold because you are armed with a laser torch which is so powerful that it would blind you if you could see it.
A clever alien wants to steal the spaceship, and knows about the laser torch, so it puts on a blindfold as well.
The keys to the spaceship are kept in a cave with only one entrance (the circle of children).
What we have now is much more than a game: an exciting story to which we do not know the end; and a visual image which will lead us to an exciting starting point for a drama, an image which we know has engaged the children.
If I had tried to impose either of the above on another class I doubt the drama would work.
The stories were their own, so they could see that the drama would be theirs.
They started the drama with ownership of the material, with a commitment which comes from the game and the questioning.
It is also worth noting that the questioning has opened up a new area of exploration — that of symbol and meaning.
The rolled-up newspaper represents a sword, and the sword is itself a symbol of dangerous power.
The teacher now needs to ask how best to engage all the children actively.
What roles are the children to play?
If the teacher-in-role strategy is to be used, what role will the teacher play?
What is likely to be an engaging and appropriate issue?
It might help at this point to ask the children a further question: "What might happen if the thief (the rightful owner of the jewels/the alien in the above examples) does or does not (depending on the drama) manage to steal the" keys "?" 
This might be termed the "worst case syndrome" .
Whatever answer the children provide also creates the fundamental tension behind the drama: "If we don't manage X, then Y will occur." 
Note that the children have seen that the outcome of the game cannot be pre-planned, and are likely to take this understanding with them to the  Example continued drama itself.
The teacher can now say, "We can plan for the worst, but we can never know what exactly will happen." 
Here are some ideas showing how one might develop a drama appropriate to the age range for each of the above stories:
1.
Prisoners in the Castle (a) Children are workers at the castle.
Teacher is the guard.
Drama opens with teacher saying"Please don't tell the king what I'm about to say to you…
Can I trust you to keep this a complete secret?…
I've already lost my sight.
I don't think I can go on guarding the jewels any more.
They're too dangerous.
Will you help me?"
(b) Children as villagers, teacher as the thief.
Drama begins: "I used to be a wizard with great powers; but my magic jewels have been stolen.
Can you help me get them back?"
(c) Teacher as the guard, the children to decide upon their own role once the drama has started.
Teacher: "I cannot see, but I know you're all there.
What do you want?
The jewels will do you no good."
(d) The teacher simply says: "Will somebody please help me get my brother out of prison?" 
Some other questions which might prove useful: What powers do the magic jewels have?
(See Chapter 6).
Who has put the people in prison?
What sort of life does the guard lead?
What sort of person is s/he?
Could we try to talk to the guard?
Are we sure the jewels rightfully belong to the wizard?
If we do get the jewels, what should we do with them?
2.
The Stranded Spaceship (a) Children as crew of spaceship, teacher as alien, going to the crew, asking for help: "I admit that we've tried to steal your spaceship.
That was wrong; but we desperately need to get off this planet.
Will you help us?"
(b) Children as crew of spaceship, teacher as crew member, perhaps the guard on duty.
Drama begins: "I must have fallen asleep.
The aliens have stolen the key; and now they've taken the spaceship.
How are we going to survive on this planet?"
(c) Children as aliens, teacher as crew member.
Drama begins: "We know you want to steal our spaceship.
We'll let you travel in it if you will tell us all about yourselves, and show us your planet."
(d) The reverse of the above, so that it is the children who are marooned on the alien planet, the teacher who is the alien offering them passage back to earth providing the children can explain the way of life on earth.
Other questions, and ideas, which might prove useful:
Why has the key to the spaceship been put in the cave?
Are the aliens as frightened of us as we are of them?
Example continued Why has the mission landed on this planet?
Do the crew want to stay?
Why does the alien want to get into the spaceship?
Could an alien have human feelings?
How can we find out if the aliens mean us any harm?
What benefits might there be from establishing a friendship with the aliens?
What do the friends and relatives of the crew feel back on earth as they await news?
The teacher might add the information that we need help from the aliens ourselves, or that the aliens look much more gentle than we had feared.
The teacher might play an alien who could not communicate at all with the crew members (children) and wanted to learn their language.
Could it be that the alien does not want to steal the spaceship, but wants the key for some other purpose?
Although the above is a detailed examination of ways of developing a game, it is not comprehensive.
 "Keeper of the Keys" can also be used to explore ritual; it can be used to teach about the nature of dramatic tension and dramatic structure (see Chapter 4).
Name games
1.
Calling out one's own name, each in turn, going round in a circle.
2.
Calling out one's own name plus one person to the right, then two, three, etc.
3.
Crossing the circle, calling own name.
When you are approached, you set off for someone else, calling your own name.
4.
Crossing the circle, calling the name of the person you are approaching.
Tag
There are numerous different versions of tag.
All of them contain strong elements of role play, narrative and ritual.
The following version is useful to give children the opportunity to channel excess energy — everybody is in action for the whole time it is being played.
A chases B. When B is caught, s/he freezes, eyes closed, counts to 5, then chases A. The game continues for as long as you want — or to a pre-set time limit, or when somebody is caught three times, for example.
The game can be developed, rapidly turned into a form of role play — a "Hunter and Hunted" situation — by asking, "Who are you?" 
 "Where are you?" 
 "Why are you running away?" 
From there it can become an adventure yarn told in movement, with B miming climbing a cliff face, going through tunnels, crossing rope bridges, etc.
A has to follow wherever B goes.
This, in turn, can move into still image work.
Three still images to encapsulate the key moments in your story.
Blind
Again, there are numerous variations of these blind games/exercises.
The following involves everybody at the same time.
Everybody stands in a circle.
One person directed across the circle.
When s/he gets to the other side of the circle s/he is gently redirected across again.
This continues until s/he feels confident enough to close his/her eyes.
Then a second and third person introduced to the circle.
The "game" is one in which the people on the outside are given responsibility for those on the inside, crossing the circle with their eyes closed.
The class is competing with itself.
This can be developed thus (in pairs): 1.
A leads B to a number of different textures.
2.
Control your partner without words.
3.
Control your partner without touch.
4.
 "Blind" person is a Robot.
The role play can become more interesting, and more complex — if, for example B becomes the blind parent of a sighted child being shown round the classroom or the hall by A, a teacher in that school.
Two concentration exercises
When I introduce myself to a class that I am working with for the first time I frequently begin by asking them to sit close by me on the floor and listen with their eyes shut to the sound of a pair of Indian bells struck together.
They are asked to open their eyes when the sound stops.
I have a colleague who never uses games as such.
But she often takes a rather beautiful candle into the hall when she teaches drama.
At the beginning of the session she lights the candle, the children sit round it in a large circle and she asks them to watch the flame, to concentrate on the flame and nothing else.
For me, as a "warm up" activity there's nothing to beat it!
STILL IMAGES
The idea of the still image is one which has already been mentioned several times both in this and in the preceding chapter.
It's a very useful technique — not least because it is so adaptable.
Just as children are very familiar with drama itself through the dramatic fictions that they see enacted on television and on film, so too they have encountered the idea of still images in other contexts: their own family snapshots, freeze frame on the video recorder, sculptures, waxworks and comic strips.
As with all techniques, it's important to be clear about why one is using it.
At its simplest the participants use their own bodies to create a three-dimensional still photograph.
But it's a technique which can be used in many different ways, for example:
As a control device.
To initiate a drama.
To focus on a particular moment.
As a means of reflecting on the significance of a given moment, of developing an understanding of the depths and layers of meaning any given moment or image might carry.
To open up a situation, to broaden thinking which has hitherto been from a limited viewpoint.
To develop understanding of the significance of eye contact and body language.
To develop understanding of narrative.
To select the key moment(s) or the key stages in a narrative.
To develop understanding of the articulate use of space.
To recap on previous work.
To represent photographs taken, so they can be examined within a fictional context.
To make it possible to deal with very fast moving, or potentially violent, events.
To shift the children away from thinking about drama in straightforwardly naturalistic ways and into more stylised modes in which, for example, emotions and ideas are given physical representation.
Still image work has the additional advantage of being easily repeatable.
We are not concerned about spontaneity, but with accuracy and detail — setting the tone for what we hope will follow.
We can return to a particular image at various points in a lesson, noting the way our understanding of a given image changes as we understand more about the broader situation.
Introducing the idea
Because the audience can take such an active part in still image work it is something which can easily be tackled in the classroom, which might be the best place for introducing it to a class who are unfamiliar with it.
1.
A movement exercise — moving round the room without bumping into one another— and at a given signal everyone freezes.
 "It's as if I'd just taken a photograph." 
You could even use a polaroid camera, show them the photo, ask them to recreate that moment.
2.
Using herself, the teacher creates a still image.
Children guess what it is: making a cup of tea, turning on TV, reading the paper.
They do similar actions, creating a still image from their own lives — cleaning their teeth in the morning, eating a packed lunch, etc.
3.
The teacher "moulds" a volunteer to create a still image.
The children then do the same with a partner.
4.
Teacher shows photographs of statues.
Can they make themselves into a statue of, for example, Anancy playing a trick?
Somebody who has just had a trick played on them by Anancy?
Put the two together?
As with all drama work, it's important to move forward at an appropriate pace, to aim for gradual progression.
There's a neatness and conciseness, however, about Still Image work which makes this easier to achieve than in other areas of drama.
I'll now examine three different ways of using the technique of Still Image — to initiate a drama, to develop understanding of narrative, to focus and reflect on a particular moment.
Using still image to initiate a drama
A photograph (or picture) is given to a group(s).
They then take up positions as if they were the people in the photograph.
When they are satisfied with what they have produced they are asked to bring the image to life — for a very short time, perhaps as little as ten seconds — and/or say one line of dialogue each.
From there the groups can be questioned further — either by the teacher or by other children — to establish what is going on.
The class work in small groups to "mould" each other into still images which will function as waxworks or statues in the drama.
The making of the images becomes the first part of the drama, in which (for example) the work is inspected by the teacher in role as new Mayor, who commissions a statue to commemorate the return of the children of Hamelin!
The teacher will be taking on a role in the drama; the class help to construct the role by using the teacher to create a still image of the role.
When they are satisfied with the image they have created they take up their own positions in relation to the image, positions which indicate their role and attitude.
Example
The teachers reads part of a story to the class — about a merman caught in a fisherman's nets.
The class create an image of the merman at the moment he is brought to land, surrounded by humans.
The teacher will take on the role of the merman, but asks the children: "How do you want me to look?
How should I express fear?
Show me how to do it."
When ready each child can then join in the still image, remembering their position and expressions so that it can be recreated later, and so that half the group can move out of the image to examine the other half.
We can then move backwards or forwards in time.
What led up to the merman's capture?
What do each of you feel about it?
What does each of you want to do now?
The class make an image of something which is then put into a fictional context as photographic evidence.
Example
The children are to be in role as time travellers.
They are asked to create still images of an incident they saw on one of their journeys back in time, as if these were holographic, three dimensional pictures.
The rest of the class then use these pictures as evidence, discussing the implications of what they are shown in order to plan for their next journey back in time.
Using still image to develop understanding of narrative
Having been working on a drama spontaneously, the class (either as a whole group, or in small groups) are asked to consider the most important moment in the story so far, and to represent that moment as a still image.
This activity develops skills which are important in other areas of the curriculum as well as in drama, namely the ability to analyse, to edit, to condense and to focus.
The activity can be taken further by asking them to represent three key moments in a story line (either one they have heard or one they have themselves developed through drama).
This opens up possible discussion about dramatic structure.
Choosing three images should give us "beginning" , "middle" and "end" , i.e. what is stable, how that stability is disrupted and how the disruption is resolved.
This task of considering key moments can be a very valuable way of recapping from one session to the next when the drama extends over a long period, as it usually does once it becomes part of a project or topic work.
It's more interesting for the children than being asked "Can you remember what we did least week?" , it makes them immediately active, it reminds them what they were doing and can be very informative for the teacher, who can see clearly what the children are finding most engaging about the work.
Having made a sequence of images, ask them to put them into a different running order.
Changing the sequence of a series of images invariably affects the meaning of a narrative.
This exercise could be used in conjunction with image sequencing exercises we might do in Media Studies.
The examples given above imply fairly naturalistic images or representations.
But we can also ask children to create more expressive images which are more like pictures of a state of mind or of an idea.
Example
The children are in role as islanders who have decided to abandon their homes because a volcano is becoming active.
We could ask each child to say (or write) what they are feeling as they leave the island, but we might first want to focus on the leavetaking in a more active way.
Suggest that in small groups they make an image to show what it's like to experience conflicting feelings — of sorrow, loss, relief, excitement, hope, expectation.
Using still image to focus and reflect on a particular moment
Whatever kind of image the class have created, we now have an opportunity to deepen and clarify their thinking.
While one group holds their image still, the rest of the class briefly become spectators, an audience.
The teacher can comment on the image, trying to deepen commitment to the work and draw out the significance of what has been made.
At the same time she can take the opportunity to try to build the esteem of those class members who lack confidence and are finding the work slightly embarrassing.
Example
The children are involved in a drama about the construction of a railway (described in detail in Chapter 5).
They have been working in  small groups to show the lives of a small rural town as yet unconnected to the railway.
One small group of children have decided to be miners.
They have created a still image showing work down the pit — but one child can't stop giggling.
The teacher says: "I see work which is backbreakingly hard; I see people in very cramped conditions; I see people working together, needing each other.
And I see one of these miners managing to stay cheerful in these very tough circumstances."
You, the teacher, are taking the work seriously even if they're struggling with it.
In my experience this is one of the quickest and most effective ways of drawing children into the drama; you are helping them to make sense of what they're doing, you're showing them clearly that what they're doing matters.
The teacher can comment on the images, as in this example; but with a large part of the class functioning as an audience we have an opportunity for involving them actively in the process and developing the sense that in educational drama the "audience" should be active and responsible.
The class can be asked to:
Move around the image and look at it from various points of view.
How does this change your impression of what you see?
Give the image a title or caption.
Who is most important in the image?
Who do you think they want us to look at?
Who's the person we're meant to focus on?
What might that person (or others) be thinking?
What are their hopes and fears in this situation?
What does each person want to happen?
This not only opens up what is going on, but takes us forward as well.
The "thoughts'" given to the characters in the image are those which will lead to action.
You can put one question to anybody in the image, who has to answer in role — or out of role (but be consistent!).
Suggest a line of dialogue for each character.
A spectator group can copy a particular image, and then animate it — with dialogue if appropriate.
If the image represents a still photograph we can frame it by using an overhead projector as a light source, as if the image is a photographic transparency.
This takes us into some very interesting work about point of view.
Example
The "photographs" have been rescued from the wreckage of a plane crash.
What do they show?
What do they not show?
What is hidden  from us?
Where do you think the person who took the photograph was when s/he took it.
Above all else the guiding principle is to tease out the meanings inherent in the images; to ask: "What's important here?" 
There are several examples in the book where still images are used at key moments in the drama as part of the dramatic fiction, notably "The Giant Awakes" (Chapter 5), where the images are used as photographic evidence.
TEACHING IN ROLE
Teaching in role is a strategy which a great many teachers have found extremely useful.
It is most often used in whole group work, but it is also very productive in forum theatre, particularly if the role you take on functions as an obstacle which the class (or representatives of the class) have to find their way round by argument, persuasion and compromise.
It is also useful on a one to one basis, or with a small group — either in front of the class or discretely.
Teaching in role is a strategy, a means to an end; it is not an end in itself.
The purpose is to offer a way of intervening which challenges and focuses the work, which moves it on, which creates learning opportunities and deepens the understanding of the participants.
Teaching in role requires the teacher to play a role in the drama with the children for a specific purpose.
The role itself should provide some focus for the drama.
This could be as simple as entering the drama as a messenger and passing on information.
If you've never tried the strategy before this is a good way of beginning: the messenger doesn't have to stay in the drama.
One reason that many teachers find the idea of teaching in role worrying is that they feel that once they have embarked on a role they will have to stick with it for the rest of the lesson.
This is to misunderstand the strategy, which demands that the teacher moves out of role occasionally to reflect on the work.
To take the example of the messenger, consider this simple sequence: 1.
The children are in role as the townspeople of Nazareth; out of role the teacher has established with them the nature of their work, their commitment to their land, families and places of work.
2.
In role the teacher enters as a traveller to tell them that she has come from a neighbouring village, where Roman soldiers are  delivering a decree that all will have to pay a new tax; the traveller has to go on her way.
3.
Out of role the teacher asks the children about the traveller — what did she say, what does it mean for them?
They might then be asked to consider their response if the soldiers arrive in Nazareth.
More adventurously, the teacher might choose to play the role of the Roman Centurion who reads out the decree.
This is a confrontational role.
Always remember, however, that at any time the participants in the drama can come out of role to consider what is happening.
Indeed it is vital that they should do so from time to time.
If the confrontation between Nazareth and Rome looks like it's becoming unproductive, the teacher can come out of role and ask the children to reflect on what has been happening — perhaps through discussion, perhaps through a short piece of writing (a diary entry, a letter to a friend, a sketch representing how the townspeople feel about the power relationship, or — shifting the perspective — the report that the Roman has to make to his commanding officer).
Types of role
We can classify roles in terms of their function and in terms of their status.
The messenger role, for example, has the function of bringing information; but that information could be brought by a beggar or a King.
When we're using role we need to consider both function and status.
The following lists are not exhaustive, and many of the categories overlap; they do give an indication of the vast range of possibilities open to you:
Possible functions of a role:
To seek help and/or advice: "I've inherited a circus and I've no idea how to look after the animals." 
To seek information: a traveller looking for a lost companion, a curious stranger.
To co-ordinate: an investigator trying to co-ordinate the enquiry into an air-crash.
To obstruct, to provide an obstacle which the class has to overcome, to challenge.
For example, the mayor who doesn't believe that the damage in the town is caused by a giant.
 "Can you get me some proof?" 
The teacher playing the Pied Piper, with whom the class has to negotiate for the release of the children.
To assist the class with their tasks: the teacher as the learner, someone taught by the class, an apprentice, a deckhand, a new recruit.
To be the Devil's Advocate, to enable/provoke the class into clarifying their feelings and articulating what they believe to be right: "I don't see why we should share the proceeds." 
 "We should leave the whale alone; that's what we've been told." 
To bring information, the messenger: "I'm getting a message through from an alien life form." 
 "I've been asked to tell you that we all have to fill in a census return." 
Classifying roles by status
1.
High status: King, Queen, Captain on a ship (or spaceship), leader of the expedition, leader of the village, headteacher, team leader, athletics coach, managing director, etc.
2.
The second in command: The chief in awe of his Adviser (cf "Whale" in "Using Poetry" , Chapter 2), Monarch's dogsbody, Deputy, go-between: "I can't do anything about it, but I'll tell her how unhappy you are about it." 
3.
Equal status (on the same level as the class): one of the team, a member of the gang, villager, crew member.
4.
Low status: beggar, traveller seeking help, plague victim, shipwrecked sailor, refugee, apprentice, etc.
Any role has both a function and a status; it is effectively a combination of the above.
Some of the combinations seem to go together automatically — e.g. the apprentice will be low status, somebody who needs to be taught — but often it's useful to think beyond the obvious.
Consider, for example, the different challenges posed to the group by the Devil's Advocate who is high and low status.
Responses to the status of the role
When planning to use teacher-in-role consider what sort of responses to the role are possible.
Put yourself in the position of the children.
If you were encountering a tyrannical overlord, what would you do?
This may not, of course, be what they decide!
Ask yourself what are the  possible and likely responses?
This should not defuse the dramatic tension.
You should think why you're choosing a particular role.
Think through the likely focus it's going to create in the drama, the problems and dilemmas it is likely to introduce.
High status
The advantage of this type of role is that it's similar to the traditional teacher role; you're retaining control.
This can be productive, but there's a danger that it prevents the children from taking any real responsibility for the drama.
In an encounter with a high status role the options are few — they can agree to do as they're told (in which case you, the teacher, end up doing all the decision-making) or they can refuse; it's a battle of wits and wills: you remain in control or they overthrow you.
That might make for excellent drama — but be prepared for it.
When used in conjunction with the function of Devil's Advocate you can push the children to a point where they refuse to take orders; they have to persuade you that what you are proposing is wrong.
You are, perhaps, the captain of a pirate ship, proposing to take on a cargo of slaves because it's easy money.
Second in command
A much more versatile position.
You can always defer to the "off-stage" higher authority (which means you're less likely to have a revolution on your hands!); you can seek assistance; you can still play Devil's Advocate; you can co-ordinate; bring information and, importantly, transfer responsibility to the children.
One of the dangers of the position, however, is that it's very easy to slip into full authority — which is a "con" that children can see through all too easily.
Equal status
Enables you to ask very open questions of the "What should we do now?" variety.
If the children are unused to the teacher taking on a role, however, they will want to push you into an authority role.
Providing you resist, this can in itself provide useful learning opportunities: "I'm not in charge; I can't make decisions for you." 
The traveller or stranger can be of equal status; this allows you to ask particularly useful questions in role: "How do you organise your meetings?
How do you make sure that everyone doesn't speak at the same time?"
Low status
This needs a good deal of confidence on the part of the teacher, but is very productive as real responsibility for decision-making is transferred to the children.
It raises the status, and esteem of the children.
Although the Devil's Advocate role is traditionally associated with high status roles, you should remember that someone in a low status position can still have opinions, can still provoke.
I have sometimes taken on a role where I have been injured, a plague victim, and used the role to become Devil's Advocate, suggesting that one of the more aggressive boys in a class "Finish me off." 
Risky, certainly; but it hasn't yet failed to get the class — and the child concerned — to argue strongly that while there's life there's hope!
How to prepare children for the strategy?
Teachers often have more problems with the concept than children: pre-school children will often play with adults, asking them to assume roles (the shopkeeper, the bus conductor); children who play in this way are used to moving in and out of role, are quite happy for an adult to be in their play one moment and to be themselves the next.
Infant teachers who go to the play corner and take part in domestic or shopping activities are already using a form of teacher-in-role
With older children there can sometimes be difficulties.
The easiest way to introduce the strategy is to give a few simple demonstrations: 1.
Role play the beginning of a very simple scene on your own — e.g."Why are you late home?
You've not been in trouble with your teacher again?!"
2.
Then ask — "Who was I pretending to be?" 
3.
Ask for a volunteer to join you.
Improvise a short scene with a simple but clear beginning: "Can I go out to play now, Mum?" 
Try several on this one to one basis.
Then try working with a small group, doing the same thing.
From there it is a comparatively small step for you to take on a role in a piece of forum theatre, and then on to working in role with the whole class.
Forum theatre
If you are working in forum theatre the class can help in the creating the role for you: "How should I play this character?" 
 "Do you want to meet someone who's going to be helpful or who's going to make life difficult for you?" 
This is a useful question because it also takes the class towards an understanding that drama is often far more enjoyable if the problems that are raised are not easily solved.
Negotiations with a difficult character (e.g. the Pied Piper holding the town's children in the mountain caverns) are better conducted with the teacher taking on the problematic role because the teacher can judge just how difficult to make the task, and can allow the children success when they need it.
Moving in and out of role
Always make sure the children understand how you are going to signify moving in and out of role.
As you, and the children, become increasingly familiar with the strategy you can make the boundaries less clear; but initially clarity is all important.
You might use a cloak, scarf, cardigan which you put on to signify that you're in role.
When you take it off again you're back being the class teacher again.
What props can you use that help signify the role — a brief case?
A bunch of keys?
Another simple, but effective way is to say"I will be playing a part in this drama unless I'm sitting in this chair.
And when I sit here it means two things: first, that we all stop playing a part at that moment and second, that I'd like you all to come over and sit down to discuss what we've been doing."
Further considerations and suggestions
We've already discussed the status and power of the role.
How much knowledge does the role have?
Be careful not to use "superior" knowledge to intimidate.
Releasing knowledge slowly not only enhances the drama, it also increases the likelihood that the children will want to get involved in research.
Use the role to defy expectations.
Let them find, for example, that authority has clay feet.
Use their expectations and then confound them.
The book Drama Structures contains an excellent example of this in the "Starship" project.
The teacher takes on the role of an alien, who says that the crew of the Starship must be lying when they say their leader is a man.
She knows very well that male creatures are incapable of such responsibilities.
She wants to speak to a female, the real boss!
Thinking beyond the starting point
As a starting point the role can create highly dramatic moments, but be careful not to choose a role which then limits you.
Think ahead.
How can the role continue to be used?
Example: The Roman Census
The initial function of the role is to pass on information that the Nazarenes will have to leave Nazareth for the Roman census.
This can be done by: A Roman centurion giving fearsome orders (high status).
A town elder passing on information and advising them to do what the Romans say (second in command).
A weak member and infirm townswoman who has heard rumours (low status).
A traveller who has come from a nearby town, where the Romans have already given out their orders (low to equal status).
Having given the information, where do you go now?
Is that all the role is good for?
The Roman centurion can return and enforce the evacuation but he can't open up responses.
Each of the other roles is more productive: The traveller is a stranger whose curiosity can enrich the sense of community.
The infirm townswoman will need to be helped on her own journey.
The town elder can help organise the necessary preparations (or resistance), can ask all manner of questions about families and journeys which will help deepen the commitment to the project.
There are several examples in this book of the use of the teacher-in-role strategy, notably: "The Construction of a Railway" in "Drama at the centre of the curriculum" , Chapter 5.
 "The Island" in Chapter 2.
 "The Crashed Space Ship" and "The Giant Awakes" in Chapter 5.
WHOLE GROUP WORK
When I first started teaching drama I accepted the prevailing dogma that you started by getting children to work individually, then in pairs, then in small groups and eventually (when they were really good at drama) in larger groups!
It was an appealing idea because it at least seemed to offer some sort of progression to the work at a time when there was little or nothing written about coherent development in drama.
But the great strength of whole group drama is precisely that it gives context and coherence to small group work; it makes it easier for the teacher to monitor work, to make it highly dramatic and keep it tightly focused.
What is whole group drama?
The image I had of whole group drama when I was first introduced to the idea was of a large crowd scene in which everybody was acting as a group.
I assumed whole group drama had to be about football hooligans on their way to a match or passengers in an aeroplane about to crash; that there might be shades of difference, but that basically everybody would be doing the same thing at the same time.
How wrong could I be?
Whole group drama in fact offers individuals great opportunities for personal decision making.
Whole group drama is best seen as an organisational strategy, a way of organising all the small group and individual work which takes place within a unifying fictional context.
Suppose we set up some small group scenes about neighbours arguing, trying to resolve a dispute (it could be open-ended, up to the children to sort out the "back story" or the teacher could prescribe it — a barking dog in one house and loud music late at night in the other).
A problem arises when the groups come to share their work — when for long periods children will be passive.
We could still make our drama about disputes between neighbours, however, and organise it as a whole group drama — simply by setting each of the improvisations in a single street.
The drama might be unfocused, but we can now ask each group to look at the others' work as examples of what's going on elsewhere in the street.
The advantage of this is that it enables us to start focusing on content.
We could make a plan of the street, we could ask each of the groups to find a reason to go to someone else's "house" ; we could perhaps ask other people in the street to try to help resolve some of the disputes other people are having.
But the drama is still not very exciting, and the unfocused nature of the work is likely to continue to create organisational problems.
We need something dramatic to focus it, either to introduce something which will create a potential for change in this situation (which will potentially destabilise the situation) or pick up on something going on in the groups which will have the same effect; we need to focus on an issue.
In this instance, for example: The corner shop is to be closed and knocked down to make way for a multi-storey car-park.
The street is preparing its contribution to a town pageant.
An empty warehouse is to be converted into a leisure centre — the inhabitants of the street are actively involved in the planning.
People in the street are asked to prepare for an influx of refugees who will be looked after in the local church hall.
A big hole has suddenly appeared in the street!
What are we  going to do about it?
(This starting point is described in detail in Chapter 5, "Writing in Role" — "The Crashed Spaceship" .)
We can introduce this issue in a number of ways:
The teacher can act as a narrator, telling the story thus far.
The information can be given in the form of a poster, letters, tape-recorded message (as if coming over the radio), video-tape (TV news), or on a computer screen.
The teacher can take on a role and introduce the information in role — as a messenger, as a member of the group, as an outsider, as someone giving orders.
The teacher can present the class with an image which intrigues, mystifies, challenges.
Where to start?
Slow build up or in at the deep end?
This unifying issue can be presented at the beginning of the drama or at a later stage, after the children have taken on roles and started on small group work.
The advantage of presenting the issue at the start of the drama is that the work is focused from the beginning.
The danger of approaching whole group work by letting children first improvise in small groups and then presenting them with an issue which you hope will give them a focus is that they remain more interested in what's going on in their group than in the supposedly unifying issue: "Why should I be interested in the corner shop being knocked down when I never use it, and anyway we've just been burgled?!" 
The advantage, however, of first letting them improvise more freely in small groups is that with careful monitoring you can see what's interesting them, what they want to explore in their drama.
It may well be that several groups have had a burglary, in which case the teacher could use this as the focus: "How are we going to deal with it?
How are we going to stop it happening again?"
Interdependence
So far we've concentrated our attention on this one imaginary street.
It exemplifies a group of people who have separate lives, ideas and attitudes, who are united because they're in a common space and (if the drama is working) because they now share a common concern: something has happened which they have to deal with by working together.
In creating whole group dramas we should be aware of the need to ensure that every child feels they have a stake in what is happening and that they can genuinely influence outcomes.
One way of doing this is to establish, within the whole group framework, small groups with common interests, which depend on each other.
This means that when they watch another group's work they are affected by what they do, they're all working within the same fictional context.
To take the example of the island community (described in "The Island" , Chapter 2), these small groups might be: hunters boatbuilders fishermen and women net makers builders farmers — those who tend crops and animals woodcutters woodworkers — carpenters and carvers.
We can use the technique of spotlighting, focusing attention on one group's work: "Look what's happening on the farms." 
If the crops have been destroyed by the storm or animals have got loose, it will affect every group.
As children become more experienced they establish their own interdependent relationships, but initially it requires careful questioning by the teacher: "You're a woodworker.
Who do you get your wood from?
How do you help the builders?"
We can then establish the way group members interact amongst themselves and with other groups.
This type of work, in which the children are playing at their roles, is frequently a necessary stage in the process of building commitment to the drama; and it's one which adults find as useful as children.
It can, nevertheless, get out of hand and we should always bear in mind the need to intervene, to challenge, to focus the work, to use this period of "dramatic play" to provide learning opportunities.
One simple way of deepening the "play" is to ask each group to consider what very special skills each individual brings to the group.
In the case of the woodcutters, for example, Who knows those parts of the forest where the best trees grow for boatmaking, for furniture making?
Who is best at climbing trees?
Who makes the tools?
Every child is special, every child should feel they have a special role in the drama, that their presence or absence will affect what happens in the drama.
If we can achieve this it will make it much easier to keep the children engaged in the work throughout, even when they are watching what others are doing.
Working in this way, setting up a whole group which functions as a community, frequently leads drama teachers towards work which is set either in villages or small towns or on islands.
It's not just that drama teachers are nostalgic romantics who hanker for a simpler way of life (though there may well be an element of truth in that); it's that these self-contained communities cannot easily call upon outside forces to solve their problems.
The problems of the drama remain within the group.
Good drama is very much about dealing with the mess we find ourselves in, not calling up some outside agency to solve all our problems.
Bearing that in mind, we find ourselves setting whole group dramas on spaceships or sailing ships, in medieval castles, on expeditions; and what all these have in common is that within the setting it is comparatively easy to ensure that each participant has an essential role; we can easily create a chain of dependency, to ensure that each child feels they have a stake in the drama.
Allocating roles
How do we ensure that every child has a role?
If the dramatic starting point is strong and the situation is clear, children will usually find roles for themselves.
But there may be occasions when you want to be sure that every child has an appropriate role.
This might be because it will give you, the teacher, more confidence in what you're doing, in which case the simplest way is to discuss the likely roles and ask for volunteers before the drama proper begins.
This will not, however, solve the problem of certain children taking on what appear to be menial roles.
We should never allow the drama to reinforce any child's feeling of poor self-esteem, so the problem needs to be tackled.
The simplest way is to ensure that once the drama is under way these roles become highly significant in the drama.
Many of the organisational procedures that we use with small groups can easily be adapted, for example giving out cards with relevant information.
A slow but dramatic way of allocating roles is to come to the children (probably gathered in a circle) and ask them who's who in role: "I'm a stranger here.
Where can I buy bread?
And who supplies you with flour?
Who works with you?"
Each person goes in turn to one or more other(s) in the circle, saying who they are and what dealings they have with them.
The problem with this approach is that it can become rather competitive and nerve racking for those children who don't get "chosen" early on.
When I use it I ensure that I have some "special" roles "up my sleeve" as it were, so that the children who are  approached last are allocated roles which, at least potentially, are the most important.
Breaking out of the community based drama
Basing whole group work on a community is a relatively simple way of organising a drama project.
It is, however, by no means the only way of organising whole group work.
The class can take on the role of any group of people unified by a common concern or problem, so long as we ensure that every child has an active role to play.
The class can be, for example: 1.
Detectives investigating a crime.
The children go into the hall and find a frame with the picture cut out of it; an empty cash box; or a desk and chairs overturned, papers strewn all over to give the impression of a ransacked office.
2.
Archaeologists exploring a Roman settlement.
3.
Architects or builders preparing to build a new leisure centre.
4.
RSPCA officers who have to deal with the animals in a badly run zoo.
In each of the above examples the children have been asked to take on the role of "people who know" ; and it is this which gives them their stake in the drama.
The work could be enhanced by the teacher working in role alongside the children; but it is not essential.
Building belief, involvement, engagement, commitment
Do we want children to believe in what they're doing?
Do we want them to be involved?
The words are used frequently in connection with drama.
I very much hope that they are engaged in the work and committed to it, but I don't want them to believe it's real; and the word involvement to me implies an inability to stand apart from the role-playing.
It's an important issue, and has led to some serious misunderstandings about the teaching of drama.
It is in periods of reflection that the real learning occurs in drama, when people are given the chance to think about what they have been doing.
Children, remarkably, often understand this better than many adults.
Even very young children have little difficulty in the notion of moving in and out of role.
Frequently in whole group drama we need to stop the drama and move out of role to think about the situation; without these periods of reflection whole group drama can become indulgent and aimless.
The problem with the word involvement is that it seems to imply a single-mindedness, a deep identification with character which is not only unnecessary, but often counter-productive.
It is as if involvement in "character" is the highest goal.
Professional actors are very much aware of the need to stay detached from the roles they play night after night; similarly, children taking part in a drama project need to keep their wits about them, to be thinking about meaning and implications in what they say and do and make.
When outsiders watch a drama class they frequently comment on how "involved" the children seem.
I think what they mean is that they appear so intent on their work that they don't seem to notice onlookers.
What I hope (and would like to think) is happening is that the children are aware of the onlookers, but that they're making a choice to stay in role; that their engagement with the issues and the problems of the drama is what is keeping them intent on their work.
So how, in whole group drama, do we build commitment to the work and engagement in the issues?
How do we shift the children from the glib superficial, mocking comments (which are usually symptomatic of nervousness and insecurity) to deeper, considered responses?
There is no single, simple answer.
We use a range of strategies: Raising the status of the children, making them important in the drama.
Careful questioning.
Periods of reflection.
Teacher in role to challenge, to redirect and make sense of glib responses.
Encouraging research.
Developing intercurricular work, which itself enhances the drama.
Developing the drama beyond single lessons into extended projects.
Making the work as visual as possible, trying wherever possible to create visual images and symbols rather than simply talking.
Above all, the teacher needs to take the work seriously — which means that whenever possible we ensure that drama time is not interrupted.
Discussions and meetings
One of the criticisms sometimes levelled at the whole group drama approach is that it always seems to involve lots of meetings and discussions, and that this disadvantages those children whose grasp of  language is uncertain; that this "type" of drama can rapidly become nothing more than a heated discussion involving only the teacher and the more articulate members of the class.
Whole group drama, however, is not a type of drama, but an organisational strategy; as with any strategy it can be well used or misused.
There are occasions when the strategy demands whole group discussions and it's all too easy to be lulled into thinking the drama is going well because a group of very articulate children are thoroughly engaged in the work and able to vocalise their very imaginative ideas, while other children are left out of the real decisionmaking processes.
Here are some pointers to how we can make meetings and discussions more dramatic and accessible to all the children in the class: Establish in advance the purpose of the meeting — both for yourself and for the children.
Is it one at which they will simply be given information by the teacher in role?
A way of heightening the formality of language?
If the intention is for the group to reach a key decision they should know this.
Establish the rules of meetings.
Who can speak and when?
It is sometimes useful to encourage meetings to be set up as a form of ritual.
Perhaps people can only address the meeting when they hold a certain talisman (which is passed from speaker to speaker).
Wherever possible try to bring in physical and visual elements, so that the meeting is about much more than group discussion.
When setting it up, for example, ask "Where do our meetings take place?" so together you and the children can organise the space in a way which is visually meaningful.
Sometimes we'll all be sitting in a circle on the floor, but not always.
How do we organise the RSPCA offices or police headquarters?
If the whole group has to make its decision through verbal discussion it is often better to first present the issue or problem to small groups, then ask each to report back to the whole group.
This way everybody has a chance to air their opinions and everybody's voice is represented at the meeting.
Voting.
Don't assume the children know what is meant by democracy.
Before putting something to a vote you need to negotiate (usually out of role) what it means.
You'll need to get agreement from everyone that if they end up in the minority they will bide by the majority decision.
When you ask for volunteers, or opinions, be prepared for the "Me me me!" syndrome.
If we're asking for somebody to persuade the giant to leave us in peace, ask those whose hands are highest: "What qualities are going to be needed here?
What sort of person would be best suited?
Somebody who's cunning?
Clever?
Or perhaps someone who's "brave" ."
And then we can explore, through the medium of drama, what those words mean.
Does being brave mean being strong or overcoming our fears?
Then we can return to the problem of persuading the giant to leave us alone and ask who in the drama has those qualities?
Remember that the essence of drama is acting out "What if?" situations.
In any subject we can discuss "What might happen if…?" 
In drama we can try things out, we can find out what happens.
As a general rule try it, do it and then talk about it.
Don't avoid the drama (as exemplified in the "Construction of a Railway" project documented in Chapter 5).
What next?
What does a whole group drama look like?
We've had our meeting, we've all got our roles, what do we do now?
If the dramatic frame is an enquiry or an investigation the children might well be creating still images, which they can then bring back to the whole group.
What differentiates this now from uncontextualised still image work is that the audience are now looking at these images in role; they are interrogating the images as if they were detectives looking at photographic evidence.
Prepared small group work can similarly be viewed in context as if it were video material, or plays acted out — showing, for example, the bravest thing they have ever done.
There will also be spontaneous small group work, with the teacher maybe intervening in role, or staying out of role, commenting, spotlighting work for others to see.
Occasionally, the teacher will make use of Forum Theatre techniques; and there will certainly be times when a small group of children will be working in front of the class in a spontaneous improvisation.
There is no set model.
The problems within the dramatic fiction are dealt with as they arise; the teacher tries to keep the focus, intervenes as necessary and ensures that there are periods of reflection when everyone can consider carefully the meaning and significance of what has happened.
Whole group drama — the myths and half truths
 "It's very demanding in terms of organisational skills." 
Providing you understand clearly the rationale for whole group work, it is often much less complex than small group work; a simple narrative thread can keep the drama alive.
 "It only really works if you are prepared to work in role alongside the children." 
Working in role definitely helps; it's an economical and effective strategy.
But it's not an essential part of the process.
And if you do choose to use teacher-in-role there are  going to be many occasions when you'll have to step out of role to reflect on the work.
 "Whole group work and small group work indicate quite different ideological approaches to the teaching of drama." 
It's difficult to imagine whole group work which doesn't also involve small group work at some point, but with the advantage that whole group work gives the small groups a focus, a purpose and a context to their work.
 "There are teachers who do whole group work and there are others who do small group work, and their approach is very different." 
For those who have never tried whole group work this might seem true, but it's a half truth at most.
The two approaches should be seen as complementary.
 "Whole group work is all about process, never about performance." 
For some this is true; but I would contend that the best way to develop performance work is by using the whole group approach.
Part Four of this book offers specific examples of plays developed in this way.
 "Whole group work is all about endless meetings and discussions and is therefore intimidating to children whose grasp of language is uncertain." 
Be very careful of this one.
It's all too often true.
Guard against it, see the discussions as ways of reaching decisions.
It's the decision-making that's important; it doesn't always have to be tackled verbally.
Make sure that every child contributes to the decision-making process.
 "In order to run a whole group drama effectively you have to be not only very experienced, but also very charismatic." 
People who ooze experience, self-confidence and charisma appear to find most aspects of teaching easy; many of the best drama teachers I've seen working, however, are quiet and self-effacing, and I've seen relatively inexperienced young students running very successful whole group drama sessions.
To summarise
When we're using whole group drama: We must give the class a clear focus to the work.
Dramatic play is an important stage which people need to go through to build up their commitment to the work, but don't expect learning to take place without teacher intervention.
We need to structure in periods of reflection.
All the strategies referred to elsewhere in this book (such as forum theatre, still image, small group drama) can be used within the context of a whole group drama.
If the class is working in small groups as part of the whole group, try to ensure these groups are interdependent, that they can see how their work relates to that of others.
Try to ensure that every child feels they have an essential role in the drama, that they have opportunities to make decisions and influence outcomes.
Establish that once an idea has been accepted it is not to be denied.
Negotiate with the group to agree on decision-making procedures; don't assume they understand the workings of democracy!
When involved in discussions and meetings consider the needs of the children who are less verbally articulate.
It is this form of drama which best lends itself to topic work and intercurricular project work.
This book contains several detailed examples of whole group drama projects: 1.
 "The Island" in Chapter 2.
2.
 "Construction of a Railway" , "The Giant Awakes" and "The Crashed Spaceship" in Chapter 5.
3.
 "The Donkeyman's Daughter" in Chapter 8.
4.
A "Toxic Waste" project planned in detail in Chapter 10.
Organisation and development
This chapter starts by looking at the issue of control and discipline, and the related skills of questioning and reflection.
This discussion then moves on to examine specific ways of developing, deepening and enhancing the work, looking in particular at narrative and non-verbal language.
The chapter concludes with a discussion of collaborative teaching.
control and discipline reflection questioning skills narrative: dramatic tension and the dramatic frame non-verbal language: the use of space and symbols collaborative teaching 
CONTROL IN THE DRAMA LESSON
I believe that the two prime requisites for good control are careful organisation and clarity.
The teacher does not need to know exactly what will happen and cannot usefully plan a story line very far ahead, but should give a great deal of thought to the organisation of the lesson: How will groups be divided?
How will the situation of the drama be introduced?
Are props/costumes (for children or for the teacher in role) needed?
Are suitable writing materials easily available if the children are likely to need them for reflective work?
How will the space in the classroom/hall be used?
What resources are needed?
What register of language do you intend to use?
As the drama develops remember that if each child feels s/he has a clear responsibility within the drama control problems are far less likely to arise.
The children must be quite clear from the outset about the task in hand; what is going to be expected from them during the course of the lesson?
We all mess about when we think that what we have been asked to do is silly or pointless.
Build into the drama periods of reflection; they give significance to the drama itself and to individual contributions.
Ground rules
Always establish good ground rules at the beginning of each session.
Keep the rules clear and simple and to the point.
If possible try to frame them in a dramatic way — because this is a further pointer for the children showing how you are going to work together.
It is productive to agree these rules with children rather than dictate them.
If you explain that in the drama lesson you are going to be working together, that you will need their help, that you cannot create the drama on your own, you are raising their status, making them important.
This sense of collaborative work — within agreed parameters — is a key to good control and good drama.
These ground rules might include how we make sure we can hear each other, who talks and when, how we organise meetings, whether or not children are allowed to use PE equipment, do they have access to chairs?
Stopping work
Perhaps the most important ground rules to establish are those about silence and stopping work.
You should make quite clear what signals you'll use to indicate that you want them to stop what they're doing.
Remember, however, that if you're asking them to become engaged in a problem in any depth, simply clapping your hands and asking them to stop what they're doing can be quite destructive.
You need at least two different signals: 1.
One that indicates stop at once(something's going very wrong and you need to draw everyone's attention to it).
2.
One that effectively says stop what you're doing and come over here when your concentration is wavering.
The signal for (1) could be clapping your hands or banging a drum or tambourine.
I prefer to use a set of Indian bells — very small cymbals which produce a quiet but high pitched and very pure note which can be heard above all sorts of other noise.
(See also "Games and exercises" in Chapter 3, where the use of Indian bells (p. 49) is described in another context.)
For (2), simply sitting in a chair can be very effective.
 "When you notice that I'm sitting here it means I want you to stop what you're doing and come round." 
This may sound rather wishy-washy, but it can be extremely effective.
The hidden message to the children is that you value their engagement in their work.
Another way might be to raise your hand — a bit more tiring if some are so engaged in their work that they don't stop what they're doing for a couple of minutes.
Having established the ground rules, explain to the children how you will be working — e.g. if you are going to play a role yourself tell the children, and tell them what signals you are going to give to indicate that you are going to move into role.
One of the great advantages of working on a drama project, rather than on single, self-contained lessons, is that one can not only choose the duration but also the location of the drama lesson; the work becomes integrative.
When the children begin to perceive drama as part of the curriculum and not as something separate they value it more highly.
The child's point of view
If there is a problem try to see it from the child's point of view.
Why is the child "playing up" , misbehaving or distracting others?
Here are some common reasons: Are they themselves distracted?
It is hardly reasonable to expect the children to concentrate on sharing out the last of their emergency rations if the dinner ladies are putting out tables for lunch.
Make sure there are as few interruptions to the work as possible.
Drama makes difficult demands on the participants.
Interruptions are distracting and embarrassing.
I once worked with a teacher who was called out six times in an hour to deal with comparatively trivial problems (certainly trivial compared with the slaying of the Minotaur).
The hidden agenda could easily appear to be that "our drama is the least important thing in the school" .
Maybe the children could make a notice to hang on the hall doors — STRICTLY NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT TO THESEUS AND ADVISERS (adapted as appropriate, and put up with staff agreement).
Do they properly understand what is required?
Think how you would feel if you were asked: "I'd like you to be slaves in the hold of a sailing ship." 
What would you do?
Perhaps sit and do nothing at all— or perhaps be revolting?
What else could you do if you'd been given no further guidance?
Suppose, however, the children have to secretly plan an escape which the crew of the ship are to know nothing about…
Are they embarrassed by the situation or task in hand?
This may come from the content of the drama or from its organisation.
Whilst it is productive to ask boys and girls to work in small groups together, it is often very embarrassing for them to be asked to choose a partner of the opposite gender.
Don't let organisational oversight get in the way of the work.
Children find it embarrassing to work on something they feel they have outgrown.
Do they want to be the centre of attention?
There are some occasions when it is educationally valuable to offer such a child the "centre-stage" for a while through the drama itself.
The class may learn a great deal about tolerance from such a strategy.
There will be other times when it may be necessary to ask: "Do you want to take part in this drama, or not?
Are you behaving like that to make people laugh or because it is what you honestly believe to be right."
In most cases asking a child to sit out for a while is sufficient "discipline" providing the drama is interesting enough to draw them back in.
Are they bored?
Perhaps the task in hand is too easily achieved or is pitched at an inappropriate level.
Are they unable to tackle the problem?
Perhaps it is beyond their intellectual grasp; or maybe the language it is couched in is too complex.
Are they unwilling to tackle the problem?
Maybe it opens emotional wounds.
Any teacher is constantly having to make difficult value judgements.
Here the key issue is the extent to which the child is likely to benefit by tackling the problem through drama.
If, after taking all this into account, the drama lesson begins to go wrong, it is often a good idea to ask the children to help in analysing why.
If this means stopping the lesson, so be it.
Do something else.
Try not to feel too bound by the timetable.
As you gain in confidence you and the children will probably soon find that there is never enough time to do all the things you want to do.
REFLECTION
It is vitally important to create periods of reflection within a drama when the participants can consider what they have achieved as individuals and as a group; when they think about the significance of their work and examine the implications of any decisions they may have taken.
Reflection is one of the keys to good control and organisation in the drama session; it is largely through reflection that children learn to value what they are doing.
Reflection can take place in or out of role; during a lesson (as and when important moments arise); at the end of the lesson; in the classroom; immediately before the lesson.
Ideally reflection will: raise the status of the children's contributions draw significance from the work help the children understand the meanings in their work, and how they have used dramatic forms to create those meanings move the drama forward — both in terms of the narrative and the quality of learning.
Reflection is often thought of as a backward looking process.
There is certainly value in this but if the reflection also contains the seeds of future action then it is even more useful.
The reflective process often involves work in other curriculum areas, be it discussion, writing, artwork, computer programming.
The most useful activities are those which stimulate children into thinking dynamically and constructively about what they have been doing.
Examples: Consider the following: a painting of a giant a sailor's personal log a letter to a friend left behind after a move.
Each of these could be usefully used to reflect on what has occurred in the drama.
But the reflection is likely to be more interesting and more challenging if the activity looks forward as well as over the shoulder, as it were.
1.
The painting of the giant could become a picture which is going to be used to show a sceptical researcher (the teacher in role?) how big the giant really is — necessarily demanding that the child thinks about the concept of scale.
2.
The sailor's personal log might not only record what has happened on the journey so far, it might also speculate about what the crew should do with the merman they've caught in their nets; it might contain thoughts about food and the way it is stored on board ship; it might suggest new ways of storing food.
3.
The letter to a friend left behind after a move could contain thoughts about the way the family have been treated by immigration officials; the really interesting letter would not just recount memories, but also hint at the dreams and fears, the expectations and terrors of what lies ahead.
Discussion
The most obvious way for the teacher to initiate reflection with the whole class is to discuss the work.
Such discussion should include thoughts about the form of the drama and its content.
If the children are going to develop skills in drama, time must be given to consider the way language and space have been used.
Examples 1.
The teacher has been playing the Pied Piper, the children a group from Hamelin negotiating for the release of the children —"How would you describe the way the Pied Piper spoke to you?
Where was he looking?
Did that make it easy for you to talk to him?
I wonder how he would have responded if you hadn't been so angry/polite/upset by the loss of your children?"
Wondering is a very useful skill in drama.
2.
The teacher, in role as a Roman Centurion, arrives in Nazareth to give the decree that everybody has to return to "their own town" ; the children as the citizens of Nazareth.
The teacher steps out of role and asks the children a question:
Teacher: What is your private reaction to that?
What are you thinking that you would not want anyone else in the town to hear?
Whatever the response, the teacher can add a further reflection, which could support or challenge the pupil, and in some cases move the drama on.
Pupil: I'm glad; Nazareth gets very dull.
Teacher: Nazareth is a small town, isn't it.
And going back to somewhere you have not been since you were a baby could be very exciting.
I wonder what you expect to find when you get there?
or Pupil: I don't want to leave; my son died a year ago.
I want to be able to go to his grave on the day of his death.
Teacher: And it's important to mark those anniversaries.
I can see the journey may well be difficult for you.
I wonder how the rest of us could help this woman?
It is in the nature of the work that we often ask children to make difficult decisions in drama; if the class are finding the process difficult it is well worth reflecting publicly on that: "I can't imagine anyone would find a decision like this easy." 
Sometimes it may be  appropriate to support the child who appears to be being facetious: "People often laugh when things are really difficult — maybe it would help us make the decision if we did something quite different for a little while." 
Or: "Making the decision does seem to be easy some- times.
We could just toss a coin.
It's living with the consequences that's difficult."
The teacher can help the children reflect by focusing the discussion or task in hand, or s/he can create opportunities for the children to consider their work for themselves.
Sometimes we need to reflect publicly, sometimes to provide space for a few moments of private reflection — this might mean the children sit quietly alone while the teacher asks questions which they respond to in their thoughts, or the reflection might take the form of a diary, or perhaps an "emotional map" charting the highs and lows of a journey/adventure/exploration.
Showing or sharing work always contains possibilities for reflection.
If a small group has shown its work, try to encourage discussion in terms of meaning, rather than by judging it.
If, for example, a shy child has been very quiet in what is supposed to be a television interview, a positive way of dealing with it is to acknowledge it as something that has happened within the dramatic fiction: "Most of us would get very nervous being interviewed for TV; I know I would.
What can the TV crew do to make the situation less frightening?"
Much better than booming out in an intimidating voice, "We can't hear you!" 
Still Image
The technique of creating still images (described in detail in Chapter 3) is very useful as a means of encouraging reflection.
At the end of a drama session the children can be asked to consider the most important moments in the drama and create (say) three images or "photographs" of those moments.
The activity itself encourages reflection; the children are thinking back over what has happened and making important decisions in selecting the key moments.
If the drama continues from week to week it might be a good idea to adopt a similar strategy at the beginning of each session — a more active way of recapping "the story so far" than through general discussion.
Still image also allows you to slow the drama down and think about a situation from another's point of view.
Look at the image which another group has created: what is each person thinking?
And what might be the implications of those thoughts?
Children often play in role.
One of the key differences between this type of play and educational drama is that the latter is specifically  structured so as to create learning opportunities.
Much of the learning that takes place in drama does so in periods of reflection when we are given time to consider our actions.
That is why it is wholly inadequate to describe drama as "learning through action" — in drama we learn through thinking in new ways about actions and about decisions we would not otherwise have the opportunity to take.
And that is also why finding time for reflection is vital to good control.
But the quality of the reflection is very dependent on the questioning skills of the teacher.
QUESTIONING SKILLS
By now it will hopefully have become evident that it is more important for the drama teacher to develop questioning skills than to have an armoury of clever ideas.
It's the children's ideas we should be interested in, not our own.
A skilful teacher uses questioning: to draw ideas from the class to introduce decision-making processes to provoke and encourage children in their use of language to draw reticent children into the drama to encourage reflection to enable feelings and thoughts to be articulated to develop skills of analysis and interpretation to consolidate learning to build tension to encourage research to create a focus for the drama.
A well-constructed drama session will also create opportunities for children to develop their own questioning skills.
The key organising question
A playwright once responded to someone who asked him about the message of his play that when he wanted to send messages he did so by telegram.
It's far more useful to think about plays in terms of the questions they ask us than what they tell us.
Macbeth, for example, asks us some very difficult questions about (amongst other things) the relationship between power and sexuality, about acquiescence in the face of evil and turning a blind eye to things we'd rather not know about.
Different interpreters see these questions differently, which is why there can be so many different productions of the same play.
But by formulating the central questions (sometimes subconsciously) the production is made coherent and given a focus.
Exactly the same is true of educational drama.
Good theatre asks difficult questions; so too should our drama work.
When a playwright embarks on a new play, the starting point is frequently "What if?" 
The questions matter, more than the answers.
The concept of the "key organising question" , or the "unanswered question" , is very helpful both at the planning stage and during the project itself.
It allows you flexibility while giving the work a strong sense of purpose and direction.
Here are some examples of useful "key organising questions" :
How can we persuade the Giant to leave us in peace?
( "The Giant Awakes" , Chapter 5.)
At what point do group loyalties come into conflict with personal/family loyalties?
How can we deal with bullying without resorting to violence ourselves?
Sometimes (as in the first example) we need to ask the question directly.
There will be times (as in the second example) when it's more useful to keep the question at the back of your mind; asking it directly might be too intimidating.
Types of questions
There are many ways of categorising questions.
As with most things in drama, there are many questions which slip between categories, but the attempt to define types of questions is useful if it helps us see more clearly what we are doing and what we could be doing.
Open and closed questions
This is perhaps the simplest classification — but beware the simplistic notion that links open with good and closed with bad.
Closed questions are sometimes perceived to be those which can only elicit a "Yes" or "No" response.
The received wisdom is that they are not very productive in drama, where we're trying to open up possible responses.
There are, however, times when closed questions are very useful.
What is crucially important is that you, the teacher, should be aware of the type of question you're asking.
The real problems come when you think you're asking an open question which is in fact closed; and, worse, when you think you're asking an open question which is actually a "Guess what's in teacher's head question?" 
Branching questions "Do we accept the coming of the railway, or do we resist?" — are closed questions.
(Eventually the railway is either built or it's not.)
Such questions are particularly useful when the social  health of the group is poor, when the group is very unused to being given responsibility, when you want to draw individuals into the decision-making process, perhaps because they are mischievous or nervous.
An open question, such as— "How should we deal with this man who's come to do a survey for the railway company?" — can be very intimidating.
The better the social health of the group, the more open our questions can be.
In the meantime, closed questions can start us on the path to fuller negotiation.
When children have seen that their decisions, however small, affect the course of the drama their self-esteem rises enormously.
There are children so painfully shy that they find it difficult to voice publicly "Yes" or "No" .
If you ask such a child "How should we respond to the aliens' request for help?" s/he's not likely to respond very articulately.
Narrow the possible terms of response by a branching question: "I understand just how difficult this decision is, but you're the bio-chemist; I don't think any of us can make the decision.
Should we allow the alien to come on board the ship?"
The child is going to feel pressured, certainly, but it's my experience that after the decision has been made (maybe simply a nod or shake of the head) the child seems to grow almost visibly.
Their decision has been crucial to the subsequent direction of the drama.
Questions for clarification
In many school situations teachers use questioning to check up on how much children have taken in.
In drama there is rarely a single right answer, and it's often more appropriate to phrase questions so that it is the teacher who does not know, the children who do the clarification:
Am I right in thinking…?
Now, can I get this clear in my head…?
Questions that simultaneously convey information and demand a response
Consider what information is fed into the drama by each of the following: Without guns, how will we defend ourselves?
Where can we find a map of the caves?
What makes this particular tree so special?
Questions that suggest implications
Don't ask questions to which you don't want an answer!
If you ask "What should we do now that there's a reward been offered for our  arrest?" you should be prepared to accept the response: "Find whoever put up the poster and kill them." 
You may ask further questions which suggest implications, but if you don't want to deal with the implications you shouldn't have asked the question in the first place.
Consider the implications of: Do we really want to know who put up the poster?
Who'll do the killing, then?
And will that put an end to the offer of a reward?
Questions that build tension
Can I trust all of you to keep this secret?
Is this bridge still strong enough to carry us all?
What will happen if we fail?
Just how dangerous is this giant?
Consider the other questions in this section and note how many of them also build tension.
Questions which seek information and/or stimulate
Consider the wide variety of research opportunities (in role and out of role) which are created by the following: What do we have in our homes today that you think people didn't have a hundred and fifty years ago?
How many people use the corner shop regularly?
I wonder what really causes a plague of rats?
What can we do about these bacteria then?
What equipment should we take with us on our expedition?
Questions which encourage deductive reasoning
Consider what children might actually be required to do in response to each of the following: Why do you think the giant has come to our town?
What evidence do we have that the alien means us no harm?
What makes you think that the smugglers were never caught?
What gives you the feeling that we'll be safe here?
Questions which lead to decision-making
Sometimes these are closed, branching questions (as above): "Should we leave the spaceship unguarded?" 
Sometimes they are much more open: "What should we do about…?
Questions that are too open — "Well, what do we do now?" — make considerable demands on the group socially as well as dramatically.
General skills related to questioning
Be prepared to wait.
If there is a silence don't jump in.
Give the children time, a chance to respond.
When you ask the whole group questions, give careful thought in advance to how you are going to deal with a flurry of waving hands and shouted answers.
Developing questioning skills for the teacher
The following activities are designed as skill-building and awareness-raising exercises to be used by groups of teachers:
Play the "Yes" , "No" game.
One minute of questioning (in pairs, small groups or as a whole group) to try to make someone say "Yes" or "No" .
Working with a partner, A asks B open questions, which B tries to answer as briefly as possible.
How do you get them to open up?
What sort of questions?
How do you listen?
A asks B closed questions, which B tries to answer as expansively as possible.
Working initially in pairs and then in groups, pursue the question: "What would you like to do a drama about?" , seeking to find a dramatic starting point which stems from the interviewees' interests.
Be curious!
Develop the skill of wondering, of asking "What if?" 
The book Teaching Drama has a good chapter on questioning that includes a number of useful skill-building exercises for teachers.
Developing questioning skills in children
There are particular roles that children can play which themselves encourage the use of questions: the detective the investigator the reporter (TV, radio, newspaper) the interviewer the researcher.
Use the strategy of teacher in role to create a character who is mysterious or enigmatic; then give groups the opportunity to question the role to find out more.
In small groups they can decide in advance on the questions they want to ask.
It's often productive to limit the number of questions allowed to each group.
This encourages them to listen to the responses and to each other.
When sharing still image or small group work, instead of asking for comments about what's been seen, ask children to formulate questions about it.
This is a very useful strategy in developing performance drama.
The questions which are asked about a still image tell us a great deal about the narrative interest in that image.
For example, an image is presented of one child threatening another.
A comment about this might be — "It's about bullying." 
The responses to "What questions do you want to ask here?" might range from "What happens next?" through "What has he done to deserve this?" and "What can he do about it?" to"They're both looking in this direction.
What have they seen?"
NARRATIVE: DRAMATIC STRUCTURE AND DRAMATIC TENSION
Dramatic structure and tension
Throughout this chapter I have argued that the most productive way of maintaining good control is through the content of the drama itself.
As in all teaching, if you can "hook" the children, interesting them in the subject matter, you are less likely to encounter disruptive behaviour.
In drama we have a great advantage over other subjects in that non-verbal language and narrative are at the centre of our work.
We can use the power of narrative to intrigue and draw children into the work at the same time as teaching them about narrative; teaching them how to manipulate it for themselves.
Ask a class to shut their eyes, play them a recording of footsteps and then ask what they have heard.
Some children might say "the sound of footsteps" , but others will begin constructing a story — a prisoner being taken to his cell, perhaps, Mum or Dad coming upstairs to say goodnight or a murderer walking along the landing.
We tend to want things explained, and stories (for the most part) create meanings for us.
Play another sound effect — perhaps a door opening, keys jangling, a car moving off, a bomb exploding, or a dog barking — and it becomes difficult not to link the two sounds together and make them part of the same story.
However little "plot" there might be in some of our dramas, there is always narrative of some kind; a series of events or incidents in which the sequence itself is meaningful.
We should use narrative and dramatic tension to structure our work in such a way that it draws the children in, but we should also create opportunities to teach about narrative.
At whatever level we are working (be it with children in their first years in school, or with adults) the first engagement with the work comes through dramatic tension of some kind.
The teacher should plan carefully first to create dramatic tension, and then to use it productively.
Let's first examine how we can generate and use dramatic tension, and then look at how we might teach narrative.
At its most basic level dramatic tension originates in the questions the participants are being encouraged to ask themselves: What's going on here?
What's going to happen?
We know something's going to happen, but when?
How did things get to be like this?
Dramatic tension, and indeed drama itself, is frequently associated with confrontation.
But it is not confrontation itself which creates the tension in dramatic terms.
It creates the possibility of tension.
The argument between two children which runs: Tom: You stole my packet of crisps.
Jane: No I didn't.
Tom: Yes you did.
Jane: No I didn't is certainly confrontational but it's of little interest dramatically.
It becomes interesting when it seems that Jane might hit Tom, or when one of them stops for a moment and thinks.
We don't know what's going to happen next — which is what makes it dramatic.
Confrontation only creates the possibility for drama when it raises the possibility of change.
It is change, or at least the potential for change, which underpins any consideration of dramatic structure.
In most dramas we start (however briefly) with a stable situation: The prisoners of war in the prison camp.
The smugglers who regularly bring their booty ashore.
The islanders whose way of life has been unchallenged.
The giant who has been buried under the ground for hundreds of years.
The children who go to and from school every day.
That stable situation is then made unstable: Somebody proposes a breakout.
The smugglers hear of a large reward for their capture.
A terrible storm comes to the island and a whale beaches on the shore.
The giant awakes.
The children discover a great hole in the ground.
The instability of this new situation has to be acknowledged and built on.
In other dramatic forms this is the job of the writer, director and actors.
In educational drama it is up to the teacher to create and build the tension.
To do so we make use of theatrical structures, which are built on contrasts; the contrasts between light and darkness sound and silence movement and stillness.
In this way we ensure that the pace of the drama lesson doesn't remain constant.
There will be times when things are happening quickly, and times when everyone is hushed and expectant and everything hinges on a symbolic gesture.
We create suspense, mystery, an air of intrigue.
One of the best ways of doing this is to take children into our confidence.
We use the power of secrecy and confidentiality.
Above all don't avoid the drama.
Don't be frightened of being dramatic.
This doesn't mean putting on silly voices; but, rather, allowing those confrontations that are likely to create possibilities for change in the dramatic situation, that of themselves create difficult dilemmas.
We can create dramatic tension by building up expectations.
The islanders who have heard on the radio (a pre-recorded tape cassette?) that a hurricane is heading their way.
They know it is coming, but they don't know when.
A similar device can be used by the teacher out of role: "Something big is going to happen in the drama, I promise you, but I'm not going to tell you what it is until it happens." 
Tension is also created when we expect one thing, and something else, quite different, occurs.
Here, as elsewhere, we can learn by watching the way tension is raised in theatre, TV drama and films.
Teaching narrative
At its simplest we are looking at a sequence of events.
When we  change the order in which things happen, it changes the meaning of the story.
This apparently simple concept of cause and effect will be at the root of much of our early work on narrative in drama.
In drama children make decisions, and then they see the consequences of those decisions.
This is another good reason for not pre-planning the outcome of decisions in drama; why it is good to work on the "back story" but not to plan the outcome.
If we set up tasks which ask children to plan what happens at the end of their plays, we not only eradicate the tension, but also lose considerable learning opportunities.
Example: Difficult decisions and their consequences
A year six class is working on a drama about undersea exploration.
They have decided to go to Italy, where they have heard that there is the wreck of a Roman Galley.
(Some useful Geography and History work in this.)
They prepare for the expedition, making lists of equipment and supplies, passports, negotiating to hire an appropriate boat (Maths as well— they'll have to calculate the costs involved — and Science).
When they get to Italy the teacher decides it's all a bit cosy: there's a lot of good work going on in other curriculum areas, and the children are enjoying it, but where's the drama?!
There's been nothing very dramatic since the secretive and highly confidential opening, when the teacher started with: "I've been told about the wreck of a Roman Galley, which is buried in mud off the coast near Pompeii; and it's said that when it sank it was carrying great chests of treasure from Egypt." 
So the teacher decides to present a challenge.
Taking on the role of an Italian customs officer, she comes on board ship and tells the children that the authorities know about their activities.
They will be able to keep half of all the treasure they find (unrealistically generous, certainly) but it will all have to be declared.
The children are asked to decide what to do.
Or are they?
What if they say "We'll kill the customs officer." 
There's a strong temptation to tell them that they can't do that.
But this is in a school where a high proportion of the children know people and have relatives who have been (or currently are) in prison.
Killing the customs officer is morally wrong, of course.
But if we deny that as a possible choice to the children, we tell them it's wrong (which they are very used to) but we withhold from them a dramatic experience which, if handled carefully, would allow them to understand the morality of the situation.
Allowing them to make such a decision does not sanction it — far from it.
If they decide to kill the customs officer we'll take our time over it, we'll make it very difficult and very unglamorous.
In the drama they will have to confront the isolation that comes from being outside the protection of the law.
They may be asked to change role, and be a colleague of the officer informing her husband and family what has happened.
Don't avoid the drama.
Seek it out.
Drama gives us the safety to make bad decisions and time to think about them constructively.
A similar situation occurs in "The Island" drama documented in Chapter 2, and in the Civil War drama "The Deserter" documented in Chapter 5.
THE DRAMATIC FRAME
When planning and organising the narrative structure of our drama lessons we are essentially thinking about a sequencing of events.
As we're doing this we should also consider the point of view from which those events are seen.
In real life we see the world through our own eyes.
Much though we might sometimes like it to be otherwise, events unfold as they happen.
Moments which we would like to savour disappear in a flash and moments which embarrass us seem interminable.
But drama is not real life.
In drama we act as if we were someone else, or as if we were ourselves in an other situation.
In other words we see the world through another's eyes.
In drama we can slow down time, we can stop and examine a particular moment, we can go backwards in time.
If we are in a drama which moves forward at "lifespeed" it is because we have chosen to do so.
These things are just as true of educational drama as they are of traditional theatre forms.
It is this manipulation of time and viewpoint which enables us to choose an appropriate frame through which to explore our dramatic situations.
Thus we can examine any given sequence of events dramatically by seeing these events through different eyes, or we can look at the same events from a distance by framing our drama as an investigation or an enquiry: we, the participants in the drama, could be townspeople celebrating the history of our town, creating a pageant.
Example: Smuggling, various dramatic frames
Let's return to the smuggling example discussed in Chapter 2, "Starting out" .
Several examples of possible frames were suggested there.
Here are some further examples.
There is nothing absolute about the headings suggested.
The court, the enquiry and the investigation are in many ways similar, and all will include elements of reconstruction.
The intention in suggesting them is to stimulate further thought about other possible frames.
Example continued First, look again at the Smuggling poster reproduced on p. 22, then consider the following possibilities:
The adventure story Time — 1782 We are smugglers.
One of us (the teacher in role?) has seen the reward poster…
Time — 1782 We are townspeople, knowing that smugglers use caves in the nearby cliffs.
We want to stop the smuggling and claim the reward, but one of us (teacher?) is worried…
Time — the present The teacher needs the children's help to find the smuggler's treasure which is rumoured to be hidden in a cave which is very difficult to reach.
If we find the treasure, what is it?
What should we do with it?
To whom does it rightfully belong?
Time — the present We are a group of divers undertaking an exploration of the Cornish coast, trying to find the wreck of the ship pictured in the Smuggling poster.
What equipment do we need?
The reconstruction Time — the present The events of 1782 are reconstructed (and acted out in small groups) from letters, maps, pictures, posters, historical documents.
This could be for a television documentary about the town or for a town pageant.
The Investigation or Enquiry Time — 1787:(five years after the poster is displayed) Three customs and excise officers have "disappeared" ; we are trying to find out what has happened to them.
The Court Time — 1792:(ten years after the poster was first published) Several villagers are in court, accused of aiding and abetting the smugglers.
Is there a difference between the evidence given in court and what really happened?
Drama teachers have as much to learn from playwrights and screenwriters as they do from other drama teachers.
Think of popular films such as ET, Ghostbusters, Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Ghost.
There had been numerous movies about ghosts and aliens before these.
One of the many things which made them successful was the particular dramatic frame they used.
TV and film producers are  notorious for asking "What's the angle?" 
If it's true, as is often suggested, that there are no new stories, then one of the things that makes a piece of drama original is the angle — or the frame.
The chapters on working with children in the early years (Part Three), and on planning (in Part Five), give further suggestions about finding an appropriate frame.
Chapter 7 also contains two alternative storyboards of the Pied Piper story, one from the point of view of the Piper one from a Hamelin family.
NON-VERBAL LANGUAGE: USE OF SPACE; SYMBOL
Non-verbal language — the use of space, gesture, facial expression, the understanding of symbol — is a vitally important part of drama to which we have to give careful attention if we are going to develop our work.
Use of space
In any drama session we need to consider: 1.
how we're going to organise our use of space, and
2. how we are going to encourage the children to manipulate the dramatic form so that they, too, can use space intelligently and articulately.
We should try to see space itself as something which can be made as articulate as verbal language.
We should try to make it a significant factor in the dramas we create.
This is just as true of whole group dramas in which we might be working in role alongside the children as in small group work or performance based work.
Consider the different ways in which the organisation and use of space becomes part of the language of drama: How do we make the distance between people meaningful?
How close?
How far apart?
Movement in space.
Consider these contrasting types of body movement: fast — slow/static strong — weak heavy — light smooth — jagged Eye contact and eye movement.
Who looks at whom?
Who avoids eye contact, and why?
How do people communicate across space without words?
How do people relate to what is in the space around them?
What does this tell us about them?
Working at different levels.
How do levels affect our perception of relationships?
What can the "audience" see?
What are they prevented from seeing?
What effect does this have on narrative?
If something or someone is deliberately hidden from us what does this lead us to expect?
How do we organise the space in which the drama takes place?
How do we represent the zoo, ship, town, pet shop or mayor's office?
Once we start developing awareness of the use of space as part of the language of drama we are teaching theatre skills.
It's worrying how many excellent drama teachers have been troubled by the idea that they might be teaching theatre skills as an integral part of their non-performance work.
But we shouldn't be frightened of it.
The language of educational drama and the language of theatre are the same.
So it should come as no surprise that we can teach children to manipulate this theatrical language by the same variety of means as we can teach other aspects of drama; using the whole gamut of strategies (working in role or out of role, with small or large groups, using forum theatre, still images, games and exercises).
The organisation of space
Whether working in small or large groups, encourage the chldren to think what the space they are working in represents.
How do we translate our two-dimensional maps into three-dimensional drama space?
We can use chalk, string, rope, cloth or benches to partition the space — so that different areas in the school hall represent different areas in the drama.
Perhaps a long blue cloth laid down the middle of the hall represents a river — itself an important boundary.
The representation of the river turns into an important symbol when crossing the river becomes highly significant — perhaps doing so will lead us into open conflict with the Abbey who are demanding an increase in tithes…
Organisation of space can be as simple as considering carefully how you place a single wooden table and chair — but it is always important.
Forum theatre
Constructing a character.
How do they move?
What about their eyes?
"You say you want me to make him seem shifty.
How should I do that?"
Let's replay that scene.
What happens if you stay standing up when you confront the Mayor?
If you keep your distance?
If you, the teacher, take on the "obstacle" role you can focus on their use of space/ body language/ eye contact in their attempts to get round the obstacle.
Working in role
Always consider your own use of space when taking on a role.
Think about the levels you're using, the body language, the use of eye contact and movement.
When you come out of role to reflect on what's been going on your questions might include: "What led you to believe the carpenter was nervous/hiding something from us?" 
When using those dramatic frames which require children to prepare and then share small group work (e.g. the investigation, the pageant, the making of a documentary) take the opportunity to question or comment on their use of space: "I wonder why the council official wouldn't look at the interviewer?" 
"The old man looked rather frightened by the TV crew.
I wonder if that's why he didn't have much to say?"
 "Did you notice how they always kept their distance from each other?" 
When the class are getting ready to take action: "You say that you want to convince the Giant you're friendly.
How close should we get to him?"
Discussing small group work out of role
When children discuss each other 's work out of role it tends to be along the lines of "The door opened different ways, Miss" or "You just walked through the table." 
Try to focus on the positive, on what a scene did achieve rather than what it didn't; give them a vocabulary for talking about the work.
Ask the audience about the effect of specific aspects of the scene — eye contact, use of levels, distance between people etc.
Using still images makes it much easier to initiate discussion of the organisation and use of space: the constraints of the task allow us to focus on specifics; the stillness makes the work much more open to inspection.
The use of games to develop articulate use of space
Certain games can be used to raise spatial awareness — preferably not as an end in themselves, but to lead into some sort of drama work.
Here are a couple of examples:
1.
Standing behind — or Watch your backs Agree on a signal to indicate "Freeze" .
"Everybody move around without touching anyone and not letting anyone else get near you.
When you hear the signal, freeze.
If anyone is less than a metre behind you, you lose a point; if you are less than a metre behind anyone else, you gain a point."
2.
Hunting the space Starts as a game of tag, initially in pairs A chasing B. When B is caught, reverse: B chases A. Then split class into the two groups, A and B.
Each child in Group A chooses someone in group B, without saying who it is.
As are to hunt down their "prey" , but not actually touch them, to get into a position so that when the teacher calls "Time" (after say thirty seconds) the As can strike.
Discuss qualities needed to do it well — stealth, speed, pretending to look at someone other than your "prey" .
A variation is for everybody to hunt an imaginary prey: "Wait for a space to become empty, move into it quickly, wait, stalk the space…" 
The spatial relationship between performers and audience is discussed in detail in Part Four.
Symbol
Symbol is part of the language of drama: "The way in which the teacher draws attention to the symbol (gesture, word, object etc.) generates a collective meaning and also gives time and opportunity for the participant to endow that symbol with his or her individual meaning." 
It is when actions and images begin to become symbolic, or at least contain symbolic resonance, that drama becomes really "tingly" — both for teacher and children.
And it's when the drama becomes "tingly" that we know our organisation is working well; that we're beginning to get things right intuitively.
While it's not a good idea to overload a drama with symbolism, it's well worth keeping any eye open for possibilities, both in the planning stage and while the drama's underway.
Objects
Consider the different ways we can use a key: to open doors or containers or gates that have long been locked: "Are you sure you want to do this?
We may find things that are best kept locked away."
to lock doors or a container: "Have we got all his things out of the house?" 
throwing the key away: "This really will mean no going back." 
transferring ownership: "It's yours now.
That's a great deal of responsibility."
A cloak can be used: to conceal identity or diguise to give warmth and protection to assume or transfer power.
A loaf or a crust of bread can: be divided between everybody be snatched become part of a ceremony, or a ritual.
An empty bowl can: signify hunger and poverty be a gift from a skilled craftsperson.
A rope can: be what binds us all together as we make our journey through the secret caves
be used to create a Time Line, whereby we create a visual representation of someone's life history on the floor of the school hall — perhaps with still images at various points, or carefully chosen objects to remind us of particularly significant moments in a person's life.
Actions
Delivering a letter can be both a very ordinary action and one which is rich in symbolic significance, providing the context is appropriate and the teacher draws out the meaning.
Example
An old man (the teacher in role) is refusing to sell his house to the railway company; everybody else in the town is keen for the railway to come through — and if he doesn't sell, the company will choose an alternative route.
The Council (of children) has agreed to effect a compulsory purchase.
(Chapter 5, "Construction of a railway" ).
The class can simply tell him he has to go, but the moment of eviction is potentially highly charged and to let it slip by is to waste opportunities.
If the council choose someone to act as bailiff, the act of serving the eviction order on the old man (in effect delivering a letter) becomes a highly charged dramatic moment.
Because it carries deep symbolic resonance it will be memorable, dramatic and open up rich opportunities for discussion.
Consider how the following actions are both "ordinary" , and symbolic: Giving someone a mug of water.
Suppose that person is a stranger and is very weak.
Do they carry the plague?
Tearing up a letter.
Suppose we are US Cavalry and the letters contain orders to attack a Native American village.
"It's easy to tear up the letter.
It's what happens now that worries me."
Taking down a poster.
Suppose it offers a large reward for someone's arrest.
Consider what context would give the following actions symbolic resonance: using a talking stick or talisman crossing a threshold turning off a radio knocking down a wooden post.
Think of at least two different contexts in which the use of each of the following might become symbolic: a book a goblet a photograph a necklace a fob watch a dried flower.
COLLABORATIVE TEACHING
Whether we're working on drama as a subject in its own right, developing a school play or using drama as a means of focusing and enhancing work in other curriculum areas, working with other adults is potentially very rewarding.
At a time when the school curriculum is becoming increasingly prescriptive, when there seems less flexibility than there used to be, it might seem difficult to set up collaborative teaching projects.
But it is far from impossible.
It's surprising how many people are keen to come and work with us, who are fascinated by what we do in drama.
Providing we don't intimidate them, collaborative teaching can be a very productive way of convincing people of the value of drama.
The benefits
Collaborative teaching in drama: enables us to work from individual strengths, to develop skills, to learn from each other can give us more hall time, and/or more flexible use of spaces appropriate for teaching drama
is a way of encouraging colleagues to start teaching drama
makes it easier to develop inter-curricular projects because of increased flexibility
is a way of demonstrating to parents both the methodology of drama and the value of it; it's a way of getting parents to argue for a greater emphasis on drama in the school.
The people
With whom do we collaborate?
In short, anybody!
The most obvious people to approach are one's colleagues.
But I have seen many examples of excellent practice involving collaboration between teacher(s) and student(s), teacher(s) and parent(s), teacher and auxiliary assistant(s), amongst others.
Working with experienced colleagues
If you're going to work with one or more colleagues who have some experience of drama, the experience can be very rewarding for both of you.
The following become possible:
1.
A in role, B out of role, focusing the children on aspects of the  role, constructing the role with the children.
If one adult is in role and another remains out of role the roles adopted can be pushed farther; it is easier to take on very challenging Devil's Advocate roles.
There's an additional safety net for children, in that they can see the function of the role more clearly through the responses of other adults.
2.
A and B in role.
If two adults are playing roles they can adopt quite a confrontational stance, challenging the children to act as mediators.
This demands that one or both adults regularly move out of role in order to reflect on what is going on.
But…
3…if there are three adults working together, A and B can stay in role, C stays out of role, is able to focus the attention of the children, to reflect and summarise with them, and to give colleagues useful feedback both on the drama itself and on teaching techniques.
4.
A greater variety of small group work becomes possible.
A single small group can work on drama with one teacher whilst others get on with other (related) work.
For example A can remove a small group and prepare them as journalists for interviewing other members of the class, who will in the meantime be making a detailed map of the area showing where the new relief road is going to go.
5.
Splitting the class into two or more working groups — still united by a common fiction.
When you're working on your own it is dangerous to allow the class to split when branching decisions have to be made: it creates considerable organisational problems and diffuses the drama because of the split focus.
With two or more teachers working together this becomes much more productive.
If (for example) the overall project begins in the potato famine in Ireland in the nineteenth Century, A can work with the group emigrating to America, while B works with those who choose to remain in Ireland.
6.
Forum theatre with two teachers taking on roles and children in two groups as advisers.
This might be a way of introducing teaching-in-role.
In an ideal world it would be wonderful to have two or three experienced teachers working together with one class.
It's certainly possible to work with drama students in this way, although it's very important to be fair and clear about what you're asking them to do.
But in most situations, when you'd be asking a colleague on the same staff to work with you, you'll need to find a way of working that is not going to cause massive disruption to the school timetable, that's not going to demand that the headteacher come and cover one of your classes while you're busy with your investigation into the disappearance of the crew of the Marie Celeste.
One solution to this problem is for two or more classes to collaborate on a project.
Careful planning is necessary.
The following are two ways for different classes to collaborate.
A collaborative teaching project culminating in two classes working together in the hall
The two classes work separately for (say) three weeks, and then come together in the hall in the fourth week.
Each class needs to take a group identity.
The planning will need to take account of the fact that the groups should come together at a later stage.
It's also very useful to build in to the planning a mutual need — or else any conflicts which arise when the two groups do come together may be impossible to resolve.
Example:
A "Space" drama in which each class takes on the roles of the inhabitants of different planets, each of which is in trouble.
Perhaps the first (Caloria) is suffering from global warming and the second (Frigorix) is entering an ice age.
Both groups need to leave and are intending to settle on a previously uninhabited planet.
The two classes can send each other messages (in code if needs be, written, on audiotape or on video) and perhaps send small advance parties to the other world prior to meeting in the hall — which would signify the arrival of both groups on the "New World" .
It would be advisable to build in at the planning stage something which would create a need for co-operation on the new planet.
The following diagram should illustrate through a simplified example: Inhabitants of Caloria Inhabitants of Frigorix Good at fishing Grow crops Reliant on fossil fuels Use solar power for all machinery When they get to the new planet, Terra Nova, they find that the fish are abundant, but the soil won't support crops; although the sun shines, there are no fossil fuels — so if the groups are going to survive they will need to share their technology and skills.
This type of collaboration can work well with different age groups.
I have worked on a drama project in which Year Seven children were the Argonauts (without Jason!) and Year Three children developed a Greek island community.
When the groups came together it was because in the fiction the Argonauts were landing and desperately  needed food and shelter — which the younger children enormously enjoyed providing.
In their turn they wanted the Argonauts to tell them stories of their journeys.
Although there can never be any guarantees, it is frequently the case that older children enjoy working with younger ones, enjoy the responsibility they are being given, and behave much better than they do when they are working on their own.
The performance project, "The Donkeyman's Daughter" , documented in Part Four, is another example of this kind of collaborative teaching in action.
Collaborative teaching in separate classrooms
Two, three, or more teachers jointly plan a project in which their classes work independently of each other, but produce material which another class can use in their own drama.
They leave something behind, as it were, for the other class(es).
The sort of material which might be produced, for example, could be:
1.
Documentation a census return, advertisements, a page from a ship's log.
2.
Letters found in the attic of an old house.
3.
Maps of the journey in search of a dragon.
4.
Videotapes messages from spaceship to spaceship, interviews with residents troubled by new building developments.
5.
Audio tapes weather forecasts (warning islanders or people on board ship of a storm).
6.
Information on a computer disc a database giving details of the crew of a spaceship, or a message transmitted through space from the crew to settlers on a distant planet.
This sort of work frequently benefits from being set up to create a triangle, so that each group has some relationship with the other two, each group needs and services the other two.
If the situation is basically stable, the drama then begins when something occurs which has the potential to destabilise it.
Here is a more down to earth example than the ones suggested above: the drama is set in contemporary Britain, in a small rural area by the coast.
Class A are on an area of farmland.
Some of the class are farmers.
The land includes a caravan site and an inn.
Class B live in a small town nearby.
Some work in a hotel, some  make their living from the sea, maybe fishing, maybe making boats.
Thus far the situation is stable.
Good drama could take place in each of the above groups independently of each other, and each group could interact with the other.
But when the third group, Class C, is added the situation is destabilised and it becomes inherently dramatic.
Class C are a group of entrepreneurs who want to build a leisure park in the area.
They are trying to find somewhere suitable or, alternatively, they are trying to make a documentary about the area, having heard that the inn is haunted.
(The "Smuggling" example in the section on "Starting Points" could be adapted and work in this way.)
Each class working on the project develop their own strand of an interconnected narrative.
The material (the letters, the maps, the inventories, etc.) which is produced becomes part of the dramatic fiction.
Collaborating with people who have not had any previous experience of drama
The methods described and examples outlined above demand a certain amount of expertise on the part of the collaborator.
But it is possible to work with people who have had no previous experience of teaching or drama.
When working with inexperienced collaborators it is important to brief them carefully, and to use them in simple roles, and perhaps non-speaking roles, for example, as
a lost child seeking his or her parent
a friendly giant who cannot speak our language (but we have to explain to him/her how dangerous s/he is)
the alien arrived on earth, not knowing anything about our way of life
the refugee from a war zone, shocked and unable to explain what has happened
The collaborators can be used to play themselves in the drama.
I have worked with a cook, a caretaker, a community policeman, a coach driver and an athletics coach — all of whom greatly enjoyed taking part in our drama and working with the children.
Not surprisingly, the children also felt that day's drama to be very special.
Secondary School pupils, especially those studying drama, are often keen to help in Primary Schools.
It's well worth approaching the Head of Drama to see if there's anybody interested in coming and doing their work experience with you.
Drama and the whole curriculum
This chapter is concerned with using drama as a learning medium, to encourage and motivate learning in other curriculum areas.
It contains a number of detailed examples of such work throughout the primary age range.
Examples: The Crashed Spaceship The Giant Awakes The Deserter The Iron Age Encampment
A detailed account of an extended cross-curricular drama-based project: Construction of a Railway
It is not difficult to see how role play and drama can be used to achieve many of the Attainment Targets for Speaking and Listening in the English National Curriculum documents.
What is less obvious is that drama can have a central role in developing children's reading and writing skills, not only in English but also in most other curriculum areas.
Drama can be a powerful force for motivating and enhancing work in every curriculum area.
While it takes ingenuity and careful thought it is possible and productive to use drama at the centre of the curriculum, rather than as an occasional extra.
In this chapter we shall explore how drama can be used alongside other subjects; how it can be used to create and enhance learning opportunities, to stimulate research, and to give cross-curricular coherence.
We'll examine in detail the specific possibilities created by writing in role; and then move on to examine specific examples of cross-curricular projects.
TOPIC WORK
All drama has to have content; it has to be about something.
It is essentially cross-disciplinary.
You can't have drama which doesn't refer to other curriculum areas.
The fallacy that by using drama as a learning medium we necessarily dilute the drama is exposed by the fact that drama itself is usually greatly enhanced by the work that can accompany it in other curriculum areas.
You can use drama without specifically teaching about dramatic forms (although in using drama as a learning medium, you cannot help but make use of dramatic forms), but you can't effectively teach anything about the nature of dramatic forms without some sort of content.
In the early years of schooling, for example, children's activities in the play area frequently include shopping.
It would be wasteful not to make use of the children's interest in their dramatic play to do some work on counting.
If the only experience children have of drama is acting out stories that have been read to them, learning opportunities are being missed.
In a similar way, simply asking children to draw a picture of what happened in their play is wasting an opportunity to move the drama forward and make the work purposeful: the picture could have an important part to play in the drama, in which case the quality of both the drama and the art work improves.
The cross-fertilisation is in itself exciting and highly productive.
The commitment to the drama becomes greater, and the work in other curriculum areas is tackled with real purpose.
Many teachers begin to find it difficult to contain their drama to occasional one-off sessions in the hall.
Drama lends itself to becoming part of topic work because:
it effectively gives you the content of your drama work it brings the topic work to life it facilitates continuity within a drama project it makes it easier to do drama in other spaces than the school hall.
By linking your drama and your topic work, you can take ten or fifteen minutes at various times during the day to work with small groups.
If the whole class is involved in researching a topic — which might include using the computer, browsing through the library, watching a video programme — it becomes easier to supervise the work of one small group (that might, for example, be preparing an interview).
If the narrative of the drama continues from one day to the next, it makes sense to do at least some drama in the classroom most days.
If you use forum theatre, or interrogate some still image presentations, you don't even need to push the desks back.
It's possible to use  classroom time for discussions and all the out of role preparatory work that greatly strengthens the children's commitment to drama.
The guiding principles in using drama alongside other curriculum areas are that it should: give greater purpose and meaning to work both in drama and in the associated curriculum areas
create an appetite for research of all kinds
create opportunities for the children to give their work authenticity
create a context in which the relationship between the different curriculum areas is strengthened.
If the work is to do this it should be interactive, rather than tangential; it should have a clear purpose within the context of the drama.
Some of this work will take place in the classroom, some of it during drama time.
It can be done out of role — with the information gathered through research, for example, then used to inform the subsequent drama — or it can be undertaken in role.
WRITING IN ROLE
While it is perfectly valid for children to step back from what they have been doing in drama and write about it, the exciting alternative of writing (or drawing, or carrying out scientific experiments) within the context of the drama, as the characters they are playing, produces lively and highly motivated work.
Whenever we are looking at children's writing, it's a high priority to respond to the content, but this can sometimes be difficult; children themselves often become over-anxious about the surface features of their writing and frightened of making mistakes.
By making written work (of all kinds — including Maths, Science and Artwork for example) a part of their drama we provide a sort of safety net, a "No Penalty Zone" in which they can pretend to be someone other than themselves writing their letter, wording their advertisement or drawing up their menu…
The motivation to write is heightened, and writing of great diversity can be encouraged — including, where appropriate, writing in the child's own language or dialect.
The drama itself also benefits from this approach: writing in role slows the drama down in a very productive fashion, encouraging children to look at a particular situation in much greater depth than they would otherwise.
Three specific projects described in detail exemplify the ways in which writing in role can be encouraged.
In each of the following  examples I used the technique of "teacher in role" to challenge the children and focus their work.
Examples
The first two examples below are accounts of work undertaken with reception classes; one in a rural school, one in an inner city multi-racial school; the third is a brief account of a drama with Years Three and Four in a Liverpool school.
The Crashed Spaceship
We begin by talking about their daily routine of coming to school and returning home, which they enact individually and in pairs.
I then tell them a story which they act out: one day the children all set off home only to find that a great big hole has opened up in the playground.
I ask them to form a circle, as if standing around the hole, and close their eyes.
When I ask them to open their eyes, I am in the middle of the circle, at the bottom of the "hole" , wearing a pair of very dark goggles, clearly in role, but as what?
A tense moment!
We wait a little and then I step out of role, remove the goggles, and ask them what they think they have seen.
The children decide that it is an alien creature.
Two children climb down into the hole (having first borrowed a rope ladder!) and try to talk to the creature.
I make this a little difficult, creating an opportunity to encourage a shy child to communicate with the alien.
She discovers that the alien's space ship has crashed.
 "Can you help me find all the pieces?" 
I ask.
They draw the pieces and label their drawings.
Many of the children are not yet able to write in conventional form, but all tackle the task of labelling the bits and pieces of the space ship.
The labelling matters; without it they cannot rebuild the alien's spaceship.
I am able to respond to their emergent writing honestly and give it significance in the drama.
 "I can't make this out," I say (as myself, not the alien), to which several children respond: "No, that's because it's written in the alien's language." 
So the labels now need to be "translated" , and this becomes a collaborative process with children of different abilities working together.
One child says his labels are in English, and they can't be read easily because they're in grown-up, joined-up writing!
The work is of a very high standard, with several children who have recently joined the school writing something for the first time.
The Giant Awakes
I begin by telling the children a story about a giant who was very unpopular with all the other giants because he wouldn't eat people or animals.
I ask the children what his name might be; they decide on "Herbert Thunder" .
With each of them individually playing Herbert Thunder, they act out the first part of the story: Herbert finds a lonely spot for himself, and there he cries himself to sleep.
His tears form rivers.
Once he is asleep, he sleeps for a very long time — thousands of years in fact.
While he is asleep leaves fall on him and turn into soil.
Example continued It's not until 1992 that the giant wakes up and tries to dig his way to the surface.
He looks for food.
The children act out each of these actions individually.
While looking for food they are careful not to eat animals or human beings.
I ask them what he might like eating; some suggest eating car tyres and drinking oil.
(Interesting echoes of The Iron Man here — any drama is likely to contain elements of other stories from home or school; it's good if they are given an opportunity to make these their own.)
Herbert heads for a nearby town where, having gorged himself in a garage, he finds his way to an open space and falls asleep.
Up to this point the children have all been acting as the giant.
I gather the class and ask if they can play grown-ups.
They are keen to do so; and they become the townspeople.
I take on the role of the mayor to ask — "What on earth has been causing all this damage?" 
The townspeople say it is a giant; but the mayor doesn't believe them.
He wants proof — in the form of pictures or photographs that show the size of the giant.
The children draw and paint their representations of the giant — several show the giant beside trees, some next to buildings, one remarkable painting has Herbert with his head in the clouds!
The mayor is convinced, and wonders what they should do next.
The townspeople decide to write letters to the giant asking him to leave, reasoning that talking to him directly would be too dangerous.
They set about this task with great enthusiasm.
The mayor asks them to tell him what has been written because there are several which he cannot read.
The children explain that these have been written in the Giant's own language.
One child is particularly proud of his work: it contains many letters, large and boldly formed, and this was the first occasion that he had written anything since arriving in the school.
The Deserter
This is a history project, set during the English Revolution (1640–1660).
The class takes on the role of a small rural community.
After looking at various books and pictures of English rural life they decide what jobs they will have in this community — fishing, farming, milling, etc.
In role they are asked to complete a census return: who are they, where do they live, what do they do for a living?
This simple listing task is tackled with great gusto, and greatly deepens their commitment to their roles.
When finished they copy their work onto "parchments" (wallpaper stained with weak tea!).
Back in the drama, they are confronted by a stranger (a second teacher in role) who needs their help.
It transpires that he is a deserter from one of the warring armies.
They agree to hide him, providing he does his fair share of work — a great deal of negotiation going on here.
The teacher and the class agree that it would be exciting to have someone come looking for him.
The first teacher becomes the King's envoy, seeking out the deserter.
The class have to plead for mercy on his behalf, but the King's envoy will only accept written pleas.
The resulting letters were written with an extraordinary formality, but the content was deeply moving.
In order to save the stranger's life the letters had to be good.
The brief list of writing-in-role activities below indicates some further avenues you might want to explore; many are suitable for children who have not yet learnt to read and write, providing that, as a teacher, you wish to encourage emergent writing.
Diaries journals ship's log starship log.
Letters formal: pleas for forgiveness/mercy requests for planning permission requests that the selfish giant let people play in his garden from the Mayor of Hamelin to the Pied Piper petitions (for the release of the children of Hamelin).
informal: to Mum, Dad, grandparents, brothers, sisters, to friends, pen friend from Jack at the top of the beanstalk.
Messages telegrams memoranda messages in code reports from spaceship to Earth via computer messages in a bottle after a shipwreck.
Lists inventory of furniture in a Haunted House inventory of equipment to take on a journey/expedition menus for the King's celebratory banquet or a friend's birthday party shopping list for ingredients for a cake shopping list for Christmas presents census returns — who lives here, what do they do?
Advertisements classified to put in newspaper/magazine  for sale/wanted who dares to stay overnight in the Haunted House? cards in shop window "Lost — one dragon!" display advertisements/posters.
Scripts records of interviews for Radio, TV, newspapers
Newspaper reports by reporters who saw the children of Hamelin piped away
Headlines newspapers magazines TV/radio programmes.
Database details of the crew on the spaceship details of wild life survey by conservation workers.
Plans designs for a conservation area diagrams of how to put the alien's spaceship back together how do we foil a bank robbery? map of the giant's castle — showing how we might set Jack free town plan of Hamelin.
Much of this written work can be done alone, but some of it is best achieved in collaboration; it might be that the purpose of the drama is to work together to produce documents, for example: The letters written by the sailors on the Mary Rose as they left port (had they been able to write).
The wording of a peace treaty, or an agreement between the people of Hamelin and the Pied Piper.
The Rules of Space: how do we behave on our (or the alien's) space ship?
As elsewhere in the book these suggestions are not intended to be  prescriptive but, rather, a stimulus for ideas.
Here are some very brief ideas as to how the Pied Piper suggestions might work in practice: After the story has been read to the class, children might take on roles as the townspeople of Hamelin.
The teacher as the Mayor asks for their help.
Who saw the children being lured away?
What did the newspapers/radio/TV say about it?
What should the Mayor write to the Pied Piper?
Can the townspeople help with the letter(s)?
How do we deliver the resulting letter(s) to the Pied Piper?
Or perhaps the teacher takes on the role of the Pied Piper and tells the class (still as townspeople) that they can write letters to their children (out of role the teacher could suggest these might be in code); the drama might focus on negotiations between the townspeople and the Pied Piper.
It could be that the Pied Piper is never seen, but that all communication with him is by letter or petition — with the teacher writing replies but not actually appearing in the role.
In any of these the life of the town could be built up through various activities including role-play, mime, map making, art work.
Making a town plan can be done with young children by suggesting the children draw pictures of different parts of the town and sticking these onto a large piece of paper.
Many of the practical examples given in this book contain reference to work in other curriculum areas.
The following brief notes are indications as to how one might use drama both to stimulate and support work in specific curriculum areas.
Maths
Map-making, co-ordinates, scale The drama begins with the children being shown a treasure map.
How do we read it?
Can we plan a route?
The children make their own maps or plans in role.
Calculation How is food to be rationed — on the journey; expedition; during the siege?
We're stuck in our spaceship.
How do we calculate the volume of air left?
And how long will this last us?
Working out wages and bonuses.
Databases Inventories of equipment.
List of crew members (ship, submarine, spaceship) with country of origin, age, interests, training, previous experience, years' service.
Graphs Bar graphs to record results of research into community prior to building of new leisure centre/road/railway station.
Codes The spaceship and its crew are trapped on a distant planet; they need to understand the (coded) messages they are receiving from the alien inhabitants.
Science
Flight We are in the mountains, on an expedition/fleeing a tyrant/trying to find somewhere safe to live after an earthquake has destroyed our town; we come to a ravine.
We need to get a message to the people on the other side.
A flying machine?
A paper dart?
What design will fly furthest and straightest?
Open-ended research We (class and teacher-in-role) as space voyagers who have discovered a "sister planet" to Earth.
Or as time travellers returning to the present day from the future.
Or as aliens planning a visit to Earth.
In each of these cases their task is to find out what life on Earth in the present day is really like.
This could be a way of introducing study of skeletons, use of a microscope to compare animal and human hair.
Food preservation A long voyage by sea in a sailing ship (as pirates, emigrants, smugglers, the Navy).
How will we keep food from going off without the use of refrigerators?
What food will be good to take with us?
Technology
Teacher requests children's help, as experts, in designing a supermarket, pet shop — plans and model making.
Lists of tools and equipment required for an expedition/rescue mission.
Shipwrecked on an island with limited resources.
We need to make a boat to get off.
What could we make it out of?
How do we make it?
Geography
Contour lines on maps.
Research about population movements — in drama about emigration.
Ecology and animal origins The teacher (in role) has inherited a badly run circus or zoo.
She requests the children's help and advice.
What food and bedding should the animals have?
How much space?
What sort of environment would they enjoy in the wild?
Should they be returned to the wild?
Art
Photography Mug shots for identity cards or passports.
Photographs taken of still image work.
Photographs used as starting points for drama (see Chapter 2, "Starting Out" , and the section on "using video in drama work" in the Appendix).
Three-dimensional Making the artefacts and sculptures of a given community (as in "The Island" in Chapter 2).
Music
Making sound pictures using musical instruments and voices but not words — of (for example) a swamp, building site, storm at sea.
Time/space travellers make audio tapes of the sounds and rhythms they have heard on the voyages.
These are presented to the whole group as part of a debriefing session.
Using recorded music to create atmosphere; or, better, ask one class to make an audio tape with the intention of creating atmosphere, then play it back to another class as a way of initiating the drama —"When you hear this, where do you think we might be?
Who might we be?"
Religious Education
Because plays and assemblies in the primary school so frequently have religious starting points, much of the practice described in Part Four, Performance and Production exemplifies the connection between drama and RE both in terms of religious and moral content.
History
One of the issues that faces teachers wanting to use drama in the teaching of history is the thorny problem of facts and authenticity.
What do we do when we're engaged in a drama and the children come up with solutions to problems that are historically inaccurate?
The following example illustrates the problem.
Example: The iron age encampment
A class of Year Five children are working on a project about Iron Age Britain.
They have seen pictures of Iron Age encampments, but had done very little previous work on the topic before starting on the drama.
The drama starts with a brief discussion of how people might live without modern technology, and (using the model of the pictures they have seen), they build themselves a fortified encampment — a wonderful image this, with chairs organised into a large circle and then laid down so that the legs all face out.
They agree on a system of foraging and divide themselves into the groups they think important.
These include: hunters, ironworkers, woodcutters, clayworkers, gatherers of fruits and…honey makers.
The rules of the encampment are decided upon.
We then move into a short period of dramatic play (or "busy time" as it is sometimes called) in which each of the groups go about their business, which they greatly enjoy — until frustrations begin to creep in.
I stop the drama and talk out of role about the problem.
I ask each group what they've been doing.
When it comes to the turn of the honey makers I ask how they make honey.
After a few moments of thought, a child replies, "We collect it from bees." 
 "That must be very difficult" , say I, admiringly.
 "How do you do that?" 
A rather longer silence this time, and then one of the group says hesitantly, "We milk them." 
The rest of the group don't agree, but none of them are sure.
They have reached a point in their drama when they need factual information, they want to get it right.
So we stop work on the drama for a while and adjourn to the classroom and library, where there are several textbooks about the Iron Age and some encyclopaedias.
For half an hour the children research into their own area of work.
When they return each group enthusiastically reports their research findings back to the class.
I would wager heavily that years later those children still remember what they learnt that morning.
The drama created a desire, a need for knowledge, which was useful to them — and when they later returned to their drama they were far more committed to it.
At the same time they have successfully begun to develop research skills.
Children have voracious appetites for authenticity, but in drama we should never intimidate them with factual information.
We should instead create opportunities which encourage them to seek that information.
A child who actively seeks information is likely to make far better use of it than one who passively receives the same information as a chore and is constantly reminded how little s/he knows.
This is not to deny that accuracy is important.
It does matter that children don't leave a drama lesson believing that Cromwell's army used bazookas and machine guns!
Maps
Many children are fascinated by maps.
Maps are concrete representations of what is otherwise abstract; they can become an important part of the reflective process, making it easier for children to understand the meaning of their work.
They are symbolic representations, but there's nothing absolute about the type of symbols we use on them.
Consider the variety of symbolic representations in the following:
electrical circuit diagrams map of the London Underground medieval picture maps.
When making maps you might start simply by asking the children to draw something on a sheet of paper that they want represented on the map — a house, a shop, the well, the woods…
Initially we're using the activity as a way of visualising spatial relationships and of giving the children a concrete representation of what they have achieved in the drama.
They can either draw their contribution directly onto the paper, or they can stick their drawings onto a large wall map.
As the drama develops we can make "emotional maps" , "time lines" : all ways of making the drama work more concrete, of deepening the work and broadening our perspectives on it.
You'll find that the usefulness of the various kinds of map-making extends far beyond the obvious curriculum links with maths and geography.
The place of drama in a topic
In considering drama's place in topic work, we have to start by thinking how we might dramatise the topic; and that means seeking out human dilemmas, looking for the moments of change in a situation, or the moments when change might be possible; we're looking for those moments when people make choices.
In a topic on industrialisation one might look at the effect of industrialisation on a rural community without work.
We should avoid easy moralising.
There's a difference between moralising and opening up moral issues.
We know (and children know) that pollution is damaging; that children in Victorian schools were subject to rather repressive regimes; that the slave trade was a bad thing; that being an Ancient Briton after the Romans invaded wasn't nice.
But we need to go beyond simplistic simulations.
We can do so much more than simply acting as if we were all Victorians.
Drama should explore the How and Why of situations.
We could ask, for example: what sort of personal sacrifices might people have to make in order to reduce pollution?
The children might take on the roles of factory workers who stand to lose their jobs if the factory cleans up its act.
Continuity
Once you start linking drama and topic work you'll find that your drama projects can go on for weeks.
You'll need to start thinking about structure and ideas in a slightly different way.
While there's no need for each hall lesson to be self-contained, you still need to find strong, engaging starting points.
The key to this lies in dramatic tension.
Raise the tension, end sessions on a high point so that(rather like a TV serial) everybody wants to know "What next?" , sometimes described as "The Flash Gordon syndrome" .
Topic "ideas" 
The introduction and the section on "small group work" in Chapter 3 shows how we set about planning the early stages of a drama lesson.
The same approach holds good when planning to use drama as part of a topic.
Think about Who, What and Where — and make sure that the What contains an issue or a problem of some kind.
Always start by thinking about "Who?" , thinking about people.
We can't have drama without people.
And if our drama is to be at all dramatic we'll need to put those people in a difficult situation, one which confronts them with choices.
Part Five, Planning and Assessment, contains detailed examples of how one might go about planning a topic based drama.
The remainder of this chapter is taken up with an account of an extended drama project which indicates how this interactive, cross-curricular approach works in practice.
Although the work began life as a historical project, it involved work in most curriculum areas.
The class involved is Year 6.
Example: The Construction of a Railway For clarity — and in order to emphasise the amount of work in other curriculum areas — I have divided the account of this project into "drama time" and "class time" .
In reality the divisions were not so distinct, and the "class time" included researching in school libraries, homework, work out on the school field and visiting a local museum.
The techniques and strategies used in the drama work included: small group work — in and out of role forum theatre  still images simple mime writing in role whole group work.
Aims 1.
To examine the effect that railway building might have had on a self-contained and isolated rural community.
2.
To explore the conflicts of loyalty that might arise among people when faced with major changes in their way of life.
3.
To stimulate interest in simple surveying and engineering, and to give the children opportunities to develop skills related to these areas.
Class time The drama work is preceded by research into nineteenth-century life, including looking at maps of the local area prior to the coming of the railway.
Each child to name one item invented in the last 150 years.
 "What do we use in our lives now which people didn't have a hundred years ago?" 
Drama time Mime work in pairs: A mimes a simple activity, using gadgets from today;
B has to achieve the same end result by using materials available in the early nineteenth century, e.g.
A makes breakfast using fridge and electric cooker
B milks cow, draws water from well, chops firewood, lights fire, takes eggs from chicken, etc.!
A small imaginary town (Seatown) is established.
Children agree on roles within small groups (farmers, miners, shopkeepers, mill workers, etc.), create still images of these people at work.
Teacher comments.
The commitment to the roles strengthened through improvisation work in small groups, each with a small problem which must be solved, e.g. broken cart, insufficient labour at farm or mill; then trading in the market-place.
The teacher takes on a role as a member of the local council who has been away on business.
He returns with the news that he has been asked to ensure that the Parish Registers are all up to date.
In the meantime he has to go back to the town on further business, but first his horse needs shoeing, his cart needs repairing and he needs food and shelter.
The difficulties of the journey on bad roads made evident.
The role chosen by the teacher here is as neutral as possible, to avoid confrontation, effectively a messenger.
The shoeing of the horse and repair of the cart are simply ways of intervening in small group work, using the role to value and focus it.
Example continued Class time The children examine original documents loaned from the local library, showing what a parish register from this period would have looked like.
They then create their own "Parish Register" — a way of confirming the roles they've adopted.
Further research is carried out into rural lifestyles in the 1840s.
Drama time The teacher returns in role to collect the new Register — and comment on its usefulness.
He also enthuses about the extraordinary steam trains he has recently seen for himself, reading from a journal which he has been writing while away.
(This description is taken from a contemporary source.
Wherever possible use authentic contemporary material.
Children are excited by it; it helps reinforce the children's understanding of and commitment to the time shift, and in this case introduces the idea of a journal as part of the fiction, thereby leading into writing-in-role activities.)
He brings a large, but incomplete, map of the village and surrounding area, saying that he's been approached by one of the railway companies who are interested in building a railway line to Seatown, and that they have asked him to have the map updated.
The map shows the village is close to the sea, has a natural harbour, but is cut off from nearby large towns by hills and a large marsh.
Class time Map work includes map symbols, contour lines, co-ordinates and introduces some simple surveying tasks.
The children work on completing the map provided.
A growing body of material is provided to create opportunities for possible research — books, photographs, maps, documentation, letters describing reactions to the railway, old newspapers, prints.
Drama time After recapping through still images, the teacher explains that he will now be taking on a different role.
A meeting is held which the teacher attends in role as a railway engineer.
He is carrying the map the class have made, which his "friend" has delivered; he thanks them for the excellent job they have done.
"I am an engineer, not a surveyor.
Surveying is clearly something that many of you are very good at.
We want to build a line which will connect Seatown with the big cities.
And we need your help with the survey."
As the meeting progresses it becomes clear that the railway link will be very expensive, involving tunnelling through the hills and viaducts across the marsh.
In order to cut costs elsewhere the company want to build the line right through the middle of the town and across much of the farmland  which the children have established (in role) as belonging to them.
Most of the children want the railway and are prepared to help with the survey, but a few want things to remain as they are, and they want to organise resistance to the coming of the railway.
There are organisational problems in allowing the group to split into two such distinct factions.
There is not only a danger of the drama becoming very confrontational; the focus can split, resulting in confusion and loss of control.
This is less of a problem if team-teaching is a possibility.
If you're working alone one way of dealing with it is for the class to look at each side in turn: they can all play the townspeople who want to join the survey team, and then all play those who don't want the railway to come through the town.
The potential confrontation does, however, create opportunities for practising and developing skills of negotiating, persuading, listening, and compromising.
Class time Discussion and research about railway lines, straightness and gradients.
Historical research into survey methods.
Discussion about industrialisation and possible effects of not letting the railway be built.
We do not yet, however, discuss what might happen in our drama.
Drama time The children start by working in small groups, continuing to improvise their daily routine, but with the added task that while they are working they should be discussing the issue of the railway route.
The teacher moves from group to group, occasionally spotlighting one of them, saying "Let's see what's happening in different parts of the town" and then reflecting on what's been heard and seen: "Feelings are running high.
Whatever happens it seems the town will never be quite the same again."
Still images of the conflicting feelings.
A short scene played out between four farmers and the railway engineer (teacher in role), who tries to persuade them to sell their land to the railway company.
The teacher uses this opportunity to introduce the idea that the railway will open up new markets; and the children are persuaded.
The real drama appears to be over!
It seems that the children have been too easily persuaded to sell their land and houses, for what matters in a drama like this is not that the children should act out what actually happened in real life, but that it should open up and help them understand the dilemmas of industrialisation.
In this case it seems that the structure of the drama has made it too easy for the children — perhaps because of the non-confrontational role adopted by the teacher as messenger early on, when he was excited and enthusiastic about the railway and its effect on another town.
But all is not lost!
One of the advantages of using drama in this way (when the narrative continues over a period of several weeks) is that both the teacher and the children can change roles, enabling us to look at any given topic from different points of view.
The drama session ends with the railway engineer offering contracts of employment to those townspeople who want to work for the railway on the construction of the line.
Class time The map is marked up with the lots that have been sold.
Research begins on the materials needed for railway construction, with some children producing a broadsheet (on computer) reporting what has been happening in the town — which they "sell" in the next drama session.
Others write letters (in role) to relatives and friends in other parts of the country telling them what has happened, and (for the most part) excitedly proclaiming how easy it will be to visit once the line is built.
Work also begins on planning the construction of a bridge.
How will the line cross the marshes?
Model-making, drawing, scientific testing of materials and further historical research.
Drama time At the next opportunity — in class time — the teacher relates the "story" of the drama so far, taking care to include reference to all the groups of children, but concluding:
"So the railway engineer's job appeared to be complete.
He was about to go back to the company when he realised that in the middle of the town was a house where an old man lived, exactly where the company were planning to build their new station; and the old man was refusing to sell."
The teacher asks the children what they know about the old man.
Together they "construct" the role, which the teacher then takes on.
Using the techniques of forum theatre, the class try to persuade the old man to sell his house and land.
A letter arrives from the railway company, stating that if they can't purchase all the necessary land for the agreed route, they'll pull out.
Class time We look at maps of Britain in 1840, 1890 and today.
Did any towns thrive which were not connected to the railway system?
Drama time The pressure is on.
How will they persuade the old man to leave his house?
Should they?
There's no easy moralising here.
It's tough and difficult.
Through their research the class know that no railway will mean rapid decline.
They decide to threaten the old man with violence.
It's tempting to stop the drama at such morally dubious moments, but it is precisely here that we find the greatest learning opportunities.
If we are to examine the consequences of actions, we must allow the choice.
Having threatened the old man (the teacher has continued in this role  whenever necessary), he agrees to leave his house.
The railway will come through.
They appear to have triumphed.
They're asked to make two still images showing what the townspeople might be feeling at this moment — first, about their success in getting the railway to the town, and secondly, about what they have done to the old man, who is now homeless.
Each member of the class is asked to think quietly: "Listen to your own thoughts for a moment or two" then "If there is something you want to say to him, go to him and say it now." 
The project finishes there, with the children expressing considerable remorse for getting the old man out of his home.
But they have learned far more about morality this way than they would have done if they had been stopped from making their threats.
Although this project was not taken any further, it is not necessarily "the end" .
What happens to the old man?
What happens during the construction of the railway?
What happens to people ten years later who leave their small town and go to the big city to find work?
We could easily move on to a project exploring other aspects of Victorian England.
There is a key "branching" decision being made in the drama described above — when the children decide to accept the coming of the railway, or turn it away.
The drama comes not from discussing what each decision would mean, but in making the decision and working through the consequences.
In a drama based on a similar starting point another group of children vehemently refused to let the engineer carry out the survey — and the focus of the drama shifted: how do people cope with rural decline, losing markets and jobs?
In this instance they decided to emigrate!
And the drama continues — reaching out, as ever, into exciting areas of exploration in history, geography and science, etc.
Drama with children in Key Stage One
PLAY
Although there are several different theories about play, there is certainly a consensus about its importance in human development.
From a very early age we use various forms of play to make sense of the world.
Young children play with language, trying out sounds before they start experimenting with words.
I was intrigued recently to read an interview with Roman Polanski, the film director, in which he claimed that he learns languages not by learning tracts of vocabulary, but by playing at the sounds of a new language, first speaking a "gibberish" version of it, finding out what it feels like to be making those sounds and those speech patterns.
As he claims to be able to speak seventeen languages, it would seem to work.
Adults learning to use computers are frequently taught very basic principles (like how to switch on the machine and "boot" a disc) and then encouraged to simply play with it for a while.
The word processor package which I'm using to write this book has a couple of games built into it — partly for light relief, no doubt, but also to give newcomers the opportunity to play with the system, to get confident in using the tools.
Children's own free play is not in itself drama, although it's a close relation.
They use role, they develop stories, they give symbolic significance to the spaces in which they play — a bed becoming a pirate ship, the arm of an armchair becoming the back of a horse.
And they use this role play to explore their interests and their concerns; in similar ways and for similar purposes to the way we use drama — to explore and develop their understanding of the world.
Drama with children in Key Stage One — what's the difference?
Drama with children in their first years of school differs from drama with older children only in content and organisation, not in basic approaches to the subject.
In fact what young children demand of us is not that we dilute the work, but that we make it more exciting, more tightly focused.
Whereas with older children we can sometimes talk our way out of a sloppy beginning, with young children we have to grab their interest from the outset.
Five, six and seven year olds are perfectly capable of working on drama for an hour and a half or more at a time, but they need very clear tasks, strong images and narratives which are intriguing and above all dramatic.
Script writers are often urged to "Take your characters closer to the centre of the action." 
It's very useful advice for drama teachers, especially when working with young children.
If a giant has come to town the children will allow you to have your council meeting to discuss what the townspeople should do about it, but what they really want to do and what they will learn most from is dealing with the giant.
In terms of organisation, working with this age group we can go in several directions: 1.
We can provide a small group with a stimulus in the play area and let them get on with their own play, occasionally intervening (as described below).
2.
We can take part in their small group work.
3.
We can organise them and lead them through highly prescriptive sessions in which they act out the teacher's scenario.
4.
We can work together as a whole group in which there is a clear focus and a clear task.
There are times when each of these strategies is appropriate, although I am reluctant to use the third unless it serves a very clear purpose.
When I do use it, it tends to be as a way into a narrative for which the children themselves will take increasing responsibility.
 "The Giant Awakes" (Chapter 5) is a good example of a highly prescriptive opening which is then used to stimulate much more open-ended work.
MAKING A START
Whatever the age group we're working with (be it five year olds or fifty year olds) the basic elements of drama remain the same:
narrative role play verbal and non-verbal language (for example, gesture, body language, facial expression, the space between people).
We should never underestimate the vast range of vernacular knowledge that children bring to school with them when they first arrive.
Their knowledge and experience of drama will be far more wide-ranging than is commonly acknowledged.
Consider the following: their own play (which is likely to have involved role play — though this is certainly not always the case)
stories — telling and being told
film and television
puppets, pantomimes, theatres.
In some of these the child is an active participant, is making drama of a kind, in others s/he is responding to what others have made.
All the basic elements of drama are present to an extent in children's own play.
But while many children enter the school having already enjoyed many hours of "pretend" play; there are some whose experience of such play is very limited, who find it very difficult to differentiate between being in and out of role.
We need to take account of this range of experience when we plan drama with young children.
What we can, however, be reasonably certain of is that they will have at least some common experiences of television dramas; these can themselves provide us with useful starting points.
While an experienced teacher might start by working with the whole class, drawing the more reluctant children into the drama through the excitement of the drama itself, full of dramatic tension, rich in imagery, there's much to be said for working in the classroom with small groups.
The best practice combines these two approaches — with the whole class working in the hall (or drama room) on a regular basis and small groups working for much shorter periods in the classroom.
The simplest way of starting is by intervening (sometimes very briefly) in play corner activities, taking on a role yourself in the children's own play.
This intervention can be very simple: buying items from a shopping list and needing change
WORKING IN THE CLASSROOM
Intervention in the children's own dramatic play; structuring play corner activities
having a cup of tea and asking questions about the neighbours —"Is the old man next door still poorly?
He really appreciated it when you got his shopping for him last week."
Even at its simplest your intervention — supports the children in their role-play introduces the idea that you, the teacher, can play a role yourself creates the possibility of formalising their language creates the possibility of introducing some simple work in other curriculum areas (e.g. counting) encourages them to think beyond the immediate, maybe introducing simple notions of cause and effect narrative gives you the opportunity to introduce simple signals indicating when you are in and out of role, thereby accustoming them to this strategy for when you use it later in a whole group drama.
To the children who find any sort of role play difficult (perhaps because it has been discouraged at home, or because they are very shy) it communicates to them that you approve of such play.
As the children get used to your interventions, you can make them more challenging.
Perhaps instead of asking questions about the neighbours, you can yourself be the old person who lives next door: I know you're very busy [acknowledging and supporting what they're already doing]but I wonder if you could help me?
I've been very poorly and I can't get out to the shops.
Can you help me make a shopping list?
When intervening in this way with a small group working on their own in the play corner you'll need to think through how much time you can afford to give them.
How long can you leave the rest of the class to get on with their own work?
You'll need to be clear about the purpose of your intervention.
Is it to challenge? to support? to focus? to stimulate?
It is often a combination of these.
If the children are already working well, perhaps all you need to do is to enter very briefly and present them with a stimulus: "I'm trying to arrange a birthday party for my nieces and nephews; could you help me organise it." 
A stimulus to imaginative play
With very young children, a very effective way of getting imaginative play started is to put "something magic" into the play area: "Here's a magic box.
I wonder if you can find out how it works, what it does?"
The magic box could equally well be a key, a trinket, a crystal — or even a saucepan.
This approach is particularly useful when their play has become "stuck" , when they continue to enact the same situation in the same way.
I once said to a small group of Reception children working in the play area: "I've heard that this bracelet has some strange magic powers.
Could you find out what they are?
It doesn't seem to work for me."
I let them get on with it, and returned ten minutes later to find them "space-walking" .
The bracelet not only made them fly, but had taken them to the moon.
You might also try: "This magic chair seems to make people who sit in it very grumpy.
It's not supposed to do that at all.
Can you help me put it right?"
Note that the basic approach, with very young children, is in many ways similar to that which we use with other age groups: I, the teacher, do not know.
Can you help me?
Using an item of costume can be a powerful stimulus to initiate dramatic play.
A well stocked dressing-up box is a very useful resource.
Make sure it contains plenty of different fabrics and textiles as well as props and items of clothing.
Hats, caps and headgear of various kinds are useful because they are so easy to use quickly and without fuss.
I most often use it as a resource which the children can go to during their own dramatic play.
Although it can become distracting if the children always want to use it when you're working as a whole group, there may be times when you want everybody to  take a piece of cloth and make themselves something with it — a headband or a belt in a particular colour, for example to identify them as belonging to a particular group.
In this way they're not only using the clothes in the box but also using textiles and fabrics creatively.
If there is a school play try to appropriate as many costumes as possible at the end of it.
Young children get a lot of pleasure from using the costumes and re-enacting (and adapting) in their own play what they have seen older children doing.
You'll need to spend longer with children who find role-play itself difficult, or who will work alone but not with others.
Simply entering and offering a stimulus could provoke argument, disagreement and even tears.
Taking on a role yourself and making that role the focus of the dramatic play enables you to support contributions as they're made.
When you have some children who find it very difficult to work with others, one solution might be to work with much smaller groups, maybe even just a couple of them at a time for five minutes or so.
You can then set up a number of pair group "plays" which can perhaps later be merged into small groups of fours or sixes.
WHOLE GROUP WORK
So far I've described what might be called a "gently, gently" approach.
It not only gives the inexperienced teacher an opportunity to build up confidence, it also gets children used to role play being taken seriously.
The problem with using small group work with young children is that it's inevitably rather disparate: they will happily play for long periods, but find it difficult to share each other 's work unless there is a powerful dramatic context, as is provided by whole group work, which gives us the chance to really focus the drama.
We can work with the class to create a story in which they all have a stake, slowing it down at particular moments, thereby creating strong dramatic tension, deepening understanding and also enabling us to value publicly the contribution of particular children.
The two ways of working (in small groups and in a whole class group) should never be seen as mutually exclusive.
As discussed in Chapters 3 and 5, whole group work rarely means the whole class doing the same thing at the same time.
It's more useful to think of it as a way of giving coherence and focus to the work of small groups.
The whole group work can be used as the stimulus for small group tasks, or can itself spring from work which the children have originated in separate small groups.
Example: The Magician who Lost his Magic
The Magician who Lost his Magic by David McKee is a story which is popular with young children; it tells the story of how Melric the Magician, woke up one day to find he no longer had any magic.
Everyone in the castle where he lives had become totally reliant on him to do everything for them, so the loss of the magic is somewhat disastrous.
In the story Melric goes off on a quest to various fellow magicians to seek help.
In our drama we can change the frame (see Chapter 4) and look at the story from the point of view of the people in the castle.
What's happening in the Castle Kitchens?
How does everyone manage?
We can break into small groups and look at what's happening throughout the castle.
The pictures in the book are a useful stimulus because they hint at the disasters and yet allow the children to flesh out the world of the carpenters, the gardeners, the cooks, the soldiers, the furniture makers (perhaps using small pieces of fabric to indicate who they are).
Children love acting out "disasters" .
From here we could go on to explore how the people in the castle manage without Melric.
Frequently, young children use "magic" as a way of solving problems, and thereby avoiding the drama.
This story itself offers a useful control device in that you're asking them how they manage without magic.
Here are some brief alternative suggestions: 1.
Class as nearby townspeople who have never had the dubious benefit of Melric's magic.
Teacher (in role) goes to them to seek advice: "Melric, our magician, has lost all his magic; and we don't know how to do anything.
We don't even know how to get water from the well.
Could I stay with you for a few days and learn how you manage without magic?"
2.
My name is Mertel; I'm Melric's sister.
I've heard that my brother has been wasting his magic.
If we're to help him get his magic back I'm going to need to know just what he's been up to.
The dramatic frame
This example illustrates how we can use different dramatic frames to develop drama from story with this age group.
As with older children we use the story as the possible starting point, but shift the point of view, so that they are not simply acting out what they have heard but rather they are making decisions which affect the drama.
Although the king in The Magician who lost his Magic is not named in the story, he seems to be King Rollo, a character who has featured in an animated television series based on a series of David McKee's books.
Shifting the dramatic frame enables us to use the dramatic fictions that are shown on children's television as starting points for drama.
When I use a well-known television series as a starting point I start by talking to the children about what we're going  to do and the way we're going to work: "We're going to make up a play together.
It's going to have King Rollo in it, but it'll be our play."
Example: The Circus When I first started teaching drama the stock infant lesson was "making a circus" !
Times have changed, as have circuses and public attitudes towards them.
Not many children are likely to have been to a circus; but although they're not as glamorous or as attractive as they once were, they still hold a fascination for children.
If we're going to use The Circus as the theme for our drama we need to consider another dramatic frame than simply putting together all the different acts, for example:
Teacher in role produces a large document.
"Uncle Chippersmart's (!)
Last Will and Testament."
"My dear old Uncle Billy died recently and I've inherited his circus.
I've got to run it and I don't know anything about circuses.
What's worse is that before he died all the people who looked after the animals had left and got jobs with other circuses.
All the animals are in their cages, but they don't seem to have very much space, and some of them haven't been fed properly for a long time.
I really need your help and advice."
The drama's about how to look after the animals, finding out what they eat, where they come from, maybe whether we can release them back into the wild.
Organisation
One of the problems often associated with working with young children is their apparently short concentration span.
What this tells us is not that we should not attempt serious drama work with them, but that we need to give particularly careful thought in our planning to the appropriateness of the material.
Exactly the same principles apply as with any age group.
We need to catch and hold their attention.
We'll best do that with good strong images; by intriguing them, by creating tense dramatic moments.
To this end teacher in role work with young children is especially effective.
PRETEND AND REALITY
It still surprises me sometimes how difficult some children find it to distinguish between the drama world of pretend and the real world.
There is a danger in letting the drama become too real for young children; we don't want the dragons and giants of the drama to follow them home and give them nightmares.
We need to remind children that what we're doing in drama is pretending.
This is another reason that I deliberately choose to move frequently in and out of role in drama  with young children, and why I often use the strategy of asking them to help me create (or construct) the character that I play.
Discussion
However dramatic and intriguing you make the work, however visual, there will nevertheless come times when you need to sit down with them and talk things through.
These periods of reflection and decision-making are important, but we must not let them get out of hand.
Discussion is only of interest to those participating in it, and many young children find it extremely difficult to articulate their ideas verbally — especially before they've actually done what you're talking about.
I tackle the problem by trying to act on suggestions as soon as they're made.
Any discussion occurs after the action.
We have a problem.
We need to discuss it.
Draw the children to you; take them into your confidence.
You'll have to use more than words to convince them just how special they are in this process.
You clarify the problem as visually as possible; and then you get ten different solutions shouted out.
What do you do?
You act on one of them at a time, and then decide which, if any, is going to be most productive.
Example: The Giant's Toothache In advance of the drama session I've made several large sweet papers.
When they come into the Hall they see these giant wrappers leading to the corner of the room.
We talk about why they might be there; who they might belong to.
They're all pretty certain that they belong to a giant.
I ask them: "Do you want to meet the giant?" 
They do.
 "What will he be like?" 
We construct the character of the giant; a child makes a suggestion, and we all have a go at enacting it, seeing what it would look like.
How does he walk?
They show me.
I pick up on one idea at a time, and we try each of these as a group.
I try it myself, to see if I've got the right idea.
How does he talk?
How does he eat?
They want a frightening giant, big and loud and angry.
I then ask if they're ready to meet the giant.
They are; and he's pretty much the way they'd constructed him, except that he's in the corner, bent over and moaning.
They gather round, tentatively asking what's wrong.
I point to my mouth and my tummy.
I come out of role and ask them about what they've seen.
What do they know about the giant?
They tell me he's got toothache and tummy ache from eating too many sweets.
They want to help him, and I have to remind them that he might be frightening (that was the way they had wanted him to be) so we'll need to approach him very carefully.
(This adds to the dramatic tension.)
So the issue becomes: How do we help a giant who is poorly, but who might get very angry with us if we annoy him?
As you'd expect with this age group, there is an immediate barrage of responses.
 "Clean his teeth for him," says one child.
With older children we might spend some time discussing this (perhaps wondering if the giant would ever let us get near enough to open his mouth and clean his teeth for him); with this age group, however, I immediately enthuse about the idea: "Right, that's really good.
But aren't we going to need a very large toothbrush.
We'll have to make that ourselves.
Go to the shops and buy anything you think would be useful to make a giant's toothbrush."
And then, when we've bought all the materials and made the giant's toothbrush (which could itself be a Technology task), that's when I go back into role as the giant and refuse to let them come anywhere near me with their (mimed) toothbrush.
I come out of role again and ask them what we should do.
One child suggests we give him a bath.
You can see how firmly grounded the drama is in their own reality.
So we have to make the bath tub and then fill it with water.
It needs to be hot water, so we have to be careful.
And the drama continues in this way: a stimulus to excite and intrigue; a problem, action, and then thought about the action.
Action and then reflection.
People frequently get into difficulties with this age group by trying to think through the consequences of suggestions before trying them out, which requires an inappropriately sophisticated level of thought on the part of the children.
MAGIC
Several of these examples refer to "magic" in some way.
In drama magic is both blessing and a curse; a blessing because it creates a wonderful control device, and because it can be very stimulating to the imagination; a curse because children can — and often do — use it as a way of saying "This is not a problem" , using magic to get them out of seeking a solution.
Magic as a control device
When working with young children it is sometimes a good idea to invoke magic: "When we go into the hall we are going through a magic door" , as if it were a door to a magic wardrobe.
You can say that if they don't keep to the agreed rules of the drama, then the magic will start to fail; if they climb up the wall-bars when you have asked them not to, you can say that the magic only works when their feet are touching the ground, thus using the fiction of the drama to limit the space they work in and remind them through a dramatic device of those rules which you will have agreed before the lesson begins (see also the section on "Control" in Chapter 4).
The hall, the drama itself, becomes magic.
Anything can happen, as long as the rules of the magic are adhered to.
Using the device of the  "magic door" also allows you to contain the world of pretend within the hall if, for example, there are children in the class for whom the drama frequently becomes too real.
The curse of magic
Anybody who has taught drama with primary school children will have come across many examples of magic being used as a "Get out" .
For example: We're stuck in a cave.
There's been a rock fall.
There seems to be no way out.
At which point a child says,"It's alright, I've brought a magic spade with me.
It can dig us out in ten seconds".
You could, of course, reply, "Nonsense, there are no such things as magic spades" (and I've been tempted often enough); but that wouldn't be very supportive, and there's a good chance that the child who offers the spade is doing so in good faith.
Instead, try: "Thank goodness you've brought that.
How marvellous, "and then start asking questions about the magic: " How long does the magic last?"
 "What are the dangers of using it?" 
"Where did you get it?
It's not stolen, is it?"
Enter into the world of the magic, accept the idea, but challenge it.
In other words, use the magic, but create limitations for it.
Establish the parameters.
What does the magic spade do exactly?
When does it, and when does it not work?
By giving the magic limitations, asking in which particular circumstances it works, the drama is actually enhanced.
The children have to make a decision about using the magic, they have to think when would be a good time to use it and when would be harmful.
In this respect the following is a technique which I have found particularly useful: We're stuck (again)!
It doesn't matter where.
The problem is how to get away from the encroaching flood water.
A child says she has brought a magic carpet.
"How wonderful.
Can I look at it?
Oh it's magnificent isn't it…
A bit small, but beautifully coloured.
Oh, what's this?
A label?"
And then I "read" aloud: "" "Magic carpet.
Danger.
Do not use except…
 "" 
Oh dear.
the rest of the label's been torn."
We're exploring the world of exciting new technology.
It's magic, of course, and it brings great benefit to us but it could also have terrible dangers in store for us — just like magic carpets!
The focus of the drama shifts to discovering the dangers, and weighing up pros and cons of using the magic carpet.
Avoiding the problem
There are times, of course, when one simply feels it is inappropriate to be dealing with magic; and "magic" can take many forms, including laser guns which appear from nowhere.
It is important to establish at the beginning of a drama lesson/ project whether magic is to be allowed or not.
If it is agreed that there is to be no magic, the teacher and the children must stick by their decision.
Before any sort of an expedition — be it to South America, or a distant star — I often ask the children to make a list of all the things they will be taking with them.
This becomes an important task in itself, and can be done either in the hall or in the classroom (perhaps in role).
With older children it could be that each child makes his/her own list on a piece of paper; with younger children maybe we do it as a class, and the teacher writes everything on the blackboard; or perhaps nothing is written down by individuals, with each giving what they will need to the teacher who's a "quartermaster" .
The lists could be written or sketched.
Maybe some of the items have to be purchased.
What matters is that a limitation has been set; and now if a child brings out a gun, a knife, a rope ladder or even a box of matches you can check with the list and then either stay in role and say "You may have meant to bring that rope ladder, but it's not here" , or come out of role and discuss the agreed rules of the drama, one of which is perhaps that in this drama there is no recourse to magic.
The lists have been agreed, and anything not on the list cannot simply "appear" from nowhere.
Most of the ideas, techniques and strategies described in Part Two hold good for working with young children, but it is worth devoting time to a specific discussion of how one might adapt the work on still image and forum theatre for use with this age group, as they are sometimes thought to be strategies that can only be successfully used with older children.
Reception children are used to stories told in the form of consecutive images through comic strips; they're also familiar with "freeze frame" on video.
A simple way of introducing still image work with this age group is to have them walk or run round the hall and then stop and freeze at a given signal.
You say you'll try to lift up the child who is  stillest.
We can then look at one or two of the still images as if they were statues or models in a theme park.
Perhaps we then go on and create a drama about a theme park.
Maybe the class are model makers; they could make still images of their favourite cartoon characters.
STILL IMAGE AND FORUM THEATRE
Still image
Consider two images: 1.
children taking apples from a tree
2. a farmer shouting at the children.
In this order it's a story of crime and punishment.
If we reverse the order we get a story of revenge, the children getting their own back.
Working with the images develops the concept of cause and effect in narrative — a very important early stage in teaching about narrative.
We can do the work by using photographs or drawings initially, but it's often more exciting for the children to make the images themselves, perhaps later drawing what they have done in comic strip form, making their own comic based on the story that's been created in the drama.
(See also "storyboarding" on pps. 156–9.)
Forum theatre
 "The Giant's Toothache" (earlier in this chapter) exemplifies how we might use forum theatre to construct a character.
This method is very useful with all ages.
By giving young children the opportunity to create the more "dangerous" characters themselves, they are made safe; the elements of pretend are made clearer.
They like their drama to be exciting, but not too frightening.
The technique is one which is wonderfully adaptable.
Suppose we need a dragon in a drama.
If we're going to stick by the principle outlined above of keeping close to the centre of the action, we'll need to meet the dragon in the drama, to find out what it's really like, maybe to persuade it to come and melt an iceberg for drinking water.
How do we create a dragon?
Ask the children.
"If you like, I'll pretend to be the dragon, but you'll have to help me.
How can I do it?
Have you seen the dragon?
Can you show me what it looks like?
My arms aren't big enough to be wings; what can I use for wings?
Is there anything in the dressing-up box that looks like dragon skin?
And what about its face?"
Having gone through this process, and perhaps used various bits of PE apparatus to create the dragon's lair, maybe ask the children to shut their eyes and imagine the dragon in its lair, talking them through the suggestions they've made, helping them to visualise their creation, before taking on the role.
And when you take on the role always hold something in reserve, so it's what they've created, but here's  something unexpected about it.
Maybe the dragon's lost its old fire, maybe it's an endangered species, maybe it's rather timid.
Be careful with your questioning.
Don't ask questions to which you don't want answers.
If you want a fireless dragon, don't ask them if the dragon breathes fire.
Fantasy and the power of story
There are several schools of thought about whether young children get more from working on what they know — dramas about shopping, going to school, their daily routines — or fantasy.
My own feeling is that we at least need to start where the children feel most comfortable, and then to introduce elements which are better described as mythic rather than fantastic; that is, to dramatise or create stories which contain imagery and symbolism which are likely to excite the children, and yet which they can relate to their own lives.
I'm sure that young children like stories about giants so much because that's what adults seem like to them.
Dealing with dragons (or aliens) in drama is an enjoyable and safe way of dealing with our fears.
And in all these dramas the children's responses are very much about their own world — as exemplified in "The Giant's Toothache" earlier in this chapter.
The Appendix contains a brief selection of stories and picture books which I have used as the basis for drama with children in Key Stage One and can personally recommend.
Chapter 5 contains two examples of drama projects undertaken with Reception children — "The Giant Awakes" and "The Crashed Spaceship" .
The section on "Drama and Story" (in Chapter 2) contains a number of brief practical examples which are well suited to use with children in Key Stage One.