

The effective teaching of RE
The crucial role of the teacher
The most fundamental factor in effective RE, as in the effective teaching of any other subject, is the teacher.
Guidelines, syllabuses, books, aids of various kinds, all depend upon the teacher who actually applies them within the classroom situation.
The teacher is in control of the way that the intended learning is handled.
The same topic, with the same age and ability range of pupils, and the same general style and method of teaching, can yield entirely different results, depending upon the teacher.
One lesson can really take off, and another be dead.
Material which I have tried out in schools with different teachers has yielded fascinatingly different results.
I think of one particular school working with a scheme on "The World of Nature and Belief in God" in which the same slides were shown, the same background material given to teachers, and the same amount of time allowed for discussion in the four different classes of 9–10 year-olds, each of which was similar in composition with regard to ability and home background.
The same materials produced exciting work from one group, ordinary and rather drab work from another, and moderate interest in the other two.
The difference was that the teacher in the first group really related to the material and to the children, and she had understood the underlying purpose and challenge of RE and was able to point up the discussion, listening carefully to what the children said and leading them on in their thinking.
She was, from what I saw, an extremely effective teacher of RE.
What makes an effective teacher of RE?
What do you think would be the profile of an effective RE teacher, whether in the primary or in the secondary school?
These are some of the responses teachers have made: 1.
able to establish good rapport with pupils; 2. has charisma; 3. is good at organizing; 4. is a survivor; 5. keeps in touch with what's happening in other subjects and in pupils' backgrounds; 6. has a quality of openness; 7. has long teaching experience; 8. has good qualifications in the subject; 9. has strong religious faith; 10. has enthusiasm for the subject; 11. has a sense of humour.
How did the particular teacher mentioned above match up with this list? 1, 3, 5, 6 and 7?
Yes.
4 — A survivor?
Yes, in the sense that she was not a person who just reacted and went along with the system, but was prepared to be independent and assess situations for herself.
10 — Enthusiasm?
Yes, for whatever she was teaching — she believed that, provided she was involved and interested herself, her pupils would be too.
But regarding 2 this teacher was not especially charismatic — in fact more self-effacing than naturally the centre of attention.
Point 7 — long teaching experience?
Moderate, about eight years, but hardly any of that in RE.
Point 8 — qualifications?
None in religious education.
9 — strong religious faith?
No, she was an agnostic.
This teacher, therefore, was not an RE specialist in any sense.
She was indeed inexperienced in teaching RE having been unhappy with what she had hitherto been expected to present.
But the credits she did have outweighed such difficulties.
She in fact demonstrated what I have elsewhere argued (Watson 1987: 14–16) is at the basis of all education worthy of the name — a quality of five-fold respect, namely for oneself — a proper self-affirmation; for all other people as persons like oneself; for the total environment in which we find ourselves, both natural and cultural; for beauty, delighting in experiencing a sense of awe and wonder; and finally respect for truth which, however difficult to attain, needs to be like a beacon beckoning us forward.
These constitute, so to speak, the raw materials for effective education per se.
Provided there is a basic commitment to education, therefore, her example offers real hope to the many teachers, in both secondary and primary schools, who find themselves having to teach RE with much less knowledge and experience of the subject to back them than they would wish.
For her it worked because of one other factor — her ability and willingness to engage at some depth with the concepts, ideas and questions evoked by the material.
If a concept presented difficulties for children in understanding, she did not, gladly or reluctantly, resolve to postpone trying to communicate it — she thought of ways round, using such devices as homely examples and visual stimuli.
She had taken the trouble first to find out what she could about the topic from the notes  given, and had thought about it carefully, so that in a real sense she was herself involved in what was happening in the classroom.
She believed in openness, in giving space to pupils, and actually practised this.
She told me that perhaps her agnosticism was a help in this respect, because, while she respected the faith of religious people and found religious ideas fascinating, she was not tempted to be dogmatic about what she believed.
Is religious faith a hindrance or an asset for RE?
There is in fact a flaw in such reasoning, because a dogmatic kind of agnosticism is possible: agnosticism just as much as religious faith rests on its own assumptions which can betray key-hole vision.
Furthermore a strong case can be made for arguing that religious commitment is the only way to understand the depths of religion which from the outside may remain sheer enigma.
As in the teaching of science or music, for example, the scientist or the musician has far more to offer than the non-scientist or the non-musician.
Nevertheless, we do well to remember that if education is thought of in terms of enabling pupils to take responsibility for their own ongoing self-education through life, the more limited experience that the teacher may have can nevertheless be deployed in a professionally helpful way.
Similarly the teacher and the knowledge itself, as well as the teacher's religious or non-religious faith, can often get in the way of pupils' learning.
This is especially so in the case of a subject which, like RE, arouses strong emotions.
Basic attitudes essential for both specialist and non-specialist RE teachers
It is obvious that experience and knowledge of the subject yield dividends in the classroom.
Especially in secondary schools, considerable sophistication is called for in order to sustain the interest of older and often religiously alienated pupils.
In both primary and secondary schools there is a need for as highly qualified teachers as possible to act as coordinators, helping and encouraging those whose main expertise lies elsewhere.
RE does, however, have to call on the services of many non-specialist teachers.
I would like therefore to reassure them, as well as those specializing in the subject, that most teachers who are willing to try to teach RE well can do so.
This is based on my conviction that certain basic attitudes and interests are present in almost all people — both teachers and pupils — and that these provide the raw material for effective RE.
An outstanding American teacher of music speaks from her own  experience of young children (Upitis 1990: 2): "We have one strong factor in our favor in taking on the task of helping people become musicians, and that is, in some form all of us are already musicians." 
In thinking about this I concluded that the basic requirements for teaching music — in addition to certain skills essential to any effective teaching of any subject — are a basic sense of rhythm and pitch, delight in organized sound and ensemble work, and a real interest in developing children's own creative powers.
Figure 1.1 represents what I see as the equivalent for teaching RE and shows how these qualities are related to the attitude of five-fold respect discussed above (p. 2).
Although these qualities may appear as a formidable list, they are mostly present in people, even though for many reasons they often remain undeveloped.
The purpose of education, and of RE in particular, is to help these aspects to grow, relating them to basic religious concepts and basic skills for discernment.
Whether formally qualified or not, the effective teacher in the classroom will seek to exemplify such qualities.
These are not optional.
What is effective RE?
This is an interesting question in itself, quite apart from how to achieve it.
Here is a selection of characteristics of effective RE which I have heard many times.
You may like to compare it with a list of your own.
1.
class control; 2. interest shown by pupils; 3. exam results; 4. reinforces nurture within a particular religious tradition; 5. encourages religious conversion; 6. develops openness and tolerance towards other religions; 7. level of information retained about religions; 8. helps pupils to become kind and compassionate; 9. promotes good citizenship; 10. develops strong sense of social justice; 11. lack of complaint about having to attend school worship; 12. encourages willingness to question everything.
The first two of these points are the ones which most immediately concern the teacher, together often with the third, that of exam results and assessable performance which is a priority forced upon teachers by society as a whole.
The fourth and fifth relate to a long-standing debate about the purpose of RE — this is the "confessional" approach which starts off from the assumption of the truth of a particular religious viewpoint and seeks to nurture pupils within, or strongly encourage them towards accepting, that viewpoint.
Points 6 and 7 advocate what is regarded by many as an opposite way of looking at the purpose of RE.
Known as the phenomenological approach to RE, it is the one currently in the ascendancy in many schools, whereas the confessional approach is the one which is more traditionally associated with RE.
Points 8–10 show how RE has frequently been understood as primarily moral education.
This remains one of the strongest reasons why so many parents still want their children to have RE even though they themselves have long since given up having much to do with religion.
This has also been a way of escaping from the serious clashes which historically have taken place between different Christian groups involved in education and which remain a distinct possibility in the multi-faith situation.
The link with school assemblies (11) is very important for some RE teachers.
For others, what they see as the opposite approach to worship, that of questioning,(12) should be the fundamental criterion for judging effective RE.
This list, therefore, raises important questions with regard to the purpose of RE, style of teaching, and the content of what is taught.
These issues will be teased out in the course of this book: thus Chapter 4 will attempt to adjudicate between different views of the role of RE.
All I shall do at this stage is to give a summary of how I see effective religious education.
Qualities which effective RE develops
Figure 1.1 on page 4 drew attention to six qualities which the whole of the curriculum ought to be encouraging.
RE can be judged effective to the degree that it helps pupils develop: 1.
a basic self-awareness; 2. a basic attitude of empathy; 3. a basic curiosity towards diverse traditions; 4. a basic sense of wonder; 5. a basic interest in questions about the meaning and purpose of life; 6. a basic concern for wholeness.
We can apply these to the purpose of religious education in this way: to help pupils 1.
A basic self-awareness (a) to reflect constructively about religion without being overwhelmed by prejudice, whether religious or non-religious;(b) to see and understand the kind of assumptions about religion present in their environment and in society as a whole, and be prepared to think about these and not automatically either reject them or take them over;(c) to develop trust in their own powers of perceptiveness and intuition, provided that this trust is balanced by openness towards the insights of others and the findings of fresh evidence;(d) consequent on this, to develop willingness to modify, change, enlarge, or revise, what has so far been thought and felt about religion.
2.
A basic attitude of empathy (a) to appreciate the power and attractiveness of religion and be able to get on the wavelength of religious people;(b) to be aware in a meaningful way of the kind of experiences and arguments upon which religious people base their convictions;(c) to learn fluency in the language of affirmation, both of others as people and of what is meaningful and important to them.
It is especially important with regard to those people whose views are very different from one's own.
3.
A basic curiosity towards diverse traditions (a) to appreciate and delight in diversity and know enough about different religions not to offend the susceptibilities of people, and to be able to give respect to them as persons without marginalizing their religious commitment — to be able therefore to contribute towards a harmonious society;(b) to perceive the crucial area of common-ground between almost all major religious traditions, and that differences and disagreements are only meaningful against that background of what is held in common.
4.
A basic sense of wonder (a) to foster their capacity for imagination which can give rise to vision, realizing that reality can be greater and other than it often seems — so that they appreciate that a flat two-dimensional approach to life is not the only option available;(b) to understand that religious faith expresses itself in a variety of forms, many of which are close to the arts, and to realize also that religious language is mostly used in symbolic or metaphorical ways;(c) to appreciate the emotional power of religious commitment and how this can be beneficial or harmful.
5.
A basic interest in questions about the meaning and purpose of life (a) to challenge secularist assumptions and to appreciate that religious truth-claims cannot be easily dismissed;(b) to understand what is distinctive about religion, that is, what it essentially concerns, and be able to distinguish between that and features of it which can vary and perhaps be dispensed with altogether;(c) to realize in particular in how many different ways religion can masquerade as something else, and fail to be what it claims to be;(d) to appreciate the highly controversial nature of religion and of almost everything that is said about it by anyone, whether religious or not;(e) to have a firm grasp of criteria by which to evaluate precise examples and manifestations of religion in practice;(f) to appreciate the force of the question-mark with regard to the ultimate divide between religion and non-religion, and to appreciate the reality of the dilemma, and the ways in which religion needs to be questioned for its failures, negative attitudes, hypocrisy and externalism.
6.
A basic concern for wholeness (a) to be able and willing to reflect in depth about the totality of life's experience and the views one comes across.
(b) to be able to appreciate the interlinking of everything and the force of cumulative evidence, and that what is done and learnt in school cannot be divorced from what happens outside;(c) to appreciate that religion challenges head-on any view that regards knowledge as something only arrived at by reasoning and scientific experimentation;(d) to be concerned about conviction for or against religion, but to be open to evidence and to experience — not to have the answers all neatly sewn up, but to see life as a journey of exploration with exciting prospects and a sense of fulfilment in actually moving forward and, if necessary, changing in order to accommodate fresh insight.
Effective teaching
What the teacher needs — in addition to developing these points which are appropriate for pupils — is professional awareness of the nature of RE: 1.
that it is crucial to draw attention to fundamental assumptions in our society, and to keep open for pupils the options of accepting, modifying or rejecting these views (Chapters 2–3); 2. that the purpose of RE is pupils' self-education, engaging in depth upon the meaning and truth-claims of religions in a way which is relevant to their total experience of life (Chapter 4); 3. that space needs to be given in which pupil involvement has a chance to develop, together with creativity, a sense of wonder and the cultivation of inner quietness (Chapters 5 and 6); 4. that teachers need to model a positive, fair and balanced approach to the diversity of religious traditions and outlooks, and the controversy which these can generate (Chapter 8); 5. that in a spirit of critical affirmation it is important to develop skills of evaluation and criteria for discernment (Chapters 7 and 9); 6. that the crucial need is to put persons first, to establish genuine relationships which are affirming of pupils, believing that they  have something to give, and so listening to them and responding to them — and in the light of this to encourage their capacity for self-assessment (Chapter 10); 7. that the distinction between education and dogmatic teaching is all-important and that, provided this is borne in mind, opportunities for stillness and possible worship can be an invaluable aid to education (Chapters 6 and 11); 8. that RE can relate in a dynamic and creative way to all other areas of the curriculum (Chapters 12 and 13).
The content of RE
Nothing has been said so far about precise content, for example, which world religions should be included, or whether the focus should be mainly on Christianity, how far non-religious stances such as Humanism should feature in RE, or what to do about the occult, and so forth .
Nor has anything been said about precise method.
This is deliberate because: 1.
The most impeccable and well-prepared content, and the most exciting and suitable method, will fail as RE unless plugged in to what is its central purpose as outlined above.
Furthermore, if this is really understood, this purpose can be achieved through a great variety of approaches with regard both to content and method.
The teacher can adapt almost any and every available item.
Even something from the day's newspaper can be all that is needed as an effective starting-point, just as the latest or the most interesting work done in other subject areas of the curriculum may be used.
Materials that happen to be available in the school, including even seriously inadequate ones, can be brought into play and yield educationally valuable material if approached from a point of view of real understanding on the teacher's part.
2.
What is essential or helpful or inspiring for any one pupil, group of pupils, or class will vary enormously, and therefore effective RE is inescapably dependent on the teacher's skills and perceptiveness within a particular situation.
There are no blue-prints which can be given.
Even agreed syllabuses, drawn up for a particular locality, only suggest ideas and very general outlines; if given in any detail they will be more or less inappropriate for this particular pupil or this actual class.
3.
There has to be a freshness about teaching — it cannot be pre-arranged and pre-packaged, for that almost always loses the attention of pupils, even if not also of the teacher.
Teaching must be alive and it can only be alive in the present moment — it is time-consuming to try to make stale bread palatable, and why  bother when fresh bread is available?
Fresh bread is the interests, concerns, questions and problems of the moment which pupils bring and which the teacher as a person brings.
4.
The teacher always has to operate within a number of constraints such as agreed syllabuses, governors' wishes, heads of department, parental pressures, and so on, which mean that he or she is the only person who is competent to decide on content and method.
Other people, such as the author of a book, do not have the right to do more than offer suggestions which are a few among the thousands possible.
5.
The possible content of RE is so enormous, and the possible interpretation so varied, that the idea of a core content and suitable method of conveying it is utterly unrealistic.
Attempted cores turn out to be highly simplistic generalisations that satisfy very few people, but carry many dogmatic messages which are in fact controversial and so therefore masquerade as being objective.
Selection itself — the choice of this material rather than that — can be a hidden form of indoctrination and the more so if it comes in the garb of so-called publicly agreed authority.
So it is better that variety and flexibility are maintained with freedom to respond to current needs and interests.
The need to look at theory
Because teaching RE effectively depends upon understanding the nature of RE and developing those skills and attitudes essential to it, there is a certain amount of theory to be mastered.
This can sometimes be rather hastily dismissed as irrelevant to the classroom.
But time spent with a map at the beginning of a difficult and complicated journey is time well-spent — failure to do so can be disastrous, causing much frustration and waste of time and the real possibility of never reaching the destination at all.
Impatience is justified if theory moves off into the stratosphere, so to speak.
Provided, however, that it is properly grounded, failure to engage with it may be termed irresponsible.
This is because the effectiveness of RE depends first and foremost on the teacher perceiving the underlying challenge it presents, and why, so that what is negative can be countered.
There is another important reason for attending to theory: it needs to be shared with pupils.
Edward Hulmes, who has contributed one volume to the Effective Teacher Series on Education and Cultural Diversity (Hulmes 1989) has many times noted that RE is for teachers as much as for pupils.
I would want to add that the theory of RE is for pupils as well as for teachers.
This is the only way in which indoctrination can be avoided and any real understanding of religion  conveyed.
We cannot expect pupils to learn the sophistication necessary for handling difficult concepts if we constantly draw a veil over them and shut pupils off from the real debate.
Pupils as well as teachers should be aware of secularist tendencies in what is taken for granted in our society and in the educational world, and they should realize that these are not beyond being questioned.
Again, they need to appreciate the problems posed by the fact that there are so many different religions, and be alert to possible responses.
It is also most important that the abuse of religion with its destructive consequences is faced, and that pupils are helped towards levels of discernment.
A consideration of these basic issues is the theme of Chapters 2 and 3.
RE — Erratic boulder?
Geographers speak of a rock deposited by the Ice Age perhaps hundreds of miles from its place of origin as an erratic boulder, and it often seems to me that that is how RE appears in the landscape of today's schools.
What is it doing there — strange, alien, even threatening?
Of fascination to some, most would prefer to have it taken away or at least effectively cordoned off so that its presence could largely be ignored.
Fifty years ago most people would not have thought of RE in such terms.
They would have preferred the analogy of the soil which supports vegetation and the wherewithal to live.
Very few seriously asked how education could flourish without the sustenance provided by religion.
This was why religion was the one subject required by British law to be taught in schools.
Even in the 1988 legislation, RE has been referred to as "basic" , although in most people's minds any substance to that interpretation has long since evaporated.
What kind of picture does "RE" conjure up in your mind?
Often when people have enquired about my subject area, my reply is greeted with a polite, "Oh!" followed by a change of conversation.
To them RE is an embarrassment, something to avoid, forget or oppose.
Lurking behind their response are images of RE reflecting past experience: "dull" , "irrelevant" , "soft option" , "load of nonsense" , "dangerous — trying to get at people" , "morals and all that" , "a training in prejudice" , "an anachronism in the modern world" , "the odd one out in schools" , "to do with the God squad" .
But a few say, "fascinating" , "tremendously important" , "really stimulating" , "central to the curriculum" , "exciting" , "fun" .
Wherever you may locate your own particular response, I want in this book to discuss what is involved in giving RE the positive and creative image which it should have by virtue of the importance of its subject-matter, the challenging controversy it can generate, and the depth of feeling to which it can appeal.
Religion is one of the most powerful sources of human motivation, and can therefore, even in a utilitarian age, be seen as "useful" for attaining socially acceptable ends.
These very assets of course, if improperly handled, become liabilities.
The uses to which religion can be put are not always beneficial — indeed can be very damaging indeed.
The controversial element can lead to intolerance, bigotry and bitterness.
Similarly depth of feeling can become equated with prejudice, and the arousal of  emotions in schools can become indoctrination.
Even a sense of the importance of its subject-matter can generate the pious "holier-than-thou" tone of voice, so much detested and ridiculed — probably quite rightly — by our society.
In Western societies like Britain awareness of the possible or actual dangers of RE is more to the fore than appreciation of its potential assets.
Effective teaching of RE has to battle against unfavourable odds and can be severely damaged in the process.
The suggestion that it might occupy 10 per cent of curriculum time in order to do justice to it and its importance in general, and for all other subjects in particular , is normally greeted with frank incredulity.
 "That's ridiculous — of course there's no hope of that." 
Features of Western society today
In order to manoeuvre intelligently within this state of affairs it is necessary to refer to the overall context in which RE operates.
Here we find that the pressures against taking religion seriously are considerable, despite much that is extremely positive and creative to which RE can and should relate.
Here is a list of some of the facets of life in the late twentieth century which should be RE-friendly.
You will probably want to add many more.
1.
impact of science in increasing knowledge; 2. achievements of technology in reducing drudgery; 3. more widespread opportunities for enjoyment of life; 4. revolution in communications; 5. increased pluralism of society; 6. concern for human rights; 7. stress on the importance of individual integrity and personal responsibility; 8. renewed interest in the spiritual dimension to life; 9. impact of the "Green Movement" ; 10. awareness of and concern about global evil and suffering; 11. acceptance of religion as a phenomenon and some resurgence of religious feeling.
The marginalizing of religion
Yet all these facets also carry negative implications with regard to religion.
The achievements of science have encouraged the view that scientific method provides the only route to genuine knowledge.
As religious beliefs cannot be proved scientifically they are to be doubted, for it is assumed that religion is just a matter of subjective opinion.
This assumption will be examined in detail in Chapter 3, as it is so pervasive and damaging, and RE must be able to discuss the degree to which its basis is faulty.
The success of science in extending the frontiers of knowledge has led to scepticism about religion
The spectacular achievements of technology have dazzled people into awe at the marvels of human inventiveness and mastery over the natural world; as well as promoting an unprecedented emphasis on mechanical and organizational efficiency.
This has greatly encouraged a utilitarian attitude to life, and inflated the notion that human beings are the measure of all things.
Both of these developments have tended to have the effect of dulling sensitivity to religion.
The achievements of technology have promoted the distractions of a utilitarian approach to life
A materialist way of life is enjoying a heyday.
This shows itself in a variety of ways: in the all-consuming craving for more money and possessions, more power and social status, and more pleasure and entertainment.
In such an environment it is hard to take religion seriously which requires that all these things — good as they may be — must take second place to the cultivation of spiritual values and the worship of God, not gods.
It is not that these things are in themselves opposed to religion, but the possessiveness and distractedness which they tend to promote are.
The attractiveness of a materialist way of life in encouraging consumerism, individualism and hedonism or the pursuit of pleasure
Technology has brought speed of travel, and the almost instantaneous dissemination of information from one part of the world to another, such as has been unheard of in the history of the world.
It has created a world of mobility: of rapid and constant change, with attention focused mainly on novelty or utility — a world eager to break free from tradition which has become irrelevant to a restless, fast-moving age.
Although this can help religions come together, their traditions are under threat.
It also affects religions in another way: religious sensitivity needs stillness in order to develop — a stillness almost impossible for most people in today's noisy world.
The restlessness of constant change and novelty, promoting activism
Increased pluralism has brought different problems for religion, notably that of yet another -ism — relativism.
Out of bewilderment at such diversity of views and the need to promote some level of harmony between them, the view has been quite widespread that  differences are entirely due to cultural context and are not therefore contradictions to be resolved.
This on the surface may not seem to be hostile to religion, but it causes severe re-interpretation encouraging many people to regard religion as little more than a culturally derived dressing-up game.
How justified such a view is will be looked at in Chapter 3.
The emphasis in the human rights movement supported by this relativism is more and more in the direction of a hidden pragmatism.
There is a marked reluctance to arguing why people should be accorded such rights — "It just is so and things work better if you accept it — racism for example causes instability and prejudice and violence, so it must go" .
Religious support is normally little called upon — indeed the record of most religions with regard to these issues is not regarded as good, and so it is not surprising that many see religion as the suppressor of human rights rather than as their advocate.
Pluralism leading to relativism
A pragmatic basis for the human rights movement
This relates also to the newer concern for a holistic way of life which takes personal experience, integrity, health and good relationships seriously.
Religion is often castigated for encouraging an attitude of dependence upon authority or tradition, which is at loggerheads with the attitude of taking responsibility for oneself.
Religion has been accused indeed of keeping people docile and naive.
Assertiveness training has rarely featured much in religious traditions.
They have often not promoted the idea that human nature is basically sound if encouraged, but rather emphasized the need for a concept of divine grace.
This does not seem to fit in at all with the demand for autonomy.
Personal responsibility seen as the pursuit of autonomy and individualism
It may seem that the movement just discernible towards "spirituality" would be wholly to the benefit of religion, yet it is not necessarily so.
The word spiritual has become for many fundamentally dissociated from religion and so serves to encourage an alternative, one that is more attractive because lacking both definition and the incubus associated with religion.
The search for spirituality can become diverted also into cults or fascination with the occult, and if it avoids these dangers it can become simply another form of aesthetic experience and move away from the major religious traditions, so that the arts become a kind of substitute for religion.
The spiritual dimension seen as separate from religion
The "Green Movement" is not necessarily the friend of religion — it can displace it as understood within the great religious traditions, giving  rise to a neo-paganism which challenges them.
It is deeply critical in particular of the exploitation of the earth which it often considers the three semitic religions are guilty of pursuing — Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Christianity especially has come in for great criticism as being the major religion in the history of Western civilization.
The "Green Movement" is often critical of religion
Concern about the destructiveness of human nature is paralleled by awareness of the enormity of global evil and suffering, aggravated by the potential powers now within human grasp, and has been augmented by the speed and change of life and the challenges and displacements this brings.
All this, often broadcast by the media too, has had a detrimental effect on religion causing the age-old cry of the heart, "If there is a God why all this suffering?" to be raised with ever-greater seriousness and urgency.
The dilemma is worse still in that religion often appears to be inextricably and centrally involved in the perpetration of crime and the proliferation of human misery and damage to the environment.
The problem of global evil and suffering can be seen as an indictment of religion
The shortcomings of organized religions in having within their ranks and amongst their leadership large numbers who do not live up to their beliefs have had a serious effect on attitudes towards religion.
A huge battery of criticism is levelled against religion including charges of hypocrisy, smugness, dogmatism, narrow-mindedness, imperialism, naivety and prejudice.
Criticism of religious institutions, leadership and policies is rife, and religious people have on the whole been tardy in responding creatively to justified charges and pointing out the inappropriateness of false charges; an approach of burying one's head in the sand has been a characteristic of many religious people.
Hatred of religious bigotry, and of the violence and injustice it can produce, is a major reason for people turning their backs on religion.
This question will therefore be discussed in some depth in Chapter 3.
Damaging criticism of organized religion
The radical secularism of society
All these factors fan the bias against religion and produce a fundamental obstacle for RE — that of the radical secularism of Western society.
What I mean by this is the prevalence of the assumption that religion does not matter because it is not true — it is an illusion.
God is banished and the spiritual dimension to life, if there is one, is simply an aspect of human personality which human beings create for themselves.
In such a society it is not "done" to admit to taking religion  seriously.
David Hay, who was director of the Religious Experience in Education Project at Nottingham University, draws attention to the taboo about religion in British society.
Research conducted at the Alister Hardy Research Centre suggests: a culturally mediated prejudice.
It is based on a conviction that religious ways of interpreting reality simply must be mistaken because they appear to conflict with, or be irrelevant to, cherished and successful scientific paradigms.
It too easily discards the spiritual dimension of human experience as attributable to some kind of personal or social pathology and it creates a taboo a bit like the one there used to be about sex.
(Hammond et al.1990: 205)
It is important to note at this point two very different ways in which the word "secular" can be used.
One meaning relates to this-worldly matters — how things get done, efficiency, practical points, anything to do with what we see, hear, touch, feel and taste, how we find out about these things, and so on.
But the word can also be used to denote the idea that religion does not matter because it is not true.
A question of vocabulary: secularist and secular
The distinction is a very significant one, because all the great religions of the world have emphasized how important it is that religion and life are bound up together, that religion does not hive off into some remote corner unrelated to the real world; all religions do bother about the secular in the first sense of the word — about how life is actually lived and what people are and do, and not just about what they say and believe.
But if secular is used in the second sense, as meaning the abandonment of religion, it is obviously the enemy of religion.
Its presence will indicate hostility towards religion and make it very difficult for people to take religion seriously.
Some Christian theologians (e.g. Macquarrie 1968: 20f) have tried to indicate the difference between these two uses of "secular" by coining specific terms: secularity and secular as referring to the straight- forward neutral sense, and secularism and secularist to the anti-religious stance.
Although this distinction is not widely known, I think it is a most helpful one because when words mean radically different things it is useful to have some way of distinguishing them outwardly.
The widespread presence of secularism does not mean that religion is totally eclipsed or reduced to the status of a literally insignificant minority interest.
The legacy of Christianity in the West is still at work.
Its roots are tenacious and most people still wish to acknowledge the ideal of Christian values, as George Carey, Archbishop of Canterbury, noted at the 1991 2nd Malvern Conference, "I would deny that Britain is post-Christian — I think that people have basic Christian values which they would be very reluctant to let go." 
You may like to consider how far you agree with this view.
Is society really completely secularist?
Michael Polanyi draws attention to the way in which people can unconsciously share certain basic assumptions or beliefs even if, at a conscious level, they express something else.
He suggests a reason for this — the power of habit: "People can carry on a great tradition while proposing a philosophy which denies its premises.
For the adherents of a great tradition are largely unaware of their own premises, which lie deeply embedded in the unconscious foundations of practice"(Polanyi 1964: 76).
He considers that our society is a secularist one, not in its values but in its rejection of the beliefs supporting those values.
In this way we may be able to see that he would both agree and disagree with the Archbishop's statement.
Values enshrined within Christianity are still widely held, but this does not mean that Christianity is believable in for the vast majority.
The vehicle may still be moving forward under the impact of the initial push, but if the source of the pushing is removed, how long will it continue in motion?
Are there other pushing agencies available, and if so will they push in the same direction?
This poses the interesting question which only the future can resolve: how long can values survive without the beliefs which sustain them?
Peter Fuller, the atheist art critic who died in 1990, pursued the question rigorously as to how art can flourish in a secular society.
The discontinuity with religion which he saw as the dilemma of modern art he takes for granted, and even a cursory knowledge of twentieth-century art confirms this.
He asks, "Can work be reinvested with its spiritual-aesthetic dimension when tradition has in fact gone, and we have lost the illusions of faith?" 
(Fuller 1990: 297).
Impact of secularism on schools
It would be surprising if education escaped being profoundly influenced by secularism.
Schools may, and often do, challenge society, but they cannot avoid also reflecting it in the same way as revolutionaries normally rebel only against some of the characteristics of a society — others they have internalized too deeply.
In schools the assumptions of society show themselves in three ways: through what has been called the explicit, the implicit and the nul curricula.
The explicit curriculum
The explicit curriculum refers to what is openly expressed as the intention of the school, and to what is actually taught — the content per se which is put across.
In the majority of schools this is mostly devoid of any reference to  religion; it is carved up either into subject areas which by definition rule out any necessary reference to religion, or into topics or integrated approaches which normally have little specifically religious content.
The subject area RE continues to have low status.
The position is still worse because, in many schools, most of the RE time available is spent on content only marginally linked with religion: on moral and cultural education of one kind or another or social studies in which the information conveyed about different religions tends to be of a largely sociological nature, describing other people's customs and beliefs.
It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that with regard to the explicit curriculum, RE has to fight for its life — constant vigilance is the necessary price it pays for retaining any foothold at all in a curriculum groaning under the weight of other priorities.
In the majority of schools RE is, for political as well as pragmatic reasons, there by sufferance — occupying time which most teachers would quite happily see spent on something else of more pressing importance.
The implicit curriculum
The implicit curriculum is what is received through the total impact of what actually happens in school.
It covers attitudes, relationships, behaviour, selection of content, manner of teaching, way of speaking to pupils, and so forth.
The implicit curriculum includes the messages conveyed by the ethos of the school and the total approach to pupils, as well as to how the explicit curriculum is delivered.
One powerful message put across by the curriculum in most schools is that knowledge can be divided into compartments.
This has the effect of divorcing religion — like other subjects — from the rest of the curriculum.
If practical considerations make it desirable to put RE with another subject, then the one chosen is usually humanities or social studies, it being taken for granted that religion is an aspect of what people believe.
It is assumed to have nothing to do with, for example, science, maths or PE.
We need to remember that the implicit curriculum works especially through style of teaching.
Pupils can pick up many notions from the very methods we use.
Thus discussion lessons can often give the impression that everything is just a matter of opinion — there need be no rigour, for "it's all subjective anyway" .
Talk of problem-solving becomes translated into a message to pupils that all matters of controversy can and should be resolved; the idea that not everything is a problem to be solved is barely entertained.
The use of role-play can similarly often give the impression that facades are more important than being oneself, acting a part more significant than reflective evaluation.
Thus the implicit curriculum rests on beliefs and values also — not  necessarily the same as those behind the explicit curriculum, for there is often considerable double-talk and hypocrisy, mostly unintentional but sometimes not.
The existence of a powerful taboo against religion in society as a whole, together with the lack of opportunity given by the explicit curriculum for questioning the taboo, ensures that most of this implicit curriculum operates against religion — against its being taken seriously at all.
The nul curriculum
The nul curriculum exists by reason of the fact that it does not exist — it is what is conveyed by omission, avoidance, bypassing, as well as by ridiculing, criticizing, and putting-down.
Its allies are boredom, distraction, prejudice and narrowness of outlook.
It refers to excluded knowledge, failure to give pupils opportunities to appreciate, areas left out of consideration, ideas not addressed, concepts not offered or discussed.
Pupils cannot think about or develop sensitivity and discernment concerning what they are in deepest ignorance about, even as not to appreciate that there is anything of which they are ignorant is an even greater indication of the degree of deprivation.
It also relates to the way in which subjects are not presented — to processes and procedures and methods which are rarely or never employed.
This is not neutral — it indoctrinates more successfully than anything else.
As Maria Harris has noted: The point of including the nul curriculum is, of course, that ignorance — not knowing something — is never neutral.
If we do not know about something or do not realise what is addressed can be understood in another manner or seen through another lens, it skews our viewpoint; it limits our options; it clouds our perspective.
(Harris 1988: 20–1)
Religion is most notable by its absence, and, where it appears, by the omission of any serious discussion of its truth-claims.
A good example of this is the way in which the national campaign against AIDS has been conducted.
It is on the whole assumed that any religious considerations are irrelevant.
Indeed it is remarkable how little the question of any revision of a hedonist philosophy of life has even been raised, never mind taken seriously and discussed.
Concern about moral or spiritual or religious attitudes of responsibility with regard to sexual activity has been conspicuous by its absence.
The problem of AIDS is seen as mechanistic, and therefore mechanistic solutions are all that are offered.
The scales are not neatly balanced as between secularism and religion in our society.
In most societies the world has known, the balance has been in favour of religion; in ours it is the other way  round.
This is the background against which RE has to happen.
It is interesting to note that there appears to be great resistance to acknowledging the full impact of secularism on schools.
The real situation RE has to contend with is now very different from how many, perhaps most, people have generally thought it to be.
Historically, the Christian churches had exceptionally close links with education: indeed in the early nineteenth century almost all the impetus for setting up schools and teacher-training establishments and extending schooling to all children came from the churches.
The teaching of religion was always a feature of the curriculum, and until 1988 was the one subject legally required.
Failure to meet the secularist challenge
Reaction against the privileged status of religion
In recent decades there has, however, been more and more chafing at this privileged position.
That the subject was in fact normally accorded Cinderella status mattered little to the many who objected to its being there at all.
The charge of indoctrination has been regularly levelled against it with great force, especially because of the holding of assemblies for worship which is still required by law.
Many have accused schools of trying to prop up ailing churches and fill empty pews, and Christian teachers in particular have been assumed to be heavily biased, teaching for commitment to their particular brand of religion and intolerant towards other religions and other world views.
In his book Better Schools: a Values Perspective (1990) Clive Beck devotes a chapter to religious bias alongside chapters on racism, ethnic bias, sexism and class bias.
There is no mention at all of secularist bias.
The omission is significant: the danger is perceived as entirely pertaining to religious believers, and illustrates very well the hold which a secular view has on him and on the educational world in Britain and in the United States.
Most people do not in fact recognize the secularist bias precisely because it is ubiquitous and so forcefully put across.
It has often and justly been observed that real indoctrination goes undetected except by those who for other reasons have cause to question the content of the beliefs and values into which they are being pushed.
Most people in our society have no cause whatever to question the truth of what is put across in the teaching of science, English or history, for example, and therefore the indoctrination which can go on there is largely unheeded.
The fear and suspicion of religious indoctrination is a most powerful indicator of the opposite trend being uppermost.
Most people have not been indoctrinated into religious faith but into a questioning or  ignoring of religion as basically superseded if not actually false.
Indoctrination into secularism
David Hay calls for a "de-indoctrination" from secularism (Hay 1990: 109).
He summarizes the kind of attitudes and assumptions towards religion which a majority of children when they arrive in school for the first time will be likely already to have assimilated.
They will have some feeling that the sacred books of the religions are really fairy stories, that religious people are out of date and a bit silly, that the clergy are figures of fun.
All of this will have been picked up from a multitude of cues within the family — coyness in speaking about religion, sentimental talk at Christmas-time that equates religion with belief in Santa Claus, contempt for the hypocrisy (real or imagined) of religious officials, and the equation of religion with fanaticism and political reaction.
Where children do not carry these assumptions inside them, it is because they have been brought up in an enclave that is struggling against the weight of secular pressure.
(Hay 1990: 96–7)
This is the situation which RE must address.
The task for RE
For many — perhaps most — children, their schooling does not greatly increase their understanding of religion.
A large comprehensive school in an area little affected by a multi-faith presence could report colossal ignorance of the most elementary "facts" concerning Christianity.
Thus in a class of 31 fourth-formers, 14 pupils did not know in any terms however simple, the significance of Good Friday nor 9 of Easter Sunday; 21 could not name one book in the New Testament and 27 one book in the Jewish Bible.
What is even more instructive was the reaction of staff and visiting RE specialists to this information.
It did not trouble them much.
Such "facts" are unimportant.
From one point of view I agree — I do not think we should be concerned about teaching a basic kit of factual information.
Does it really matter that pupils know Jesus had 12 disciples and what their names were?
But what is serious is what this kind of ignorance reveals about the level of understanding concerning religion which they have.
What Good Friday and Easter Sunday stand for is not something to be taught as such but something which pupils with any understanding at all of Christianity would automatically acquire en route.
The equivalent level of ignorance in another subject might be not to know the name of Shakespeare or anything at all about evolution or to have any skills of basic measuring or to know that Asia is a continent.
It is not these facts per se which are important, but the lack of experience of literature, science, mathematics and geography that ignorance of these facts betrays.
RE has a most important and wide-ranging task to fulfil.
It cannot  do this unless it first challenges the secularist assumption so endemic in our society.
Giving religion a chance: the formidable case against secularism
The acknowledged purpose of RE is to help pupils towards an understanding of religion so that they can reflect on it in an informed way.
But they cannot do this if their minds and emotions are already sealed tight against it — if they assume that religion is outdated and not worth studying.
As the previous chapter showed, many aspects of growing up in today's world encourage such a dismissive attitude to religion.
In order therefore to teach RE effectively, we need to be very clear about how shaky the secularist stance actually is, and how strong is the case for an openness towards religion.
It is a matter of practical importance that teachers can argue this case.
Specific work on it in secondary schools is often essential in order to break down resistance to the subject.
Many "awkward" classes become much less so if some exploration in depth is attempted of the kind of points discussed in this chapter.
It is important also that awareness of this argument informs what primary school teachers do concerning RE.
In all sorts of situations it is called for, not only with children, but with other staff, parents and governors.
RE is on a much stronger wicket than it is usually given credit for, provided it is open in character.
I shall return to this point at the end of the chapter on page 35.
The nature of assumptions
Two preliminary points need to be made before setting out the argument against secularism.
First, we all have to live and act as if we were sure and as if we had reliable knowledge.
We have to stand somewhere as we decide the next step forward.
Yet whether we think of ourselves as secularist or as religious, we cannot be absolutely certain in such a way that our certainty cannot be challenged by other people.
Delusion is possible for everyone: feeling certain does not mean that therefore the world is as we think it is.
All of us can make mistakes.
The unavoidable fact of the matter is that both religion and secularism are stances.
To vary the analogy, not to be religious is  already to have invested money in what is as high a risk venture as an investment in religion.
Secondly, it is impossible to prove assumptions, but this does not mean that we are just locked into a position for ever.
Experience of life, and genuine discussion with people of other views, can enable us to add to, and revise, and even occasionally to give up, aspects of the stance which we have adopted so far.
What is needed is a willingness to be open to fresh possibilities — to be prepared for a constant voyage of exploration.
We need to look at assumptions, seeing whether we think they really are justified, and if so, do they really lead to the positions which we at the moment think they lead to.
For example, if we think that a basic assumption is that people matter as persons, and that this is justified, then what follows?
(a) does this entail a secularist view of the universe and of life as a whole?
(b) does it leave the options open for religion?
(c) does it maybe lead more naturally to a religious view of the world?
The case against secularism
At this point we can move to the case against secularism.
RE needs to sow seeds of doubt into the current widespread acceptability of secularism.
Suggestions are made in Chapter 13 on how the possibility of a different perspective can be approached in the classroom, and it might be helpful to read these two chapters in conjunction.
In Chapter 2, 11 aspects of contemporary society which can cause trouble for religion were outlined.
Three of these are of major significance: scientism, relativism and religious intolerance.
The others are largely dependent on them.
Secularism based on a mistaken view of science
Figure 3.1 offers a possible starting-point for explaining why science has for many people ruled out religion.
The root problem here is the question of how we can arrive at absolutely certain and reliable knowledge.
Scientific method, using experiment and reasoning, has led to a marvellous extension of knowledge.
But it has also led to assumptions which cause religion to be ignored, doubted and re-interpreted.
This is because of certain -isms or hardened stances.
The diagram gives three: 1.
Positivism is the name given to the philosophy based on the principle that all claims to knowledge must be scientifically provable — there must be "positive proof" .
This philosophy was developed first in the seventeenth century and it has become increasingly influential ever since.
2.
Scepticism is the familiar name given to the appropriateness of doubting the reliability of something until it is proved beyond shadow of doubt.
3.
Relativism is a stance which assumes that opinions which cannot  be tested scientifically are just subjective and relative to the particular context giving rise to them, to cultural upbringing and different individual and group experience.
All these -isms together set up a serious fact/belief divide whereby facts are regarded as objective, reliable and unbiased, and values, principles and beliefs as subjective, unreliable and probably biased.
On the doubtful side of this line come most of the things which people care most about — matters associated with personal relationships, the arts, moral issues and religion.
The fact/belief divide is powerfully at work today as for example the debate on the original National Curriculum proposals with regard to the teaching of history and geography has amply attested.
The way that many politicians and others have called for the teaching of "facts" and wish to throw out all matters relating to "mere opinion" such as environmental concerns, shows how unaware many people are that there is any problem with regard to the reliability of facts or the possibility of there being evidence supporting beliefs and values.
The fact/belief divide is simply taken for granted.
Yet the positivism which is ultimately responsible for it is deeply flawed in three ways: it is illogical, unscientific and exclusivist.
It contradicts itself.
It claims that proof is necessary for knowledge, yet cannot prove itself to be true.
It appeals to reason, but in order to reason we have got to take something for granted as a starting point and this cannot be proved.
Another way of expressing the same idea is that logic is like kicking a ball — it may go in a straight line, but if the direction is wrong it will not help the team to win the game.
It is illogical
But how do we know in which direction to head?
There is no proof on which to draw reliably for that.
It rests on what is bound to be, to some extent, subjective assessment, as in playing a game when there are rules and communal experience to draw on, but ultimately it depends on the players' awareness and skill.
Positivism contradicts actual scientific experience and findings.
Many leading scientists do not consider that science can give absolutely reliable and unchallengeable knowledge.
Increasingly today, they are accepting that scientific pronouncements have an unavoidable element, not only of subjectivity, but also of informed guesswork about them.
This is because of the nature of the world which is so complex and has what appears to be an inbuilt indeterminism or chance.
It is unscientific
An anecdote told by a scientist well summarizes this element of randomness: "When I visited the European Medium Range Weather Forecasting Centre they told me," We can predict the weather  accurately provided it doesn't do anything unexpected "" (Stewart 1989: 131).
To insist therefore that science provides cast-iron knowledge is to believe in a mirage.
Science cannot provide that kind of certainty.
Furthermore, it is often overlooked that we can only apply scientific method to a tiny fraction of the impressions upon which we act.
This very selectivity of what the scientist chooses to notice and work upon is another reason for saying that science is to some extent subjective.
Besides this, the whole process of scientific investigation is based on a series of assumptions which the scientist makes, very often at an unconscious level.
If those assumptions were seriously challenged the scientist would not be able to operate.
(See suggested reading in Chapter 13, p. 202 n. 1.)
A positivist view of science excludes an enormous area of life.
Scientific method is obviously extemely valuable for finding out about things amenable to observation, experiment and logical progression of thought.
To say however that this route supplies the only reliable way to knowledge is grossly to overstep its boundaries.
It is in fact to be very dogmatic and to try to say something about every other way of knowledge, and every other thing to be known.
For by insisting it is the only way to knowledge it is dismissing other ways as unimportant, irrelevant and probably misleading.
It is exclusivist
This is a wide agenda.
Where is the scientific evidence to support so wide an onslaught?
The intrusion of the single word "only" is a serious fault.
This challenge of scientific method to ways of knowing is probably more significant today than the well-publicized clashes between religion and science associated with Galileo and with Darwin.
It was indeed Darwin's wife, Emma, herself a scientist, who pointed out the real danger in the use of scientific method when she asked him: "May not the habit in scientific pursuits of believing nothing till it is proved, influence your mind too much in other things which cannot be proved in the same way? and which if true are likely to be above our comprehension?" 
Doubt can play a very useful role in resisting credulity and naivety, but to argue that only if you doubt can you arrive at the truth (a position of scepticism) is to disregard the question of what is to be known.
In getting to know a person for example, to insist on doubting everything he or she does and says all the time will soon put an end to any effective relationship — doubt is simply not appropriate.
We get to know people by accepting them, by trusting them — the opposite of doubt — and by "giving them the benefit of the doubt" indeed, unless exceedingly strong evidence to the contrary presents itself.
Exclusivism frequently occurs unintentionally but nevertheless effectively through the teaching of separate subject areas which tends  to give the impression that they offer a complete explanation of something.
Secularism based on relativism
The fact that religion won't just go away — that it is a phenomenon to be explained — has led those influenced by positivism to explain religion as entirely a matter of social and cultural conditioning and outward show: basically religion is a kind of cultural dressing-up game.
This is a view of religion which is seen as primarily like fashion — what people "put on" .
Such "sartorial" religion is taken seriously indeed, because it deals with deep human needs, desires and questions, and the level of conditioning can be deeply internalized.
It can nevertheless be seen as a kind of charade whereby societies have in the past been held together but which, as a charade, is replaceable by something not involving the pretence element.
For there is no truth-element involved in religion.
It is all a matter of cultural focusing.
Relativism draws attention to what Aristotle noticed long ago: "Fire burns both in Hellas and in Persia; but men's ideas of right and wrong vary from place to place." 
People brought up in different places and having different life experiences will come up with different opinions.
If they had been born into a different culture they would have believed something quite different.
Before responding to this objection against religion it is important first to acknowledge the insights it brings — insights often neglected in earlier centuries.
Just as Figure 3.1 draws attention to the proper use of science, so there is something extremely valuable and "right" about a relativist approach, provided it does not overstep itself and pretend it has the whole truth.
These insights include awareness of: 1.
an amazing diversity of views — even within one society this is so, and even more so on a global scale; 2. the importance of context in understanding why people are as they are, and believe as they do, and assume what they do; 3. the possibility of self-delusion: we could be conditioned into mistaken views; 4. the importance of non-judgemental attitudes towards people; 5. a style of education which encourages individual learning skills rather than teacher-dominated presentation of content.
As such it seems particularly appropriate for a time of rapid change and the need to unlearn dogmatism.
These insights are muddled, however, if the little word "only" creeps in to the way in which they are expressed.
 "What you believe is  only a matter of where you were born, and what people around you believe." 
The short maxim, "It's all relative" expresses the same exclusivism.
In this way beliefs and values are denied their claim to be real knowledge.
There are at least three strong arguments against relativism as a stance which it is important that we help pupils to understand.
Relativism actually bows itself out.
For if all opinions are relative, then the view that all opinions are relative is itself relative and therefore not true in itself.
So if it is true it is false.
It is illogical
This is like the puzzle which can quite infuriate children as well as adults: one side of the paper has written on it: "The sentence on the other side of this piece of paper is not correct" , and the other side has this sentence, "The sentence on the other side is correct" .
Which side is right?
The point is of course that the puzzle itself is false in setting up an impossible situation.
Similarly, the relativist stance does not work unless it makes an exception of itself which denies its own principle.
In my experience children in primary schools as well as older pupils not only can see this point, but also enjoy doing so — they find it intriguing.
Relativism as a stance ignores what is central to religion — its truth-claims.
It assumes that there can be no evidence worth discussing concerning the truth of religious beliefs.
It is exclusivist
This is to misrepresent religion.
Religious faith is based on what is believed to be true.
Within Judaism, Christianity and Islam, faith is a response to what is claimed as revelation about the nature of reality.
Within religions of Indian origin, such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Sikhism, certain views of reality being as it is are taken for granted, such as dharma — the existence of a moral law, and karma — the impact of this on individuals according to how much they fulfil or fail to fulfil dharma, and samsara — the process of reincarnation.
These are not regarded as just ideas in the mind, or a figment of the collective imagination, but as true.
The attractiveness of the cultural explanation of religion is that it appears to account for the diversity in religious practices and beliefs without the necessity to get involved in controversy.
Cultures are like colours — we can have any number on our palette without any problems.
We don't need to enter the troubled waters of religious truth-claims.
Yet as the sociologist Peter Berger has pointed out, while a sociological perspective on religion is extremely illuminating, fascinating and insightful, it can be misread as an argument against religion (Berger 1969: 9).
It can seem to offer a completely adequate  explanation of religion which bypasses what religious believers have always insisted upon as the truth.
Such matters become safely and clinically bracketed away into the equation: knowledge = understanding of religious people (who believe x, y, or z).
The possibility that knowledge = understanding of x, y or z is ruled out.
This is to be just as dogmatic as relativists accuse religious people of being.
It is to risk leaving out what religion is really about, rather like music without sound, or mathematics without numbers.
The pervasiveness of a version of religion as culturally cosmetic subtly does a lot of harm to people; it can be very dismissive and hurtful, marginalizing what makes a religious person tick.
This can have the effect of isolating that person and creating the ghetto mentality.
It can also cause self-crisis in which the mainspring of a person's belief system is called into doubt and inwardly crumbles without anything strong and important to take its place.
It could be destructive in its consequences
Fear of this happening is a prime reason for some religious people's failure to relate to other people's views; they therefore take refuge in intransigent attitudes often referred to by other people as fundamentalist or extremist.
Often, therefore, relativism produces, through reaction to it, precisely what it sets out to destroy: increased dogmatism.
More often the impact of dogmatically held relativism on other people is to cause them to waver, feel uncertain and drift into what they feel they can be sure about — mostly in Western society a materialist attitude to life, or perhaps pursuing a lifestance which thinks it has avoided value judgements.
Of course it has not; for example, with regard to moral issues, the typically relativist view that there are no absolutes is itself a stance based on assumptions which it is possible to challenge.
It is also a potentially destructive one.
Put in a nutshell, it puts the whole concept of justice into jeopardy.
If all is relative, then protest against racism, sexism and so forth is at root an arbitrary subjective one — why shouldn't somebody be racist if all is a matter of mere opinion or expediency?
If there are no absolutes or eternal values, then the moral imperative behind such movements evaporates into thin air.
The appeal to human rights, which has provided the primary motive power behind freedom movements throughout the world, has a non-discardable moral aspect to it which denies the relativist stance.
This moral underlay even shows itself in the fervour and intensity with which relativists dismiss those who disagree with them as "dogmatic" .
Values are necessarily grounded in belief.
The relativism of values seems so sensible and convincing until we reflect on what this implies, namely that what we feel passionately about with regard to truth or justice or purpose of life has no justification apart from the fact that we happen to think like this.
This consideration leads us on to the third major argument supporting secularism, that based on a lively concern for justice, peace, goodwill and genuine respect for people.
Secularism based on hatred of religious intolerance
A major reason why people decide to have nothing to do with religion is that, in the name of religion, much injustice, violence and bigotry has been perpetrated.
An example is the writer, A.N.
Wilson, whose rejection of religion was on account of its encouragement of so much evil.
An extract from his booklet, printed in The Observer on 2 June 1991, caused it to receive a record mailing from readers, many of whom supported his "boo-ing" of all religious leaders as so many cackling geese.
This is so widespread a reason for rejecting religion, present in all strata of society and amongst all types of people, young and old, that any RE which fails to help pupils think clearly about it is seriously deficient.
I want to express this point very strongly indeed.
The sentimentality conveyed by the careful selection of only "nice" aspects of religion to present to pupils causes them to see it — and perhaps believe in it — as just a fairy story unrelated to the real world.
For in the real world there is a nasty side to religion, and religious people can become ogres.
Religion is responsible for much injustice affecting ordinary everyday life as well as newspaper-headline material.
Religious people often too easily run away from this, but school RE must not.
Various considerations however undermine the force of this objection to religion.
To dismiss religion because of its potential for evil is to risk being onesided and exclusivist, committing a logical error, failing to appreciate the nature of religion, and mistaking the real culprit responsible for such unedifying behaviour.
I shall discuss each of these considerations in turn.
This objection to religion is highly selective in what it chooses to notice about religion; it ignores all its beneficial aspects.
Religion has been, and is, capable of sustaining some of the finest civilizations the world has seen, and it has attracted many of the most brilliant and high-minded people who have ever lived.
To ignore what has been regarded as central by such civilizations and persons can hardly claim to be a fair and objective approach.
A one-sided and exclusivist view
If religion has produced its hypocrites and bigots, it has also produced people like St Francis and Sri Ramana (see Chapter 6).
To notice only the bad, when there is so much good, may be seen as a jaundiced view.
There is no necessary connection between evil and religion, either a logical one or on factual grounds.
To argue that religion can go wrong, and therefore should be rejected, is like saying that because surgery can go wrong, therefore all surgeons should be pensioned off.
Eggs can become poisoned, therefore eggs should no longer form part of a staple diet…!
A logical error
To blame religion for what could be people's failure to live up to it is not logical.
Just because the vicar down the road is selfish and insensitive, I am not justified in concluding that therefore religion is bad.
Another explanation of the vicar's selfishness is possible, namely that he does not live up to his religion and is therefore a poor representative of it.
In fact this is the case because Christianity does not teach, "Thou shalt put thyself first" .
If the vicar thinks it does he is mistaken.
If the risk of eating eggs being poisoned is extremely high, then we should be justified in rejecting eating them.
People who oppose religion on the grounds of its intolerance and bigotry think that the risks are very high.
This is where we need to turn to the factual evidence.
Appreciating the nature of religion
This indicates clearly that religion has no monopoly of evil.
The blatant example of Stalin has vividly shown the world this.
It suggests therefore that there is another explanation for such behaviour.
The diagnosis is misleading if it gives the impression that there is a straight connection between the expression of religious belief and bigotry.
It is essential to appreciate that when religious people show bigotry, intolerance, narrow-mindedness, violence and all other such forms of evil, they are in fact betraying the religion which they say they uphold.
They stand condemned by the very tenets of their religions unless that religion is in itself a perverse and cancerous development which will in time kill what gave it birth in any case.
All the great world religions have very high moral codes which reach out towards a quality of authentic selflessness and love for all others which is the antithesis of selfishness and hatred.
(See Chapter 8 on this.)
The sternest critics of religion have often been found within religions.
Religious people themselves, because of the strength and depth of their religious convictions, have appreciated most thoroughly the extent of the abuse of religion.
This is because such bigotry and violence are the result not of being too religious, but of not being religious enough, of superficiality, of mistaken ideas about what religion is about.
As Edward Hulmes quoted in his book in this series, Education and Cultural Diversity: The great teachers of religion have always had to get rid of the useless lumber which accumulates in its progress — the rigid dogmatism, the narrow legalism, the mechanical rites, the silly superstitions which may become a substitute for religious life.
Many religious people are as worried as non-religious people about the abuse of religion.
Speaking about the resurgence of interest in religion which many people see in the world today, the Chief Rabbi, Jonathan Sacks, asks "Whether religious revival might be not a refreshing breeze but a destructive hurricane." 
He goes on to note how"revolutionary leaders have enlisted religious passion…it is an explosive combination.
War becomes a holy struggle against the demonic other.
Terror is sanctified.
Hatred becomes a form of piety"(Sacks 1991: 79).
It is not religion, nor its truth-claims, that is the trouble, but rather attitudes of selfishness and possessiveness — of thinking of religion or of truth as an entity which we have and somebody else does not have.
The real culprit
The distinction between religion and exclusivism is crucial.
People can believe in something strongly without assuming that therefore other people are wrong to believe something else.
Apparent contradictions often turn out to be paradoxes — insight relating to different circumstances and experiences.
What never fails to harm is pride in being right.
People may actually be right but that is not an excuse for smugness, and non-interest in what anybody else thinks except to knock them down and force them to acknowledge the superiority of one's own views.
When this happens, the rightness of the belief or value or action is not infrequently forgotten altogether and ignored.
The nineteenth century headteacher who knew he was right that God loved everyone, and would therefore thrash any boy who did not acknowledge that, had in fact paid almost no attention whatever to the content of his belief.
A moment's reflection would have helped him to see the folly, cruelty, and hypocrisy of trying to force someone to acknowledge this.
Many people suffer from the same disease of thinking they must be right all the time, and they must push their rightness onto other people.
This is what does the damage — not religion — for it can be seen in all walks of life wherever people are emotionally involved.
Because religion appeals so strongly to the emotions and to life commitment, it is a special temptation for religious people.
(See Chapter 8 for further discussion of this.)
Conclusion: giving religion a fair hearing
The argument developed in this chapter is of vital importance for the teaching of RE because it concerns deep-seated anxieties with religion  which people have today.
These must be addressed in such a way as to help pupils to see that the questions are open ones, worthy of their attention throughout life.
Religion deserves a fair hearing, and effective RE will see that it gets that.
It deserves it because: 1.
Unlike positivism and relativism, it is not based on an illogical position.
It does not assume any proof demonstrating its validity, and therefore it cannot be knocked down for not offering it.
Of course religion can be challenged, but there are plenty of sound reasons for religion.
2.
To consider religion carefully is not to be dogmatic and exclusivist, but actually the opposite, for it allows an important area of experience — both communal and private — to be explored instead of being ignored or reinterpreted in terms inappropriate to it.
Religion is thus allowed to speak for itself.
3.
Religion can be creative.
It can afford motivation as hardly anything else can, and its influence can help both society and individuals to a fuller and more satisfying form of life.
Whether school RE reflects the obvious case for it depends upon the openness with which it is approached and the style of teaching adopted.
And this brings us to the next chapter.
The purpose of RE
Secularist influence within RE
The secularist assumption is challengeable, as we have seen, and thus the ground is cleared for a serious consideration of religion.
Yet much of the RE of the past 30 years has been strangely reluctant to offer the challenge.
To some extent this is because secularist attitudes have invaded RE, as they have influenced the thinking of many religious people in general, often in unsuspected ways because of the level of secularist indoctrination in our society.
RE teachers have responded positively to many of the insights of the modern world but in the process they have sometimes allowed the pendulum to swing too far to the other side.
Table 4.1 sets out a number of features of RE which illustrate this trend.
Thus for example many have deemed it necessary — in order to make RE relevant, acceptable and interesting today — to downplay work on religious vocabulary and explicit beliefs.
This has led to considerable confusion as to what religion is anyway, because any necessary reference to the divine, to God, to the transcendent has been removed from it.
This has not encouraged clear thinking on a number of other points of vital importance to RE, such as the question of openness and religious commitment presumed by many to be incompatible.
A close look at the points listed in Table 4.1 will show the level of confusion operating.
Thus the two columns of section 2 are not opposites in the way that the two columns of section 1 appear to be.
Furthermore, the points under the first column of section 2 have many inbuilt inconsistencies.
An emphasis, for example, on observable practices does not fit neatly alongside an emphasis on implicit religion.
All this has profoundly affected those who teach RE in both primary and secondary schools, some of whom really do not seem to know what the subject is about.
The goal-posts seem constantly to be moving — indeed they are often told there are no goal-posts.
It is a bit like trying to paint a picture with no picture frame at all in mind — endless possibilities mean confusion and distraction and difficulty in applying oneself to anything.
Effect on Teaching
In practice of course, faced with a class of pupils, decisions have to be made, so people settle for what is on offer without any real consideration of the overall value or purpose.
The pressure of this or that requirement or directive, together with the environment in which one happens to be, for example working under an agnostic headteacher, or a staunch Christian one, or with an enthusiastic multi-faith team, etc., governs what happens.
I certainly want teachers to respond closely to the situation in which they are — but they need to be clear about the overall function of RE, what it is about, in order to respond in a way which is meaningful so as not to be just taken over by the latest influence.
The purpose of this chapter is to aid this by: 1.
looking at the main views on offer about the proper focus of RE and; 2. setting out a possible rapprochement between these approaches which tries to bring together what is good about them, and add what they all tend to omit.
Three views of the purpose of RE
There have been broadly three quite different approaches to RE which are still discernible today.
Any one person may hold aspects of each together, though not necessarily in a way which is successfully integrated.
The confessional model
The traditional answer given as to the purpose of RE has been nurture within a particular faith.
In Western civilization this has generally been considered to be Christianity, as this is the religion which has most powerfully moulded the values and beliefs on which society is based, just as in a Muslim country for example the religion to be handed on would be Islam.
This approach recognizes the seriousness of failing to induct pupils into the heritage of a great tradition.
The recent debate concerning the role of RE in the new legislation of 1988 has shown how powerful this attitude towards religion still is among politicians, the church and the public at large.
Many fear the collapse of a society which is not undergirded by religious principles to which the young are trained to commit themselves.
The dogmatic attempt to hand on religious faith through education is very much alive within religions other than Christianity also.
Indeed the presence of a significant number of people of other faiths in our society has given fresh courage to many Christians to try to reassert the "confessional" approach to RE.
If for example Muslims want to bring up their children within their own faith, perhaps in Muslim schools, surely it is time — so the argument runs — to reverse the anti-confessional trend and teach Christianity as true?
Almost all the advocates of the confessional approach today would in fact distance themselves from the kind of RE that this has often produced in the past.
They would mostly agree with the list of "helpful" features in Table 4.1, on page 38, and acknowledge that the confessional approach should not engage in those in the righthand column.
But they would still insist that induction into a tradition is right — it should be teaching religion not just teaching about religion in a way which distances it and effectively marginalizes it.
They would also assume the validity of the religious starting-point, and while acknowledging that faith should never be forced onto people — that freedom is essential for real religious awareness to develop — they are nevertheless sure that they are right and that no teacher will be misleading the young if they teach religion straight.
Although therefore most advocates of a confessional approach have taken on board quite a lot of the criticism against old-style RE understood as indoctrinating, narrow, academic and meaningless to the vast majority of pupils, they have not gone far enough in meeting certain objections.
These objections include the need to start where people are and relate to the pressures placed on them.
As discussed in Chapter 2, the world in which RE has to happen is a pluralist, secularist one and only a minority of the population acknowledge that religion is an important  part of their lives.
To meet the needs of pupils growing up in such an environment, RE must not assume any religious faith — it has to start much further back with questions of why there is such a phenomenon as religion.
And it must help pupils to come to their own commitments as they live their lives in a world of confusing, diverse and often conflicting values and beliefs.
Objections to the confessional approach
A second objection is that it still has not taken the point seriously enough about the rights of pupils to autonomy and freedom in reflectiveness and choice of commitment.
This point was acknowledged even 150 years ago by a far-sighted Baptist parson, John Howard Hinton.
The way he expressed it, quaint to us today, nevertheless neatly points up the dilemma: If one government has a right to require that children be religiously educated, so has another, so have all (whether…in Constantinople Islamism, or Pekin Confucionism…).
Would all this be right — this forcible impregnation of the minds of millions upon millions of children, with or without the consent of parents, with these systems of error, all called religion?
To the objection that Christianity is true while the others are false he replied significantly, "It may be so said, we think so; nothing more." 
He took his argument further than that based on the existence of the pluralist society whether of his day or ours, and drew attention to the crucial question of truth-claims which cannot be publicly demonstrated in such a way that reasonable people may not disagree.
A third objection to the confessional approach is that it assumes that religion provides the adequate answer to the dilemmas facing society.
 "If people had been taught to believe in God then this or that calamity would not have happened." 
Yet, as has already been discussed in Chapter 3, it unfortunately is the case that religion can become a powerful ally of thuggery, violence, aggression, intolerance and denial of human rights.
Just to invoke God's name for what one chooses to do is no guarantee whatever that the thought, word or action really is God's will, or is creative and positive as opposed to being destructive and negative.
Christians need to remember the words recorded of Jesus: "Not everyone who says to me on that day, Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom but those who do the will of the Father" (Matthew 7:21).
This remains a pertinent warning for all who profess religious faith, or who argue that religious commitment by itself can save the world.
The saying draws attention to the crucial distinction between outward words and behaviour and inner integrity and authentic devotion — a distinction which RE must share with pupils.
(See Chapters 7 and 8 for further discussion of this.)
This distinction may be unclear to religious believers themselves, and consideration of this  possibility suggests a fourth objection to the "Confessional" model for RE: it does not have to, but easily can, unless great care is taken, result in a narrowing of perspectives.
What is communicated can easily be a view that ignores other religions, or that interprets them inadequately within terms of a comparison with one's own, or that accepts them without trying to relate to them so that they exist in a kind of schizophrenic soup in the mind and emotions.
In Britain this kind of attitude has led to considerable animosity between some supporters of teaching Christianity in schools and some supporters of a multi-faith approach.
An unfortunate and unnecessary bifurcation has taken place, the latter group overreacting to the perceived dogmatism and parochiality of the former.
I shall return to this after looking at the other two models (see pp. 46–48).
The Highest Common Factor model
This is a term which I have coined myself.
It indicates the kind of approach to RE which wants to nurture pupils in values, attitudes and interests associated with religion, yet which can be acceptable to the widest number of people, including those who are not religious.
It looks for the Highest Common Factor (HCF) and seeks to promote that.
Those unhappy with the "confessional" model, mostly in its Christian form, have over the years sought to escape from the dilemma — unconsciously or consciously — by subtracting from the equation of RE all that is controversial and likely to cause trouble.
They hope to nurture pupils in the rest.
What this HCF consists of has been seen in different ways.
Traditionally it has meant some form of moral education to encourage pupils to develop attitudes of cooperation and concern for justice.
A little religion is thought, furthermore, to be the way to reduce crime and promote a stable society.
Following the immense popularity of Goldman's analysis of the problems facing RE in the 1960s (Goldman 1964; 1965), the emphasis on moral education was given a partner, that of life-themes — general topics which could be seen in greater depth through helping pupils to appreciate their symbolic use within religion.
More recently, the quest for "ultimate meaning" has been understood to be at the heart of RE — and something which all can share in.
This is generally linked to a sense of the importance of personal development, so that RE can play a significant role in PSE (personal and social education) courses.
The induction into values and beliefs is here very low-key with the emphasis on personal search.
This approach has received considerable reinforcement recently in what is often referred to as "the experiential approach to RE" (see Chapter 6 for detailed discussion of this) which focuses on helping  pupils to relate to their own experiences and develop the skills they need to reflect on this in a meaningful way.
The main difficulty with the HCF approach, however interpreted, is that it tends to jettison most of what is distinctive of religion.
This is not just a matter of irritating supporters of the confessional approach.
It is that we tend to be left with an RE which effectively has lost its "R" .
We might just as well call it the Non-R RE model.
Objections to the HCF model
The widely accepted, and soundly based, educational aim of RE, advocated in almost all syllabuses and policy statements, is to help pupils achieve understanding of religion.
It is difficult to see how avoiding teaching about what is distinctive of religion can help people gain an understanding of it!
The intentions may be fine, but when considering what is actually happening in schools where the HCF approach is practised — as it is in very many — it seems to fit the marvellously Jewish remark attributed to Sam Goldwyn: "on the surface, profound, but deep down, superficial" .
And the reasons, while many, are closely connected to the watering- down of any specifically religious content to a safe Highest Common Factor.
This may provide calmer sailing but is it worth the trouble?
Can we reach our destination of understanding of religion that way?
Furthermore, the rights of pupils to autonomy and self-responsibility are still not adequately protected under the new form of confessionalism.
Certain principles and values are assumed to be unchallengeable and therefore to be nurtured.
Many assumptions are made which pupils are not encouraged to question at all.
This becomes clear especially to those who disagree with the content of the nurture.
Thus, for example, Goldman has been accused of trying to instill Christianity — and his own particular brand of it — by the backdoor.
Another serious objection to this HCF kind of approach is that it fails to prepare pupils for the real world, helping them to appreciate the strength of religious conviction and extend to people of all kinds of religious persuasion, including those dubbed as "fundamentalist" or "extremist" , real empathy and desire to understand their positions.
The so-called open non-dogmatic approach not infrequently is arbitrary in its welcome, and conceals a strong form of commitment held sometimes with great intransigence.
There tends to be a lack of conceptual rigour in the way this HCF approach works in practice.
Much RE writing in the past 20 years or so has centred on the raising of ultimate questions, and there has also been an insistence on developing in pupils skills of understanding and of handling these questions.
This reflects the trend in education as a whole away from the imparting of so-called factual information towards a greater concern with process — with how we know.
Yet despite this there has mostly in practice been little depth, little more  than discussion of opinions with regard to these ultimate questions — what one disillusioned teacher called "mutual exchange of ignorance" .
Real attention to the quite sophisticated concepts with which religion is concerned has tended to be dismissed on the grounds that, apart from a select minority, pupils are incapable of any sustained thought, uninterested in such hypothetical and academically conceived ideas which in any case are mostly of historical interest and irrelevant to the modern world.
Chapters 5 and 7 will especially try to address these issues.
The induction into beliefs and values separated from all that is religiously controversial or ill-fitting in a secularist, pluralist world, which the HCF model sees as the focus of RE, is performing a valuable educational service, but it is one which can and should be shared by the school as a whole, and every subject-area in it.
RE should not be expected to bear the full weight of this responsibility, especially because if it does it cannot deal with what is distinctive and peculiar to it — there is not time, etc.
Furthermore, moral education must be, and is seen by people to be, distinct from RE.
Values have validity without any specifically religious component, so it is unhelpful — indeed dangerous for a secularist society — to link moral standards to religious commitment, or allow religious education to do the lion's share of moral education.
The interest in values education across the curriculum, e.g. in anti-sexism, anti-racism, and anti-elitism, and the impact of the "Green Movement" in all subject areas, is in fact taking the mat from under the feet of such HCF RE.
And it is better so, because all these value concerns do need to be pursued within other disciplines as within RE.
This is helping many people see that RE should have something more distinctive to contribute to the values education of pupils than what can happen within the teaching of other subjects.
How far the experiential approach offers something distinctive will be discussed in Chapter 6.
Although many would now see this HCF model as pushing RE into a backwater if it is pursued on its own, it is still a highly influential view, and is likely to go on being so for some time because Agreed Syllabuses on the whole encourage it.
They do so normally alongside another approach, the hope being that by putting the two ingredients together a synthesis will appear.
Increasingly, such a synthesis is seen as important, indeed essential for proper motivation whether at teacher or pupil level, and for the health of RE in general.
The Phenomenological model for RE
The name "phenomenological" betrays its origins in University departments, but in ordinary language this approach is usually referred  to loosely as the multi-faith or world religions approach.
The aim is to develop an attitude of tolerance and openness through the study of religions.
A particularly influential way of studying them was outlined by Ninian Smart, one of the first members of the Shap Working Party which has been campaigning for this approach since the early 1970s: religions each have at least six dimensions: doctrinal, mythological, ethical, ritual, experiential and social.
More recently he has added a seventh: the material and artistic dimension (Smart 1989: 12ff).
RE should aim at giving pupils information and understanding about all of these, bearing in mind the age and aptitude of pupils.
Michael Grimmitt in his widely read book, What can I do in RE?
(Grimmitt 1973), which advocated the dimensional alongside the existential approach to RE, advised intermingling the experiential, mythological and ritual dimensions and focusing on them in the primary school, adding the social and ethical together for lower Secondary, and finally bringing in the doctrinal with the upper forms of Secondary schools, as this dimension is the most difficult to cope with (pp. 50, 92f).
The aim of RE according to the phenomenologists is promoting respect for, and understanding of, religion and its significance for behaviour in such a way as to leave intact pupils' integrity — it is not educating into religion in any way, but educating about religion understood as more than information because involving a positive and creative approach to pluralism.
Sometimes the phrase "celebration of diversity" is used to point to the affective as well as cognitive impact which this approach would like to see in pupils.
There has been considerable criticism recently of this approach, even though it seems to be now so firmly entrenched in many schools.
It has frequently been lampooned as the "supermarket approach" to religion, or the "Cook's Tour of World Religions" .
While such phrases do not do justice to its many insights — to which I will return in Chapter 8 — there are nevertheless some serious weaknesses in the approach.
Objections to the phenomenological model
First, it can encourage superficial learning.
This can be borne out by looking at many of the resources available — often well-produced, informative and written from a sympathetic point of view but lacking depth.
As an example, I have before me a well-produced booklet, interestingly and appropriately written, which confounds the young reader with factual details about Hindu mythology and customs.
It could, however, easily leave the impression, especially with Western children, that religion is a matter of irrational feelings and sentimentality divorced from the real world and divorced from truth.
It is not easy for twentieth-century children to see any profound link between the real world and the mantra described as "magic syllables" and the action of the priest in "bringing the goddess to life" .
One teacher indeed summed up the book as portraying religion as a fairy story and a religious festival as like a birthday party.
Second, it easily misrepresents religion as something which can be neatly packaged up in sections.
Themes like "rites of passage" or "festivals" can so attract attention to sociological aspects of religion, that the impression is given to pupils that religion is about how people organize themselves and give meaning to their lives — that the essence of religion is manufactured by societies and by people.
The view that religion is a response to revealed truth, and the implications of this with regard to how we can be expected to find out about it, are not normally considered at all.
In an article in the British Journal of Religious Education in 1989, Nicola Slee notes that in practice, There is little respect for the claim of religious believers that it is a lifetime's work to come to know and be possessed by (note, not to possess) the truth of even one tradition.
[She goes on to note that]…the needs of squeezing religions into manageable units can easily lead to unhelpful emphases on the superficial, the external and the exotic on the one hand, or the conservative, the established and the institutional in religious traditions on the other hand, at the expense of such less obvious and less accessible factors as the profound interiority of faith, the mundane ordinariness of discipleship, and the radical reforming zeal within traditions which challenges them to continually renew themselves.
The inevitable over-simplification, if not actual misrepresentation, of the richness, complexity and dynamism of religious traditions can be deeply offensive to religious believers and can even lead to charges of racism.
(Slee 1989: 130)
I have quoted this objection at length because it is a very serious one.
The failure of the phenomenological approach to teach skills of discernment, and to wrestle with truth-claims and the problems these present when they are conflicting, does not prepare pupils to cope with secularist objections to religion.
Thirdly, the phenomenological approach can easily convey relativism.
The attempt to be fair to all traditions, by being equally tolerant of all and non-judgemental, can lead like a slippery slope from well-intentioned neutrality to profound scepticism about religion.
For the descriptive approach carries hidden messages of the impossibility of any fair evaluation, for all such beliefs are subjective and relative to particular cultures.
The "sartorial" version of religion is smuggled in unawares, and with it radical doubt as to the truth of any religion.
As a college lecturer, Slee comments (1989 p.130) that this is what has happened for many of the students now coming up through secondary schooling, as several of her own students can testify.
Like the third objection to the HCF model, the fourth is that it fails to prepare pupils for the pluralist world with its confusions, contradictions and instability.
Slee expresses it very clearly: They need help in wrestling with the questions of identity, truth and commitment which the contemporary pluralism of beliefs and values poses more sharply than ever before and which are therefore very real and pressing questions for children of the secular century.
Such questions will not and do not go away, whatever the philosophers of education dictate.
Pupils do ask questions of truth, do seek to establish moral foundations for their lives, do quest for a spirituality which will assuage their own sense of rootlessness and hunger for meaning as well as teach them how to live compassionately and courageously on our fragile planet.
(Slee 1989: 130)
@AHEAD NO LINE = The need for rapprochement
Slee argues (p.131ff) that the time is ripe for a rapprochement between confessional and phenomenological approaches to RE, and many voices in the RE world would appear to agree with her.
Robert Jackson, for example, envisages a "middle way" as a "study of religions conducted in such a way that it makes a distinctive contribution to the pupils' development of a coherent and personally satisfying set of beliefs and values" (Jackson 1987: 17).
This echoes the Schools Council Working Paper 36 which in 1971 expressed the view that RE"must include both the personal search for meaning and the objective study of the phenomena of religion.
It should be both a dialogue with experience and a dialogue with living religions so that one can interpret and reinforce the other"(p. 43).
Overcoming false polarization
In order to achieve this middle way it is important that a false polarization is overcome.
The debate over the Education Reform Act, and subsequent developments since then, such as the appeal by the London boroughs of Ealing and Newham against their local Agreed Syllabuses, has shown up the extent of this polarization.
Many of those concerned about the ignorance and marginalization of Christianity in numerous schools have failed to state publicly what is insightful about the multi-faith approach, and those convinced of the appropriateness of the latter have tended to display similar insensitivity towards the former.
Things are, however, rarely so simple.
In the first place there is much that is right about the confessionalist stance.
Traditional Christian teaching has been removed from many schools and replaced by what may be in the minds of teachers clear and accurate material, but which is not infrequently received as a mish-mash of other religions and vague talk of spiritual development.
Ignorance of Christianity has in some areas reached monumental proportions.
Often there has been no concern at all that perhaps more can be  expected educationally of the new Agreed Syllabuses.
The omission of any reference to "Jesus, God or the Bible anywhere" , raised by Mr Harry Greenaway concerning the Ealing syllabus, does raise a serious question.
As an editorial in the British Journal of Religious Education put it, "It could equally be claimed that the syllabus is defective because it did not refer to Krishna, Allah and the Guru Granth Sahib anywhere." 
It could indeed.
The real matter is in fact that the vast majority of children in this country are growing up in a secularist culture which rules out religion altogether, and that those within faith communities are living in a world in which their faiths will be more and more subjected to secularist interrogation.
Therefore it is no more satisfactory for Muslims or anyone else to have a syllabus which does not mention Allah anywhere than it is for Jesus, God and the Bible to be omitted.
Furthermore, the problems, as well as the delights, of diversity of views exist, and we cannot pretend they do not.
The confessionalist is typically too much aware of this problem, and the phenomenologist and supporter of the HCF approach is typically under-aware.
In the editorial mentioned above there was a significant reference to "the poverty of the local environment" in "an area where almost all the school population was Christian" .
This contains an unfortunate value judgement, not just upon the Christianity that precedes the reference, but on the whole concept of locality as somehow opposed to cosmopolitanism.
We do well to remember that many can live incredibly full lives and develop a very extensive range of sympathy and understanding, who live only within a geographically and culturally restricted circle.
The great composer Bach for example hardly ever left his native Germany.
Also there are many who roam the world in an entirely superficial fashion, who are not really "present" anywhere, who get bits and pieces of ideas from all over but who do not really understand them.
The argument for multi-faith RE, which I support, must not get involved in negative judgements of this kind.
People are not benighted and narrow and dogmatic just because they live in the Outer Hebrides or Gedney Drove End.
These same characteristics can often be found — with far less excuse — in well-seasoned travellers who have had the privilege of sampling far and wide.
What we are really talking about of course is entitlement — sharing the privileges of being able to be in touch with other cultures.
With this I agree fully.
But we need also to remember that there is another entitlement — the privilege of feeling at home somewhere, of understanding something in depth, of being immersed in a culture.
Many children exposed to global pluralism today lack this, and this is the underlying concern of those who support religiously confessional approaches to education.
Many Jews, Muslims and members of other world religions are just as concerned about this as many Christians.
A further point can be made.
There is no appreciation here that to teach Christianity could be a fine way of helping pupils towards that global perspective which I agree is desirable, and that the real issue is the superficiality or the depth of what is taught.
To reduce RE to opposing camps of Christianity versus world faiths is belittling and damaging.
Even if some people mistakenly do polarize the issue, those who claim to be more professional and enlightened should not.
It is really unacceptable to see the position as simplified along the lines of Christian emphasis bad, world religions good.
A much more positive way forward must be found, one which does justice to the insights of both sides, and which seeks to avoid the criticism which both sides must face as to how it is delivered in the classroom.
What this polarization shows up is a two-fold problem to be tackled: 1.
The confessional concern for commitment to certain beliefs and values needs to be broadened.
There is something intolerant and ungenerous about both the confessional and HCF models outlined above which fails to affirm the insights of those who start off from a different "confession" of whatever complexion this might be.
It must find a way of affirming the experience of others.
The need for balance
2.
The phenomenological model needs to be deepened.
It should acknowledge what is confessional about itself too which compromises it and opposes its intended outcome of openness and tolerance.
These beliefs and values cannot for example remain in sole Olympian splendour as necessarily always more important than others.
A re-alignment is needed and some significant additions made to the RE programme.
I believe such a rapprochement IS possible.
If, for the sake of clarity, a name or label is helpful, we might call it "Essentialist" RE.
Essentialist RE
This term emphasizes an approach to RE which concentrates on what is essential from several points of view, with regard to breadth, depth, relevance and time.
(See Table 4.2).
It assumes the importance of those qualities discussed in Chapter 1 (pages 6–8) and seeks to relate these to classroom practice.
Essentialist RE takes seriously the concerns of well-intentioned people within the three major models outlined.
The sevenfold purpose of RE   as set out on pages 50–2 represents the basic thrust of the confessional, the HCD and the phenomenological models respectively in the three aims each given under Sections A and B.
Breadth — balance between the models
Furthermore, the holistic emphasis on the interconnectedness of insights opposes isolationist views of religion and can help RE to be seen as "basic" to the curriculum.
(This is further discussed in Chapter 12, pp. 179–84.)
Essentialist RE seeks to go to the heart of the matter with regard to what religion really and distinctively is about.
This is notoriously difficult — to attempt any definition of what religion essentially is.
There has been a long-standing debate among philosophers and theologians.
Often the "essence" has been seen in terms which wider study of religions has shown to be too narrow or too idiosyncratic or in ways which undermine the significance of the external forms of religious traditions.
Depth — clarity as to what religion is
All turns on how the "essence" is seen, and the kind of assumptions brought to bear on the endeavour.
(This is set out in Chapter 5, e.g. p. 55, and Chapter 8, pp. 111–13.)
Suffice it here to note that I do not mean that all religions are really saying the same thing; that differences do not matter, that they all have basically the same origins, or fulfil the same functions.
Diversity, controversy and possible contradiction have to be taken seriously.
It is important to note that in  any case this question of the essence of religion is to be debated by pupils, not assumed for them.
This is possible because the ability of even very young children to engage in reflective thought has now been recognized in many educational circles (see Chapters 5 and 7 for discussion of this).
Essentialist RE focuses on what is essential educationally for each pupil.
Effective learning requires a certain simplicity of structure in which to contain the openness and indefiniteness of all genuine learning.
Furthermore, this "essence" needs to be capable of being infinitely adaptable according to the uniqueness of each person's experience and needs and interests.
What is serious about so much school work generally is that so frequently it seems to fail to have any deep effect on life outside the classroom.
The real needs of pupils are not being engaged with.
Relevance — educational needs of pupils
Essentialist RE therefore encourages a particular teaching style: a method which homes in on what is of central importance and relevance for each pupil.
Not based upon any consensus of content, nor the expectation that teachers will do the same thing with all the class, this takes seriously the concept of the teacher as the manager of pupils' own learning instead of a purveyor of information and ideas.
This is a very practical consideration.
All teachers are over-pressed with regard to what is expected of them, and none more so than those doing RE.
We cannot do everything in a very limited time, so we must select what is essential on the fairest and most comprehensive basis possible: that is, what we think may help pupils to cope with, and make decisions about, things which happen to them — at any age and at any level; and also what will encourage responsibility concerning the effects they themselves have on others.
I recently asked eleven experts on RE from widely differing backgrounds what they each saw as the major priority for RE.
The results exemplify a coming-together through emphasis on what is essential (Watson 1992).
Time — the need for priorities
The purpose of RE
Essentialist RE stresses both the E and the R of RE.
The purpose of education in general is to help each pupil to be responsible for his or her own self-education throughout life — holistically and with integrity.
The purpose of RE is to help them genuinely to reflect upon religion, opening up for them the possibility of a self-chosen and real commitment, religious or otherwise, so that the individual can freely play his or her role in the wider community, whether this be the faith community or society as a whole.
RE needs to focus on: 1.
inform about society, thus continuing the induction of pupils which they are already experiencing into the tradition which is theirs by virtue either of birth or of taking up residence in a country.
In the former case help is needed to acknowledge the changing nature of society, and in the latter to become bi-lingual, as it were, in a deeper way.
All Western societies have a heritage with religious roots — and still alive today despite massive conscious abandonment of the specifically religious aspect — and these roots are actually being strengthened by the multi-faith presence; 2. promote moral education in the sense of transcending the purely informational and inspirational in order to encourage pupils to play their part in maintaining an ordered and civilized society.
The motivational power, as well as the explanatory role, of religion has always had an important contribution to make to moral education; 3. actively to fight prejudice and encourage an attitude of tolerance towards other people and openness to what is different from one's own outlook.
The sympathetic and informed study of ethnic and religious minorities is crucial for the well-being of our multi-racial society.
A) Responsibility to society
4. develop and deepen pupils' grasp of religious concepts especially the key one of "God" .
Initiating pupils into theology is an essential part of RE, so that they may be on the wavelength of the major religions and be able — if they wish — to use their language and outlooks to make sense of their own personal experience.
They cannot use a vocabulary which they do not know, nor relate to what they are in deepest ignorance of; 5. promote pupils' own search for a commitment by which to live and find meaning and fulfilment in wrestling with ultimate questions;
B) Educational concern
6. counter stereotyping of people and religions, and develop the capacity to discern the real from the sham, the inner meaning from the external expression, the central from the peripheral.
Finally, there is another aim which relates to both Sections A and B, and which none of the models has taken seriously enough: 7. help pupils to learn how to cope with controversy, complexity, confusion, and uncertainty within a safe environment, so that they  are able to manage these unavoidable aspects of life without trying to resort to premature certainty, dogmatism or exclusivism.
This involves helping pupils so to develop skills of reflective thinking that they can be generously affirming of others without losing their own footing.
The paradox of openness and criticism should be appreciated, together with learning how to draw conclusions from evidence.
Coping with controversy
Centering on five basic questions
Essentialist RE can retain all the important and helpful features listed in Table 4.1 without carrying the price-tag of those in the opposite column which are increasingly today being seen as unacceptable.
It can do so by focusing on five basic questions which are expressed in Figure 4.1.
The circle and the square show the way in which the phenomenological and the personal aspects of understanding relate.
The three questions in the centre concern the proper focus of RE, attending to what religious people may consider to be central to religion: the questions of definition, integrity and truth.
This is not to be dogmatic about answers, but to encourage pupils to reflect on them, developing increasing knowledge and understanding of how religion is expressed, and learning how to make evaluation which is both personal and yet in touch with public enquiry.
A vital ingredient for exploring these five questions is imagination, and to that I now turn.
Imagination and the development of religious concepts
Saying that imagination is essential for effective RE is perhaps like pubs advertising good food.
No-one in their right mind would consider one offering bad or indifferent food!
Our society pays lip-service at least to the idea of imagination in that the word "imaginative" is normally regarded as a compliment — the opposite of "dull" .
It is worth clearing up one not infrequent misunderstanding.
Imaginative teaching is not what in the end matters — it is developing in pupils their capacity for imagination that counts.
Imaginative teaching does not necessarily produce the capacity for imagination in pupils.
They can be overstimulated by variety, and often it is the teacher's ideas that are expressed and not the pupils'.
Often, too, the teacher trammels the pupils too much within particular boundaries so that they are forced to go in the teacher's direction and not their own.
Being an enabler of pupils' learning is an unselfish task and "imaginative" teachers do not necessarily excel in qualities of humility and standing back and giving space to others.
Why, however, is it important that pupils' capacity for imagination is developed in order to understand religion?
Imagination is essential for getting on the wavelength of religious people
This use of imagination is probably obvious to everyone.
The importance of practising empathy, especially with what may appear strange and uncongenial, is a major aspect of RE.
This is not at all an easy task.
H.G. Wells wrote a story about a traveller in South America coming across a community of people who had all been born blind.
Imagine yourself as that traveller.
How would you set about convincing these blind people about the blueness of sky, the greenness of grass, the beauty of painting?
This kind of putting oneself in the place of another and attempting to portray and communicate something through a medium which is unsuitable to it is very essential for an understanding of religion.
The capacity for this use of imagination is closely related to attitudes of mind.
Openness, and a spirit of generosity towards other  people and what makes them tick, can enable very great barriers to be overcome.
It is not easy, for example, for a modern Westerner to understand eastern religion or the Semitic thought-forms at the root of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
An imaginative "thinking what I would think, if I was in their place" is something which has to be worked at.
Imagination is essential for understanding religious language and other forms of expression
It is easy for people to misunderstand religious language and ritual.
There is a very strong tendency to take literally what needs imaginative interpretation.
All the great religions affirm that at the heart of religion lies Mystery which nothing can adequately express: all religious forms of expression have the character of pointing towards this Mystery, and not describing it.
We need to appreciate that, as used in religion, "mystery" does not indicate a problem to be solved.
The kind of response which it calls forth is not a factual wonder why but a wonder at.
It does not question as such, but accepts the givenness of mystery which arouses awe and even adoration.
It may be helpful to visualize the difference between the two approaches by envisaging two circles, the one is given a precise central dot which is clearly defined, the other does not express the centre but has a number of lines on the circumference of the circle which point towards the centre.
The second approach to learning activates the imagination.
It helps people to appreciate mystery by not defining too easily and sewing it all up.
It has far greater fluidity and dynamism — it avoids the static quality of factual description.
There is no understanding of religion without appreciating that it concerns this second kind of expression and communication.
Religious language is not primarily informational but inspirational in becoming more and more aware of the extraordinary ramifications of the few essential truths.
This must be understood, really understood, for otherwise — whether or not we agree with the "truths" — we are likely to misinterpret what religious people believe.
For awareness of Mystery brings a paradox: at the same time that religious people claim to have knowledge of this Mystery they become more deeply aware that it is infinitely beyond any understanding.
The function of religious language, ritual and art form is in fact to try to express the inexpressible as a way towards greater awareness.
Imagination is essential for gaining knowledge in religion
Imagination extends the possibilities of knowledge.
Often people think of imagination as necessarily fantasy far removed from reality.
Yet in  fact imagination can be the means by which we can come to understand reality.
It enables us to envisage what is not immediately present to the senses.
Imagination is the capacity to make links and to see links — it is not discontinuous with reality, but is a way of understanding what really is there if only we can see it.
Einstein noted that imagination is more important than knowledge.
He used to conduct what came to be known among his fellow-scientists as his "Gedanken" (thought) experiments.
Russell Stannard, in a book on relativity written for children, explains how Einstein made his discoveries, not by finding new experimental results, but by drawing out the implications of what was already well-known.
One of Einstein's ways of working things out was to take the laws of nature as they were understood at the time and imagine them in unusual fictitious situations — such as, for instance , trying to imagine what it would be like to catch up with a light beam.
In this way he was led to discover that the old laws could not make sense of these situations.
So this, in turn, led him to revise the laws of nature.
(Stannard 1989: 120)
Elsewhere in the book Russell Stannard commented that, though such "thought" -experiments are open to everyone, "not many people think hard enough to produce one" .
Hard thinking is indeed required because the kind of information which science is dealing with and seeking to extend is quite literally mind-boggling.
That light travels at the speed of five times around the earth in the time it takes to say rice pudding is indeed an amazing matter.
The potential truths of religion are even more staggering to the imagination than straightforward empirical matters.
A great deal of "making links" is achieved through the use of metaphor and analogy, for word-pictures can help us to move forward into fresh insights.
Colin Gunton has recently written, It is now widely accepted that almost all intellectual advance takes place by means of metaphor…
Metaphor is not mere ornament, but an indispensible means of articulating the shape of reality…
They are the means of interpreting one part of the world by another.
(Gunton 1992: 10)
A precise use of imagination with regard to religion is that without it a person can quite easily not even consider the possibility of there being truth in religion.
For no-one can believe anything unless they previously know it to be believable.
 "We are obliged to believe only what we think is consistent, without having any real choice in the matter" as a textbook on Logic puts it (Hodges 1977: 15).
Imagination does not lead necessarily to belief, but belief cannot happen without  the ground being prepared by imagination.
This is why Cardinal Newman once remarked, "It is not reason that is against us, but imagination." 
The development of religious concepts
Imagination is, in all three aspects of its value for RE, intimately connected with the development of religious concepts.
Inadequate concepts cause people: 1.
to misinterpret religious people's behaviour and commitment; 2. to take literally what may have been intended metaphorically or symbolically; 3. not even to see the possibility of the truth of religious concepts.
Effective RE must therefore be concerned with the building-up of concepts which are worthy of a person's total development, emotional, experiential and intellectual, and which fairly represent what is at the heart of all great religious traditions.
Only on this basis can people make the informed choice which is the hallmark of the educated person.
An enormous task faces the RE teacher here.
Two well-known quips make an important point: Xenophanes' famous remark in the sixth century BC, "If oxen had gods they would look like oxen" , and Voltaire's sarcastic remark,"God made man in his own image.
Man has returned the compliment."
It is not difficult to illustrate the insight these sayings convey.
This is reflected in such comments as that of the Russian astronaut Gagarin who said, "I didn't see God in space" , or of the scientist who says, "You can't prove God exists" , or of the literalist church-goer who says, "If you don't go to church you are not worshipping God" , or of the religious fanatic who says, "God tells me what to do" .
All these responses are based on a seriously inadequate concept of God as being literally like a man, best denoted by a small g: a god who is visible; a god who has physical properties like anything else in the world; a god who inhabits certain places and not others; a god who acts and behaves just like another person.
Such concepts are unworthy of educated people and refer to anthropomorphism which has been misunderstood.
Often indeed the concept is even cruder.
A businessman commenting on an experience he had in a stockbroker's office in London when "I saw a beam of light between me and my eyes" commented, Although I wasn't a particularly religious person, I realised immediately that this must be the thing that people call God.
There was never any question in my mind: there it was and I knew it.
I had always had difficulty with the idea  of a long-bearded god sitting on a throne on high, but because it came in the form it did, as an energy, I had no difficulty with it…
The interesting point about this comment is that it indicates the degree of conceptual retardation from which an intelligent adult can suffer.
The picture of an old man in the sky is not taught by any of the great religions — yet this may come as a surprise to many people today.
Many adults have grown up in an environment in which they have picked up extremely infantile notions — notions which have never been challenged directly, but which, because of their almost total inadequacy and failure to square with other knowledge and experience, cause religion itself to be rejected as people become more sophisticated in other departments of life and other areas of knowledge.
Reasons for immature conceptual development in religion
Important research carried out at Oxford University by Olivera Petrovich (1989) suggests that such naivety is something which children learn from adults rather than being innate.
In carefully structured interviews on the concept of God with three and four-year old children she found that if she began by asking them to distinguish between objects which were man-made and ones which were natural and then to speculate about origins in each case, a majority of the responses referred to the natural objects being made by God or an unknown power (almost half and half responses on this).
When questioned further very few of them thought of this God or power as a man, but either as a person without a body or as something like air or gas, and a few said they did not know or that there was no God.
The concepts therefore were for that age quite sophisticated, indeed quite sophisticated by many adults' standards as we have seen.
Petrovich found in her interviews with the children, that if she started off asking them about "God" , as a word which they had learned, the majority of them said that God was a man.
She therefore deduced that crude anthropomorphism is something which children are taught, not necessarily intentionally, in fact probably not intentionally at all, but it is something which they pick up from the comments which they hear and the deductions which they make.
The possible distortions which people can pick up are numerous.
In a famous book entitled Your God is too Small J.B. Phillips (1932) drew up a list of twelve inadequate concepts of God which people tend to carry around with them.
These include such images as Parental Hangover, Resident Policeman, Managing Director and God-in-a-Box.
It would not be difficult to draw up a similar set of misunderstandings from a survey of pupils in the classroom.
In almost every other sphere of knowledge and learning, the young child's highest intuitions are developed and allowed to mature — in mathematics, science, art, language-work, and so forth.
But as regards religion, there appears to be a conceptual descent from an age of enlightenment in early childhood to one of childish lack of awareness in adulthood.
Why is this?
Much school education has done little or nothing to try to correct these misunderstandings.
There has been a major tendency, for example, to bypass and ignore the concept of "God" altogether — a situation which leaves children where they were.
Non-teaching in schools
A prime reason for this neglect has been the impact of the theories of Piaget mediated in this country through Goldman in the 1960s.
This has effectively banished explicit work on religious concepts in most primary schools, because children in those age-groups are deemed unable to think in abstract terms, but only concretely.
This prohibition, however has been based on what is highly questionable.
Petrovich's research was a far-reaching critique of the assumptions, methods, and findings of Piaget.
Her conclusions destroy the credibility of Goldman's research based upon Piaget's work with regard to his denial of children's capacity to handle such concepts before the age of 11 or 12.
The research shows that pre-school children are capable of thinking in abstract terms.
It is interesting and important to note that, even when Piaget's views on a child's conceptual development are still accepted, the danger of omitting theology from the young child's RE is becoming more widely appreciated.
For example, John Hull argues that "there is a theology appropriate to the concrete thinker just as there is one available to the abstract thinker" (Hull 1991: 13).
Lack of sound education in building up more mature religious concepts has left pupils a prey to chance forces, snatches of conversation and the effects of the implicit and nul curriculum.
Many today are not encouraged at all in the development of imagination.
Let us consider the poverty of understanding which a child growing up in a religiously deprived background might have of one of the most evocative concepts in religious language, that of "heaven" .
A chance hearing of the Lord's Prayer produces the following conversation: Child: What's heaven?
Impact of chance forces
Adult: Don't know — I suppose it's where you go when you die.
The child asks again: But where is it?
Reply: Up there, in space somewhere.
The child, better acquainted about science than about religion, then asks: In space?
Reply: Well these ideas got around before people knew about space.
Child then asks: Why do they believe in it?
The adult replies: Oh, come on.
Stop day-dreaming.
Tidy your things up.
It might have been even worse if one of these fairly common replies had been given: "Because it gives people a nice cosy feeling that there's a home somewhere" or,"Don't know.
I think it's a bit stupid myself."
What will be the effect on the child if there is no further discussion at all in that child's life of "heaven" ?
Almost certainly the child will think of "heaven" as a funny idea which people believe in for some nonsensical reason which does not fit in with a scientific way of looking at life.
If not dismissive in this way it is likely to be considered unimportant and never thought about again.
At the same time a quite different attitude to life is being constantly reinforced which ignores such questions and focuses on what is useful or factual or enjoyable.
The responsibility of RE
RE needs to address this situation.
For "heaven" we can read any and all of the other religious concepts, including the crucial concept of "God" .
Crude anthropomorphism effectively closes the door to understanding of religion for most pupils.
Furthermore, all the great world religions pronounce it false.
Whether or not there is a God, none of the great religious traditions can be saddled with intentionally fostering such anthropomorphism, for it goes against the fundamental tenets of their faith.
(See Tables 5.1 and 5.2, and Chapter 8 for further discussion on this.)
We are not therefore helping children to get on the wavelength of any of the religions by failing to address haphazardly acquired anthropomorphic ideas.
This is like just allowing children to pick up a bottle of poison, and leaving it in their hands as though it is a matter of no consequence to us whether or not they drink it.
RE must endeavour to revive the natural awareness and sensitivity which most likely has been lost by middle junior school, and apply this recovered awareness to the religious vocabulary which pupils need to understand in order to make sense of religion.
Otherwise, the views which they have about religion are no more valid or meaningful in themselves than those, for example, of a beginner mathematician on advanced calculus about which he/she knows nothing.
What can RE do to encourage the imagination necessary for understanding religion?
The use of story
RE needs to introduce pupils to religious myth and story.
These can incorporate religious truth in a far more effective way because they  appeal directly to the imagination of the listener who can then recreate it anew.
An example of story is given in Chapter 8 on p. 116: that of The Little Fox.
The story makes some very profound points about the role of ritual in religion, the development of conceptual understanding, the meaning of the word "spiritual" and how it is related to religion.
Yet the story says simply what it may take many pages to explain in words.
Further points about the story are: 1.
that it can be appreciated even by young children; 2. that it is memorable; 3. that it holds the attention.
Little wonder therefore that all religions have used story as a prime means of communicating and of inspiring people.
We need to remember, however, that story by itself will not do.
The inadequacies of a diet of bible stories in RE has long been appreciated.
Telling and re-enacting stories and myths is part of RE but dangerously not enough.
In presenting the story it is necessary to bear in mind the effect of the information-expectancy syndrome on pupil's attitudes — that is, the way in which people tend to look for "facts" as what matters: this means that unless content is useful, novelty and sheer immediate interest or entertainment are what count.
The teaching of the parables of Jesus is a case in point.
The complaint used to be, and still in some schools is, that they are done ad nauseam.
 "Oh, we've done them" , meaning that they know the story of the Good Samaritan.
Yet if they have been done in this way it means they have not been done!
There are Christians who would say that one can meditate a lifetime on them.
We have only done them when we know we have not done them, because there is so much more to them; and the more we think about them the more they have to say.
Of course fresh approaches to teaching them are necessary.
To give parables to very young children for example is likely to be unhelpful unless they are done in a particularly skilful way, because they might be just accepted as a story (Ainsworth 1968).
So RE needs to attend to encouraging pupils consciously to get beyond just looking for information or entertainment and see that there is a quite different way of looking at things.
A further reason for caution with regard to RE through story is that knowing a story does not by itself provide sufficient safeguard against serious misunderstandings which can have far-reaching effects on people.
An example is the Adam and Eve story.
No-one can doubt its power to evoke the imagination of millions upon millions of people  through the ages and today.
Yet it has also spawned some monstrous offspring which include such distortions as a dismissive attitude towards women, a view of work as punishment, a view of pain and hardship as revealing personal guilt, a view of the body and anything to do with it as inherently evil, a view of the earth as the property of homo sapiens who can choose what to do with it, a view of God as an insensitive, self-opinionated, unjust task-master concerned about protecting his own property and the slavish obedience of the human-beings he has created.
The following example illustrates the problems involved here.
An advisory teacher for English, taking part in a scheme of curriculum enrichment and extension for ten-year-olds, used the Adam and Eve story.
He got some excellent work from the children and he made an important point with regard to the level of conceptual development which is possible with this age-group.
He wrote: My plan was to use familiar material in a watered down way.
In the event there was no need for any dilution.
Once I had started to work with the children, I did exactly what I would have done with older children — or adult learners.
[He went on]I had learned that age, like notional key-stage of development and attainment, is unimportant in learning and creativity…
Willingness to experience is the basis of all good learning.
(p. 4)
But how was this material used?
In reporting on the children's work he noted this: If any society wanted to perpetuate notions of female fickleness and the importance of accepting the proprietorial bias of moral authority, then here is a tale for the purpose.
In a modest attempt to amend the damage accumulated over centuries by this pernicious little fiction, I asked the children to give me the Other Version, particularly Eve's, but Adam's or God's as well if they preferred.
(p. 5)
He commented on the results: Even God came out of the thing with a more credible characterization than offered in the original…
I was delighted with the attribution of a motive more understandable and more worthy than in biblical and Miltonic tradition and was lost in admiration of the boldness that could characterize the Supreme Being.
(p. 6)
I have quoted this incident at length to show that teaching story is not enough.
Misinterpretation is easy for children today growing up in an environment very different from those in which the stories were told originally.
Within religious traditions myth and story have received overtones  through many other factors which are not available to modern children (a total lifestyle, worship, theological language, above all a community of people to whom it is real).
Most children today are religiously naked — they have none of these "clothes" with which to adorn their perceptions.
It is like expecting them to see distant stars without the help of any binoculars or telescopes but just with their own native eyesight.
Some stars can be seen that way if the conditions happen to be appropriate, but children will not get very far as astronomers unless their own resources are supplemented by those accumulated by the tradition of astronomy built up over the centuries.
For astronomy read religion.
The responsibility of the RE teacher is clear.
How well most dereligionized pupils can come to an understanding of the profound significance of such stories for religious people depends on teaching which is both informative and inspiring.
Even so, such work is unlikely to be enough.
Work on symbolism
Some explicit work on symbolism is necessary, and great care is needed on how this is done.
Work on the external aspects of religion, such as putting on special clothes and going into special buildings, is likely to be seen by children as quite literally what religion is about.
Even the most up-to-date methods and generously multi-faith context, which includes visits to temple, mosque, gurdwara, synagogue or church, may not overcome this hurdle but rather reinforce for children the cultural and sociological explanation of religion.
Many of the resources available for RE are likely to have this effect.
Often they are well-produced and informative.
From this point of view, teachers should have no difficulty in finding suitable material.
Yet there is a problem with many of them.
They mostly do not adequately safeguard pupils against a casual, almost literalist, understanding of symbol.
There is normally, for example, little discussion of the difference between idolatry or superstition on the one hand, and authentic religious devotion on the other.
Symbol seems to be thought of just as standing in place for the real thing because that is absent.
The idea that symbol denotes presence within the means appropriate for time and space is hardly anywhere mentioned.
A specifically religious term, "sacramental" , probably needs to be introduced at this point.
It is illuminating to note the difference between the average response to an icon and that of a member of one of the orthodox churches.
For the former it is a work of art reflecting a particular symbolic way of describing certain believed truths.
For the orthodox, however, it is not so much an aid to devotion as a way of  communicating with God.
The icon mediates a presence not an absence.
Admittedly this is a very hard point to get across.
If the secularist assumption is operating it becomes almost impossible.
This is because the assumption is that the significance of the icon is based upon the faith of the believer and so the possibility of a meeting between the believer and that Reality is discounted from the start.
It is like in a story such as the ballet Giselle when Alberic goes to her tomb and is caught up in a vision of her.
The secularist looking on will see the act of his taking the flowers to her grave as symbolic, in the sense of a way of expressing his grief, which is rewarded by an imaginary visit from her.
Similarly, the act of lighting candles or passing round the arti-lamp in a religious ceremony will be seen in the same way.
The possibility of there being a real lover, and a real response "from the other side, as it were" , is not even considered.
Unless, however, such a possibility is considered, the onlooker is not really appreciating what the ritual means to the religious person.
This does not necessarily involve affirming it.
I may believe it is possible that the dead Giselle really did communicate with Alberic, but that in fact she did not.
But the difference needs to be grasped before I can venture an opinion usefully upon that.
In trying to teach such a distinction, it is helpful to discuss, as a kind of bridge or way in, such phenomena as ghost stories and other instances of paranormal experience.
Fairy stories too, and at a more sophisticated level plays like Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream" , can be helpful in raising the question of whether appearances are real or imaginary.
The point is at least to raise the question.
Work on metaphor
Pupils are likely to be able to make more sense of symbolism if some work on metaphor is done from an early age.
Here we need to encourage pupils to think and express themselves in vivid ways using word pictures.
Contrasting proverbs with ponderous prose offers a way in: "too many cooks spoil the broth" is a far more expressive way of saying: "Over-maximization of the work force is counter-productive because it inhibits the realization of a satisfactory outcome." 
From such word-pictures we can move on to simile and metaphor, found especially in poetry.
At a simple level children can appreciate this.
Here is a poem by a ten-year-old girl who had never before written any poetry.
The class had done some work explicitly on metaphor, and the poem was a voluntary outcome of a visit to a churchyard.
The accompanying notes, given when her teacher asked for them, indicate a sophisticated grasp of metaphor, and a high level of imagination.
Lavender Lily Lily was a flower girl, Her house was in the air, Sweet lavender she picked gladly Without a single care.
Her shop it was the streets; After noon and after morn Wearing her shoes, tattered and torn, She walked to see her mother yew Who once, in olden days, she knew.
Her bed was the moorland grass On mountainside or in the pass.
Her fingers were the summer breeze, Her voice like rustling in the trees.
Her face was pretty, like the swan, Her sparkling eyes, a lake.
Her old white dress and purple shawl She bought once from an ancient stall.
Her soul, God rest it, it has left — People say "it was for the best" .
They found her in the lavender field With her flowers as her final shield.
Her conscious understanding of how she was using language is clear from the explanations she gives for the expressions she uses in the poem:(on line 2) "She lived outside in the open, so the air was like her house" ;(on line 5 "the streets were like a giant shop where she could pick and choose out of bins and gutters" ;(on line 8) "this means she was close to nature and she felt like the yew was her mother" .
From being able to recognize and use metaphor, we need to share with pupils how metaphor works.
I.A. Richards has defined metaphor like this: "In the simplest formulation, when we use a metaphor we have two thoughts of different things active together and supported by a single word, or phrase, whose meaning is a resultant of their interaction." 
We can give simple examples such as, "Lucy is a gem" .
Here thoughts about Lucy and about gems are active together and cannot be given a satisfactory literal translation describing exactly the degree of similarity between Lucy and a gem.
The metaphor of the gem here is like a filter or a screen through which Lucy can be seen in a fresh light, and as such the metaphor has the "power to inform and enlighten" which a literal paraphrase would not have — it would fail "to give the insight that the metaphor did" (Black 1971: 186f).
This applies also to the religious use of metaphor.
When, for example, God is thought of as like light, the metaphor is meant to bring into play all kinds of overtones and ideas which can help the user to a greater understanding of the word God: light shares some  characteristics which can be applied to God — but ones which cannot be neatly packaged up in literal words.
It is important to help pupils to appreciate that metaphors require interpretation within a background of shared ideas.
It is very easy to pick up a meaning from a metaphor which was perhaps not the one intended.
If God is likened to a king, as in Islam especially, it indicates that God is in control, that we can trust God, and so forth.
But it is possible for people growing up in a totally different culture to see kingship in terms of tyranny, in which case they would receive the statement that God is like a king as meaning that God is tyrannical, even some kind of dictator, so that religion resembles a prison rather than paradise.
Thus the same metaphor can lead to diametrically opposite understandings.
Within Judaism and Christianity, Psalm 23 for instance has spawned many misunderstandings.
Likening God to a shepherd has made many people assume that the point of the metaphor was to emphasize the sheep-like quality of people — that they have no mind of their own, that they are there to be told what to do and treated like sheep.
In fact in its original Hebrew setting the shepherd referred to a totally different picture — one who actually cared for and was perhaps even prepared to give his life for the sheep, protecting them from very real danger from which they could not be expected to protect themselves.
None of the overtones of subordination and all the rest of it would have been present to the Hebrew.
Another very telling metaphor used of God — supremely so within Christianity — is the metaphor of the father.
This has run into very heavy water in the twentieth century, and not only because of Freud's onslaught on religion in the name of wish-fulfilment, where he portrayed the idea that people create an imaginary father in the skies to give them comfort.
Other factors have been the break-up of family life, the prevalence of one-parent families, very often only a mother, and the whole feminist movement which sees such language as sexist.
Attempts to rewrite the Lord's Prayer and the whole of Christian theology are now being seriously considered.
The problem here is the failure of very large numbers of people today, both religious and non-religious people, to appreciate the metaphorical nature of the language they are using.
The term "father" was never intended to be taken literally.
The question of whether God is male or female is supremely bad theology.
It is like saying that if Jim Bloggs is an ass it means he has got long ears and brays.
In our society we would normally not interpret a phrase like that wrongly, because everyday usage confirms that when we say someone is an ass we mean they have been rather stupid.
But in theology we commit enormous howlers.
The point of the metaphor of father is to indicate the experience which religious people have of God as a loving creator.
It has nothing whatever to do with gender.
Of course this does not mean that we should not be careful about the metaphors which we use.
It is possible that if a metaphor ceases to mean what it used to mean in another society then we should abandon it.
This is often seen with regard to metaphors like shepherd for example.
Work with pupils can often translate these metaphors or similes into something more meaningful, like that in Carl Burke's book God is for Real (1967: 34) where the 23rd Psalm is given a quite different translation by one boy: "The Lord is like my probation officer" : the probation officer was the only person in his life who had ever shown any real love and care for him.
I am not arguing therefore that metaphors should not change, but that it is impossible for us to change them organically unless we understand them in the first place.
If "father" today means for many people a non-existent person, a drunkard, someone unkind or hateful, or if it denotes for others an exclusion of women, then it needs to be appropriately translated in different terms.
Specific teaching on the concept of "God" 
What has already been said in discussing metaphors for "God" indicates the need for some specific teaching on the kind of understanding of the word current within world religions.
The concept of God is as salient for any understanding of religion as is the concept of number for mathematics.
It requires therefore time and some kind of structured development.
The occasional discussion period, in which pupils express their current level of thinking about God, is no substitute for study in depth of how religious people understand "God" , why they do, and whether they are justified in so doing.
A lack of ability to think clearly about "God" will adversely affect all other aspects of attempted RE.
In all probability pupils will miss the point of the otherwise excellent work they may be doing on the phenomema of religion, its rites, customs, beliefs and moral values and so forth.
All these gain their significance as "religious" phenomena because of their underlying relationship to an understanding of "God" .
The only possible exception within the major world religions is Theravada Buddhism, but even here the concept of Nirvana is all-pervasive and has more features in common with an understanding of "God" than with a Western secular atheist view.
(See Chapter 8 for further discussion of this.)
Effective RE will help pupils develop specific skills concerning the concept of "God" .
Extensive time-allowance should be given to this.
The temptation for teachers to cut off at this point and move on to something easier and less controversial is great, but the real value of RE lies in following the development through.
Otherwise it is rather  like spending several days journeying to a famous tourist site, but when we get there only allowing ourselves 20 minutes to see it.
A possible way in might be the following.
Outline of a scheme of work on the concept of God
Aim: to help pupils forward in their thinking concerning the concept of God, and the question of whether or not God exists.
No level of belief or un-belief in God is assumed; the purpose is clarification and enabling pupils to enter into the debate, at their own level, from a basis of developing knowledge and awareness of the complexity of thinking about God.
[1]Is your idea of God anything like any of these?: 1.
a celestial policeman; 2. an absentee landlord; 3. a magician; 4. a being greater than anything we can possibly think of; 5. an old man on a cloud; 6. light which gives life; 7. the conclusion of a mathematical theorem; 8. the chairman of a rather boring harp-playing assembly; 9. a presence who is loving and just; 10. a crutch for people who can't cope; 11. an all-powerful dictator; 12. a character in a fairy-story; 13. a power that is either evil or indifferent to suffering; 14. a heavenly Santa Claus; 15. a king who is just and holy; 16. electricity which is invisible and powerful, useful but dangerous; 17. a slot-machine whom you can approach with a coin and get out what you want; 18. the ground without which nothing in this world could exist.
[2]How we think of "God" affects what we think about other things too, for example especially whether or not "God" exists.
Can you match any of the following statements to the images of "God" in the list above?: 1.
 "I've never seen God, nor has anyone else." 
2.
 "You can't prove God exists." 
3.
 "God's O.K. for little children — Christmas carols and all that." 
4.
 "Talk about God makes me sick —" Thou shalt not… "etc." 5.
 "God's never answered my prayers." 
6.
 "Miracles don't happen, so God doesn't exist." 
7.
 "God made the world and loves everyone everywhere." 
8.
 "I sure would hate to be in heaven!" 9.
"Going to church doesn't make people any better — just look at Mrs X down the road.
If you want a kindness doing, don't ask her."
10.
 "Even if God exists, it doesn't matter anyway." 
11.
 "It is the will of God, and we must trust Him." 
12.
 "Religion is basic to life." 
Do you think that members of the different religions you have studied would be likely to agree with any of these?
If so which?
Do you think there would be important differences between the religions on this?
Why/why not?
[3]Collect some comments about religion.
These could be from your family and friends, or from newspapers or television, or books in the library.
Write them out and beside each one describe what picture of God is behind the comment.
Where do you think people get their pictures of God from?
Do you think some of them are ones which genuinely religious people would not adopt?
[4]What do you think yourself — whether you believe in God or not?
What is the picture of God you have?
Perhaps you have several, in which case what are they?
And do they contradict each other?
[5]How do the various pictures of God you have been looking at, and also those which you have yourself, compare with the lists in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 which most of the great world religions would agree on?
If there is a difference, why do you think there is?
Why do you think they think of God in these ways?
Do you think their reasons are good ones?
What reasons do you yourself have for your answers?
Fundamentally the successful development of children's capacity for imaginative thinking depends on their own development as persons as well as on particular thinking skills.
The next two chapters will discuss these in turn.
In search of the spiritual: the experiential approach
The purpose of this chapter is to examine the question of how pupils can gain some inkling, through their own experience, of what religion is about, so that their imagination is stimulated to conceive of the possibility of the spiritual dimension being more than meaningless talk.
It is well-known that experience teaches far more effectively than talking about something.
To understand what an ocean is, it is far more helpful to see one rather than just read about oceans, and if we experience it by swimming in it or crossing it by boat, we are likely to have a much more real understanding.
So experience is important, but, apart from that in which we are purely passive recipients of what happens to us, we have to have the will and the courage to seek it.
The experiential approach to RE
We cannot discover New oceans Unless we have courage To lose sight Of the shore These lines from André Gide are quoted in New Methods in RE: An Experiential Approach (Hammond et al.1990: 26)— an approach which is gaining ground in schools.
It is a method of RE which focuses on pupils' own capacity to relate to themselves at a deeper level — to their own authentic feelings and insights.
It sees the RE teacher's task as two-fold: to help pupils to learn first: to take seriously their own inner experience, thereby coming also to respect that of other people; and secondly, to appreciate the role of metaphor in interpreting experience (p. 17).
The approach originated in the findings of the Religious Experience Research Unit originally set up by Alister Hardy in 1969.
The data so far accumulated suggests that half or more of the adult population of this country believe that they have had some sort of direct religious experience.
Nearly half of these people never attend a place of worship and quite often they are unwilling to use religious language  at all because they do not want to be associated with a particular religious institution.
An interesting additional finding which is stressed is that it appears that such people are more rather than less likely to exhibit qualities of psychological balance and social responsibility.
David Hay deduces what this means for RE: There will be some pupils who know from their own experience what the RE teacher is talking about.
Some of these may formally belong to a religious group.
Other members of the class, because of their upbringing, may accept intellectually the beliefs of their own religious community, but lack any confirmation from their experience.
Yet others may lack both religious belief and any experience that might make them dubious of their secularism.
(Hay 1990: 108)
There is a distinction here between personal religious experience and formal membership of a religious tradition.
The former can be found both within and outside the externally religious.
This in itself constitutes a major difficulty for RE: how do we enable pupils to appreciate this distinction?
It is so easy to judge by externals.
Chapter 7 will discuss this further.
Another major difficulty to which Hay draws attention is the effects of secularist conditioning in restricting the horizons of children and young people.
He confirms the analysis of western society given in Chapter 2: "The problem for most RE teachers is…that the minds of the pupils are tightly closed against the possibility that reality might plausibly be seen in any other way than that transmitted via the dominant culture." 
He therefore sees effective RE as essentially helping to liberate all pupils "from the taboos which inhibit them from exploring freely the experiential and cognitive options available" (Hay 1990: 109).
The experiential method (outlined in Hammond, Hay et al.1990) sets out to give detailed help to the teacher on how this kind of work can be begun in schools.
The intention is to correct a serious imbalance in education as a whole, not just in RE.
The emphasis on the desirability of academic detachment — however rarely achieved in practice — has had the effect of disengaging pupils at a personal level from what they are studying.
This has been presumed to be desirable, as the only way in which to guard against indoctrination and rampant subjectivism.
Today this detached attitude to learning is being questioned even in subjects like science where it would seem to be most at home.
Its unsuitability therefore for gaining understanding of religion is becoming more widely appreciated.
It tends to view religion as something external, only appropriate possibly for other people.
The experiential approach therefore tries to get pupils in communication with the depths in themselves so that they may have some idea of what that is like for other people, as well as helping them  to be more truly "present" in what they are studying.
It is important to note that the intention is de-indoctrination.
 "The teacher is not attempting to convert pupils to any particular belief, but to increase their insight into other ways of seeing" (Hay 1990: 109).
The strengths of the approach are clear: it gets away from being content-dominated and takes the teaching of skills seriously, especially skills of stilling, centredness and attentiveness.
The purpose of the exercises is to affirm a person, and also to integrate experience — they are holistic in intention.
They are also interesting, which is a major point because without interest there is no learning.
Weaknesses of the experiential approach
It has, however, been open to criticism.
For example Adrian Thatcher (1991) takes issue with the emphasis on private individualism which talk of "inwardness" tends to convey, seeing this as based on a radical distinction between what is objective and what is subjective — a distinction which, though very influential since the seventeenth century, is now regarded as mistaken.
In a reply Hay and Hammond (1992) assure readers that they are not guilty of dualism or rampant individualism.
The experiential approach is seeking to supply a missing ingredient in so much education including RE, that of genuine involvement and learning to become aware of the depths in one's own experience.
They point out also that they offer, "a practical means of complementing (not replacing) the other parts of the religious education syllabus" (Hay 1992: 149).
What I think is more debatable is how successfully the method can in practice avoid the following criticisms.
First, the experiential approach to RE tends to be only lightly related to religion.
It affirms the "spiritual" dimension but fails to make clear links with the great religious traditions except with regard possibly to Buddhism and certain aspects of Hinduism.
This is a serious weakness in an approach intended to aid understanding of religion.
Secondly, while it wishes pupils to experience freedom, in practice it is easy for the teacher to determine the structure.
Techniques such as guided fantasy reveal the teacher's presuppositions which are not discussed, and these are put across in a way which can have a particularly binding effect upon the recipients.
The comment by one teacher about the objections of her class to one of her guided fantasies is an honest acknowledgement of this problem.
She wrote that without the challenge of some who were Christians of a particular persuasion, "I would not have been aware of how deeply my own assumptions had constructed the fantasy that I had desired" (Kathy Raban in Hammond et al.1990: 219).
There seems indeed to be an unacknowledged weighting in the direction of a particular religion.
Another teacher told me, after attending in-service courses, that while the approach offers an exciting avenue to explore which pupils find rewarding and even mind- blowing, and many of the exercises are valuable as a means of self-awareness, she felt that pupils were being steered towards abandoning the mind as a means of knowing and just accepting the subjectivity of values which do not have to be justified.
She sees the insights of Zen at work here, and commented that, if this is so, then it should be stated and some critique of Buddhism as a religion given.
Thirdly, although its intention is to encourage depth it can end up as being rather superficial, and indeed possibly dangerous, in failing to be aware of the pitfalls into which meditation not properly understood can fall.
Precisely because it is seeking to bring some awareness of spirituality to those mostly brought up in a spiritual desert, great care is needed to avoid conveying misleading impressions.
The confusion between introspection and meditation can be very serious.
The purpose is not to reinforce egoism but to refocus awareness of the self.
Within Eastern traditions this is usually expressed in the language of self-transcendence, annihilating the ego.
It has nothing to do with self-centredness in the sense of moral immaturity.
It does not fall under the strictures of Thatcher's criticism referred to above.
Within semitically-derived religions the emphasis is on self-surrender and sacrifice in the interests of love.
It is of crucial importance that this distinction between centredness and self-centredness is appreciated by pupils — between affirmation of oneself which implies, and leads to, affirmation of others also, and selfish self-absorption which leads eventually to an incapacity to see others as persons at all.
Fourthly and finally, the nature of the participation asked for is not made clear.
The approach states: Experiential learning uses the tools of phenomenology, in particular the device of bracketing out, or putting aside, our personal assumptions when attempting to understand the religious life of another person.
(Hammond et al.1990: 198)
From one point of view we all know probably what is meant by this: the importance of not allowing one's own stance to block the way to understanding someone else's.
There is no doubt that this is something to which constant attention needs to be drawn.
I argue for this in Chapter 12 concerning the possibility of participation in school worship at different levels, one level being a conscious but temporary withholding of the critical faculties in order to get on the wavelength of a particular belief.
Yet pupils cannot get on the wavelength of the experience of others  by bracketing out all aspects of their own.
There is little chance of the "professional" participator emerging with real understanding, for to find out the truth of religion it has to be wrestled with and lived, not just safely and probably patronizingly studied from a safe distance.
How do we know that the experience that we presume that other people have in their religion is what we ourselves experience as we come apparently empty-handed to it?
The level of sophistication required here is very great even for highly educated adults.
For pupils in school, the problems are infinitely more complex still.
It is in any case impossible to come empty-handed.
Even in the midst of "participating" we are constantly interpreting in the light of what we know and expect.
The need for a broader experiential approach
It is important that this potentially very valuable approach safeguards itself so far as possible against misinterpretation: in particular, that the content of religious belief does not really matter, that knowledge of religious tradition is unimportant, and that any opinions and beliefs are acceptable so long as they are sincerely held.
For in the present climate of opinion this is what might be conveyed.
One way of ensuring that such misinterpretation does not occur is to adopt an approach to "experience" which is not so tied to "inwardness" .
Experience is, after all, part of the whole way in which all education happens, including RE, and it should not be associated with something particularly special or precious.
It needs to be seen as part of a continuum of experience from the most ordinary and humdrum to the most sublime and special.
What would such a broader experiential approach look like?
It might have at least six strands:
1.
Integrating what is studied in school with personal experience
It would encourage pupils to relate to their own uniqueness as a normal activity — not as something done in special sessions or requiring special structures or special input by someone like a teacher.
This integrating process needs to go on all the time, whatever is happening or being studied.
It is the most important use of the word "experiential" in its application to education.
Because each person is unique, and has experiences which no other person has ever had quite in that way or in that combination of circumstances, this learning cannot be structured by teacher or syllabus or advisers from without, except possibly in certain exceptional situations where a sustained one-to-one relationship is possible or required.
All the teacher can do — but it is a most important and fulfilling role — is to encourage  self-reflection through appropriate teaching style (see Chapter 10 on this).
Reflectiveness should be seen as natural and part of the normal rhythm of daily life.
Elizabeth Ashton, an experienced primary school teacher and now lecturer at Durham University, has found that work on particular symbols can energize children into relating effectively to their own experience (Ashton 1989).
This helps them to produce work substantially more creative and thoughtful than what they have been able to do before.
The poem, "Lavender Lily" , quoted in Chapter 5, is an example of this from one of her classes.
It is an expression of the child's experience at several levels, especially an awareness of a love of nature.
The poem reflects on themes such as poverty and death in a way seemingly detached, but yet at considerable depth indicating the writer has really been involved in what she was expressing.
Effective RE would take such reflection a stage further.
It would discuss specifically religious views on the purpose of life and attitudes to death.
It would also discuss how general experience may be potentially seen as religious experience.
Words such as "spiritual" would probably form part of the discussion.
2.
Opening up possibilities for interpreting experience
It is important for RE to engage explicitly with those aspects of experience which open up for many people a religious frame of reference.
Pupils can be helped to appreciate the link between the spiritual dimension and religion, and to do this in such a way that the outcome is not assumed.
Pupils may respond to seeing this possibility in different ways.
The links between the spiritual dimension and religion are in fact close.
Peter Berger spoke about "signals of transcendence" which are given in and through our normal human experience (Berger 1969: 70–96).
People can immerse themselves in the spiritual dimension without being religious at all.
Yet if these signals are really thought about, they can lead people to an awareness of religion.
Berger noted five: 1.
the sense of order; 2. the phenomenon of play; 3. the experience of hope; 4. the concept of damnation — a sense of cosmic injustice to be put right; 5. the fact of humour.
Such aspects of life are normally just taken for granted yet, if thought about, they are at odds with a materialistic understanding of  the world; they point to something other — something more.
We can add many other signals of transcendence present within ordinary and everyday experience.
They can include: 1.
a sense of wonder at beauty, especially the beauty of nature; 2. artistic creativity; 3. the experience of personal rapport with other people; 4. altruism; 5. the fact of love.
Such signals of transcendence can often consciously give rise to an awareness of the need to use a different kind of vocabulary.
A very striking example was told me not long since by someone who attended a dinner party in Moscow soon after Gagarin's space trip — the Gagarin who had reported that he did not see God in space (see p. 57).
Apparently Gagarin said that when he looked out of the right window of his spacecraft and glimpsed the earth for the first time, he had an experience or sense of — and then he used a word which the interpreter did not know the meaning of, so he had to go to another table and ask another interpreter to help.
After considerable discussion they came out with the word "numinous" .
Gagarin had had to search into the past for a word which perhaps he had heard from his granny!
Whether or not such factors develop religious awareness depends on the degree to which people can see a relationship between them and religion and can tease out the implications.
3.
Experience explored through the arts
A stepping-stone for many people is through the arts seen not just as providing means of expression but also as giving meaning and helping to structure experience.
Here the central point is not to try to imitate arts education in RE, but to encourage links with what pupils do and experience in their arts education.
In this way RE continues to do what it should without trespassing outside its domain unduly — it can focus on religion, while the arts retain their integrity and are not treated like "visual aids" or "follow-up work" .
Also it promotes that holistic sense of the whole of life's experience being brought into harmony, including the discords.
The arts are especially important and effective in arousing spiritual awareness because they can speak directly at a feeling level, as well as being free from any slavish dependence on religious ideas which are often rejected out of hand by secularists.
The arts therefore provide an invaluable way-in for many people.
Veronica Williams, for example, has developed an interesting approach in connection with her work on art history.
She has found that she can interest modern teenagers, and  develop attitudes of stillness and attentiveness and reflectiveness, through detailed study of certain masterpieces.
Involvement in the visual arts is one way in for many young people today.
The same can be said about music which provides an immensely satisfying spiritual experience for many people for whom religion is totally dead.
Religious masterpieces such as the Messiah continue to exercise a fascination which is much more than enjoyment of good tunes.
Arts education and its relationship to RE is an area being explored in some depth today, for example by the Department of Arts Education at Warwick University and at King Alfred's College, Winchester.
4.
Investigating what is meant by "spiritual" experience
The word "spiritual" is often used in connection with aesthetic experience.
Unfortunately, however, there is a great deal of uncertainty as to what the word means.
This is not just an academic matter — it affects practice, for example in the arts.
The art critic, Peter Fuller, considers: "One worrying feature of recent years has been the fashionable appropriation of the language of the" spiritual "to defend work of a numbing vacuity" (Fuller 1990: 18).
It is important therefore to try to achieve some clarity.
The HMIs who produced the Supplement to Curriculum 11–16 (DES 1977) had an intense debate on this very matter.
They could not reach agreement and so in the end two definitions emerged in the document: 1.
The spiritual area is concerned with the awareness a person has of those elements in existence and experience which may be defined in terms of inner feelings and beliefs; they affect the way people see themselves and throw light for them on the purpose and meaning of life itself.
Often these feelings and beliefs lead people to claim to know God and to glimpse the transcendent; sometimes they represent that striving and longing for perfection which characterizes human beings but always they are concerned with matters at the heart and root of existence.
2.
The spiritual area is concerned with everything in human knowledge or experience that is connected with or derives from a sense of God or of gods.
Spiritual is a meaningless adjective for the atheist and of dubious use to the agnostic.
Irrespective of personal belief or disbelief, an unaccountable number of people have believed and do believe in the spiritual aspects of human life, and therefore their actions, attitudes and interpretations of events have been influenced accordingly.
There are difficulties with both these statements.
The latter is unacceptable because non-religious people do talk about the "spiritual" .
Furthermore, we cannot equate the spiritual with the religious.
As Basil Yeaxley put it back in 1925: "the spiritual has a wider character than the religious, just as the religious does not fall wholly within the spiritual" (Yeaxley 1925: 46).
True religion may be said to add to the spiritual a conscious relationship to the Source of the spiritual.
Yet it is possible to have a real relationship without such consciousness, just as it is possible to talk about God without being spiritual.
The first definition is also unsatisfactory despite its broader nature and the way in which it might be regarded as potentially containing the second definition.
The problem is that although the beliefs and feelings are "always concerned with matters at the heart and root of existence" — which does suggest or give opportunity for something which is not just subjective in interpretation — it tends to subsume the religious view of life under what we might call a humanist umbrella.
 "Often these feelings and beliefs lead people to claim to know God." 
The phrase itself suggests the uncertainty of what is claimed, and in any case directs attention away from the content to the fact that some people are claiming it — in other words the human element is the focus of attention.
More therefore needs to be said.
Yet even this is highly controversial!
For any attempt to define what is meant by spiritual is easily killed in infancy by pointing out how ridiculous such an attempt is: the spiritual automatically transcends all possible categories and definitions.
Nevertheless, the word continues to be used a great deal, even by those who do not wish to pinpoint its meaning.
Have we therefore exhausted all possibilities of being clearer as to what we are talking about?
Clarifying what is meant by "spiritual" 
Table 6.1 suggests a way of drawing attention to what the spiritual dimension is, without giving the misleading impression of its being some kind of object.
It refers to three radically different kinds of human behaviour and attitudes, one of which expresses ordinary human nature, one the "spiritual" dimension, and one the reverse of both: what may be called the "demonic" , whether that word is understood symbolically or not.
Of course I am not here arguing for a return to a three-tier model of reality seen in literalistic terms.
 "Supernatural" has had all kinds of misleading innuendoes associated with it — such as a separation between this world and another higher one.
The spiritual plane is for all the great religions inseparable from the physical and psychological ways in which it manifests itself and becomes known by us, but yet it is truly distinguishable.
Its relationship with the molecular "vehicles" which express it is a non-reciprocal one: its presence can explain theirs, but they cannot explain it.
Spirituality is a genuinely different dimension to reality.
To see it requires imagination, and yet it is not itself the product of imagination.
Imagination is the faculty whereby we perceive it — or better, glimpse it — but imagination does not create it.
The examples given in Table 6.1 refer to the kind of experience well within the capacity potentially of everyone, and may be so much accepted as part of everyday life as to go unnoticed.
For people to see  these as consciously linked to "spiritual" and religious experience, other qualitites would normally be present: 1.
Inclusiveness — a sense of unity and seamlessness, awareness of the inter-relationship of everything
2.
Assurance — concerning the way things are, the great matters of life and death, the reason we are here — an inner certainty not imposed from without or dependent on other people's approval, nor reflecting chance moods.
3.
Inspiration — used in its sense of "being-breathed-in-to" and "allowing" power to work within us.
As a friend of mine — who has only the most ephemeral links with any religious tradition — put it recently to me: "We must learn to be channels not engines!" 
4.
Acceptance of mystery — taking it for granted that the spirit is beyond our total comprehension, that this dimension cannot easily be put into words, or expressed adequately in any art form.
It is to be pointed towards, implied, and therefore intuited.
People see it or they do not.
It is as primary as that.
It cannot be proved or deduced.
But people who glimpse it know its power and supreme attractiveness.
These four qualities or characteristics are only a beginning in attempting to say what spirituality is about.
It is a dimension which meets us everywhere if we will let it, or which will elude us everywhere if we will not.
Its natural language is one of symbol and paradox, and yet it is also utterly rational.
5.
Relating "spiritual" to "religious" 
The seemingly flowery language which people often have to resort to when trying to talk about spiritual experience results from an inability to use religious language as a means of communication; even if known, it is so likely today to be misunderstood.
RE should help pupils to appreciate that there is another language possible — one which perhaps makes more sense, but that is for each person to decide for him/herself.
How do religious people understand the term "spiritual" ?
Evelyn Underhill, speaking as a Christian, defined the spiritual life as one in which "God and his eternal order have, more and more, their undivided sway" (Underhill 1985: 25).
Different religions would express this in different ways.
Buddhists for example would probably speak of it as progress towards a state of enlightenment in which persons are liberated from all false forms and images.
In most religious traditions the concept of "God" is invoked as the name for that Mystery which is at the heart of religion (see Chapters 5 and 8).
All major religions offer a deepening understanding of spirituality because of the way they enable people to be consciously in the presence of that Mystery.
True religion makes spiritual progress easier because it provides a vocabulary, a structure and a community, all of which can help people to attend to this dimension.
Religion also furnishes many inspiring examples as well as yardsticks to chart progress and guard against the hijacking of high intentions by evil forces, however these are understood.
In a similar way, talk of the spiritual can help to revitalize religion.
It is the goal of authentic religion and the judge of pseudo-religion.
RE should give access to the great spiritual traditions — the vocabulary used, and the kind of symbolism.
In so doing, any hint of attempted indoctrination, conditioning, manipulation, even influencing and persuading, is misplaced because this dimension can only be grasped in freedom, or it is not grasped at all.
It has to be experienced through people being able to be honest with themselves and reaching towards integrity.
For each person is unique and it is useless as well as mistaken to try to be someone else.
A recent anthology on spirituality has a quotation by Martin Buber from Rabbi Zusya when he said a short while before his death,"In the world to come I shall not be asked why were you not Moses?
I shall be asked why were you not Zusya?"
(Buber 1985: 5).
 "Be yourself" is, interestingly enough, a piece of advice at home in secularized Western societies as much as in traditional religion.
But it is vital that this is seen not as legitimizing self-centredness, introspection or social irresponsibility, but as a means to ever deeper exploration of life in its totality.
One of the best ways to do this is to study in depth particular people who have claimed to have religious experience.
6.
Study in depth of religious experience
A study of, for example, St Francis of Assisi and the Hindu mystic Sri Ramana, who founded a flourishing ashram in South India and died in 1950, could be illuminating.
This could help to give substance to what is meant by the spiritual dimension, for both of them lived out the kind of character expressed in the middle column of Table 6.1.
In addition, work on Sri Ramana can help to illuminate many of the "inwardness" — exercises suggested by the experiential approach to RE, for he constantly advised devotees to meditate on the question "Who am I?" 
The bonus with St Francis is in helping pupils to appreciate a depth in what it means to be a Christian which is so easily today seen at a superficial externalist level.
There are several striking similarities between the two, as Table 6.2 shows.
Both had particular experience which was overwhelming in its impact upon them.
Sri Ramana used to say that he had only one   experience in his life; he spent the rest working it out.
At the age of 16, alone in his uncle's house in Madurai, he describes how a sudden terror of death overtook him, and he found himself dramatizing the occurrence of death.
I lay with my limbs stretched out as stiff as though rigor mortis had set in, and imitated a corpse so as to give greater reality to the enquiry.
 "Well then," I said to myself,"this body is dead.
It will be carried stiff to the burning ground and  there burnt and reduced to ashes.
But with the death of this body am I dead?
Is the body I?
It is silent and inert but I feel the full force of my personality and even the voice of the "I" within me, apart from it.
So I am Spirit transcending the body."
All this was not dull thought; it flashed through me vividly as living truth which I perceived directly, almost without thought process.
 "I" was something very real, the only real thing about my present state, and all the conscious activity connected with my body was centred on the "I" .
From that moment onwards the "I" or Self focussed attention on itself by a powerful fascination.
Fear of death had vanished once and for all.
For St Francis there were a number of decisive moments, such as when he saw the leper.
He dismounted from his horse and embraced the leper even though the thought of doing so was so repulsive to him.
He wrote in his Testament not long before he died: "While I was living in sin, it seemed a very bitter thing to look at lepers; but the Lord Himself led me among them, and I had compassion on them.
And when I left them, the thing that had seemed so horrible to me was transformed into happiness of body and soul for me."
Another experience was when he was praying before the crucifix in San Damiano and it seemed to him that it gave him the message, "Build my church" , which he immediately interpreted quite literally as, "Save this church from crumbling into ruins" .
And the third occasion was in another church outside Assisi when he heard the reading from St Matthew's gospel about absolute poverty, and he became convinced that that was the path he had to follow.
The self-authenticating nature of their experiences meant that neither of them was able to doubt them, yet the similarities must not blind us to certain differences.
The experiences were interpreted quite differently, even though they produced remarkable resemblances in character.
This raises the interesting question of whether by having different expectations the experiences were in fact different.
Usually religious people tend to see these as different, Sri Ramana's being an experience of enlightenment and awareness of the Oneness of being, whilst St Francis's conveyed a sense of communion with God — a sense of a Presence revealing itself.
Such study can deepen RE as well as promote spiritual awareness across the whole curriculum.
All religions furnish many examples.
A list of books and materials on Sri Ramana and St Francis is given below and there are other references to Sri Ramana in Chapter 10 (pp. 152, 155–7) and to St Francis in Chapters 8, 10 and 12 (pp. 122, 147 and 189).
The need for reflection on experience
It is important in coming to understand religion to appreciate the role of experience in the founding and development of it.
Beliefs are not  conjured up out of nothing but are rather a response to experience.
There is always a certain mismatch between belief and experience, because the latter is untidy; it comes to us without our asking for it, while the expression in words of our interpretation of experience tends to have a more clear-cut, fixed character about it.
A doctrine such as the Christian belief in God as Trinity arose out of the way in which Christians experienced God as personal and in three quite distinct ways and yet as one.
Logically this may not seem to make sense, yet for Christians it is like paradox pointing beyond a neat literalism to that reality which has impinged itself on them.
Paradox defies logic, yet not by dismissing it but by teasing us to think wider and deeper and extend our horizons and challenge our starting-points.
Awareness of the possible truth of paradox is a most helpful way in to appreciating the nature of religious language as it wrestles to express experience.
The theologian, Donald Baillie, used to give the example of two quite different kinds of maps — one showing hemispheres and the other straight.
Both are needed to convey a spherical world in two dimensions, for although they contradict each other at every point to some degree, yet together they correct and balance each other in attempting the impossible, i.e. to convey an accurate impression in two-dimensional terms of the spherical world.
Such problems in expressing the insight arising out of experience cause some people to ask: Why bother?
Why not just accept experience — why try to understand it and encapsulate it in words which will necessarily have an imprisoning effect upon the insight?
T.S.
Eliot spoke of "the intolerable wrestle with words and meanings" .
Why do with such hard work?
Basically, it is necessary to do so because interpretation and experience inevitably interact.
This is so even if the interpretation given to an experience, or which stimulated the experience, is one not authentic to it, conditioned perhaps by the society of which the individual is a part.
In order to ensure that the expression given to experience is as little of a mismatch as possible, it is necessary to develop the capacity for reflective thinking, and to this I now turn.
They can't all be right: developing reflective thinking about truth-claims
A major task for RE is to help pupils forward in their thinking.
It is not for teachers to tell them what to believe or value, but it is for them to try to equip pupils in such a way that they can enter into the debate and develop a coherent and perceptive worldview for themselves.
Another way of putting it is to say that RE has to offer feasible road-maps enabling pupils to chart their own way around the difficult country of religion with its complexity and ambiguity.
This involves — whether we like it or not — teaching them how to think; the capacity for being scholars in the true sense of the word has to be shared with everyone instead of being for an elite of specially gifted, specially privileged pupils.
The time-honoured expectation that pupils have to be told what to believe by authority in the form of parents, teachers or the state, can no longer operate today.
In the modern world the reasons for accepting any particular authority can be and are challenged.
It is as impossible as it is undesirable to try to put the clock back and treat the majority of pupils as being necessarily philosophical and theological infants incapable of any more.
Their level of sophistication in other areas of life has become much more marked.
This must happen with regard to RE too.
The importance of developing reflective thinking
There are many other reasons for giving careful thought to developing children's capacity for reflective thinking:
1.
such an emphasis in RE relates to the questions pupils actually ask.
Even young children are interested in metaphysical questions.
As one 8 year-old pupil explained: "I'm quite good at thinking.
I just need someone to start me up."
(Fisher 1990: 245) How far does RE start them up?
The interest continues, even intensifies, during adolescence.
The Head of Humanities in a large comprehensive school commented in my hearing, in a staff meeting about 3rd year general discussion groups on controversial issues, that "in about half of such groups the question of God is brought in by  some kid or other" and that he felt "put on the spot" .
RE is one of the few opportunities in the school timetable where such questions can be pursued in some depth.
2. reflective thinking takes questions of truth — which won't go away — seriously.
In a world of potentially conflicting beliefs it can thus help to extract the sting from many otherwise nasty situations of conflict and tension.
Many wrong turnings in discussion and communication in general can be avoided, as unnecessary difficulties are pre-empted.
For example, many Protestants used to criticize Roman Catholics on the grounds that they worship the Virgin Mary.
Yet this was in fact a pseudo-problem because Catholics do not worship Mary, but honour her as mother of the Christ whom they do worship.
3. truth per se matters; beliefs and values based on a falsehood or mere prejudice are not only unstable but likely to cause much damage and hurt to the people holding them as well as to others who may become their victims.
The twentieth century has seen many horrific examples of the power of wrong thinking, and this has often turned on matters of religion.
Such an emphasis in RE can therefore help to guard against delusion and prejudice.
4. such work would help to protect pupils from indoctrination from whatever source, religious or secular.
Only thus, in fact, can over-pressurizing of the young be avoided — by developing their capacity to be able to think effectively for themselves.
5. such work will also help pupils approach the diversity of religious beliefs in an open and non-dogmatic way without succumbing to the relativism which tends to regard different beliefs as just a matter of opinion.
This will enable creative exploration of the well-worn comment "but they can't all be right!" rather than saying there's no point in the question behind the statement.
Implications for RE
It is easy to understand, however, why teachers tend to run away from helping children to evaluate truth-claims.
A minefield seems to open up: complexity, controversy, doubt, anxiety, anger, bitterness, bigotry, intolerance…all these are possible.
Yet by embarking on these difficult waters we are confronting what religion really is, not a safe cardboard version of it neatly packaged up for general retail.
This is therefore preparing pupils for the real world; they will not have to unlearn, nor painfully make many avoidable mistakes, when forced by life's vagaries to make the journey across the waters (or the minefield) alone.
Also this is the point at which RE really comes radically alive, where it shows the excitement and challenge of which it is capable.
By  comparison the seemingly safe approach is anaemic and superficial — it does not really engage pupils.
This does.
Pupils of all ages and abilities have deeply held opinions about the way things actually are, about reality, about truth.
If teachers tap into this they plug into a powerhouse of emotional — and potentially intellectual — energy.
As this also is the way to understanding religion, we must go forward at this point.
But we ought to make the journey as safe as possible — can we ensure that at least beneficial results are more likely to ensue than unfortunate results?
By "beneficial" I mean those summarized in Chapter 12 on page 176 which accord with the five-fold quality of respect outlined in Chapter 1 as basic to education as to civilized living.
I think certain guiding principles can help and offer starting- points for reflective thinking.
Before turning to these — set out in two stages (see below, pp. 93–106)— we need to be clear what we mean by reflective thinking, and that pupils can do it.
Why "reflective thinking" ?
This term is useful to get away from certain stereotypes which tend to come into people's minds when "thinking" is mentioned.
Figure 7.1 lists some of these, together with the kind of thinking I have in mind.
First, it has a quality of first-handedness and authenticity about it — a person's own thinking not somebody else's.
In an unusual analogy Coleridge described people as "tanks" or "springs" according to the way they borrow ideas from others: "tanks" just take over ideas and store them like water; "springs" adopt them, producing a stream of water and so making them their own.
The one can easily become stagnant, the other has ongoing vitality of its own.
Secondly, it is mindfully directed thinking, displaying a quality of attentiveness.
Without this quality, nothing can be learned or understood.
Yet it is important not to confuse attentiveness with the kind of frowning application traditional academic work has often encouraged.
We have probably all experienced failing to see something and then later, as we do the washing-up or walk to the post, suddenly "the penny drops" , and we exclaim"But of course…
".
Insight is like that: the quality of attentiveness must not be spoilt by our getting in the way of it — by the wrong kind of effort or by anxiety and feelings of self-doubt.
Thirdly, thinking which is reflective is intimately linked with feelings, imagination and involvement in life, and is concerned about truth.
Pure logic is only a small part of the thinking we habitually do, and can only be so because it is only appropriate for certain limited activities.
In fact what we feel relates to what we think — the concepts   we have, how we interpret situations, what we think ought to happen, and so on.
And what we think relates to what we feel.
Subjective reactions colour all we hear and see, and the words we use.
Also there is a close connection between reason and emotion in other ways.
The rational person cares about truth and is disposed to seek it.
Reflective thinking can perhaps be summarized by a quotation from the philosopher Basil Mitchell.
He sees it as: a matter of individuals attempting, incompletely, to make sense of the total environment in which they find themselves and to respond rightly to it.
It is an activity which involves the whole person and calls for sympathetic imagination, sensitivity and constant self-criticism.
(Mitchell 1990: 210–11)
Any view of RE that sees a split between a feelings/affective approach and a thinking/cerebral one is seriously mistaken, for both are involved all the time and cannot be separated.
 "But isn't it much too difficult for most children?" 
This is so common a reaction that it warrants a section on its own, even though reference to this was made in Chapter 5.
The short answer to this question is no: it is not something which demands special intellectual capacity.
To do it one must be human, with feelings, experience, and some basic capability for getting on the wave-length of other people, as well as having a certain innate logical ability — the kind which enables a baby to learn unaided the mysteries of language.
The capacity to make sophisticated discernment in thought-processes is within the grasp of almost everyone and constantly demonstrated in everyday life.
It is this capacity to which RE must seek to relate, enabling transference of skills from the general to the religious sphere of enquiry.
If I want children to become philosophers in RE it is because they are already incipient philosophers, as for example Gareth Matthews (1980) has persuasively argued.
Reflective thinking is not beyond the capacity of any but the most severely mentally retarded.
How far children take it, and especially the language they use and the sophistication with which they employ concepts, will obviously vary enormously, but none should be excluded because of a teacher's prior decision that they are not capable.
How far they progress depends on many factors, but they will not progress unless given a chance.
A scientist I know is amazed how often his eight year-old son can see immediately through a tangle of ideas in a problem — the directness and uncomplicatedness and openness of the child is a huge asset which many adults have lost.
Wordsworth spoke of children "trailing clouds of glory" , and their intuitive appreciation of Mystery may be one aspect of this which many adults have lost to their own deprivation and that of others.
An exaggerated and misplaced reliance on the research of Piaget and Goldman has encouraged teachers to have low expectations concerning children's abilities.
Criticisms of that research have already been discussed in Chapter 5 (pp. 58–9).
Here we can just note that limitations of expression and vocabulary can give the impression of naivety, just as sophistication in language can hide naivety in thought.
A lively and optimistic search to find hidden depths and insights and questioning within pupils must replace negative attitudes towards children's capacity for thinking.
In an illuminating interview on management, John Harvey-Jones made many comments as relevant to teaching as to management: One of the roles of management is to grow people's belief in themselves and raise their aspirations…
They can do what they believe they can do but they sure as hell cannot do what their manager believes they cannot do.
If you are told enough times that you are incapable, you begin to believe it and lose the self-confidence you need to do your job…
Most people are switched on by recognition.
(Harvey-Jones 1991 p. 80)
This applies profoundly to pupils' capacity for reflective thinking.
A structure for reflective thinking
For helping pupils towards greater sophistication in their thinking, the following suggestions may be helpful.
Two stages are involved, the reason for which is neatly summarized in this quotation from C.S. Lewis: The first qualification for judging any piece of workmanship from a corkscrew to a cathedral is to know what it is — what it was intended to do and how it is meant to be used.
After that has been discovered the temperance reformer may decide that the corkscrew was made for a bad purpose, and the communist may think the same about the cathedral.
But such questions come later.
the first thing is to understand the object before you: as long as you think that the corkscrew was meant for opening tins or the cathedral for entertaining tourists you can say nothing to the purpose about them.
STAGE 1: Being sure we understand what the belief under discussion really is
This is often much more complicated, especially with regard to religion, than many people think.
Discernment is called for at at least seven levels before seriously trying to evaluate whether a belief is true or not.
They can be thought of as seven tests to be applied.
Trying these out helps to ensure that we actually understand what we are talking about and what the beliefs actually are.
Table 7.1 lists these and examples discussed in the text, and suggests an exercise on them.
This concerns the importance of understanding the words used and making sure that in an argument both sides mean the same by them.
The problem of thinking we are attaching the same meaning to a word or action when we may not be can be appreciated humorously.
Pupils can enjoy making up nonsense sentences like "For goodness sake, put the table into the teapot!" or "The house looked up and ran away." 
Communication test
Conversations such as this can help children see the point: Penny: "I love giraffes — I love stroking them on my lap — I'd love to have one for a pet." 
Daphne: "I would be scared out of my wits to have a giraffe — it's a wild animal and far too big for our garden!" 
The same kind of mistake — usually entirely hidden from the people with the opposing views — can easily creep in to discussion about more serious matters.
Thus, for example: A "Democracy is the finest form of government." 
B "It certainly is not." 
(A thinks of equality and liberty when the word "democracy" is mentioned; B of football hooliganism and anarchic free-for-all.)
This is an example concerning religion:
Fiona: "I don't believe in God — science has disproved all that stuff." 
Mark: "I do believe in God — it makes sense to me as nothing else does." 
The disagreement here is at least partially one over the use of words.
Fiona and Mark mean something quite different by the word "God" such that they come to diametrically opposite conclusions.
This concerns being fair with regard to what a belief actually claims.
Accuracy matters in everyday life.
For example, in a doctor's surgery: Patient: "4 tablespoons, did you say?" 
Accuracy test
Doctor: "Good God no, 4 teaspoons." 
A famous example of the importance of checking whether the so-called facts are right occurred on the occasion of Charles II founding the Royal Society in 1660.
At the inaugural meeting he posed this question: "Why does water not spill over a bowl filled to the brim when goldfish are added?" 
Several months later, after much mental sweating, someone thought to ask, was the King right?
They did the simple experiment and of course found that he was not!
A religious example was given on page 89.
Another example might be attitudes towards Hinduism.
The question is often asked whether Hindus believe in many gods and goddesses.
Most Hindus whom I have met would say that they do not, for they believe that at the heart of life is Oneness — Brahman — which manifests itself in an infinite number of forms.
Veneration of the images is therefore for the devout Hindu worship of Brahman.
It is important when evaluating a belief to weed out of consideration any form of pretence or hypocrisy associated with the people claiming to hold the belief.
Here are two examples of mismatch between statement and behaviour.
A car driver indicates that he is turning right but goes straight on with disastrous consequences, as my brother discovered to his cost recently!
Advice to drivers is to act according to the direction in which the wheels of the car are pointing, not trusting the signal given.
Integrity Test
Y talking to Z: Y: "Listening is so important." 
Half an hour later: Z: "I couldn't get a word in edgeways" , muttered as he managed finally to get away.
What Y said may be right, even though Y fails to act by it.
The application of this distinction to religion is exceedingly important.
Comments such as these are quite common: e.g. "I'll have nothing to do with religion — that vicar down the road couldn't care a damn for anyone." 
Or what about the newspaper headline: "Religious mania behind terrorism?" 
It is easy to lump together under the heading of religion the political powermonger and the self-effacing saint, the ignorant victim of conditioning and superstition with the thoughtful and intelligent worshipper, the sensationalist religious leader with the painstaking scholar.
Unless we sort this out there is no hope of reaching any intelligent or sensible evaluation of religion.
These phenomena are as different as chalk from cheese.
To eat chalk is as foolish as to try to write on a blackboard with cheese!
Yet thousands of people do in effect do this when they reject religion because of the hypocrisy, superstition and dogmatism of some of its advocates, and when they accept religion because of their own taste for status, a safe life, or being hypnotized by the magnetism of some charismatic figure.
Equally important for understanding of religion is the ability to distinguish between what is peripheral and what is central.
The relative ease with which external forms and behaviour can be observed, and the degree of sensitivity required for penetrating their inner significance make this a special "trap for the unwary" .
Importance test
It is best to begin with some everyday examples which might include: "They shook hands." 
What did they mean by this?
Did they agree?
Were they just being polite?
Were they deceiving each other?
Head to visitor: "The purpose of school uniform is so that pupils have a pride in belonging to the school." 
Later the visitor gets in conversation with a pupil.
Visitor: "Why do you wear school uniform?" 
Pupil: "Because I'd get into trouble if I didn't." 
Visitor: "So it doesn't make you feel as though you belong." 
Pupil: "Bloody hell no — I hate wearing it." 
Applied to religion, people often say things like this: "I can't stand all the incense, candles and ceremony, and above all the sermons, so I'm having nothing to do with religion" ; "I go to church because I love the music" .
Scores of examples can be given from all the great religions, for this touches on the relationship of external words and actions to religious belief.
This quotation from the Muslim News shows how important the distinction is, and what misinterpretation is possible if pupils are not helped sufficiently to see it:
In Islam, only the Qur'an is considered "holy" .
A teacher for example may hold up a prayer mat to signify a "holy" object.
The distinction between the mat being just an object upon which prayer is performed on and not the object of worship may cause problems.
(See Chapter 8 for further discussion on this as applied to religion.)
It may seem an arid and dull activity to analyse and make distinctions.
Wordsworth can be quoted: Our meddling intellect Mis-shapes the beauteous form of things We murder to dissect Yet his friend Coleridge could see a middle path — distinguishing, not in order to divide or separate, but in order to discern or understand.
An obvious example is the relationship of a part to a whole.
The hand can be distinguished from the body, yet it belongs to it in such a way that it cannot operate as a hand unless attached to the body — except in fantasy as in Ted Hughes' story of The Iron Man.
Similarly, things can be inseparable even as they are distinguishable, as water = H20.
Distinctiveness test
The difficulty which many people have in seeing this where religion is concerned is because of an either/or mentality.
There are of course many cases where there is a necessary either/or in that if something is inherently contradictory, then choice has to be made.
If I am writing on this side of the paper I cannot at the same moment be  writing on the other side.
Either the car engine is on or it is not.
Either there is some cake left or there is not.
Either there is money in the purse or there is not, etc.
But there is often a strong temptation to see things as either/or when they are in fact both/and.
A graphic example was given me when on my first day of lecturing in a college of education a student came up and earnestly asked me: "Do you believe the Bible — yes or no?" 
I was presented with a choice between just two positions when in fact there are many more possible ones.
This test highlights the necessity to understand the original context of a belief and make sure that something is not being wrenched out of that to a setting where it does not apply.
Context test
The question of context is extremely important.
The same remark can cause very different reactions in different settings.
 "Stop talking" can be seen as plain common sense if everyone is talking at once, but if it comes from an over-talkative mother with a shy child it can have serious consequences on the child's character.
Similarly, in a court where a witness is being browbeaten under cross-examination, or in a meeting where someone hogs the discussion and refuses to listen to an important point which is being made, it may be important that the injunction is resisted.
These are terribly obvious points, but we tend to forget them when dealing with complex and highly controversial matters which matter emotionally to us.
Applied to religion here are two statements which can be received in totally different ways according to the context.
a) The phrase, "Let us pray" .
If this comes in a school assembly where there are many agnostics or atheists possibly present it can provoke the reaction, "How dare they try to make us Christian" .
But for an ordinary church service this can be regarded as absolutely matter of fact.
If it occurs at the beginning of a committee meeting where something is going to be pushed through and the agenda manipulated it can provoke the reaction, "…hypocrites" .
If it is said in the context of a vicar with a bereaved family who are deeply religious it can mean, "Yes indeed, this will really help us" .
If it is said in a situation of trouble or danger at sea or at war it can be received, even by people who are not religious, as"Perhaps there is something in it.
It's worth a try".
b) A second example is the statement: Jesus was the son of God.
It is interesting to compare the reactions of people from different religions to this statement.
Most Hindus will be happy to say, "Yes everyone is" .
Muslims, however, are likely to say,"No this is blasphemous.
God is not a person who can have a son."
The agnostic and the Buddhist might say, "So Christians believe, but other people do not" , while the Christian within the context of worship might say, "Yes, his life revealed God in a special way" .
This is the same statement which brings into play a totally different set of reactions in each case owing to the different perspectives.
But in order to be understood it needs to be seen within its original context of faith in one God who can only be spoken about by using metaphorical language.
This concerns the capacity to discern how far the content of a belief is positive as opposed to negative, and how far this promotes engagement with people rather than indifference to them or denial of them as persons.
Affirmation test
The word "affirmation" can be used in two quite different ways: as affirming a statement and as affirming people.
These are related, however, if the first is a matter of central belief to a person, as it often is with religion — what they spend a great deal of time and effort on, what makes them tick.
A negative judgement passed on such a belief has repercussions on the person, however indirect these may be.
Table 7.2 gives an example which most people would find relatively straightforward.
The content of the opinion in each case would have a spin-off effect on people who happen to love football and give a lot of time to watching, playing or training for it.
The effect of our comments is likely to be intensified towards either (1) or (6).
Thus it is clear that (a) affirms the footballer;(b) also affirms the footballer because the speaker has made it clear that it is a personal reaction of liking or disliking which has nothing to do with appreciation of football's being a good game;(c) is affirming also because although criticism of the game is stated, its positive value comes first, and in any case the keen footballer is likely to be the first to agree that the level of enjoyment varies according to different games of football;(d) however veers towards dismissal of football and therefore dismissal of what is meaningful to the footballer, because although it acknowledges that sometimes it is a good game the emphasis is on the negative side;(e) is not affirming because even though the hurt to the footballer is cushioned by making it clear that this is a personal opinion, a very negative judgement is in fact articulated;(f) has the straight effect of dismissing the footballer as well as football because it implies that anyone who spends time on football is stupid.
The importance of affirmation With regard to football it perhaps does not matter very much — people who like playing it or watching it are not likely to be seriously affected by our negative comments; they will just think that we are stupid and go on playing and watching as before.
But substitute something like modern art, or even more so religion, and the repercussions of positive or negative statements on the people who do it are likely to be considerably greater.
Applied to the theme of meditation, for example, such as is practised within Buddhism and many forms of Hinduism especially, but which is also present within other major religious traditions, a range of possible opinions is possible: 1.
meditation is extremely helpful; 2. meditation is extremely helpful for many people, even though it is not for me; 3. meditation can be helpful, even though it often is not; 4. meditation is unlikely to be helpful, even though there are exceptions; 5.
I think meditation is a waste of time; 6. there's nothing in meditation.
What will be the likely effects of such judgements on someone for whom practising meditation has become an important part of life, perhaps helping them to cope with difficulties and gain a sense of freedom and peace?
If we care about other people — and if we want so far as possible to affirm other people — we shall walk warily before dismissing out of hand, discourteously or clumsily, what is deeply meaningful to them.
Yet authentic conversation and involvement must allow for a full  range of likes and dislikes to be expressed, and also for criticism as well as acknowledgement, but we need to do this in such a way that we do as little damage as possible to other people as people.
Therefore, we should be very wary indeed of (e) and (f) types of statements unless we are sure that there is something really negative that has to be exposed and which, even if it hurts people in the process, is nevertheless necessary.
The non-affirmation of what is negative An example might be the following.
Here are six statements about a belief which is wholly negative in itself and in its implications: 1.
anti-semitism is justified; 2. anti-semitism may be justified, but some Jews are all right; 3. anti-semitism is sometimes justified, though often it is not; 4. anti-semitism is not justified, though sometimes there may be a case for it; 5.
I think anti-semitism is evil; 6. anti-semitism is evil.
Statement (6) is the one to which most civilized people would subscribe.
It is judgemental and not affirming of, for example, Nazis.
Yet it does not falsify the principle of affirmation for which I am arguing.
First, a distinction can and should be made between judging a belief or behaviour, and judging a person — we can affirm a person as a person without condoning his/her beliefs or behaviour.
We can, for example, account for the latter, even if we dislike it, by means of finding various reasons for that behaviour such as upbringing, unfortunate company, or unpleasant experiences.
There are many instances of victims of Nazi aggression who have been able to do just this — to forgive despite terrible hurt.
Secondly, although the belief we are denying poses as an affirmation grammatically or verbally, yet its content refers to a non-recognition of people, a negative judgement in this case of mammoth proportions on a whole people.
A mathematical analogy might help us to see what is involved here: to affirm a real affirmation is positive, but to affirm something which is itself negative is to end up with a negative in the same way — no better than what we are criticizing.
For a minus and a plus make another minus.
But if we oppose the negative point we make possible something positive, for two minuses make a plus.
STAGE 2: Evaluating the truth of a belief
This kind of thinking is leading on from the question of analysis to  that of evaluation.
The issue here is not only Where do I locate my response?, but Where ought I to locate it in order not to be misguided, or plain wrong, or reveal my ignorance or blindness?
There is a need for criteria which relate to the basis upon which we evaluate anything.
And these we need to share with pupils.
Thus, about beliefs and values in science education, Michael Poole writes: In science education and in other areas of the curriculum more help needs to be given to students to enable them to discern where beliefs and values are located, how to spot where they follow from the subject matter or were imported at the beginning, what are the available options among them and what are appropriate criteria for testing their truth-claims and adjudicating between the ones on offer.
(Poole 1990c: 72)
Evaluating truth-claims: do the beliefs correspond to reality — are they right rather than wrong?
A range of questions
In order to decide whether something is sound or not, we can ask a number of questions.
For example, with regard to the belief in the existence of God we can ask: 1.
is it logically satisfying or is there anything contradictory or inconsistent in believing in the existence of God?
2. can it offer an adequate, and perhaps more than adequate explanation of the phenomenon of existence than a denial of the existence of God can?
3. is it inclusive of as many aspects of experience as possible, or is it exclusive, ignoring or dismissing many other aspects?— Is it welcoming potentially to all insights?
4. does it have the support of major well-tried traditions, or does it stand out on a limb as possibly idiosyncratic?
5. can it be seen as sustainable in people's lives and through the centuries.
Can it pass the test of time?
6. does it accord with a majority sentiment in most cultures and situations, or is it very much a minority opinion?
7. can it provide a powerful motivation for practical outcome leading to a workable way of life?
8. is the outcome likely to be beneficial — producing creative consequences?
9. does it allow for the possibility of greater understanding or fresh insight?
Does it lead to — even require — greater openness, or does it close the mind up?
10. is its thrust positive and not negative, referring to what is and not to what is not?
This is quite a battery of questions.
The criteria they imply are   summarized in Fig. 7.2.
Some of them have already been used in this book.
In Chapter 3, for example, the first and the third, strict logic and comprehensiveness, were applied four times,(pp. 27–9, 30–1, 32–3, 35) and the second, explainability, once (p. 27–8) and the eighth, beneficial consequences, once (p. 31).
It is in weighing these up one against another — in balancing them and seeing them altogether cumulatively — that these criteria may become effective.
It is important to guard against certain misunderstandings however.
First, by themselves none of these criteria is foolproof, for example reliance on authority can be abused — called in when not necessary or appropriate.
An example has already been given in the anecdote of Charles II on page 95.
Authority can be mistaken and it can cover up ignorance with prestige and prevent people from thinking for themselves.
Again the criterion of sustainability is inadequate by itself.
An article in The Times carried the heading "Yuppies oust the hippies of yesteryear" .8 This offers a good example of a test developed by Newman who called it "Chronic vigour" .9 This is not, however, to be understood as "whatever is old is good" .
Mistakes and ignorance can be handed on from one generation to another, habit can blind, and tradition can bind.
The use of the criteria
Secondly, the criteria become stronger as they interact with each other like interlocking links.
The following quotation from Basil Mitchell can illustrate this.
Here the three criteria of (*a) explainability,(*b) comprehensiveness and (*c) positivity intertwine, as I indicate by means of the asterisks: The problem for the atheist is to provide a convincing account (*a) of religious experience, and with it of the entire (*b) religious history of mankind, which will do justice (*c) to its character and effects.
Such an account has to be a purely naturalistic one (*a); it has to deny (*c) that these experiences are what they purport to be, namely, instances of human awareness (*b) of the supernatural.
And it is important to notice that the onus is upon the atheist to show the reason why (*a) the experience is not (*c) to be trusted.
Of course no experience is self-authenticating, but it is reasonable to accept claims made on the basis of experience (*b and c) unless sufficient reason is produced (*a) for not doing so.
(Mitchell 1990: 208)
Thirdly, it is often helpful to consider the opposite — as Mitchell does here.
The difficulty of expressing what we think adequately in matters concerned with assumptions and beliefs means that it is often easier to say what we do not agree with than what we do.
For example, in applying the first criterion — logicality — belief in God is held by religious people to be more than a matter of logic.
So to ask whether it is logical can be misunderstood.
Yet most would want to agree that such belief ought not to be contradictory in any way (while bearing in mind the distinction between paradox and contradiction referred to at the end of Chapter 6).
In a similar way, the negative alternative to the belief in the existence of God — its denial — can be usefully subjected to the criteria.
Because this is so crucial a matter for consideration in RE, I discuss this example in some detail.
We can ask: 1.
Is it really any more rational to deny rather than affirm — am I, for example, sure that I mean by God what a religious person does, because if I do not then my dismissal of God's existence rests on a logical non sequitur .
Applying the criteria to a negative belief
2.
Can I offer any more satisfactory explanation of the mystery of existence?
Big bang, or chance, or evolution cannot provide any answer of any kind to this overall why? question.
3.
Do I acknowledge the power and ubiquity of religious faith?
Which of the alternatives on offer do I choose and why?
Are any of these fool-proof, and if not might I be wrong after all and religious experience right when taken at face value?
4.
Have I actually understood how the saints and scholars of the great religions have understood "God" and why they consider that God exists?
Otherwise my opinion may be based on ignorance.
5.
Have I underestimated the importance of sustainability?
How do I know that the alternatives to belief in God, like Marxism and Humanism, are sustainable in the same way?
6.
Is my dismissal of God something which on the total screen of human existence is rather a freak?
7.
Can non-religious worldviews offer as much, or as adequate, inspiration as belief in God for actual living and initiative in carrying practical projects through?
8.
Are non-religious undertakings necessarily more beneficial than those based on belief in God?
If the charge of hypocrisy can be raised against the latter, is it not also possible to raise it against the former?
9.
Is the evidence on which I base my denial of God actually non-experience, in which case how can I be sure that this is not caused by my own limitations in accessing what in reality exists?
10.
Does dismissal of God's existence make for greater openness and enquiry, or does it have the effect of closing the door on trying to understand what is strange or threatening to itself which might be, for example, the claims of other religions?
I do not claim any more for these criteria than that they raise at least the possibility of a belief being affirmable.
How far anyone is convinced by them depends in the last resort on the themes of the last two chapters — on imagination and experience.
The artistic eye, for example, will see what the pedestrian and clinically-minded eye does not.
Van Gogh could not possibly demonstrate the validity of his vision to someone who lacks that inner visual sense by which his greatness as an artist is perceived.
Instead that sense has to be nurtured by more direct experience over a long period of time.
This is why a child who grows up in an atmosphere where artistic beauty is in evidence and talked about and striven after has an enormous advantage  over the child from a background of visual ugliness in which people are innocent of any artistic discernment.
The value of the criteria
For art, substitute science, languages, history and all the other curriculum areas including religion.
Inner awareness is essential.
What school-work can do, however, is help to arouse the desire for understanding.
It can establish certain foundations, give pupils some strategy by means of which to proceed.
It can especially help to remove unnecessary stumbling-blocks to the way forward for any given person.
For example, no amount of arguing by itself will convince anyone of the truth of Genesis, 2–3, but knowledge of the possibility of interpreting it in different ways — which include the symbolic — can help people to think again about an easy dismissal of it.
This can help to prevent the kind of simplistic denunciation of it which was given in the example quoted on page 62–3 in Chapter 5.
If we do not ask these questions, can we be sure we have not abandoned the search at too early a point, so that we are like the police officer who judges too soon that the death in a detective story was a suicide and not a murder?
Talk of ongoingness, openness to evidence, exploration, needs to be taken seriously.
The problem is that many people tend to decide far too soon concerning religion that there is nothing there to search for — nothing important to be bothered about.
This is very far from the attitude which almost all religions agree is essential for understanding and which is encapsulated in the parable of the pearl of great price.
Maybe only to those of such a mind will religion or its truth be perceivable.
As I was writing this, the post brought some advertising blurb: "Are you tuned in to the Win a Fortune Show?" 
Maybe that is the point: without being tuned in how can we know whether there is anything there or not?
It is important to wrestle with questions of how far a belief corresponds to reality or is illusory.
This is part of making sense of the world and of our experience in it.
Applying the criteria encourages such wrestling.
These are all challengeable but nevertheless not negligible.
Their cumulative force can serve to point out weaknesses, both in the content of a belief and in its expression in words, in a way which we can helpfully discuss with other people.
Our awareness of the area under discussion, and our capacity for exercising choice, will increase through the effort of applying them, and balancing them against each other.
Beyond facts: the coming together of religions
Criticism of the phenomenological approach to RE was given in Chapter 4, particularly on the grounds that in practice it tends to lose touch with much of the religion it sets out to understand and include.
Yet it remains important to take on board the intentions behind that approach: the global vision, the search for harmony, and the emphasis upon fairness to all religions, has never more been needed in the world than today.
A deeper analysis of religion is therefore needed — one which can affirm, instead of being rather dismissive of, the intuitions behind the confessional approach which has the merit of taking religious claims to truth seriously.
But the confessional approach in its turn needs to be deepened and extended to become worthy in expression of the ideals of religious people.
This chapter gives some idea of the scope possible for a world religions course which is open, affirming and critical.
It assumes a high regard by teachers and pupils for the themes of the last three chapters — imagination, experience and thinking.
The sensitivity needed in this area calls for an emphasis on certain points before the more controversial ones are attempted.
Introductory points on approaching truth-claims in multi-faith RE
1.
Share with pupils the educational task.
This involves in particular cultivating certain attitudes and skills associated with education in general(see Chapter 1, pp. 2, 4, 6–10).
2.
Emphasize the difficulty of saying anything at all with regard to religion which may not be received by someone in a misleading way.
Controversy is unavoidable.
What is needed are ways of expressing controversy courteously.
Even very young children are aware that people think differently, and as they get older they need a model of how to discuss differences honestly without papering over the cracks.
3.
Underline that the purpose is not quickly to arrive at understanding, but to embark upon a lifetime's exploration.
All religions stress the need for preparation in depth for any understanding of their religion.
4.
Put forward the idea that "answers" are like hypotheses in science  which have to be tested and tried out and replaced by better ones if necessary, but the testing has to be appropriate to the subject-matter.
Scientific method will not do.
We cannot literally weigh religious truth-claims or look at them through a micro- scope.
Instead we need to reflect on them, ponder and wonder, find out all we can about them, learn to appreciate some of the time-honoured ways of approaching them such as meditation and prayer, and be prepared to think about these matters in all sorts of different situations and moods.
Otherwise, whether we eventually accept or reject any particular religious belief, it may not be on the basis of understanding but of mis-understanding that we choose.
5.
Emphasize throughout how important it is to appreciate the "pointing towards" quality of religious language, gesture, behaviour and ritual.
It is crucial not to take everything in either a literal sense or in a humanistic, reinterpretative sense.
(The meaning of symbol in religion can be undermined not just by literalism, but by evacuating the content of the symbol, making it "just symbolism" .)
Questions of meaning open up vistas which can be exciting to explore.
6.
Always stress what can be seen to cohere and fit together before attending to what does not fit.
It is rather like doing a jigsaw puzzle where one might never get started if insisting first on finding the exact home for this one particular piece before trying with the rest.
We cannot expect to arrive at consensus easily — there are a lot of things which may not seem to fit at all— but we can at least want to find out what is in common before worrying about what appears to contradict.
Sharing these points with pupils will help to build up the appropriate attitudes and skills in a relatively safe way, as well as increasing understanding of the great world religions.
Something of this should be attempted with all children, including those who are quite young, using appropriate examples and language.
To delay the attempt to begin to understand religion in these ways is to risk making it very difficult for people ever to understand.
Applying the principle of critical affirmation to world religions
The kind of descriptive approach already widespread in schools — and for which there is plenty of published material available — needs from an early stage to be supplemented in an important way.
The following series of 7 diagrams gives some suggestions on a possible order.
The six world religions specified under the GCSE National Criteria are included (DES, 1985, 4.3.1), but there is scope for others such as the  Bahai faith, as well as for work on distinct traditions within each religion.
Depending on the age and aptitude of pupils, as well as on local circumstances, work on just two or three religions may be appropriate.
The point of the approach is to apply an attitude of critical affirmation to the different traditions enabling them to be studied and discussed in a way which is affirming of members of the traditions without succumbing to naivety or blandness.
What major world religions hold in common Figure 8.1, using the shape of a circle containing equal segments, gives an example of what religions have in common: they all teach very high ethical standards and ideals which are seen as intimately related to the metaphysical reality behind the world — a reality which in most religions is called "God" .
Morality, for religious people, is not something invented by people to keep community life sweet; it is for them an obligation arising out of the nature of the way things are.
Morality may not be the same as religion — although in many of the great religions this distinction is not clearly perceived — but sincerity in pursuing religion is normally expected to carry with it sincerity in pursuing a high moral code.
The reverse also holds, that failure to live morally betrays and invalidates religious devotion unless there is genuine penitence.
A clear example of the degree of common ground is what has been called the Golden Rule in the different religions.
This is developed in almost all religions into a requirement to love even enemies.
The degree of emphasis given in each religion may vary considerably — some may not give it the prominence which another does.
But yet it should not be regarded as a quirk development, but as part of that to which the other more familiar aspects of the religion are pointing.
Many other themes concerned with moral education could be given.
Pointing towards the Mystery at the heart of reality
Figure 8.2, starting at the centre of a circle and pointing out towards an indefinitely increasing circle, relates to the way in which all religions point towards Mystery.
This is so fundamental a point that I will develop this in some detail.
As already discussed on page 55, Mystery has nothing to do with a "who-dun-it" .
There is a profound difference between the kind of problem-solving which encourages us to use reason in order to reach a solution and the awareness of Mystery which leads to feelings of wonder and awe and worship in the light of what is being contemplated.
This is how a modern scientist, John Cole, has put it: Mysteries"are not the product of thought, but of experience.
We can think about them, but not explain them, only know them.
We must never attempt to reduce Mysteries to problems."
He then summarizes what Mystery means to religious people of many faiths as "an intense awareness of the Presence abiding with and within themselves and the world" , and he then quotes from Hindu and Muslim as well as Christian sources (Cole 1988: 13).
This has profound implications for the way in which religions talk about God.
As a Russian Orthodox Christian has expressed it: "To speak of God we should be at once poets, musicians and saints" (Bobrinskoy 1986: 7).
There are innumerable passages in both the Jewish and Christian scriptures which speak of the ineffable greatness and holiness of God.
Sikhism sees this Mystery at the heart of religion in the same way.
The scriptures of the Sikh faith, the Granth, are full of such hymns as this: Saith Nanak: a million weights of paper, written over with learning and devotion, With ink in unending stream, with the motion of wind to scribe Even thus might Thy greatness be not expressed!
What measure might I give of Thy Name?
(Talib 1975: 158)
Muslims emphasize the greatness and transcendence of Allah, and this informs their attitude of "Islam" or submission to the will of Allah.
The Sufi tradition in particular stresses that only through the use of symbols can any understanding be reached: It is through symbols that one is awakened; it is through symbols that one is transformed; and it is through symbols that one expresses.
Symbols are realities contained within the nature of things.
The entire journey in God is a journey in symbols, in which one is constantly aware of the higher reality within things.
(Bakhtiar 1976: 25)
All religions use what in classical theology is known as the via negativa — the negative way of speaking about the centre of religious worship or meditation.
Within Hinduism a classical reply to what or who is Brahman is neti-neti — "not this, not this" .
It is interesting to note (cf point 5 p. 109 above) that this is a seemingly negative phrase  which is actually affirming something positive.
The phrase does not indicate that Brahman does not exist, or that we know nothing about Brahman, but that we know that Brahman is so far beyond our understanding that anything we say will be misleading and therefore we must content ourselves with saying neti-neti.
Christians too use the via negativa.
They speak of God as immortal, invisible, infinite, incomprehensible, ineffable, and so forth.
In trying to understand Hinduism, Christianity or any other religion, as well as in seeking to affirm Hindus, and Christians, and members of other religions, it is essential to practise this level of discernment.
(See especially pp. 99–101.)
This approach is most obviously to the fore in Buddhism which emphasizes the necessity for getting beyond concepts by the use of words like anatta, anicca, and nirvana.
Indeed most Buddhists are unhappy even to refer to "God" at all.
The point is worth making that historically it was out of a background of theological wrangling by Brahmin priests over the nature of "Brahman" that the young prince, Gautama, rebelled exasperated and went on to seek — and to find — enlightenment elsewhere thus becoming the Buddha.
Knowledge concerning that enlightenment was what he passed on to his disciples, and this — the positive content of the Four Noble Truths and the teaching of the Middle Way — is what has made Buddhism live down the ages and still today.
Yet reluctance to use the word "God" does not mean that Buddhists deny the reality of Mystery with a capital M. For they believe in "Nirvana" as not literally referring to nothingness but to the enlightenment attendant upon the laying aside of barriers to it.
It is greater than any concepts we can have to such a degree that they hold that any concept at all prevents our seeing it.
The word "God" in all the theistic religions refers to that Mystery which is at once transcendent and immanent.
It does not refer to naive anthropomorphism, to childish notions of a kind of finite Person resident somewhere.
The language of person which is applied to God is metaphorical, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Religions as sociological entities are not meant to be more than stepping-stones to an appreciation of the profound Mystery at the heart of reality.
Outward forms of expression and inner meaning
Figure 8.3 offers a way of bringing the phenomenological perspective on one religion into relationship with other religions.
What they each have in common is the use of various signs and symbols concerning both behaviour and belief.
The diagram has one segment filled in; pupils could fill in the others themselves, working either in groups or individually.
The arrangement of the signs and symbols is designed to encourage a deepening awareness of their "pointing-towards" character; the deeper we penetrate behind the scenes as it were of the various words and actions, the closer can they be seen to become because all alike are pointing towards that Mystery which is beyond straightforward conceptual understanding.
The outward characteristics of religions have an inner meaning which brings them from their very separate and distinct starting-points towards an appreciation of the Mystery at the heart of religion where  paradoxically the distinctions merge.
This does not eradicate the distinctiveness of each religion's approach.
The unique insights of each are not lost, for in order to have a less inadequate appreciation of what is at the heart of reality we need to affirm all insights.
If all this seems somewhat esoteric, the Jain parable of the Blind men and the elephant, which is given in Chapter 13, could be made into a similar diagram, and other examples then worked through such as "getting to know about" a work of art, an event, a person, a culture.
In each the same point can be made, that different people can see different facets of something or someone which may all be part of the whole which is beyond our complete understanding.
Rituals, creeds and so forth are important, for they can help people to reach a state of awareness of what is beyond understanding.
By the same token, teaching them is important, but only if it is constantly related to their purpose within religions.
For they are not the goal, but a means to something else, and any understanding of the religion concerned must acknowledge this.
Thus if the first purpose of a particular religion is to help people to a sense of the presence of God and express a response to God, then the study of the ritual which helps them towards this goal must constantly draw attention to this significance.
A short section on the teaching of ritual may be helpful.
The warning concerning how we teach about ritual is necessary.
It is easy to make this colourful and fascinating, with varied activities.
But what will pupils take away with them?
Will they equate being religious with performing ritual?
Will they see this as largely superstitious — the invocation of a kind of magic?
Will they assume that people engage in this ritual because they have always done so and have been conditioned into it?
Will the details of the ritual mean anything to them?
Will the experience of studying the ritual bear any creative relationship to their own lives?
Teaching about ritual
In order for work on ritual to become really educational, it would be necessary to share with pupils what the functions of ritual are.
Thus, for example, it enables expression of religious conviction in more than intellectual terms: the appeal to the senses, the performance of actions and so forth .
These become vehicles by which an idea is conveyed with immediacy — the power of the symbol for evoking an emotional and emotive response.
Another important feature is that it helps to overcome distractability so that people can focus attentively in prayer or meditation.
Dissipation of energy through lack of concentration is one of the chief sources of non-awareness.
The difference between routine and ritual needs to be discussed.
Superstition occurs when the distinction between the outer action or words and the inner meaning or purpose is forgotten.
This is a great temptation facing the religious believer.
But failure to appreciate the  force of this distinction can also shipwreck attempts by observers to understand religion — to read correctly what is going on as a person performs a religious ritual or speaks religious words (see Chapter 10 where an assessment task on this is suggested).
A story which can help pupils to discuss the role of ritual, and the way in which other people can misconstrue it, is that of the little fox in the Legends of Moses.
Moses finds a shepherd in the desert.
He spends the day with the shepherd and helps him milk his ewes, and at the end of the day he sees that the shepherd puts the best milk he has in a wooden bowl, which he places on a flat stone some distance away.
So Moses asks him what it is for, and the shepherd replies, "This is God's milk." 
Moses is puzzled and asks him what he means.
The shepherd says, "I always take the best milk I possess, and I bring it as an offering to God." 
Moses, who is far more sophisticated than the shepherd with his naive faith, asks, "And does God drink it?" 
 "Yes" , replies the shepherd, "He does." 
Then Moses feels compelled to enlighten the poor shepherd and he explains that God, being pure spirit, does not drink milk.
Yet the shepherd is sure that he does, and so they have a short argument, which ends with Moses telling the shepherd to hide behind the bushes to find out whether in fact God does come to drink the milk.
Moses then goes out to pray in the desert.
The shepherd hides, the night comes, and in the moonlight the shepherd sees a little fox that comes trotting from the desert, looks right, looks left and heads straight towards the milk, which he laps up, and disappears into the desert again.
The next morning Moses finds the shepherd quite depressed and downcast.
 "What's the matter?" he asks.
The shepherd says, "You were right, God is pure spirit and he doesn't want my milk." 
Moses is surprised.
He says,"You should be happy.
You know more about God than you did before."
 "Yes, I do," says the shepherd, "but the only thing I could do to express my love for Him has been taken away from me." 
Moses sees the point.
He retires into the desert and prays hard.
In the night in a vision, God speaks to him and says,"Moses, you were wrong.
It is true that I am pure spirit.
Nevertheless I always accepted with gratitude the milk which the shepherd offered me, as the expression of his love, but since, being pure spirit, I do not need the milk, I shared it with this little fox, who is very fond of milk."
(quoted in Anthony of Sourozh 1986:150f)
Discussion of this story occurs in Chapter 5.
It is interesting here to note that it is paralleled by one from Islam of how Allah sent the angel Gabriel to search for a pious man in a certain place.
Gabriel saw a man praying before an idol, lying prostrate.
He reported back to Allah that he could find only an idol worshipper.
He was asked to go and look again.
This time he heard the idol speak, saying: "I forgive you your sins, go in peace." 
He returned and told Allah the curious story, and Allah replied: "That was not really the idol speaking my word, that was me!" 
This story was told by a Muslim in the course of some Christian/Muslim conversations held in Birmingham recently.
Andrew Wingate comments: "Where this comes from I do not know, but it is a  very surprising story for a Muslim to tell, considering the normal attitude to idol-worship" (Wingate 1988: 28).
This little incident shows the way in which ideas can cross barriers, and is itself an indication of the transcendence of religions.
Points of convergence
Figure 8.4 refers to the way in which, whilst all religions emphasize many particular understandings, ideas, beliefs, and practices not found in other religions yet many of these are not contradictory to those   found in other traditions: they are different not contradictory.
Mostly indeed such "insights" are also present in other traditions but not stressed to the same degree.
Sometimes this is because they are actually taken for granted.
By affirming these non-contradictory emphases, members of different religions can move closer together without fearing loss of integrity.
Many themes can be explored in this way, like pieces of a jigsaw coming together.
The diagram gives as an example the concept of God.
Some may object that there are important differences in the way religions see this concept.
I quote such a comment in Chapter 11, p. 162–3 and I agree there are, but there is more common ground than a superficial look might suggest.
Once again, the parable of the blind men and the elephant could be used to illustrate this point.
Their deductions seemed to be contradictory, but if the little word "like" is inserted with regard to each, then they can be seen as possibly converging.
The reality of points of convergence should not, however, blind us to the fact that there are enormous divisions, not only between religions but within them.
They are not the monolithic structures which they are often presented as being.
Within Judaism for example there are Orthodox and Reform or Progressive Jews, or as Jews themselves often prefer to say Traditional and non-Traditional Jews (see Chapter 9, p. 129–30 for further reference to this).
In Islam the Sunnah-Shi'ah division is particularly significant.
The dark side of religion
This draws attention to the ambiguity of religion.
Differences do not, as we have seen with Fig. 8.4, necessarily mean conflict, but they can easily lead to this if a spirit of possessiveness is also present (as discussed in Chapter 3, p. 34).
Human nature can so easily become competitive and aggressive, fearful and defensive; and then bigotry, intolerance, bitterness and enmity are born, as unfortunately the history of all religions shows.
Religions frequently fail to live up to their high moral standards.
The diagram shows a way of depicting how religions can present two quite different — and this time contradictory — faces: one of radiance and perfection, for which light is an appropriate symbol, and one of shadow for which darkness is an appropriate symbol.
As discussed in Chapter 2, many people today are acutely conscious of the dark side of religion, and some see this failure as so colossal that they wish to have nothing more to do with it.
All religions show how difficult the path is to embodying their high moral ideals — they acknowledge a high failure rate, the majority do not come anywhere near achieving what they should, and the more saintly   or holy within the religions see this the most clearly.
The fulminations of the Hebrew prophets such as Amos, Hosea and Jeremiah against the betrayal of religion are an example.
The story is told of Guru Nanak that even as a boy he argued that the ancient Hindu ceremony of tying on the sacred thread did not prevent men from acting wrongly.
Centuries earlier the Bhagavad Gita had noted the same difficulty: "Self-conceited, haughty, full of pride and arrogance of wealth, they do acts of religious worship in name alone." 
Yet, just so — indeed, because humans are fallible, the history of all religions has its dark side.
The holy war can be terrible in its course and consequence, and is open to distortion and misuse for a variety of purposes.
The distinction between human fallibility and the goal of the religious quest is constantly referred to in all religions.
Sigmund Sternberg, as chairman of the International Council of Christians and Jews, considers that: Many recent religious revivals experienced in particular by Jewish, Christian and Muslim communities…have assumed frightening forms of intolerance, exclusiveness, racism and fanaticism as well as nationalism, using religion as a weapon in defence of particular causes.
He then refers to the conference held in 1991 with some 300 theologians, historians, educators and lay leaders from 25 countries who endeavoured to disentangle what is considered legitimate use of religion from its apparent misuse.
He concludes with this paragraph: If religion throughout the ages, and certainly in many parts of the world today, has been used as a weapon for destructive purposes, are we not called to demonstrate that as people of faith we can both live in passionate commitment to our respective tradition and at the same time in compassionate respect for each other and to affirm that the faith commitment of each one is only truly realized when we live in that mutual respect accordingly?
 "We know we are right" : the capacity for categorical assertion within religions
Figure 8.6 relates to one aspect which is often associated with the dark side of religion: the insistence within all religions that "we know we are right" .
Normally there is present a great deal of assurance and this finds expression usually in ways which are not too finely sensitive to the assurances of others.
Each religion and religious tradition has been subject to geographical, historical and sociological factors which have influenced its vocabulary and the thought-forms enshrined within that vocabulary, and which have become unknowingly exclusive of the insights of others.
One of the things which religions have in common, as John Taylor, the then Bishop of Winchester, noted, is "the capacity for categorical assertion" : "It is the nature of religious experience to put into the believers' hands a key which is absolute and irreducible.
But when one considers the different things claimed as the key, comparisons crumble"(Taylor 1978: 9).
The really important task facing all religions is whether these particular categorical assertions can be unpacked in such a way as to reveal a piece of the jigsaw which fits with others.
Or is each to remain stubbornly not a piece of a jigsaw puzzle, but in its own watertight compartment, as shown in this diagram?
The problem here is not just possessiveness and failure to live up to the high ethical ideals proclaimed by a religion.
It is also confusion between a proper assurance based on experience and the insight deriving from it, and the dogmatism which so easily follows but is distinct from it, and which insists that what we happen to know is the only thing that matters — what others have discovered or had revealed to them is unimportant.
This attitude can be unintentionally fostered through sheer repetition, through authoritarian methods of expression, and by reason of the default factor (i.e. what is not taught).
These can be as much responsible as actual content of teaching for the development of dogmatism.
Yet as Keith Ward, writing as a Christian, notes: "I can say"  "Jesus shows me what God is like, and makes the love of God available to me"  "without having to add,"  "Jesus is better than any other spiritual teacher, saint or prophet; so all other ways are inferior to mine"  "" (Ward 1991: 69).
But it is a great temptation for people to say the latter, especially if they are ignorant of what others believe.
And it is this spirit of competitiveness which can cause a link to be forged between the "categorical assertions" of religions and the dark side of religion.
John Taylor has something extremely important to say about these potential sources of offence: "We may learn to reformulate these irreducible convictions in the light of our dialogue.
But we know that the reformulation may never reduce or dilute the content of experience which it interprets"(Taylor 1978: 12).
The reference to experience leads us back to Chapter 6, for the beliefs of all religions arise out of experience and are misinterpreted at  a very fundamental level by outsiders who see them as merely forms of words imposed upon people.
The undoubted fact that very often this has been the case within religions too which have become merely power-structures and sociological units, does not excuse those who are seeking to understand religion for dismissing beliefs out of hand.
Rather we have to ask what was the experience which gave rise to the beliefs and which they encapsulate, however inadequately.
Fault-resistant features in religions which point towards the transcending of religion
Figure 8.7 looks at the way in which all religions have available within them certain fault-resistant features which is why their demise, so confidently predicted by many who see their grave faults and failures, rarely seems to happen!
There is built in to these religions the requirement for self-criticism, a guarding against idolatry, against hypocrisy, against superstition, against injustice, against self- centredness, against self-satisfaction, and against taking refuge in particular rituals or concepts.
A spiritual dimension is at work in all religions and constantly pushing and making uncomfortable the easy surrender to unspiritual and despiritualizing tendencies.
All religions have a history of reform movements which operate from within and are not imposed from without.
This awareness of the need for reform, and the capacity for renewal, is linked to an increasing appreciation of the limitations of "religion" itself.
In Andrew Wingate's account of Christian/Muslim conversations which has already been quoted from, he describes an earlier meeting in which a Franciscan and a Sufi spoke about their ways of life and teaching.
A Franciscan brother from the college is now part of the group and, wearing his habit, he held all of us spellbound with a simple but profound account of the calling of St Francis, his life and teaching, and of his own response to this.
The message seemed to speak quite beyond the bounds of one religion.
We then heard an exposition of what being a Sufi was about from Nazir's own brother — and he suggested that this was no more and no less than what being a truly spiritual Muslim was about.
(Wingate 1988: 40)
Again what the Sufi said leapt across barriers between religions.
There is a sense which is appreciated in almost all the religions that religion is itself unsatisfactory and has to be left behind.
Such awareness is considerably to the fore today where people appreciate the need for a global concern — the need to relate in a non-violent, just, perceptive and generous way to the traditions of others.
It is worth noting that the word "religion" either does not naturally   feature in some religions, or is regarded by many religious people with considerable disapproval.
For sociological grouping of religions has encouraged an attitude of defining each over against others.
We need to consider the possible question with pupils, especially as so many are de-religionized anyway, of whether religion, in order to be true to itself, needs to transcend the "religions" ?
If the latter are regarded as territory to be defended, as rallying cries for confrontation with others, perhaps we ought to be asking whether they need to be so territorial?
Many passsages in the Jewish scriptures refer to the way in which religious observance itself can become an enormous obstacle and has constantly to be overcome.
Thus Jeremiah speaks of a "new covenant being written in the heart" .
And Jesus, in his conversation with the Samaritan woman who asked him where true worship happened, answered that "God is spirit and they who worship him must worship  him in spirit and truth," for "the time will come when neither here nor in Jerusalem will men worship" .
(See Chapter 11, pp. 170–3 for further discussion of this.)
It is debatable indeed whether or not Jesus came to found a new religion.
It often seems to Christians that the Christianity which has wrapped itself round the person of Jesus has served to obscure rather than communicate its raison d'être.
Hindus have long since seen that we have to transcend separateness.
And for Buddhists this forms part of their central affirmation, to arrive at the point of "emptiness" — the central doctrine of Mahayana Buddhism (Shunyata).
On the question of religion, the Buddhist tends to think of it as a raft with which to cross the tempestuous seas of existence, and the Buddha once asked, "What would you say to someone who carried his raft around with him when he had arrived?" 
The need to transcend religion has nowhere been more clearly expressed than within Sikhism.
Was it really Guru Nanak's intention to found a new religion, or even a new religious community?
It is true that just six months before his death he chose Lehna as his successor.
Various stories about him, however, confirm how strongly he perceived that the outward forms of religion have to be internalized, and therefore could perhaps become redundant.
The role of RE
In its approach to world religions, school RE may be able to be truly pioneering, blazing a trail whereby seemingly very different and rival groupings can meet with respect and even love.
This will help us to get beyond the phase of advocacy of "tolerance" which has never been adequate on its own.
Only at a very basic level of respect for all persons as persons has this been so.
It cannot be the ultimate value because it manifestly ignores so many other values such as those of justice, as well as ignoring the truth-claims which religions inevitably have to take seriously.
Chapter 12 on school worship will take up this point, and discuss the possibility of overcoming the unfortunate dichotomy between Christian or multi-faith at the practical point of assemblies.
I want to finish this chapter with a quotation which brings together the idea of loyalty to a particular tradition and openness to change.
It is a vision which in a simple way the RE we do in schools can offer to pupils.
It is a sense of this mystery which is without price, particularly in times of rapid change, whatever one's particular religious inheritance.
It provides the resources with which to face the implications of change for one's own religious tradition without fear, but with exhilaration.
The Christian disciple  experienced this, though exiled on Patmos, and was compelled to articulate its renewing power: "Behold, I make all things new." 
Out of the contemporary turmoil of Hindu tradition Rabindranath Tagore wrote of the same mysterious sources of renewal: I thought that my voyage had come to its end at the last limit of my power — that the path before me was closed, that provisions were exhausted and the time come to take shelter in a silent obscurity.
But I find that thy will knows no end in me.
And when old words die out on the tongue, new melodies break forth from the heart; and where the old tracks are lost, new country is revealed with its wonders.
(Brown 1980: 152f)