

Sports Talk /Botham's alternative winter tour: James Rampton previews An Evening With Ian Botham
By JAMES RAMPTON
Ian Botham can't have been expecting to have such a free winter, but he's certainly filling it innovatively with a national tour of his show, An Evening With Ian Botham.
Clips of his ‘Greatest Hits’, various filmed interviews and the odd surprise guest are promised, followed by ‘Both’ taking questions from the floor.
Audiences might like to quiz him about his favourite sporting moment.
Was it the 1974 Benson And Hedges Quarter-Final when, as a 15-year-old, he lost two teeth to the fearsome Andy Roberts before hitting the winning six?
Was it the remarkable 1981 Headingley Test against Australia?
No, apparently: ‘Beefy's’ own most cherished memory is playing in the Scunthorpe v Hull City football match on Boxing Day, 1982.
The evenings will be hosted by David English, a cricketer (formerly with Middlesex and now captain of the Eric Clapton XI); journalist (on the London Evening News); actor (Lisztomania, the stiff-upper-lip Captain Andrew in A Bridge Too Far); scriptwriter (the Timothy Dalton vehicle Hawks); and author (of The Legend, an animated book on the Bee-Gees, and of the children's Bunbury Tales).
He also accompanied Botham on his walk with the elephants across the Alps for Leukaemia Research.
He has now launched a scholarship to find the best young cricketers in England.
Botham has always had a taste for showbiz.
Remember his pigtailed ex-manager Tim Hudson's trumpetings about Ian going to Hollywood?
‘Ian's a hero, man.
He's Biggles, Raffles and Errol Flynn all rolled into one…
He's England's answer to Tom Selleck and I think he should be the next James Bond, man’ The cricketer was allegedly slated to appear in a film opposite Oliver Reed, and his humorous performances on Question Of Sport surprised many.
So, this should prove an entertaining night out, especially if the name Ted Dexter crops up…
Going Out to Galleries: Debate /Public test of a private Vision: Hildi Hawkins follows the progress of A Vision of Britain
By HILDI HAWKINS
IT began with the Prince of Wales's celebrated remark, in a speech to the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1984, likening a proposed extension to the National Gallery to ‘a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a beloved friend’.
Next came his BBC film, A Vision of Britain; and the book of the film; and — at the Victoria and Albert Museum — the exhibition of the book.
That the book is topping the bestseller lists, and (according to a recent poll), 87 per cent of the public agree with the Prince's attack on modernist architecture, it is clear that the heir to the throne and self-appointed mouthpiece of the people has found something significant to say.
Now you, too, can contribute to the debate: on 2 November, voice your opinion at a Question Time-style discussion organised by the Victoria & Albert Museum —‘The Prince of Wales rules OK?
Modernists versus Traditionalists’.
The panellists include Colin St John-Wilson, architect of the new British Library, Leon Krier, urban planner and architect of the Prince's Dorchester Project.
Chairman is Charles Jencks, architect and author, who will preside over a small invited audience of architects and developers, as well as members of the general public.
Go first to the albeit small exhibition: in Prince Charles the backlash against modernism has an impassioned protagonist and the display leaves one in no doubt about his views.
His self-deprecating prose —‘You may be forgiven for thinking I only like the architecture of the past’— is reinforced by videos broadcasting extracts from the television film.
In his patrician tones, he puts over his message: thatmodernist architecture is a failure.
The central exhibit is a bright pink, skeletal temple in which the Prince's central advice to architects is enshrined.
This concerns matters such as heirarchy, scale, harmony, decoration and art.
There is also a photograph and model tour of the buildings the Prince likes and dislikes, including the development of a new suburb for Dorchester.
At the very least, the exhibition provides food for thought: as the 21st century nears, do we really want architecture that looks as if it was built in the 18th?
WHAT THE CRITICS SAID Prince Charles ‘is incapable of distinguishing between the good and the bad, only between what looks old and what looks new…’
Martin Pawley, Daily Telegraph.
‘His instincts are absolutely sound about the ruination of our cities and it is a sad reflection upon governments and planners that such damage has already been done…’
Colin Amery, Financial Times.
Although the exhibition illustrates some pretty horrifying mistakes that we made, A Vision of Britain is not pessimistic.
Charles Knevitt, Times.
Going Out to Galleries: ARCHITECTURE /Georgian values: Geraldine Prince on Georgian DIY for the home; plus selected lectures and courses
By GERALDINE PRINCE
IF you own or hope to buy an 18th or 19th century terraced house or rural cottage that needs doing up, where do you go for advice about historically appropriate restoration methods and techniques?
The Georgian Exteriors Course (11th-15th October) combines practical advice on renovation with a historical guide to the practices of Georgian building.
Although some lectures appear to be for the committed DIY enthusiast such as‘Mortar mixing and brick laying’, the organiser Steven Parissien, insists that the course is more about ‘making people aware of which things are structurally disastrous and visually awful.’
One particular bete noire is double-glazing.
‘Fine for a 1950s semi, but old buildings weren't intended to be hermetically sealed; preventing moisture getting in and out causes real damage.’
The course gives advice on a range of subjects: town gardens, metalwork, stucco and door furniture, but it's not all classwork.
There are trips to the Lime and Flint centre in Winchester and the Bellingdon brickworks in Buckinghamshire.
A visit to a traditional glassmaker in Wembley and tours of fine examples of Georgian buildings.
With an eye on the trend for people with time on their hands to take up neglected crafts such as paint finishing and upholstery, Parissien notes, ‘There are lots of courses on 101 things to do with furnishing fabrics, but there's less for the layperson about structure, about actually saving your house.’
Parissien acknowledges another benefit: ‘the bottom line, for those who want to see it that way, is that the course is also a guide to how to put money onto a house, rather than take it off.’
Georgian Exteriors Course 11-15 October.
Lectures, visits, demonstrations around the south of England, plus events including Georgian music, food, opera.
Further information on 01-377 1722.
SOUTH QUEENSFERRY Hopetoun House The Architectural Heritage Society's Annual Conference celebrates the tercentenary of the Scottish classical architect William Adam (1689-1748) on Saturday 28 Oct in the elegant ballroom at Hopetoun House — William Adam's most important commission.
It will be devoted to a re-assessment of his life in the light of recent research — and coincides with the Scottish National Portrait Gallery exhibition (which ends 8 Oct).
Topics for lectures include ‘The Patron's Part: Living in a William Adam House, 1726-1989’; ‘Adam: the latest research’; and ‘Adam: the practical architect’.
Sat 28 Oct 9.15am-9.45pm.
Conference tickets (£11 with lunch, £8 without lunch, £6 students) from Department of Extra-Mural Studies, 11 Buccleuch Pl Edinburgh EH8 9LW.
Cheques payable to the University of Edinburgh.
A special coach will run between Edinburgh Waverley to Hopetoun (return fare, £1), leaving Waverley Bridge at 8.45am and returning from Hopetoun at 5pm.
British Museum Lunchtime talks and lectures every day.
Topics include Islamic Architecture, 11 Oct.
Dulwich Picture Gallery No previous knowledge is required for a five-day course on Conservation, Care and Appreciation of Old Master Paintings (22-26 Jan and repeated 29 Jan-2 Feb 1990).
Illustrated lectures, gallery discussions and practical demonstrations will be held by Helen Glanville, conservator.
College Rd SE21 (693 5254).
Tate Gallery A series of lectures focusing on single masterpieces in the collection, Braque's Bottle and Fishes (lecturer, Carole Conrad) 5 Oct.
Millbank SW1 (821 1313) All at 1pm.
BRIGHTON ART GALLERY AND MUSEUM Treasures from Sussex Churches.
To coincide with this exhibition, a study day on church art and architecture from Medieval to Victorian times on Saturday 14 October.
Talks include 14th-century wall paintings; English monumental effigies; and the Victorian Church.
14 Oct 10am-4.05; tickets £6 (£4 concs) from Administration Section (Study Day in Church Art and Architecture) 4-5 Pavilion Buildings Brighton BN1 1UE.
Cheques payable to Brighton Borough Council (include SAE).
Going Out to Galleries: OPENINGS /Includes Aids depicted in a church setting and Iris Murdoch at the National Portrait Gallery
By GERALDINE PRINCE
MERZ CONTEMPORARY ART Artists against Apartheid — shows work that reflects a ‘humanitarian impulse’ and includes the paintings of Jock McFadyen, which concentrate on deprivation in London's East End.
62 Kenway Rd Earl's Ct From 9 Oct, to 21 Oct.
NICOLA JACOBS GALLERY First British show for the New York artist Marilyn Minter.
Like Warhol and Lichtenstein, she draws objects, images and motifs from popular culture and advertising.
Her sensual work addresses sexual stereotyping in mass and high culture.
9 Cork St W1 (437 3868) From tomorrow, 4th, to 4 Nov.
MANCHESTER CORNERHOUSE Posada: Messenger of Mortality — Jose Guadalupe Posada (1852-1913), one of the most popular illustrators in Mexico City at the turn of the century.
In the Twenties, he was an inspiration to the young muralists Diego Rivera and Jose Clemente Orozco and was revered by the Surrealists.
He cast his satirical eye over subjects from assassinations to riots.
Most macabre are the Calaveras — a celebration of the Day of the Dead (when Mexicans commemorate the deceased)— a depiction of skeletons drinking, dancing and riding bicycles.
70 Oxford St (061-228 2463) To 15 Oct.