

Modern methods to make history more accessible: New management is set to boost British Historic Royal Palaces, as Neasa MacErlean reports
By NEASA MACERLEAN
WHEN parts of Hampton Court were damaged in a fire two years ago, few could see the silver lining.
It finally became apparent on 1 October when the day-to day control of Hampton Court and the other Historic Royal Palaces changed hands, from the civil servants to a group of commercial managers.
‘The fire had the effect of attracting ministerial attention to Hampton Court in a way that would not otherwise have happened,’ said Genie Turton, under-secretary at the Department of the Environment.
‘The last thing a Secretary of State would normally have time to do is to see if the Historic Royal Palaces are being run in a way to maximise profit.’
Nicholas Ridley, after surveying the ashes, set in motion a revamp of the palaces' operations.
But lovers of the palaces need not fear that the overriding aim of the new management is to turn the current £5m annual loss into profit regardless of the consequences.
Far from lowering the tone, the changes are set to improve it.
Value for money is a primary aim.
But, within the context of the priceless heritage and history of the palaces, value for money is a concept which cannot be satisfactorily turned into a numerical equation.
The first priority is to preserve the dignity of the palaces.
The second is to present them to the three million visitors each year in ‘an educative and enjoyable way’.
And only third is to close the gap between an income of £12m and outgoings of £17m.
The Historic Royal Palaces — palaces owned by the Queen but not inhabited by her — comprise the Tower of London, Hampton Court Palace, Kew Palace and Queen Charlotte's Cottage, Kensington Palace and the Banqueting House.
Over the past 20 years the Department of the Environment, its Property Services Agency, English Heritage, the Queen's household and, in the case of the Tower of London, the military have run the palaces together — with the success normally associated with widely-drawn committees.
Statistics for the years 1975 to 1987 show an 18 per cent drop in the number of visitors to the palaces, while the National Trust has seen a 48 per cent rise.
But the Historic Royal Palaces were given ‘agency’ status on 1 October to remedy the ills of years of committee-style management and neglect.
Peat Marwick McLintock was appointed a year ago to introduce basic systems for management accounting and financial reporting purposes.
Until last year the accounting systems were largely used as a means of record, not for planning.
The major exception to this, the palace shops, have had great success.
Profits have increased nearly eight-fold in that period to £500,000.
The new chief executive, David Beeton (a descendant of the famous Mrs), put his feet under the desk just two weeks ago.
He was formerly secretary to the National Trust.
‘We don't think the product is right yet,’ he said, ‘so there is no use marketing it until we have got it right.
But the product is an educative experience.’
At the moment the presentation of the palaces tends to be rather plain and unimaginative.
Mr Beeton is considering a range of options to embellish their presentation without substituting fiction for reality.
Exhibitions, educational films, period plays, even music, are all on the agenda but medieval banquets are firmly off it.
The bland presentation of the palaces is something which, in Ms Turton's view, leaves them vulnerable to gross misinterpretation: ‘If you were an American visitor you could almost think the Tower of London was built by Walt Disney.
We have built up a great deal of knowledge about the historical side of the palaces but that has not been presented to the public.’
Rise of chartered secretaries
By MAX DE TRENSE
The author is public relations adviser to the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators ALLEN SHEPPARD, chairman and group chief executive of Grand Metropolitan, reckons that business is now becoming so complex that he needs a new core of trained administrators.
‘In fact, this could well become essential during the 1990s,’ he said.
‘A good team of administrators can provide the logistical support and the efficient administration — the service element, if you like — necessary for the new entrepreneurs.
‘This way, organisations can develop a tightly knit, well-run inner core, which can form a secure, cost-effective administrative base.
You can then add to this the more pro-active and aggressive corporate functions needed to trade successfully and keep ahead of your competitors.’
These sentiments are beginning to be echoed by others in similar positions.
Not least because of the mass of recent company legislation, notably the codes relating to take-overs, mergers, insider dealing and financial services.
Mr Sheppard believes the task calls for accomplished generalists who know something of law, accounting, commercial practice, people management and administrative systems, without being confined to a narrow, specialist niche.
Chartered secretaries have had to develop during the 1980s in much the same way as their nearest counterparts, lawyers and accountants.
Mr Sheppard, who qualified as a chartered secretary at the beginning of his career, believes their skills will become highly relevant during the 1990s.
The Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators says that demand for good qualified chartered secretaries has rocketed over the last three to four years.
This is confirmed by recruitment consultancies such as MSL International, which runs a chartered secretaries recruitment unit.
While the functions of lawyers and accountants are largely self-evident, those of chartered secretaries can be more varied.
Chartered secretaries are the professionally trained administrators and managers, who occupy a variety of senior organisational positions.
They are most widely known as company secretaries (which is the function of roughly 20 per cent of the UK's chartered secretaries).
In addition, they occupy senior positions in pensions, financial services and multinational companies.
They are also found in the top levels of local government, the health service and privatised industries.
It is, incidentally, a career in which women are making particular headway.
The Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators has over 44,000 members worldwide, including 22,000 in the UK and Ireland.
Training is based on up to six years' relevant job experience and includes on average two to three years' study.
Members of the Institute are known as ACIS (associate) and can ultimately become an FCIS (fellow).
A recent survey conducted by ICSA of its members in management roles, showed that a high proportion served at or near board level.
Mr Sheppard, who is now a fellow of ICSA, began his career with an economics degree specialising in business administration from the London School of Economics.
He wanted job-related, professional qualifications as well as a degree, though did not want to enter articles to become a lawyer or accountant.
‘Grand Met employs 25 qualified chartered secretaries throughout the company’, said Mr Sheppard.
‘Many of those are in line management.
Various Grand Met managers and executives now take the Institute of Chartered Secretaries’ exams for the same reason that I did.
‘In addition, the training gives you a broad base in actually running an organisation.
Again, this will become increasingly important as the complexity of these organisations increases,’ he said.
Salaries too have become comparable to those earned by other professionally qualified people in industry and commerce with the top levels earned by company secretaries or senior corporate administrators.
Younger company secretaries, for example, can earn £40,000-£50,000 a year, while more experienced ones or those working for large companies can earn £70,000 a year.
It has not been so long since the average chartered or company secretary was something of an eminence grise, rather than being in the front-line.
The position is changing rapidly, but they can still be powerful, behind-the-scene figures.
‘Often you don't realise the sheer range of functions of a good company secretary or administrator until they leave, because they've been so efficient,’ said Mr Sheppard.
‘However, unless you have good succession planning when they do leave, everything tends to fall apart!’