

Football: Robson's cure eases Polish problem
By PATRICK BARCLAY, Football Correspondent
FOR Captain Marvel read Captain Miracle: Bryan Robson, whom England had sadly written out of their plans for the World Cup qualifying match against Poland a week tomorrow, may be fit to play in Chorzow after all.
The England and Manchester United captain was named yesterday in his club squad for the Littlewoods Cup second round, second leg against Portsmouth at Old Trafford tonight, a hairline fracture of the leg having healed with remarkable speed.
Bobby Robson, the England manager, who had spent the weekend pondering the merits of possible deputies for his club colleague Neil Webb, a long-term casualty, expressed ‘surprise and delight’ at the news that England midfield disruption may be kept to a minimum.
Bryan Robson's injury, a legacy of previous combat, was diagnosed when he had to be substituted 20 minutes from the end of the first leg at Portsmouth only 13 days ago.
United, leading 3-0 at the time, conceded two goals at the final whistle.
It was immediately assumed that Robson, who had missed England's 0-0 draw in Sweden last month because of bruised ribs, would again be absent when his country strove to acquire the further point they need in Poland to ensure qualification for the World Cup finals next summer.
But Bobby Robson said yesterday: ‘Manchester United have obviously not made the decision to recall him lightly.
Now I'm looking forward to reviewing the situation after the Portsmouth match.
If he comes through unscathed, he can be added to the squad.
There is no problem about having another player.’
He can say that again.
If Robson could be paired in central midfield with Steve McMahon, who deputised so impressively for him in Stockholm, a great deal of England's anxiety about the trip to Poland would be relieved.
Until yesterday the favourite to partner McMahon had been the 22-year-old Michael Thomas of Arsenal, who has only made one appearance for England: a disappointing debut in Saudi Arabia late last year.
Andy Jones, the Charlton striker, has been recalled by Wales to help fill the gap created by the suspension of Ian Rush and Mark Hughes for the Group Four match against The Netherlands at Wrexham a week tomorrow.
Also included in manager Terry Yorath's 16-strong squad is the uncapped Watford striker Iwan Roberts, while Southampton's midfielder Barry Horne returns after serving a FIFA suspension.
Ian Dowie, a former missile engineer, was launched into international football by Northern Ireland yesterday — less than 48 hours after he was grounded by a red card while on loan with Fulham.
The 24-year-old Luton striker was sent off at Chester after scoring his first goal of the season, but Billy Bingham has called him up for next week's Group Six qualifier against the Republic of Ireland in Dublin.
‘He's a big strong boy, very much in the mould of Billy Hamilton.
He puts himself about a lot, tackles hard and works hard,’ Bingham said.
Equestrianism: Whitaker's wonder horse wraps it up
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY at Wembley
JOHN WHITAKER began The Horse of the Year Show on the same high note as in 1988 when winning last night's Corda International Stakes on the flawless grey, Next Milton.
He has a long way to go before equalling last year's prize money of £42,399, but the wonder horse proved that he is again in irresistible form when opening Whitaker's account with a first prize of £3,700.
Milton, the winner of this year's European Championship, finished with 2.92sec in hand over Jos Lansink and Optiebeurs Felix, who won the European bronze medal.
Third place, with the only other clear round of the 10-horse jump-off, went to Belgium's Evelyne Blaton on Careful.
Earlier, Malcolm Pyrah had won the first Olympic Talent Spotters Championship on It's Me and, though he does not believe the small seven-year-old chestnut is potential Olympic material, he echoed the widespread praise for this new series of competitions.
Speed was required last night, and It's Me won the £3,000 first prize by 0.98sec from Marie Edgar on Everest Sure Thing.
Pyrah's winning partner is qualified for the top competitions here but, because of his youth, the rider intends ‘to use him with discretion’.
The £2,000 which Andy Austin collected, by finishing fourth on Elusive and sixth on Zobias, was considerably more than the meagre £240 he won when riding River Hill to victory in yesterday's first leg of the Grade A Championship.
‘It was very hard work for that sort of money and I consider it an insult,’ Austin said of the earlier award.
If he wins the next two legs, today and tomorrow, his total prize money as overall Grade A champion will only amount to £970 — but he will have the opportunity to compete at Wembley for the rest of the week.
. New Zealand's Olympic gold medallist, Mark Todd, has accepted a last-minute ride for today's Working Hunter Championship.
He agreed to partner Seabrook, who has won the Show Hunter of the Year title here three times, after the horse's joint owner, Vin Toulson, was injured yesterday.
Toulson was unloading a horse from his lorry when the animal landed on top of him.
He sustained a broken rib and pulled ligaments in his right leg.
Golf: Seve has eye on Player's record
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY at Wembley
The Spaniard, a 7-2 favourite, has a bye into the second round, where he will meet either America's Chip Beck or Japan's Aki Omachi, one of seven newcomers.
Ballesteros won the title in 1981, 1982, 1984 and 1985, and will make a record 14th successive appearance.
He has been seeded third behind the defending champion, Sandy Lyle, and the US Masters winner, Nick Faldo.
Ian Woosnam is the other seed sent through to the second stage.
Three of the four 1989 major title winners — Open champion Mark Calcavecchia, US Open champion Curtis Strange, and USPGA title-holder Payne Stewart — are missing from the 12-man line-up, along with the world No. 1, Greg Norman.
‘There are almost 20 tournaments offering a similar top prize and we have to keep pace,’ Peter German, the tournament director, said.
‘We are trying to build up the event and, as we do not pay appearance money, the best way to do that is to offer rewards that will attract the best players,’ he added.
Football: Rangers survive Angell onslaught
By DEREK HODGSON
Stockport County............ 0 Queen's Park Rangers........ 0 (Rangers win 2-1 on agg) ON tight, little Edgeley Park where some famous names have been rolled into the infant Mersey, Rangers did a smart professional job to reach the third round of the Littlewoods Cup.
There is a tradition here, dating back to the days of ‘Go-Go County’, of First Division embarrassment if not failure but Rangers survived the early onslaught and, before an all-ticket 5,997 crowd on a clear mild night, emerged as worthy winners on aggregate after a goalless draw.
Rangers, precariously ahead 2-1 from the first leg, conceded four corners in 12 frenetic minutes.
County are a tall, muscular team and their football, if not subtle, is effective as demonstrated by their fifth place in the Fourth Division.
They flung the ball wide down the right, defenders raced in to support and in a sequence far too rapid for Dave Seaman's comfort, Brett Angell and Ian McInerney contrived four chances.
Rangers needed all of 20 minutes to catch their breath, responding to this constant raiding with play that was neat but frantic, despite Seaman's signals to slow down the game.
Trevor Francis was as guilty as anyone, but after 26 minutes the Rangers player-manager provided a beautifully weighted cross which Simon Barker headed just wide.
As County's rushes subsided, Francis was able to find space more easily and one shot, left-footed, taken quickly, was a superb demonstration of the striker's art.
Nevertheless, Rangers were grateful that Alan McDonald was under the bar to head away after John Cooke had eluded Kenny Sansom.
County's heroes were their midfielders, Mick Matthews and Andy Thorpe; faced with the glitter of Nigel Spackman and Peter Reid they challenged for control throughout.
They even doubled back to watch Francis yet still managed to send away their forwards.
Late on, County replaced the striker Gary McDonald with Mark Howard, who might have scored from his first kick, shooting wide five yards out at the far post.
Football: Howell demands riot charges for ticketless
By JONATHAN FOSTER
RIOT and conspiracy charges should be brought against those who travelled ticketless to football matches determined to confront police, the Birmingham MP and former sports minister, Denis Howell, said yesterday.
Howell, Labour MP for Small Heath, claimed that violence at the weekend was caused by groups of Birmingham City followers — totalling at least 300 -arriving in Blackpool without tickets for the Third Division match.
As courts began dealing with charges of theft and public order offences, a qualified referee was told he may be jailed for his part in the looting of a Blackpool jewellers.
Nigel Profitt, 21, of Erdington, Birmingham, and three other City supporters, were told by John Pryce, chairing a magistrates' court hearing yesterday: ‘You are nothing more than looters.
You will be remanded in custody for three weeks with a view to a custodial sentence.’
Profitt, Michael Cook, 18, Adrian Sinclair, 19, and Lee Scrivens, 19, all from Birmingham, admitted theft charges; another six City supporters were also remanded in custody or on bail, and 23 were fined a total of £8,600 for admitting charges arising from a weekend in the Lancashire resort which a Football Association inquiry may punish by banning City supporters from remaining away games; all their away matches were made all-ticket for an indefinite period after trouble last season at Crystal Palace.
‘It should now be apparent to everyone that such a riot cannot be dealt with by any football Bill,’ Howell said.
‘It requires major investigation and grave charges of conspiracy and riot.’
Chief Superintendent Ken Mackay, in charge of the operation, said police had been aware of the large number of City supporters planning to arrive from Friday.
He rejected claims that clubs like Birmingham should not be allocated fixtures in resort times at attractive weekends like the present Blackpool illuminations season.
‘We've had other clubs here with 3,000 supporters, like Bolton and Burnley, with no trouble,’ Mackay said.
‘I do not think identity cards would have changed things — I suspect they would not have deterred people from travelling without tickets.’
Torquay United are expected to appoint Dave Smith manager today in succession to Cyril Knowles, the former Tottenham player who took the club from the verge of relegation to promotion play-offs in 1988 and the Sherpa Van Trophy final four months ago.
Knowles, in the final year of a three-year contract, decided to resign on Saturday after the team lost for the eighth time in 10 games.
‘I feel that I've gone as far as I can here,’ Knowles said.
Smith formerly managed Dundee, Plymouth Argyle and Southend United.
Kevin Drinkell, 29, became Coventry City's record signing yesterday when his transfer from Rangers cost £800,000 — £20,000 more than the fee paid in 1987 to Chelsea for David Speedie.
Dunstable withdrew yesterday from the FA Cup, but face disciplinary action after their remaining players walked off in the 38th minute of the tie at Staines after the referee Stephen Head sent off a third member of their team.
Rugby Union: Paterson leads NZ tour
By BILL LOTHIAN
DUNCAN PATERSON, the former international scrum-half from Gala, will manage a party of 30 Scotland players on the eight-match tour of New Zealand next May and June.
The trip, featuring two Tests, is an integral part of the build-up to the 1991 World Cup, and, significantly, Paterson — the 46-year-old managing director of a hosiery firm — was also confirmed yesterday as manager of Scotland for that tournament.
Ironically, Paterson's 10 caps, gained between 1969 and 1972, include appearances against every International Board country except the All Blacks.
Particularly tough tour games are expected against Wellington and Canterbury, and outlining the itinerary Bill Hogg, the SRU secretary, thanked New Zealand for managing to fit the tour into a domestic schedule which also includes a 13-match visit by Australia as well as Romania.
‘Our original tour, in 1987, was cancelled because of the World Cup and we were not due to visit New Zealand again until 1996,’ he said.
Hogg's tone changed dramatically when announcing official reaction to the number of dismissals — up from 18 to 32, plus one match abandoned — in the first four weeks of the season.
‘The committee are absolutely appalled,’ he said, ‘particularly in view of a directive sent to clubs in regard to foul play.’
It was not, Hogg insisted, simply a matter of stricter refereeing.
Another letter is being sent to every club president, but suggestions that the SRU should make public the names of offenders and their sentences have been rejected.
‘This was discussed.
But it was felt anomalous to take it all the way down to fourth XV, even under-18, level,’ said Hogg.
Athletics: Scots ‘short-changed’
By BILL LOTHIAN
THE SCOTTISH Commonwealth Games selectors were heavily criticised yesterday for naming a team of just 18 athletes for the Games in Auckland early next year.
The team selected by the Scottish Commonwealth Games council is the smallest Scottish contingent since the 1966 Games in Jamaica, and brought an immediate response from David Lease, Scotland's national athletics coach.
Lease said: ‘This is undoubtedly a serious setback for the long-term development of the sport.
It now seems easier for Scots to get into a Great Britain senior team than it is to get into the Commonwealth Games team.
In future, UK teams will have to be our priority.’
Ewan Murray, the Games council's chairman, said cost was not a factor in selecting the team, but only 15 athletes achieved the stringent qualifying standards set down by the Scottish Amateur Athletic Associaton — and one, Allister Hutton, is not going to Auckland because he wished to run in the 10,000 metres instead of the marathon, for which he had qualified.
‘We only wanted athletes of distinction and no one is going along for the trip,’ Murray said.
Among the eight extra nominations by the Scottish women's AAA rejected by the selectors were sprinter Janise Neilson, a member of the Great Britain relay squad at the Seoul Olympics, and Dawn Kitchen, one of the British 4x400m squad for the European Cup finals at Gateshead.
Hilda Everett, the president of the Scottish AAA, insisted that the additional nominations were worthy of selection.
She said: ‘Seven of the eight have competed for Great Britain and we certainly would not have submitted any we thought would go just for the trip.’
Commonwealth Games: Welsh go public for cash
By ROBERT COLE
THE Commonwealth Games Council for Wales are hoping that the Welsh public will come to their aid to finance the sending of 89 competitors and 27 officials to Auckland next January.
Announcing the Welsh line-up last night, the general team manager, Myrddin John, said there was still £50,000 to find of the £172,000 needed.
‘By tradition the money always comes in at the end.
We have got terrific faith in the Welsh public,’ John said.
‘I'm not making light of the situation, it's very very serious, and we are still hoping that somebody in Wales will come forward to be our main sponsor.
‘Under no circumstances will any of those competitors who have been chosen be told they cannot go.’
Despite the money problems, the team have a golden glint.
Colin Jackson is the favourite for the 110m hurdles title, while the mens' team captain, Andrew Morris, could strike gold in gymastics.
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Roller Hockey
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Ice Skating
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Gymnastics
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Golf
By ROBERT COLE
AMATEUR PLAYERS are to have the maximum value of prizes they may accept increased to £300 from 1 January, 1990.
The increase from £170 for a 54- or 72-hole event is to bring such awards in line with inflation.
The new limit for an 18 or 36-hole event goes up from £110 to £200, and for junior competitions from £50 to £100.
Sport in Short: Equestrianism
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Cycle Speedway
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Commonwealth Games
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Boxing
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Baseball
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: American Football
Sport Page 39
Motor Racing: McLaren try for peace in private war
By MAURICE HAMILTON
WHEN Ron Dennis, the managing director of McLaren International, goes to the trouble of stressing that his team intend to continue giving Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost impartial treatment during the final two races, such a commendably even-handed approach immediately arouses suspicion in a sport governed by an organisation which is not exactly noted for its equitable methods.
As Senna raced towards the victory he needed in Spain on Sunday, James Hunt, a driver familiar with the pressures of a late challenge for the championship, was saying Senna had no right to be on the track at all.
Or, at least, not if you compare Senna's comparatively lenient fine for ignoring a warning flag last Friday with the harsh justice delivered to Nigel Mansell earlier in the week.
The argument is that Senna's crime as he rushed past the scene of an accident was infinitely more dangerous than Mansell's failure to stop on the command of a black flag.
Although guaranteed the drivers' championship, McLaren are on a loser no matter what happens.
If Prost wins, then he takes the title with him to Ferrari and, in exchange for the highly desirable numbers 1 and 2 the Italians will present 27 and 28 to McLaren, a particularly irksome detail for such a dominant team to accept.
If Senna becomes champion, and to do it he must win in Japan and Australia, then Prost's recent criticism of his treatment at the hands of Honda will immediately spring to mind regardless of a subsequent and rather naive document, signed by all sides and designed to give the impression that all is sweetness and light.
Ever since Prost confirmed his intention to leave McLaren, he claims to have been increasingly isolated within the team.
Prost's observations need to be weighed against his mounting paranoia as Senna continually proves to be the faster of the two but, when you see only one member of the McLaren-Honda management standing by Prost's car on the grid in Spain while five key people fussed around Senna, Prost's fears would appear to have substance.
Equally, when Prost won the Portuguese Grand Prix a week ago, he received but a cursory welcome home from the McLaren pit when compared with the reception given to Senna's victory in Jerez.
But, to be fair, the McLaren directors had other matters on their mind in Portugal as they moped Senna's fevered brow and cursed Mansell's unwelcome intrusion into a family affair.
FISA, the governing body, went some way towards assuaging Senna's grief by banning Mansell from Sunday's race even though the court of appeal is not due to sit until Thursday.
Jean-Marie Balestre, the president of FISA, has pointed out that the regulations permit an immediate ban regardless of any appeal and there would appear to be no further argument on that point.
Senna capitalised on the absence of Mansell, the one driver who could have beaten the Brazilian and wrapped up the world championship in Prost's favour.
Now Senna has three weeks to plan his attack in Japan.
And Prost knows that Honda would hate to see a future employee of Fiat, the owners of Ferrari, win the championship on their doorstep.
If Dennis can maintain parity in the midst of such vested interest, then the credit really should rest with McLaren International rather than the drivers, neither of whom has had an entirely blemish-free season.
Soldiers put their shoulders to the wheels of a trolley representing a bobsleigh at Thorpe Park, Surrey,
By MAURICE HAMILTON
Soldiers put their shoulders to the wheels of a trolley representing a bobsleigh at Thorpe Park, Surrey, yesterday.
Paratroopers (from the left) Alex Poole, Eric Sekwalor, John Sowerby and Sean Ollsson came third in the four-man push competition organised by the British Bobsleigh Association to find crews for the new season.
The four-man winners were a team led by the former British champion Tom De La Hunty 
Cricket: Question time at Yorkshire
By MAURICE HAMILTON
YORKSHIRE are to hold a special full committee meeting at Headingley on 10 October to discuss ‘all aspects of cricket’.
This move follows the worst season in the county's history which culminated in a call from the captain, Phil Carrick, for the introduction of non-Yorkshiremen into the team.
The extra meeting was called for by several committee members.
The county chairman Brian Walsh said: ‘We have a very full agenda for our scheduled meeting on October 26 so it was decided to meet on the 10th with cricket as the sole topic of discussion.’
The cricket chairman Brian Close is away on holiday but he is likely to face some testing questions on the 10th.
Jeremy Batty, an 18-year-old off-spinner, has been given a two-year contract by Yorkshire after his first-class debut in the last game of the season against Lancashire at Scarborough when he had match figures of 8 for 193.
Mohinder Amarnath, the all-rounder who angered the Indian selectors last year by labelling them a ‘bunch of jokers’, has been recalled to the Indian team for the three-nation Sharjah Cup cricket tournament from 12 to 20 October.
Dilip Vengsarkar, who lost the captaincy after taking part in an unauthorised tour of North America, has also been included in the squad.
Tennis: A Kiwi's promise bears fruit
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
CLAUDINE TOLEAFOA, a little-known 19-year-old from New Zealand, scored the kind of victory upon which solid careers are built, at the Federation Cup in Tokyo yesterday.
Toleafoa had been a promising junior when she joined the circuit full time, just over a year ago.
But a world ranking of 222 shows there is still a lot of room for improvement.
Yesterday, she showed promise again, however, when she outlasted experienced Italian, Sandra Cecchini, who is ranked 25th in the world, 6-4, 4-6, 10-8, in a match of rollercoaster emotions that lasted three hours.
‘Something like this makes you believe in yourself that much more,’ said Toleafoa, whose father is a consulate-general for Western Somoa, but who qualifies to play for New Zealand because of her mother.
It was a triumph that also set up the Kiwis nicely for a surprise win over the seventh-seeded Italians.
Belinda Cordwell followed Toleafoa's lead by defeating Italy's No. 1, Raffaella Reggi, 6-4, 6-1.
The latter victory was also somewhat remarkable as Cordwell, who is ranked one place above Reggi in 19th, was playing her first serious singles match since a back injury forced her out for the game almost six months ago.
Italy were, however, the only casualties on a day otherwise marked by a five-hour rain delay and cold, blustery conditions.
The British team were smart.
They practised early in the morning before the rains came and then went shopping.
After watching them work out, team captain Ann Jones decided to put Jo Durie and Clare Wood in against the Indonesians.
Ice Hockey: Wasps find it tough going to the top
By STEVE PINDER
ONLY goal difference saw Durham Wasps reach the top of the England north table and qualify for home and away games against Cardiff Devils, runaway winners of the southern league.
The winners will meet the Scottish champions, Murrayfield Racers in the final in two months' time, writes Steve Pinder.
The England north league was always the tightest with, in theory, four of the five teams all able to finish top right up to the weekend's matches.
Only Telford Tigers were out of the running.
In the first period of their game against Solihull Barons, they were 2-0 ahead and hit the upright four times.
But Barons came back to lead 4-3 at the end of the second and Tigers looked like they were heading for another defeat.
Dave Wensley's hat-trick in the opening 10 minutes of the final period gave Tigers a 6-5 lead and with 28 seconds left, Alan Gould's goal made it a 7-5 win for Telford.
Wasps went 5-1 down at the end of the second period against Barons before Anthony Johnson and Rick Brebant pulled back three goals.
Despite scores by Tom Krug and Jere Gillis for Barons, the final scoreline of 7-4 to Barons was one short of the four-goal margin needed and Wasps, breathing a huge sigh of relief, were through.
With victory over the Racers, Cleveland Bombers would have made their way to the final ahead of the Scottish team.
However, Racers, leading 9-0 after 35 minutes, cruised to an 11-2 victory.
Squash: Kenyon begins monkey business
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
SIMON PARKE, the 17-year-old Yorkshireman, made the selectors feel a little more comfortable by qualifying for the World Open here yesterday.
But still there may be some wriggling to come.
A group of English players are reported to be bitter at having been left out of the squad for next week's world team championships, and inevitably, the name of the game for the next couple of days in the Open, which starts today, will be to try to make monkeys of those who omitted them.
The man with the most to prove is Phil Kenyon, who has accused the selectors of favouritism and goodness knows what else besides.
He could start with a win against Frederik Johnson, the Swedish international, but it is hard to see any of the other rejects surviving, except perhaps Jamie Hickox or Chris Walker.
Parke, however, has a marvellous draw and could go further.
His reward for surviving against Robert Owen, in a contest between Englishmen riddled with stomach bugs, is a first round with the Scottish No. 1, Mark Maclean.
The seed in this section is the most vulnerable of them all, Pakistan's Umar Hyat Khan.
The other youngster controversially chosen for England, Jason Nicolle, kept the selectors more on edge.
He only just qualified by winning 15-12 in the final game against a West German, Hansi Wiens, and will need to produce something extra today against the most improved Pakistani of the lot, Mir Zaman Gul.
Yet another Pakistani, the former world champion Jansher Khan, was rather prematurely in the news for being rebuked by Chris Dittmar, the president of the players' association, for allegedly being too demanding of the tournament organisers.
Neither Dittmar nor two other Australians, Rodney Martin and Chris Robertson, can be dismissed as outside contenders for the title.
However, Jansher's continuing rivalry with Jahangir Khan is likely to be the highlight of the first World Open to use the lower 17-inch tin.
Volleyball: Tennant returns to make Knights' day
By MIKE SPENCER
BRIXTON KNIGHTS have enticed Lyn Tennant out of retirement as they plot the downfall of the English women's champions, Britannia, writes Mike Spencer.
The London club have opened their season with three successive 3-0 victories in the Royal Bank English League.
Tennant, a former Scottish international, created a stir four years ago when she switched allegiance and opted to play for England in international competition.
A member of the Hillingdon side which won six successive English League titles between 1980-85, Tennant, a centre net player, gave up the game after Hillingdon disbanded following their capture of the League title in 1985.
She has played in two of Brixton's three matches so far — including Sunday's 15-1, 15-10, 15-11 win over Southgate — and believes the standard has improved since she last played.
‘The Brixton squad has a depth that Hillingdon never had and we are strong not just on court but also on the bench,’ she said.
In the men's First Division, there were no surprises with Malory, the champions, beating MGI Wessex 15-6, 15-13, 15-13 and Polonia, who have made such a fine start to the season, defeating Hilton Leeds in five sets.
Why ITV are pulling plugs: Neil Wilson looks behind the screens at the changing picture of televised sport
By NEIL WILSON
AT THE Isleworth headquarters of Sky Television today, Rupert Murdoch will announce that in association with the BBC he has bought exclusive coverage of England's cricket tour of the West Indies from an independent producer.
Three hours later, in the boardroom of London Weekend Television, will follow a lunch bidding farewell to Dickie Davies.
Two unconnected events, but they present a picture of sport on television which brings the state of play in the battle for the sporting viewer into sharp perspective; BBC, centre circle, triumphant; ITV pushed to the wings; and the satellite and cable companies warming to the game after their first year's play.
Davies is the former face of Independent Television sport.
Officially, today's luncheon honours his contribution to ITV Sport over 25 years.
In fact, it brings down the curtain not only on his role but on ITV's epic struggle to match BBC in the sporting field.
Davies, who has not renewed his contract as ITV's sports presenter, is one of 17 whose names appeared on ITV Sport's credits who have jumped ship this year alone.
Richard Worth, producer of Saint and Greavsie, will be next to leave and Jim Rosenthal, the public face of ITV athletics whose contract has expired, is considering an offer from a satellite channel as well as one from ITV.
So, has ITV conceded in the sporting rivalry with BBC which has lasted as long as Davies's smile?
‘I think you have found the right word for it,’ Jonathan Martin, head of sport at the BBC, says.
‘I don't agree,’ John Bromley, his opposite number at ITV, counters.
‘There's been a definite change of policy and philosophy.
But if it is quality and exclusive, sport still has a place on ITV.’
But not much of one.
ITV spent £44m buying the exclusive rights to live Football League matches.
It has yet to show a match this season.
It claims to be the athletics network, having bought exclusive rights to the sport in Britain for £10.5m in 1985.
It showed just 25 minutes of the three-day World Cup in Barcelona (the rest of its coverage was on Channel 4).
Bromley's own leaving party is scheduled for late autumn.
Having been replaced as head of ITV's sports committee by LWT's controller of programmes, Greg Dyke, he is off to be chairman of TSL, an independent production company.
ITV Sport's new on-screen logo tells the story.
It illustrates just four sports: football, boxing, athletics and snooker.
‘We must conserve our money and our time in the schedules for the big ones,’ Bromley says.
‘Everything else, the minorities, go to Channel 4 where they fit comfortably.’
Cricket and golf, Bromley says, are both minorities, judging by the size of their television audience.
Cricket had the fourth largest aggregate audience on television in 1988, according to the figures of AGB Sports Watch/ BARB, but over so many hours that its audience at any one time is insignificant.
The final climactic day of golf's Ryder Cup last week still attracted fewer than five million viewers to BBC's Sunday Grandstand.
The Wimbledon's men's and women's finals on the same Sunday this year drew only 7.7 million.
Sunday Grandstand's average is just two million.
‘Even a repeat of Hawaii Five-O will get more viewers than most sport,’ Derek Brandon, of the independent sport producers, Grandslam, says.
BBC can live with that.
Martin has dropped next month's Grand Prix tennis at Wembley from his schedule but on sporting grounds.
Last year's entry was not of sufficient quality.
The Wightman Cup is no longer shown for a similar reason.
Only on ITV are the rat- ings the foremost consideration.
‘We are very different organisations,’ Martin concedes.
‘For quite proper commercial reasons they have chosen to be selective.
After all, they have to take business decisions and use sport as part of a commercial product.
We have to serve sport and sports viewers and keep a broad range of people happy.’
Bromley admits that there have been reductions in ITV's coverage.
Darts is out, and so is gymnastics, once a feature.
More sophisticated presentation and the buying of exclusive rights affect the budget for other sports.
‘It's getting ridiculous,’ Bromley says.
‘The French FA asked Scottish ITV for £450,000 just for France versus Scotland.’
But the ITV companies' disinclination to schedule sport is more critical.
‘If a sport offered me 12 hours free, I would have to say I have nowhere to put it,’ Bromley admits.
Even the mid-week football slot has been pushed back to 11.20pm from its prime slot after News at Ten.
‘We're still fighting that one,’ Bromley says, ‘but peak-time scheduling has got harder and harder to break into.
There's no slack space anymore.’
Again, ratings decide.
Sport can still pull an armchair crowd.
Stephen Hendry's UK Championship final with Doug Mountjoy drew 13.2 million.
Ironically, it was on BBC.
The Grand National always attracts around 15 million.
But only BBC win when an event is screened simultaneously.
‘Sharing isn't attractive any more to us,’ Bromley says, a verbal throwing in of the towel.
Even at the World Cup finals next year there will be an arrangement to alternate coverage of matches, and ITV will not screen the next Olympic Games.
‘The Olympic decision was the death of ITV as a credible channel for sport,’ said Richard Russell, a former ITV executive producer and now controller of programmes for Eurosport.
Not surprisingly, morale is low in their team.
‘We're not in the game any more but don't quote me,’ one of their ‘names’said.
‘My contract's still got time to run.’
When it has, a satellite company is his likely destination.
Given time, it may also be the sporting viewers'.
Bromley was quoted by The Listener in August as saying of Sky: ‘We intend to shoot them out of the sky.’
But this year Sky's associate, Eurosport, covered 14 of athletics' 16 grand prix meetings.
ITV, the ‘athletics channel’, covered two.
Rugby Union: Lions to meet France under plain wrapper: Steve Bale on the Home Unions’ Bicentennial blunder
By STEVE BALE
THE HOME unions committee in its implacable pedantry refuses to recognise its French Bicentenary selection as Lions.
But Ian McGeechan, the coach, will be dependent on the successful work he did on tour in Australia to get his players ready for tomorrow's game against France at Parc des Princes.
‘We have to try to build on what we did in Australia because we haven't time to do anything else,’ McGeechan said.
‘All we can hope to do is get ourselves organised.
The fact that so many of them played together for the Lions will be an important help.’
It is hard to view the Home Unions XV as other than Lions when McGeechan and Roger Uttley are the coaches and Clive Rowlands the manager — the managerial troika Down Under, back in harness.
After Donal Lenihan's withdrawal, the captaincy yesterday passed to Rob Andrew, the Lions stand-off in the second and third Test wins over the Wallabies, with Damian Cronin coming in at lock for the injured Irishman.
Last night, the No. 8 Phil Davies, protecting a rib injury, also dropped out.
Even with injury added to injury, the French make no bones about it: they style their visitors Les Lions Britanniques.
But events have conspired to leave McGeechan well short of a full Lions choice.
Finlay Calder's reasonable insistence that all of the Lions party who wished should be included on the trip, accompanied by wives or girlfriends, followed by his non-availability when this chance of expressing gratitude was rejected, have seen to that.
McGeechan regrets that the home unions committee has adhered so rigidly to the terms of its acceptance of the invitation 12 months ago.
‘I was disappointed that the situation had to arise at all,’ he said.
‘We can never re-create Australia but if the French were calling the side the Lions it would have been an appropriate thank-you to the players.’
Some of them will be further reunited when the Barbarians round off the All Blacks' tour at Twickenham on 25 November.
First the Baa-Baas play Newport next Tuesday and there are seven Lions — Dods, Hall, Mullin, Guscott, Chalmers, Armstrong and Smith — in the side announced yesterday.
Rugby Union: Student leaders veto sponsors' deal
By BARRIE FAIRALL
UNIVERSITIES' rugby, poised to sign a long-term sponsorship contract, has missed out on an immediate injection of £35,000 after an embarrassing hitch resulted in the deal being kicked firmly into touch by student authorities.
Instead of a cause for celebration, yesterday's conference to announce the game's latest financial windfall was more like a wake as agents representing the sponsor explained the sorry situation.
In simple terms, sponsorship of the Universities' Athletic Union rugby championship alone is not acceptable to the UAU's hierarchy, who seek money for all student sporting activities and are looking for something in the region of £100,000 to spread around.
If that were the case then rugby, the high profile student sport, would lose out financially.
Alun Evans, secretary of the Welsh football association who doubles up as chairman of the UAU committee, said: ‘I was informed by the chairman of the UAU rugby committee that he was discussing the possible sponsorship of its championship and I received a copy of a proposal…it contained a number of features which were not acceptable to the union and it was therefore with great surprise that we learned a launch for the sponsorship had been called and it was decided that the union could not agree to this action.’
While UAU rugby has lost out on money, Blackheath have lost the services of their coach, Alex Keay.
‘He's having a sabbatical while he sorts things out,’ Paul Rossiter-Marvell, the club's secretary, said yesterday.
‘We've now got more coaches at the club than National Express, but he can come back if he wants to.
In my day the only coaches we had were called charabancs and had four wheels and a man in a peaked hat.’
All that Keay is prepared to say on the subject is that he will continue to coach Middlesex in the county championship.
Schools Rugby: McCarthy is the key for Mount's
By BARRIE FAIRALL
AMPLEFORTH entertained Mount St Mary's on Saturday to lose by a penalty to a goal, a try and two penalties, the 16-3 result ending the run of three unbeaten Ampleforth teams.
Mount's, who won at Rosslyn Park the previous year, seem certain to enjoy a profitable season.
Their key player is the fly-half Matthew McCarthy, who opened their scoring against Ampleforth with a penalty, and went on to make and then convert a try by Neil Ryan.
Another Yorkshire school, Hymer's, are showing excellent early form, following good wins against Ashville, 39-0, QEGS Wakefield, 18-8, and Silcoates, 20-13, with a much closer contest against Pocklington, 10-6.
The National Westminster Bank Sevens, at Sydenham, were won for a third successive time by Brynteg CS, who enjoyed a comfortable semi-final against St Benedict's, 20-4, before a demanding final against Campion, 10-6.
Campion had been cruelly extended in their semi-final, beating Judd 14-10.
Already this season Newcastle-under-Lyme School have beaten Bradford GS 12-7, and Ellesmere 10-6.
Newcastle, still unbeaten after victory away at Stockport GS last Saturday, 10-32, have demonstrated what brave tackling and team spirit can achieve.
Loretto, despite losing their first match to George Watson's, 3-19, have good wins over King's, Tynemouth, 24-0, and Glenalmond, 24-0, to their credit.
Scottish schools dominated the Hull University Schools' Festival, where Edinburgh Academy beat Merchiston Castle in a hard-fought final, 7-0.
Rugby League: Saints' raid irks McIntyre
By PAUL WILSON
CANBERRA RAIDERS arrived at Old Trafford yesterday with a complaint.
Their preparations for tomorrow's world club challenge against Widnes are being hampered, they allege, by would-be raiders from the English league.
John McIntyre, Canberra's chief executive, accused St Helens in particular of putting Mal Meninga under undue pressure.
Not only had Saints offered the Canberra captain a lucrative contract, McIntyre said, they had asked him to canvass his team-mates as well.
That Meninga would receive overtures from Knowsley Road was one of the more predictable consequences of Canberra's qualification for Old Trafford, but Hull were almost as quick off the mark with an approach for Chris O'Sullivan, and other players have apparently been contacted.
‘All our players are contracted, and naturally we object to these unofficial approaches,’ McIntyre said.
‘It is not just the lack of manners which appalls us, but the sheer bad timing.
We have come all this way to take part in a major game, not put ourselves up for auction.’
Meninga, it must be said, did not look like a man under undue pressure as he genially fended press questions yesterday, even laughing off a suggestion from one of his braver interlocuters that his weight had recently ballooned.
At 29, the head Raider does not appear to accept that his best years are behind him, bad news perhaps for Jonathan Davies, for whom the press conference provided a first glimpse of a man whose reputation travels before him.
Doug Laughton, with injuries to Emosi Koloto and Mike O'Neill, toyed with the idea of moving Tony Myler into the pack and playing Davies at stand-off, but decided to keep the Welshman at centre, where he will come into direct confrontation with Meninga.
Davies can at least reflect that after tomorrow, his rugby league education will be complete.
New Zealand have named a changed side for the second match of their tour at Castleford tonight.
Only one player, Tawere Nikau, took part in the defeat at St Helens.
Castleford will again be without Kevin Ward and Keith England, and Graham Steadman and Ron Gibbs are doubtful.
Rugby Union: Rugby to view tape ‘evidence’
By PAUL WILSON
OFFICIALS from Rugby will look at video evidence before deciding to take any action arising from their Courage Championship Second Division game with Richmond, during which Paul Gutteridge the Richmond tight head prop had his nose broken.
Richmond allege that it was a punch that shattered Gutteridge's nose and have studied video evidence before writing to Rugby, who now want to see the tape before making any response.
‘Richmond's complaint is based on what they say was shown up by the video.
We feel we cannot comment on their allegations until we have seen it too,’ Roy Batchelor, Rugby's spokesman said.
Keith Cresswell, the Richmond secretary, has said that his club will not allow the matter to be swept under the carpet.
Lancashire have made two changes for their Toshiba County Championship match against Cumbria at Orrell tonight.
The lock Alan Wylie (Vale of Lune) replaces the injured Dave Cusani, and the wing forward Mark Hesketh (Fylde) is preferred to John Ingram (Orrell).
Both players will be making their debuts.
Lancashire will make a late fitness check on Orrell hooker Neil Hitchen, who is recovering from a neck injury.
Racing: Windway to breeze in again
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
LARGE bundles of cash taken out of the Redcar betting ring on Saturday appear certain to turn up 275 miles away in the south of England today, writes Hyperion (Chris Corrigan).
Beneficiaries of Saturday's successful gamble, in which a dozen big bets cost the bookmakers more than £25,000, are ready to play up their winnings when the same horse, UNIROYAL WINDWAY (nap 4.0), makes a quick reappearance this afternoon at Brighton.
The Redcar win, as 2-1 favourite in a seller, was the three-year-old's first success in 18 starts.
Today's run in a handicap is a step up in class, but David Chapman, who trains at Stillington, North Yorkshire, has clearly brought about a change in the colt's attitude since acquiring him from a Lambourn yard just two months ago.
At Wolverhampton, the bookmakers could also be dealt a blow by Shillelagh (next best 4.45).
This filly ran well behind Halstead at Sandown two weeks ago, and 7lb claimer Anthony Procter again takes the ride.
Racing: Nashwan steers wide of the Arc for finale
By JOHN COBB
NASHWAN'S owner and trainer yesterday decided against the only course of action that could have restored the reputation of their Derby winner as one of the outstanding racehorses of the post-war era by opting to by-pass the richest and usually most competitive race in Europe, the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
Instead of returning on Sunday to Longchamp, the scene of his only defeat, Nashwan will head for Newmarket on 21 October and the Champion Stakes.
That race had been touted as a possible target for the French and Irish Derby winner Old Vic, who like Nashwan carries the colours of a member of the Maktoum family.
But Anthony Stroud, racing manager to Old Vic's owner, Sheikh Mohammed, believes it highly unlikely that the confrontation that every racegoer would love to witness, will take place.
‘I would be surprised if it was decided to bring Old Vic back to tackle a mile and a quarter, even though it would be a nice idea,’ he said.
So Old Vic will probably make his last appearance of the year in Canada's International Stakes at Woodbine, Toronto, on the day after Nashwan runs in the Champion.
Travelling half-way round the world to run in a race that is two furlongs longer than one taking place in the town where Old Vic is trained seems a rather extreme route away from providing what could have been a thrilling contest.
But at least Old Vic is likely to be around next year, when Nashwan will be in residence at the Shadwell Stud of his owner, Hamdan Al Maktoum, vigorously trying to justify a syndication value of £18m.
What is most disappointing though is that Nashwan is not to return to Paris to try to prove that his defeat in the Prix Niel by Golden Pheasant and French Glory, who now occupy prominent positions in the Arc betting, was because he was having an off-day rather than because he has deteriorated since his magnificent victories in the 2,000 Guineas, Derby and Eclipse Stakes earlier in the year.
Dick Hern, who announced the decision yesterday, would not elaborate on the reason for choosing the easier option of the Champion Stakes, but Willie Carson, Nashwan's rider, has said he would be loathe to try the horse at Longchamp again.
Without Nashwan, the chief British-trained challenger in the Arc will be Aliysa, who is competing with the recent winner of the Prix Vermeille, Young Mother, for favouritism.
Cacoethes, whose partner has yet to be confirmed, and Carroll House, for whom the going is likely to be a little on the fast side, are also certain runners, but Luca Cumani will not decide until today whether Legal Case will take his chance.
The Maktoums' main hope is now In The Wings, who has spent most of the season recuperating from an operation on a chipped knee.
He returned to action just over a week ago to show an impressive turn of foot in winning the Prix du Prince d'Orange.
Cash Asmussen is likely to be on board the unbeaten colt.
Racing: Shellac still in the running
By JOHN COBB
THE SENDER of the letter threatening Luca Cumani with violence unless he saddles the heavily backed Shellac in Saturday's Cambridgeshire will have been appeased, temporarily at least, by the fact that the colt was one of 42 horses declared yesterday at the five-day stage for the race, writes John Cobb.
Less happy will be those punters who supported Jamarj from 25-1 down to 16-1, as Peter Easterby, believing that the going at Newmarket is unlikely to ease in his filly's favour before the weekend, has withdrawn her.
‘The ground is like cement here in Yorkshire and it is difficult to train the horses,’ Easterby said.
Instead of threatening Cumani, the punter with the violent rather than lucky streak should be kicking himself for not biding his time before backing Shellac.
William Hill, who sponsor the big handicap, are now offering with-a-run odds against the whole field and quote Shellac, who has alternative engagements, at 6-1.
Michael Roberts has been booked for another fancied horse in Red Paddy, but the best-backed horses yesterday were Blue Orca, who is as low as 12-1 with Ladbrokes but still 16-1 with Hills, and Tafila, who was offered at 33-1 yesterday morning but by the evening was generally 16-1.