

‘Independent’ features more news and sport
By JOHN COBB
A MAJOR expansion of The Independent begins today with more space for news, features and sport.
There will be an extra page of sport every weekday; today's five pages of unrivalled coverage starts on page 28.
The redesigned editorial page gives more space to readers' letters (page 18).
William Rees-Mogg's column moves to Monday and appears, with the book review, on page 19.
Peter Kellner moves to Friday.
Peter Jenkins will continue on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
An additional feature page, Focus, will appear every Tuesday and Thursday.
Tomorrow's Focus will examine the toxic waste chain and take an in-depth look at the problem of PCBs.
Wednesday sees the introduction of another new feature page, committed to architecture.
We believe these improvements will ensure that The Independent remains second to none in the breadth and depth of its coverage.
Dutch urge end to trade in rare wild orchids
From FRANCES WILLIAMS in Geneva
MANY OF the 60-odd species of slipper orchid, the best known and most popular orchid in the West, could be extinct within 10 years without tough measures to halt the vast illegal trade in wild varieties.
The Dutch government is so concerned that at next week's 103-nation conference in Lausanne of the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species (Cites) it will call for a total ban on trade in the plants.
It says the present system, which allows controlled international trade, has failed to prevent heavy illegal smuggling of wild Paphiopedilum (slipper) orchids.
High prices for rare specimens — one plant recently sold for $3,500 (£2,170)— are an obvious incentive.
But even for more common varieties big money is made.
Plants can be bought in tens of thousands for 50 cents each in Bangkok, and sold for $10-$15 in the West.
Demand is steadily rising.
Ger Van Vliet, a Dutch botanist who heads the EC scientific working group on Cites, says wild orchids are easy to steal: ‘I could walk into a forest in Sabah (Borneo) and take away the last remaining specimens of a rare species in one suitcase.’
Denmark and West Germany have now outlawed all imports of slipper orchids, and Britain has banned imports from Thailand, but environmentalists say comprehensive international action is needed.
Though orchids are easy to propagate from seed, and exporting them is exempt from Cites rules, traders have found it more profitable to dig plants up instead.
Dr Van Vliet wants the growing countries, including Burma, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand, to be given help for artificial propagation when the trade in wild plants is banned.
Dr Van Vliet admits botanic gardens are among those who obtain rare orchids from the wild with no questions asked.
But the main culprits, he says, are private collectors prepared to pay extraordinary prices for rare specimens, and nurseries who buy more common types in huge quantities, most of which die after flowering.
Gorbachev bans strikes in key Soviet industries
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
THE SOVIET government is introducing emergency measures to stave off a winter economic crisis, including a 15-month ban on strikes in key industries and drastic moves to ensure the normal operation of the country's railways — above all to break Azerbaijan's blockade of Armenia.
A resolution enshrining the decisions is to be voted on by deputies today.
Last night a large majority approved a motion to that effect by Mikhail Gorbachev, who admitted more bluntly than ever before that reforms, far from strengthening the economy, were merely adding to its immediate difficulties.
‘We cannot wait any longer,’ the Soviet leader said.
‘Every extra day brings terrible consequences.
We have started to lose control of things.
New methods have not taken root, the old ones work no longer.’
Lev Voronin, the Deputy Prime Minister, said it was essential to guarantee the functioning of the economy, especially with the harsh Soviet winter and its heavy demands on fuel and energy supplies approaching.
The measures will run to the end of 1990, the same period as wage controls imposed at the weekend.
They come amid rumblings of new strikes in several key sectors, after disruption which has already cost 5 million lost working days this year, and production shortfalls of billions of roubles.
The measures also outlaw — except in cases specifically approved by the government — any move to cut output of consumer goods, and place the railways in anarchic Soviet Transcaucasia under ‘direct rule’ by Moscow.
In an attempt to halt the shootings and bombings of recent months, key points like bridges and tunnels will be placed under permanent military guard.
Vadim Perfilyev, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said yesterday that the contested region of Nagorny Karabakh, at the heart of the Azeri-Armenian conflict, was almost completely paralysed by the blockade.
In Armenia itself things are scarcely better.
All attempts to lift the blockade promoted by the powerful Azerbaijani Popular Front have failed.
The logjam on the railways is now playing havoc with the national economy.
Apart from the effect of the turmoil in Transcaucasia, Mr Voronin said the protracted rail strikes in Moldavia, which ended last month, had blocked 130 trains carrying consumer goods from Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Romania.
In September alone rail freight ‘disorganisation’ had cost 600,000 tonnes of scheduled deliveries of food and industrial supplies.
With winter just a month away, fuel stocks at power stations were 4.5 million tonnes below target, and the metallurgical sector was ‘critical’, said Mr Voronin.
His words illustrate the growing disarray of the economy, caught between workers venting long-suppressed grievances and vague blueprints for change issued from the top.
Hours before Mr Voronin spoke, Nikolai Ryzhkov, the Prime Minister, presented no fewer than five ambitious draft bills on property, a single taxation system, companies, land ownership and leaseholding.
RUC faces claims of ‘loyalist force within'
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
A CLAIM that an unofficial loyalist ‘force within a force’ exists inside the Royal Ulster Constabulary gave fresh impetus yesterday to the long-running collusion controversy in Northern Ireland.
The allegation was made to a Belfast newspaper by an individual who showed a journalist documents containing the names of 233 people.
Terry McLaughlin, the deputy editor of the Irish News, said some of the material shown to him was marked ‘top secret’, the highest security classification, and went beyond the type of photo-montage material that has been widely leaked over the past month.
The man claimed he spoke for a large group of serving and former policemen who styled themselves ‘the Inner Circle’.
He said their aims were the removal of republican terrorists and the ending of the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
The RUC said the claims would be investigated.
A nationwide alert went out in the Irish Republic last night for Patrick Sheehy, one of Scotland Yard's most wanted terrorist suspects.
He is believed to have been one of two armed men who last month hijacked a police car, prompting a manhunt over three Irish counties.
Detectives have been hunting him since the discovery of a bomb factory in a London flat shortly before last Christmas.
Channel tunnel funding crisis deepens: Consortium seeks fresh finance after costs soar by 50 percent to 7 billion pounds
By MICHAEL HARRISON and COLIN BROWN
THE FUTURE of the Channel tunnel was in doubt last night after confirmation that costs have escalated by 50 per cent to at least £7bn and a warning that its bankers may not provide fresh loans unless the financial crisis surrounding the project is resolved by Christmas.
Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will operate the twin-rail tunnel when it is scheduled to enter service in June 1993, shocked the City by announcing that costs had risen by £2.2bn from an original estimate of £4.8bn, with the 50-kilometre tunnel still only one-quarter built.
The consortium also disclosed that it would need up to £1.6bn in fresh finance on top of the £6bn already raised.
The gloom was deepened further by the disclosure that the independent technical adviser to banks financing the project puts the cost at £8.1bn and believes the tunnel will open six months late, in December 1993.
The crisis surrounding the tunnel threatens to embarrass the Government, which insisted it be financed entirely by the private sector.
The escalation in costs is certain to shake the confidence of private investors who have spent £1bn on the project.
The news of the cost overrun caused Eurotunnel's share price to fall 100p at one stage, although it recovered slightly to close 45p down at 650p.
Labour's transport spokesman, John Prescott, called on the Government to rescue the project by taking it into public control.
However, sources close to the Secretary of State for Transport, Cecil Parkinson, dismissed this possibility.
‘There is no way we are going to support it with public money.
We are not going back on that,’ a source said.
At the heart of the funding crisis is a continuing dispute over costs between Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link, a consortium of 10 British and French construction firms building the tunnel.
In a statement to stock exchanges in London and Paris yesterday morning, Eurotunnel said: ‘In those circumstances, the banks’ technical adviser produced a high cost estimate for the current banking case.
We and the banks are agreed that this is not an appropriate basis for further finance.’
Eurotunnel, which is already in default of its credit agreement with the banks, has in effect been given until the end of the year to settle its differences with the contractors to permit ‘a viable financing strategy to be put in place’.
If agreement cannot be reached, the banks, which include National Westminster and Midland, have the power to close the project or bring in fresh management.
Last night Alastair Morton, the British co-chairman of Eurotunnel, said the banks could be driven to this ‘by sheer exasperation through lack of progress in the talks’.
However, Mr Morton added: ‘Technically it is serious.
The banks can pull the plug.
Practically, the banks are not wishing to pull the plug.
They are not wishing to stop the project.’
In a statement issued with Andre Benard, his French counterpart, Mr Morton said he believed agreement could be reached in time to put a fresh financial package in place by early next year.
This would involve raising an extra £1.2bn to £1.6bn.
Of this, 25 per cent would come from a share issue in 1990 or 1991 and new bank borrowings.
However, a number of ‘essential differences’ between Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link need to be resolved.
These include agreement on curbing the cost of terminals and equipment — where the contactors' estimate is £382m higher than that of Eurotunnel.
Mr Prescott's demand for the tunnel to be taken into public ownership goes beyond existing Labour Party policy.
Although he did not commit a future Labour government to taking the tunnel into public ownership, he made it clear that he believed it would require a public stake to complete the project.
Mr Parkinson is to defend the Government's stand at the Conservative Party conference next week.
He is also expected to attack Mr Prescott's call for public control of the tunnel.
Mr Prescott said: ‘If private capital cannot produce the goods as it said it could, they should be given a short period of time to clear the mess up, or we will take it over.
I don't think there is any reason to feel obliged to people who put the capital in.
‘The main concern is to get the tunnel built with the French.
If it requires public money to sustain it, it then directly becomes a public project because the private sector have failed to achieve it.’
The Labour Party Conference: Labour votes to cut defence spending
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
LABOUR LEADERS last night suffered the first setback of the Brighton conference when delegates overwhelmingly rejected pleas for unity by demanding heavy cuts in defence spending.
As expected, the conference carried the policy review statement on multilateral nuclear disarmament — with the objective of achieving a nuclear-free world by the end of the century.
The debate was enlivened by contributions from long-standing unilateralists like Tony Benn, Ron Todd and Bruce Kent, the former leader of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
Labour leaders were strongly criticised for embracing an ‘unprincipled’ U-turn away from unilateralism in an attempt to win votes at the next election.
Neil Kinnock, who will make his keynote speech today, said last night: ‘It's difficult for people who have held an opinion for a long time, and possibly haven't considered all of the aspects.
‘As I've said before directly to the Labour Party, ‘You must make up your minds.
Do you want to talk about disarmament or do you want to help those in the White House and in the Kremlin who are really trying to do something effective about it?’
The only way in which we can help is having a Labour government that has a policy to secure verifiable arms reductions.
That's our policy.
We're looking forward to the opportunity of helping.’
But Mr Kinnock's delight with the defence statement victory was marred by the successful left-wing rearguard action, calling for a cut in defence spending, ‘initially to equal the average level of other West European countries’.
Proposing the resolution, Mr Kent said it would mean a cut of at least £5bn — a quarter of this year's defence budget.
Before the debate, Gerald Kaufman, the party's foreign affairs spokesman, criticised the resolution for its imprecision in not giving a time scale, and for ambiguity in not defining the precise level of spending required.
He also warned: ‘I prefer it not to be carried because the Conservatives, who are desperately clinging at straws because of the popularity of our policy, against the irrelevance of theirs, would do what they could to make mischief about it.’
In the event, the resolution was carried by a two-to-one majority.
A party spokesman then suggested that it would be ignored, saying: ‘Future levels of defence spending will be considered by a Labour government solely in the context of implementing the policy review.’
In the debate itself, some of the behind-the-scenes tensions were reflected by party spokesmen attempting to discredit Mr Benn's contribution, pointing out that he had served in Labour governments which maintained nuclear weapons.
In spite of the setback on the defence spending vote, Mr Kinnock later scored a further advance with the results of the national executive elections, which saw Ken Livingstone replaced by John Prescott, the party's robust transport spokesman.