

Armchair Investor: Barry Wehmiller
By STEPHEN WALSH
BARRY WEHMILLER International's particular manufacturing niche of specialist packaging equipment may not be the most easily understood business but it is a profitable one.
Wehmiller has made five acquisitions in the last year, the largest being the US group's Holmatic and Kartidg Pak.
These companies have given Wehmiller a useful exposure to the US, where demand has been buoyant.
This is just as well because high interest rates have led to some of Wehmiller's customers in the UK deferring capital purchases in the short term.
Eventually equipment purchases will have to be made so long as the demand for packaging is there.
The cost of introducing new products at Inex Visions also impacted on margins and the profits from that side were adversely affected.
Wehmiller's pre-tax profit growth, 55 per cent to £8.1m in the year to July 31, was almost all from acquisitions.
Share issues and a rising tax charges meant earnings rose just 25 per cent to 22.5p and a final dividend of 3p makes a total of 5.6p (4.5p).
This year, however, organic growth will resume and even if interest rates remain high in the UK, customers will have to make some of those deferred purchases.
Profits should rise to £10.5m pre-tax.
This would put the shares at 274p, up 4p yesterday, on an earnings multiple of 10.5.
Armchair Investor recommended the shares at 235p and they remain a firm hold.
Column Eight: Game show winner for Exchange
By SIMON PINCOMBE
Sir Nicholas Goodison, the former chairman of the International Stock Exchange, once appeared on television's Jim'll Fix it to hang a badge around a small child's neck.
The tradition of taking part in Saturday tea-time programmes on the cathode ray by senior stock exchange officers continues with the appointment of Peter Rawlins as the exchange's chief executive.
Fifteen years ago he and his mum appeared on Bruce Forsyth's The Generation Game.
By participating in a range of tourneys and pantomime, both Rawlins and his mother reached the final.
Young Rawlins went on to the most arduous part of the game — attempting to memorise the host of gifts on a conveyor belt, ranging from a cuddly toy to a microwave.
If contestants successfully remembered the prizes they won them.
Legend has it that Rawlins remembered the lot although yesterday he confessed he might have forgotten one.
There is, however, a video of his performance which he is encouraged to play from time to time by his two children.
Meanwhile, he has won £150,000 in capturing the chief executive's job at the exchange.
Didn't he do well?
Hunter Howerton, an American secret service agent, has been reminiscing about the days when counterfeiting was a specialist art form.
Now he says, the only skill a would-be villain needs is the ability to press a button.
The blame, said Mr Howerton, lies in the sophistication of the modern photocopier.
He was speaking after a man was convicted in Charleston, West Virginia, of printing $800,000 in US and Canadian currency.
Experts said that the $20, $50, and $100 bills, which had been copied on a Canon Colour Laser, were virtually indistinguishable from the real thing.
The frentic merger activity among the nation's accountants (or not, as the case may be) has spread to the wilds of Yorkshire where the tiny firm of Rawlinsons is linking with the equally tiny Milne Booth.
The news will be particularly interesting to Sir Trevor Holdsworth, the piano-playing president of the Confederation of British Industry.
He spent seven happy years at Rawlinsons after the war.
It is not clear where Sir Trevor learned to tickle the ivories.
But he goes down a treat at the annual summer conference of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Pleas from the Prince of Wales for corporate help to rebuild the inner cities has not fallen on deaf ears.
Grand Metropolitan is to sponsor five sportsmobiles — Landrovers and trailers packed with sports equipment.
The vehicles will be given to the National Association of Boys' Clubs and will tour run-down inner-city areas.
View from City Road: MB's boldness is acknowledged
By SIMON PINCOMBE
ONLY a dealer who had just come back from a weekend in the Kalahari desert would have been surprised to hear of yesterday's agreed £337.6m bid by MB Group for Caradon, the Twyfords and Everest building products group, so comprehensive has been the pre-match publicity.
But a 2p rise to 208p in MB Group's share price, partly reversing Monday's 6p drop, is a cautious acknowledgement of the logic of the deal and the boldness of a move that has brought not only Caradon products but its highly professional directors into key positions, including chief executive and finance director, on the MB Group board.
Investors in MB Group have become used to bold initiatives by the company.
Its restructuring three months ago into two core businesses — heating and bathroom products and security printing — and a 25.5 per cent stake in CMB, the merged interests of MB Group's worldwide packaging interests with Carnaud of France, has been well received.
A month ago MB Group used up the £164m cash proceeds of its Carnaud merger by purchasing ABS Holdings for $300m (£194m) to make it the second largest cheque printer in the US.
Now it is doubling the size of its Stelrad baths, boilers and radiators division with the Caradon purchase.
At the same time it is bringing a new generation of management into the MB Group boardroom to mastermind the next phase of the company's expansion.
This may seem an unorthodox way of assuring management succession but then MB Group has been rearranging itself into a new structure for the future.
As for the price paid of 550p, half in cash and half in convertible preference shares, the prospective p/e may be around 14.5, to judge from an estimated 10 per cent rise in Caradon's pre-tax profits to £17m in the half year to 1 October.
Retiring MB Group chairman Dr Brian Smith said yesterday that any short term dilution in the company's earnings would be ‘minimal’.
The impact on MB Group's balance sheet of acquiring sizeable goodwill in both ABS and Caradon is mostly offset by the issue of $150m US preferred stock and a handy £80m revaluation of its CMB stake to leave pro forma gearing at 24 per cent.
This suggests that the next MB Group foray will require fresh equity of some sort but investors may not find that too alarming.
View from City Road: Flirtatious Deloitte
By SIMON PINCOMBE
DELOITTE Haskins & Sells in the UK has firmly established itself as the Zsa Zsa Gabor of the accountancy profession.
No sooner, it seems, has one prospective long-term partner been secured than it is ditched.
Both Price Waterhouse and now Touche Ross have dallied with the Deloitte domestic partnership and been given the cold shoulder.
Having been bitten by PW it may have made Deloitte shy of Touche.
However that does not square somehow with the suggestion that Deloitte is poised to announce a link-up with Coopers & Lybrand which until now has been a wallflower at this rather bizarre accountancy barn dance.
The Deloitte fiasco is not the first big eight merger to fall apart and these ridiculous posturings must leave the clients, who are supposedly served by their auditors, completely baffled.
Chairmen and chief executives will eventually become weary of their audit partner explaining why a particular merger with another firm was first a good idea and then a bad idea.
And the contempt and disinterest with which the corporate sector has greeted the recent spate of accountancy firm mergers is testimony to how insignificant the role of the auditor has become.
The problems faced by the accountancy profession are of its own making.
For too long the big firms in particular relied on the cosy requirement of a statutory audit to ensure their bread was generously buttered.
It is only within the last decade that the concepts of service, growth, competitiveness and value for money have begun to feature on accountants' list of priorities.
However, the physician which has been more than happy to dish out expensive advice to clients on how they they should deal with their own ills, has been unable to heal itself.
The blind pursuit of size in an attempt to indicate success and quality of service has been misguided.
It is a strategy which is not supported by an appropriate infrastructure.
More importantly, it is a strategy which has no benefit to clients or shareholders.
There will be no outcry from the corporate sector about the disarray in the accountancy profession.
Some companies would prefer a disorganised and confused auditor.
The losers are the shareholders on whose behalf the auditors are, in theory, supposed to act.
View from City Road: Smurfit late with good news
By SIMON PINCOMBE
JEFFERSON SMURFIT is winning no friends this side of the Irish Sea despite its undoubted skills in the paper and packaging business.
Yesterday it announced figures for the first half of 1989 so late in the day that the London market had mostly packed up and gone home by the time the screens showed that profits had risen from Ir £109m to Ir £121m and earnings were up from 21.7p to 25.4p basic.
The City put the shares up 4p to 565p, but that seems to have been largely on the basis of the optimistic tone of the statement and the general state of the market than from any in-depth analysis of the figures.
If London had been given time to study these, it would have seen that Smurfit is looking well placed in a world market notoriously prone to cyclical demand.
The philosophy that if it goes down in the US it must be going up in Europe has meant that Smurfit is looking to Europe as its main engine for growth in the months to come, when it must decide how to spend the $1bn cash raised from the recent financial restructuring with Morgan Stanley.
Shareholders will be circulated with details of this ‘in a matter of weeks’, according to yesterday's statement, and they will be interested to hear the details of what was dismissed by London as a ‘piece of financial engineering, pure and simple.’
That did no good for the Smurfit price in Dublin, and maybe the nonchalance with which the group now treats the Square Mile reflects the hurt it felt at that piece of analysis.
In its defence, Smurfit would say that it is an international company and it should pay as much intention to its US hinterland as it does to London.
After all, the US has done well by Smurfit in the past.
Market Report: Goldsmith talk puts life into beer shares
By DEREK PAIN
THE Goldsmith factor had beer shares on the hop yesterday.
Grand Metropolitan, which is believed to be keen to sell its extensive brewing interests, came to life in late trading, jumping 21p to 599p as the story flowed that Sir James Goldsmith and friends were stake-building.
Grand Met was also the busiest option stock, claiming nearly 2,800 contracts.
It was suggested Goldsmith interests already had two per cent and were planning to build a significant shareholding to encourage the Grand Met board to consider a breakup.
The stock market theory is that the Goldsmith contingent needs a new challenge now its bid for BAT Industries has effectively evaporated.
The Goldsmith plan to break up BAT has been overtaken by BAT's decision to do the job itself.
Sir James was first detected on the Grandmet share register earlier this year.
But at that time he was fully occupied with BAT.
The suggestion is he has topped up his stake in the past few weeks when Grand Met's shares have been weak, falling from 658p.
He could feel an ‘unbundling’ assault on Grandmet would strike a receptive cord in the City.
There has been criticism of the group's wheeling and dealing which came to a head with the surprise sale of the William Hill /Mecca betting shops chain to Brent Walker.
But Grand Met did not have the beer pitch to itself.
Allied-Lyons was also said to be on the Goldsmith hit list.
It is widely believed he already has a short two per cent stake although Allied has not detected his presence on its share register.
It has been calculated that Allied's breakup value is about 1,000p a share.
Scottish & Newcastle Breweries also joined the ferment.
Goldsmith rumours were helped along by talk Anheuser-Busch, the US brewing giant, had acquired Elders' 23.7 per cent stake ahead of a bid.
The rest of the stock market was dominated by Ferranti's hectic return, with Seaq putting volume at a remarkable 115 million shares.
With at least three securities houses chasing stock the shares opened at 47.5p and climbed to 55p.
Sentiment was bouyant, however, with bargain hunters taking advantage of the recent decline, shopping for stock.
The broadly based FT-SE share index rose 29.4 points in often, by post crash standards, busy trading.
However, interest rate fears remain in the background and the undertone is still fragile.
A £1.9bn US takeover bid, by McCaw for Mteromedia, excited telecommunication shares.
The Racal ‘twins’, British Telecom, which has 24 per cent of McCaw, Cable and Wireless and Securicor moved ahead.
Racal Electronics, up 10p at 237p, had to contend with a down and up grading by County NatWest WoodMac.
It has trimmed this year's forecast by £5m to £235m and lifted next year's by £20m to £340m.
Insurance shares continued to attract support with Pearl Group edging ahead a further 7p to 646p following the £1.1bn bid from Australian Mutual Provident.
Takeover speculation lifted merchant bank Morgan Grenfell another 13p to 370p and Kleinwort Benson 8p to 374p.
Building materials group Caradon, on the MB Group offer, jumped 45p to 533p.
Chemical group Evode held at 154p as James Capel placed the Bowater Industries 11 per cent shareholding at 148p a share.
Together with a preference placing Bowater raised £16.6m.
Trafalgar House advanced 3p to 388p.
Nomura, forecasting year's profits of £273m against last time's £229.1m, has put the shares on its buy list.
Eurotunnel had another unhappy session, falling 50p to 600p on the dramatic costs over run.
The shares touched 1,172p earlier this year.
Jaguar improved 26p to 599p on talk the signalled bid or deal with Ford or General Motors (or even a European group) is near.
Guinness, interim figures tomorrow, gained 6p to 573p.
Kevin Feeny at Warburg Securities is looking for £242m against £183m with £650m pencilled in for the year.
Newcomer Essex Furniture, placed at 50p, closed at 51p.
Clothing group Casket edged forward 1p to 67p as York Trust declared a 12.2 per cent interest.
Tullow Oil, moving to the USM this week, is likely to support its graduation with a set of interim figures showing operating profits a shade below £400,000.
The company is due to meet analysts on Friday.
Set up by Aidan Heavey four years ago, it operates in the UK, Senegal and Italy and hopes to clinch exploration concessions in Syria and Pakistan.
The shares are 17p.
Salomon Brothers yesterday placed with City institutions the US chunk of British Airways' £320m convertible bonds rights issue.
With American ADR holders unable to take part in the rights, the stock, around 20 per cent of the issue, was acquired by Salomon from Morgan Guaranty, the ADR keeper.
BA, up 2p to 211p, wants the cash for its share of the UAL buyout.
Bid for Eagle Trust withdrawn by Fitton
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
ANDREW Fitton, the chief executive of Braithwaite, has withdrawn the consortium bid he was preparing for Eagle Trust, the Midlands mini-conglomerate currently under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office and the West Midlands fraud squad.
Mr Fitton, backed by merchant banker Henry Ansbacher, first came up with the offer six weeks ago.
It would have involved his consortium ploughing between £10m and £15m into the troubled Eagle as part of a recapitalisation that would have left them controlling 29.9 per cent of Eagle's equity.
Withdrawing the bid yesterday, Mr Fitton said the original discussions with Eagle, which was then chaired by Malcolm Stockdale, were amicable, but when company doctor David James took over as chairman of the group last week it was clear any approach would have to be aggressive.
Mr James was brought in by Eagle's creditor banks — the group has debts of over £80m — and has been given until the end of next year to turn the business around.
He has said that the £15m on offer was either too little or too much — too little to pacify the bankers if Eagle was in trouble but if the group could be turned around a recapitalisation would not be needed.
Mr Fitton yesterday made clear that he had always been acting in an independent capacity in the offer for Eagle, and that it had no connection with Braithwaite.
‘Whoever sorts Eagle out will make a lot of money,’ Mr Fitton said.
‘Beneath the can of worms there are some very good businesses.’
However, Braithwaite, which specialises in plant hire, had tried to take over Samuelson, the film equipment hire company bought by Eagle in 1987.
Mr Fitton confirmed that Braithwaite is interested in two Eagle businesses, Samuelson and Trio Containers, which is involved in the rental of waste disposal loading equipment.
Mr James has put a hold on all disposals from Eagle while he completes a strategic review of the business, which was rocked by the liquidation of Connect Parcels and the disappearance of £13.7m of funds.
He is keen that any refinancing will be done while getting fair market values for the companies in Eagle, not a fire sale.
HTV profits top City forecasts
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
HTV Group, the Swansea-based Independent Television contractor and fine arts dealer, beat all City forecasts with a 25.4 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to £18m in the year to 31 July.
Earnings rose 20.3 per cent to 17.25p and a final dividend of 3.5p makes a 39 per cent increase in the total to 5p.
The group's share rose 6p to 135p on the news.
The figures were helped by a review of the group's stocks, both in television programmes and in paintings and prints, which added £1.1m to operating profits.
However, there was an exceptional cost of £2.1m due to the staff reduction programme which cut 160 from the head count.
The broadcasting levy paid to the Government rose a third to £4.8m.
HTV's advertising revenue rose 11.8 per cent to £101.8m, and the group managed to hold on to a creditable market share of 6.4 per cent as advertising has been sucked to South-east England.
The chief executive, Partick Dromgoole, said sales in September were down on last year.
The year has been good for programme sales, particularly overseas where sales increased more than a half to £18.8m.
Mr Dromgoole said this would flatten, if not drop in the new year, as the group reins back its activities to minimise the amount of levy paid to the Government.
HTV's objective is to have half its revenues coming from other than advertising sales.
So far non-advertising revenue stands at 38 per cent of turnover and around 30 per cent of profits, though HTV does not have plans to make any large acquisitions, such as the purchase of CCA Galleries last year.
CCA was in these figures for just three months and fine art contributed £849,000 of profits, up from £156,000.
HTV is also redeveloping a 21 acre parcel of land close to its studios at Culverhouse Cross which could realise more than £5m of profit.
It has already revalued its properties, bringing a £7m surplus.
To tie in with the new broadcasting levy system, which starts in January, HTV is changing its year end from July to December.
Anglo United to sell eight Coalite firms
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
ANGLO UNITED, which won its £478m bid for Coalite in July, has put eight Coalite businesses up for sale.
The price tag is expected to be about £150m.
The businesses include two in waste disposal — essentially landfill operations — two in quarrying, two in the manufacture of scientific instruments plus a chain of builders' merchants and a maker of specialised grouts.
David McErlain, the chairman of Anglo, said over 300 potential bidders had shown interest in the eight operations.
He said Anglo expects the sales to be completed by Christmas.
‘These disposals will break the back of our £200m bridging finance, taken on to fund the bid,’ said Mr McErlain.
He added that the group would be making further disposals in the new year, including Coalite's North Sea oil interests and its contract hire operations.
Hargreaves Quarries is expected to excite the most interest.
Many of its quarries are located next to sites owned by large players such as Tarmac and ARC.
City analysts have put a price tag of as much as £60m on Hargreaves and some potential bidders, including the Irish group CRH, have intimated that the business would be worth more to an existing player in the market than a newcomer.
Advertising group rakes in new work
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
ADVERTISING and public relations group, Lowe Howard-Spink & Bell, yesterday saw its shares rise 9p to 422p on the announcement of a 16 per cent rise in profits before tax to £7.7m for the half year to end June.
The company said that the first six months of the year ‘have seen more new business than during any previous period’.
Most of this was due to PR work from the financial side of the company, Lowe Bell Financial, which has been bought out by management since the period end.
‘Lowe International is continuing to study potential for expanding its operations in European countries and is progressing in this area,’ it added.
Worldwide, Lowe International won over £100m of new business in the first six months, more than double the total 1988 increase.
‘Lowe Marschalk, together with the existing US agencies, now has US billings in excess of $500m,’ a statement added.
City analysts said that the full year should see a profit of £19.5m, to give 43.5p of earnings and a 14 per cent discount to the market.
‘Your view of the shares depends how you view the management,’ one expert said.
‘If you think they are good, they are reasonable value.
But if you think they are beginning to lose it, the shares are fairly priced.’
Company News in Brief 
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
REG VARDY, the Northern car dealer, is seeking a full listing via a £7.1m placing.
The new shares will account for 25 per cent of the enlarged group and will be placed at 90p.
OCEAN Transport & Trading has expanded its environmental services with investments totalling £12m.
Housebuilding boosts Raine finals to 23.2m pounds
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
A 150 per cent rise in housebuilding profits helped Raine Industries, the contracting group, to raise pre-tax profits by 73 per cent from £13.4m to £23.2m in the year to 30 June.
The Hassel Homes division increased profits from £5.7m to £14.3m by avoiding the depressed South-east market and concentrating on improving margins in the North and Scotland.
Hall & Tawse, the commercial property division, raised profits from £6.4m to £7.2m.
The interiors contracting operation, enlarged by the £26m acquisition of Plumb Holdings in May, improved profits to £1.6m.
Outlook: Quids in, dollars out of the reserves
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
In a world of dubious economic statistics, changes in the official reserves must rate as one of the most unreliable indicators.
Last month's underlying decline of only $142m in the reserves seems an especially unrealistic guide to the actual level of intervention by the Bank of England — in concert with other central banks — to depress the dollar, and also — on its own account — to defend the weakening pound.
For a start, the figures exclude transactions that occurred on the last two business days of the month — the very time when pressure on the pound was thought to be most intense.
Even during the recorded period, however, there are persuasive reasons for believing that the actual quantity of reserves used for intervention was at least $650m-$700m.
Sales of reserves were offset by an inflow of $260m of foreign currency receipts from the final instalment of the sale of British Steel shares.
And the net change is reduced by interest on the $42.88bn of outstanding reserves — probably worth between $250m and $300m a month.
Then there is the tricky question of forward market operations.
The Bank is known frequently to support the pound in the forward market.
But of course such operations affect the reserves in the month in which the forward purchase matures, not in the month in which the transaction is executed.
It is thought that in January the Bank sold pounds nine months forward when it was engaged in the task of restraining the pound's advance.
And any such maturing sales would mask the extent of support for the pound last month.
Expectations now focus on tomorrow's Bundesbank meeting, and a widely expected rise in German interest rates.
But the Chancellor may be looking and hoping further ahead, to Friday's US employment report and the possibility that a bit of a dollar rebound might haul the pound up against the mark.
Outlook: Switching tack on plastic
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
People in Britain spend about £20bn a year using plastic cards.
The processing of these transactions on behalf of shops — known as ‘merchant acquisition’ in banking jargon — is worth no less than £400m annually.
For the banks chasing this lucrative and growing business, the gloves are now definitely off.
Yesterday Barclays and Lloyds announced they wanted to join Switch, the debit card network founded by National Westminster, Midland and Royal Bank of Scotland.
Yet Barclays and Lloyds have spent much time and energy privately rubbishing Switch, in efforts to promote their own debit cards.
The truth is that neither applicant actually wants to issue Switch cards, though Barclays says it is prepared to consider it.
Both, however, want the right to process Switch transactions on behalf of their retail clients.
The catalyst is the Government's decision in August to uphold a recommendation from the Monopolies and Mergers Commission that the credit card networks Visa International and Mastercard should alter one of their membership rules.
This rule, still in existence while Visa and Mastercard fight a rearguard action with the Office of Fair Trading, prevents banks from processing card transactions until they have built up a large base of card-holders.
Now Lloyds and Barclays argue that the debit card network should bow to the same principle — and that they should be allowed to process Switch transactions without first issuing Switch cards to their account-holders.
Switch is likely to resist any such application.
It says a ‘fundamental requirement’ is that its retail acquirers should be issuers too.
However, it may yet be tempted to bend the rules to admit the two newcomers.
Its problem is not the size of its card-holder base — there are 10 million Switch cards in circulation already.
It is the paucity of its retail base which is stunting growth.
Only 10,000 of the necessary terminals are so far installed in shops, though the target is 20,000 by the New Year and 100,000 by the end of next year.
Moreover, its big-name client base so far is largely confined to Sainsbury, Gateway and the main petrol retailers.
Barclays has 12,000 terminals installed in stores and another 30,000 on the way.
Lloyds too is a substantial merchant acquirer and was the first to offer the convenience of processing both Visa and Mastercard vouchers.
Bringing the two banks into the fold would do much to raise the credibility of Switch with sceptical retailers.
Outlook: Topping up top pay
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
To him (or, very occasionally, her) that hath shall still clearly be given.
Both the P-E Inbucon annual survey of executive salaries, and the much smaller Jonathan Wren city salary survey, confirm that salary increases have been bigger at the top end of business and the City than at the bottom.
The P-E Inbucon survey is truly massive, based on data for executives in 872 UK companies.
It fairly claims to be the largest in Europe.
The results put into perspective the hefty pay rises recently secured by certain notorious chief executives; but they still show boardroom salaries growing faster than middle management's.
Some 18 per cent of managing directors secured pay increases of over 20 per cent in 1988-89, compared with only 8 per cent of executives below board level.
Including all remuneration (the majority of managing directors received a bonus averaging around one-fifth of their salary), half of all managing directors received about 14 per cent or more.
For executives below board level the median increase was about 10 per cent.
The Jonathan Wren survey is more modestly based on 453 City placements over the past six months; but these, too, show much bigger increases achieved by mobile fund managers (over 26 per cent, with an average salary of over £50,000) than messengers (less than 10 ½ per cent , with an average salary of under £7,000).
But the market seems to have been generating some big increases for certain quite junior City people — notably in foreign exchange and swaps.
Commodities: Coffee
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
Coffee second position futures fell to a 14-year low of £693 in quiet trading awaiting the conclusion of International Coffee Organisation talks.
Brazil's rejection of export quotas was seen as blocking any positive outcome to the talks, now nearing a conclusion.
Manufacturers were sidelined as producers held stock until after the talks.
Japanese pursue European ambitions in financial services: Virgin's deal with Fujisankei is the continuation of a trend, Frances Moss reports
By FRANCES MOSS
A RECENT trend in Japanese preparations for 1992 is becoming evident, particularly in the financial services sector.
Strategic alliances are being forged with major European companies.
These deals are often sought by the European companies, as they are seen as a reciprocal entry ticket to the Japanese market.
They are part of the increasing worldwide trend where knowledge, goods, services and markets are being exchanged between players each hoping to become ‘global’ organisations.
The Japanese have internationalisation as a national objective, which makes them particularly enthusiastic players in this exchange.
There is a huge Japanese presence in the City, but much of it is in commercial banking.
Many of the new moves are into more sophisticated areas such as investment banking and specialised services.
There is more involvement with companies on mainland Europe as an insurance policy against any loss of London's pre-eminence after 1992.
The giant Nomura has stakes in Banco Santander of Spain (which owns 10 per cent of Royal Bank of Scotland), Francois-Dufour Kervern, a French stockbroker, and Matuschka Group, a fund management company in West Germany.
As part of the deal in Spain, a Nomura representative will have a seat on the board of the investment bankers, Banco Santander de Negocios.
In 1988 the Long-term Credit Bank of Japan set up a joint investment advisory company with Foreign & Colonial Management.
The deal was said to enable LTCB to gain information and knowledge in international asset management while providing F&C with a way of entry into the pensions market in Japan.
In July of this year the Taiyo Kobe Bank agreed to buy a 5 per cent stake in Credito Commerciale, a merchant banking subsidiary of the 500-year-old Monte dei Paschi di Siena.
The deal includes a place for a Taiyo Kobe employee on the Credito Commerciale board.
Okosan Securities, one of Japan's 10 largest securities companies, has declared that it is considering tying up with a London-based company to take advantage of its knowledge and expertise in the specialised area of offshore investment.
In the insurance market, there has been an upsurge in activity.
In life insurance in particular, Japan's domestic market is extremely mature.
There are about 100 million policies for a population of 122 million.
This provides still stronger motivation to seek new markets.
Sedgwick, the UK's largest insurance broker, has a co-operative agreement with Ginsen, which is affiliated to the giant Sumitomo group.
In February 1989, Dai-ichi Mutual Life Insurance, the second-largest life insurance company in Japan, bought 2 per cent of Compagnie Financiere de Suez of France.
Legal & General reached a co-operation deal in August 1989 with Kyoei Mutual Fire & Marine Insurance Company of Tokyo.
Included in the arrangement was provision for some joint training.
The advent of 1992 was explicitly given as one reason for the Japanese company being interested in the deal.
The Japanese are getting two things from these deals.
First they will gain influence.
A Japanese on the board will probably be a business school graduate with extensive overseas experience, who will speak from a position of strength.
Second, and more important, they will gain information.
The Japanese are the most inveterate information gatherers in the business world.
Their much-derided ‘copying’ focus is now seen with more respect as showing a complete absence of the NIH (not invented here) syndrome that causes so many Western companies problems when new but not original ideas are introduced.
With a growing network of alliances, the potential access to key market information and expertise has grown enormously.
It is unlikely that the opportunities will be wasted.
So far, with the number of Japanese-speaking graduates in the UK scarcely being measured in three figures, any reciprocal learning will depend mainly on what Japanese companies choose to make available.
In addition, there is a revolution going on in Japan in the financial services sector as it faces deregulation.
Knowledge of how to operate in the relatively unrestricted European markets could be vital to enable Japanese institutions to survive.
They have an enormous advantage in the strength of the yen and the size of their asset base.
So there is no doubt about the ability of the Japanese to pay for this information and knowledge, nor about their strong motivation for acquiring it.
The doubt is really whether Western companies have put a sufficiently high price on the information they are providing.
Akio Morita records that his fledgling company Sony was, in 1953, able to buy a licence from Western Electric to develop transistor technology.
Ultimately, this enabled Sony to make huge inroads into US electronics companies' sales and profits.
For a short-term gain of a one-off windfall profit, far greater future losses were stored up.
The implication is that Mr Morita thought that he had a bargain.
Are there many such bargains being struck today, as the key resource of the information age is being liberally shared about?
The Japanese are no longer shying away from outright acquisition, as the recent purchase of the merchant bank Guinness Mahon by the Bank of Yokohama shows.
It will be interesting to see whether Japanese management practices likely to be brought in by the new top management will work in an environment where aggressive individual success, rather than collaborative teamwork has been the norm.
So far Japanese management expertise seems to have been transferred more successfully into the manufacturing sector than into financial services.
However, co-operative agreements and alliances, which represent far less risk while still providing access to markets and information, are much more common than M&A activity as yet.
Recent research has shown that not all joint-ventures or alliances between Western and Japanese companies are a complete success.
The expectations of the two parties may be very different, as may be the amount of time and effort they each put into the deal.
The enormous losses of at least $10m apiece that the big four securities houses, Nomura, Yamaichi, Daiwa and Nikko, made in the US in 1988 can be seen in two ways.
Either they show that the Japanese magic touch is concentrated mainly in manufacturing, or, more worryingly for the West, they demonstrate the costs of entry into unfamiliar markets that Japanese firms are willing to pay.
The big four may well have learnt so much about how to negotiate with the US regulatory and financial authorities to justify the cost of this investment.
If the Western part of these alliances in the financial sector wish to make them work, they will have to put as much effort into learning as the Japanese will.
They will also need to take the same long-term view.
Otherwise, they may find that they have given a huge advantage to their competitors, without benefiting sufficiently from the opportunities that have been made available to them.
The author is senior lecturer in accounting and finance at the Polytechnic of Central London.
Intel confirms 264m pounds Irish Republic plant
From ALAN MURDOCH in Dublin
INTEL, the California-based semi conductor manufacturer, yesterday confirmed its first European manufacturing base is to be in the Irish Republic.
Its Ir £300m (£264m) plant will employ 2,600 workers within 10 years.
The decision will come as a disappointment to development agencies in Scotland and Wales — both countries were shortlisted.
The company is to invest Ir £250m on research and investment and staff training.
A spokesman for Intel said no specific sites had been earmarked in the west of Scotland or in the M4 electronics belt in Wales.
The decision to go to Ireland — made on labour, grant aid and broader economic grounds — was also made before the actual location was selected.
Intel, with a 1988 turnover of more than $2.8bn, is the world's fifth largest manufacturer of semi conductors for the computer industry.
Founded in 1968, it pioneered the modern micro processor and now mainly supplies components for other electronics firms.
These are used in machines from desktop computers to super computers.
About 70 per cent of personal computers worldwide incorporate parts made by Intel, which employs 20,000.
An initial Ir £20m is to be invested in the plant at Leixit in County Kildare, which in the first phase will produce computer systems.
Dr Gordon Moore, Intel chairman, said: ‘We are badly in need of extra systems capacity and this part of the project will go ahead extremely rapidly.’
He said this will be followed by a wafer fabrication plant on the same site at a cost of at least I £150m and finally a finishing and test centre.
Total construction costs are projected to reach Ir £125m.
Intel has set up a recruitment office in Dublin.
More than 25 per cent of the 2,600 employees will be graduates.
The Irish Industry Minister, Des O'Malley, stressed that a key factor in winning the project had been availability of computer scientists.
BAT bid boosts merchant banks
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
THE £13.5bn takeover battle for BAT affected the reputations and fees of all the City's big merchant banks in the first nine months of 1989, according to figures announced yesterday by the magazine Acquisitions Monthly.
Seven of the top 10 places in the table went to banks which had a role in the BAT bid.
The most notable inclusions in the list were Lazard Brothers and Hambros, which rose from eleventh to second place and nineteenth to third place respectively.
The last time Hambros was so well placed was in 1986 when it advised on another mega-bid, by Hanson for Imperial Group.
Warburgs, which acted for BAT, was ranked first in the table, with £23.6bn of deals done in the period.
It also acted for Isosceles in its takeover of the Gateway supermarkets business, and for GEC in its bid for electronics group Plessey.
Morgan Grenfell amd Kleinwort Benson, each of whom played no role in the BAT bid, were also in the top 10.
County NatWest, the merchant bank heavily censured by inspectors from the Department of Trade and Industry for its role in the Blue Arrow affair, has dropped out of the table for the first time.
A spokeswoman for the bank said: ‘You have to remember that the rankings are made on the basis of value of bids, which are all down to BAT.
‘We have had no significant losses of clients since the publication of the DTI report.
The year will be disappointing, but we are very confident that we will be back in the league table next year,’ she added.
Another notable movement in the charts was from Schroders, which recorded 23 deals worth £13.2bn.
‘If this bank had played a role in the Hoylake/BAT battle it would have been top of the table,’ said Philip Healey, editor of Acquisitions Monthly.
Designer Nina Campbell has licensed the manufacture and distribution of her wallpaper and fabric designs to quoted group Osborne and Little in a cash deal expected to be worth £200,000
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
Designer Nina Campbell has licensed the manufacture and distribution of her wallpaper and fabric designs to quoted group Osborne and Little in a cash deal expected to be worth £200,000 
Decision near in US battle over cellular phones
From LARRY BLACK in New York
THE LENGTHY battle for control of New York's cellular telephone franchise took an unexpected turn yesterday as McCaw Cellular announced a $1.9bn deal to acquire the half stake owned by the Metromedia group.
The move puts new pressure on Metromedia's partner in the New York franchise, LIN Broadcasting, which has been the object of a hostile tender offer by McCaw since early summer.
LIN, which last month entered into a merger agreement with Bell South in an attempt to repel McCaw, has the right of first refusal on Metromedia's stake, which would pre-empt the deal with McCaw.
LIN now has 45 days to decide whether to buy the balance of the franchise.
Meanwhile, the $110-a-share cash bid for LIN by McCaw, which is 20 per cent owned by British Telecom, expires on 13 October.
LIN's merger agreement with Bell South has been valued at between $108 and $112 a share, but the deal will not reward shareholders until early next year.
Major holders of LIN stock are sharply divided on which offer to accept.
‘McCaw's move forces LIN to make a decision,’ said Guy Weyser-Pratt, a market strategist with Prudential-Bache Securities, yesterday.
‘Either LIN buys the rest of the franchise it doesn't already own, or it has to come to terms with McCaw.’
McCaw has been pursuing LIN since June, and some analysts had expected it to raise its bid in wake of the merger agreement with Bell South, the regional telephone utility based in Atlanta, Georgia.
One New York arbitrageur described McCaw's move as a smart one, and went on to predict that LIN would now finally agree to negotiate with its unwanted suitor.
‘LIN could live with this,’ he said, noting that the company would still control large parts of the cellular market in other US cities.
In announcing its deal with Metromedia, McCaw also said it planned to sell its stake in a number of smaller cellular franchises in Alabama, Kentucky and Tennessee to Contel Corporation for $1.3bn.
New York-based Metromedia is controlled by businessman John Kluge.
In 1986 Metromedia's six US television stations were sold to Rupert Murdoch, who has grouped them into the Fox Television network.
BAe plans new 35m pounds long-range business jet
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Correspondent
BRITISH Aerospace yesterday announced the £35m launch of a new mid-sized, twin-engined business jet capable of carrying passengers non-stop to the United States and the Middle East.
The BAe 1000, a derivative of the highly successful BAe 125-800, will be produced at its Chester factory.
Seven orders have been received for the new jet which will have a 3,600-mile range.
Production of the two aircraft is scheduled to rise from 35-40 a year to 50 aircraft by 1992, 60 per cent of which will be acounted for by the BAe 1000.
Deliveries of the new jet — which is designed to tap the market for business aircraft with an intercontinental range — are due to begin in the first quarter of 1991.
The BAe 1000, claimed by BAe to be two years ahead of the competition, will be able to fly up to 15 passengers direct from London to the West coast of the US, Rio de Janeiro or Singapore with one stop-off.
BAe said its range would be up to 50 per cent greater than the existing 125-800, cutting 50 minutes from the flight time of coast-to-coast operations in the US and Australia.
Business and City Summary
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Correspondent
Pearl investigation: The Office of Fair Trading has begun its investigation into the £1.1bn bid for Pearl Group by Australian Mutual Provident.
The OFT will advise the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on whether he should refer the bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
MB well leaked: The agreed £338m bid for Caradon by MB Group was well publicised before it was announced yesterday.
This page and View from City Road, page 33 Fitton drops bid: Andrew Fitton, the chief executive of Braithwaite, has withdrawn his recapitalisation offer for Eagle Trust.
Page 33.
Egerton name change: Egerton Trust, the housebuilder and property developer, has changed the names of six of its subsidiaries to Egerton to reflect the exposure of the group.
Still running: Visa and Mastercard are continuing to operate membership rules that were decreed anti-competitive by the Government six weeks ago.
Page 30 NY cellular telephones: McCaw Cellular has bought the half stake owned in the New York cellular telephone franchise by Metromedia.
Page 31 Accounting mergers: Deloitte Haskins and Sells has pulled out of its merger with Touche Ross and is expected to join up with Coopers & Lybrand.
This page and View from City Road, page 31 Mitsubishi listing: Mitsubishi has became the first Japanese general trading company to be listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Dealings in its shares begin today.
BAT distortion: Seven out of the 10 leading merchant banks in the Acquistions Monthly league table of corporate finance activity were involved in the Hoylake bid for BAT Industries.
Page 31 Decline encouraging: The $142m deline in Britain's reserves of gold and foreign exchange to $42.88bn was less than many had been fearing.
Page 30 Dow record: A surprise buying rush took the New York Stock Exchange to a record close.
Page 30 Anglo sell-off: Eight businesses worth £150m are being sold by Anglo United following its takeover of Coalite.
Page 33 Switch applications: Barclays and Lloyds banks have applied to join the Switch debit card network.
Outlook, page 31 Smurfit rise: Jefferson Smurfit announced a rise in profits to Ir £121m (Ir £109m) after the stock market had closed yesterday.
View from City Road, page 33 Ferranti support: Ferranti shares were relisted at 47.5p yesterday but were well supported and ended at 56p.
This page and View from City Road, page 33 Pay rises: Two surveys show that pay is rising faster at the top end of the scales than at the bottom.
Outlook, page 31 World Markets New York: Programme buying and a rush of panicky short-covering saw the Dow Jones Industrial Average finish at a record 2,754.56, up 40.84 Tokyo: A flood of sell orders from investment trusts redeeming funds for clients brought a sharp fall in the Nikkei average, down 256.6 to 35,366.37.
Hong Kong: Buying by London institutions helped the Hang Seng index to climb 39.95 points to 2,786.65 in moderate trade.
Singapore: Undeterred by Tokyo's fall, bargain-hunters took the Straits Times index 13.07 points higher to 1,388.32.
Sydney: The market rallied on Wall Street's gains, a softer Australian dollar and a jump in futures prices.
The All Ordinaries index added 28.8 to 1,772.1.
Johannesburg: Gold shares eased as the bullion price continued to languish.
The rest of the market drifted in sympathy.
Bombay: Prices fell on heavy speculative selling after the long weekend.
Doubts were expressed about last week's rumour of moves to end steel price control.
Frankfurt: Strong demand for Daimler, AEG and other selected stocks pushed interest rate fears into the background.
The DAX index, at a day's high of 1,602.4, was 24.6 points ahead.
Paris: Peugeot recovered from its recent weakness, gaining eight francs to 902 on hopes of ending the strike at two plants.
Madrid: Further profit-taking bought a marginal 0.8-point fall in the index to 324.87.
New match for Deloitte UK
By SIMON PINCOMBE
THE MERGER initiatives of the large accountancy firms were thrown into further disarray yesterday when the UK firm of Deloitte Haskins & Sells pulled out of the worldwide merger with Touche Ross.
Deloitte is expected to announce a UK merger with Coopers & Lybrand this morning.
The decision by Deloitte to pull out comes just one week after the collapse of talks between Price Waterhouse and Arthur Andersen.
And it was leaked barely hours before Edward Kangas, head of Touche Ross International, announced that the proposed merger to create the giant international firm of Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu (DRT) would go ahead with Touche Ross as the sole UK representative.
Mr Kangas said: ‘Firms in the US, Japan, France and the UK have agreed to become members of DRT.
In most cases these agreements reflect national mergers between (members of) Deloitte Haskins and Sells International and Touche Ross International.’
He added that these countries reflected more than 75 per cent of the total revenues of the two seperate firms.
J Michael Cook, head of Deloitte Haskins & Sells International, was keen to minimise the impact of the defection.
A statement said he had ‘expressed enthusiasm for the decision’, which leaves Touche Ross as the sole DRT representive in the UK.
Mr Cook added that Canada and other countries were rapidly moving toward merger agreements and that DRT would boast a fee income in excess of $3.3bn in the current year.
This would still leave DRT as the world's third largest accountancy firm behind KPMG and the recently merged Ernst & Young, so far the only two successful mega-mergers.
In the UK, however, the position is radically altered.
If a merger between Coopers and Deloitte is successful, it will become the largest firm in the country and would have posted fee income of £413m based on 1988 figures.
Senior members of both firms refused to confirm or deny the story last night.
But Coopers' employees said that they were informed of the decision to merge with Deloitte yesterday morning.
‘It came as quite a surprise’, said one.
The move marks an extraordinary volte face on the part of Coopers, which until last week was the only remaining firm in the original ‘Big Eight’ without a potential partner.
Brandon Gough, the chairman of Coopers, had publicly condemned the concept of large mergers as a nonsense.
But senior directors at Coopers yesterday told staff that the move would provide the firm with a wider audit base.
Deloitte has an impressive list of audit clients although its management consultancy practice is only half the size of Coopers.
However, there are doubts about how much of the Deloitte client list will be left intact once it has left the international organisation.
In particular, the firm handled the UK end of clients such as Merrill Lynch and General Motors.
These audits will more than likely switch to Touche Ross as the UK member of DRT.
Staff at Touche Ross were unaware of the planned link between Coopers and Deloitte UK yesterday.
But sources at Touche Ross said that the loss of revenue to Deloitte UK as a result of a cessation of referred work from the international organisation could be up to as much as ‘tens of millions of dollars’.
One said that the US firm of Deloitte has a ‘wonderful client list which will now be served from here’.
Also, it is unlikely that the new firm of Coopers and Deloitte will be able to incorporate the word Deloitte in its new name.
That will technically belong to Touche Ross as part of Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu.
Staff at Coopers were told that a name for the new firm had not been decided, but that it was likely that it would start with Coopers.
MB and Caradon agree on 338m pounds bid
By TERENCE WILKINSON, Assistant City Editor
MB GROUP, the heating, bathroom products and security printing group which also has packaging interests, has made an agreed £337.6m bid for Caradon, the Twyfords and Everest building products company.
If the deal goes through, Dr Brian Smith will step down as chairman of MB Group to make way for Murray Stuart, currently group chief executive.
Mr Stuart's place will in turn be taken by Peter Jansen, deputy chairman and group chief executive of Caradon.
Daniel Cohen, finance director, and Tim Walker of Caradon, will also join the MB Group board.
‘This is not an ordinary acquisition,’ Dr Smith said yesterday.
‘The Caradon management team is joining MB Group and bringing their company with them.’
Dr Smith explained that MB Group, formerly Metal Box, had identified Caradon 18 months ago as a suitable means of expanding into building products but the company had had to reorganise itself and create a new management team to make the current deal possible.
Earlier this year MB Group merged its world-wide packaging interests with the French Carnaud to form CMB in which it has a 25.5 per cent stake.
This meant it could concentrate on two core businesses — security printing and heating and bathroom products.
Caradon was bought from publishers Reed International for £61m in 1985 and came to the stock market in June 1987 with an initial market value of £134m.
The management team, led by Peter Jansen, which originally put up 10 per cent of the £12m equity element of the buyout, has seen its investment increase 60-fold at the MB Group offer price.
The offer of 550p a share, half in cash and half in convertible preference shares, has received undertakings to accept from 35.8 per cent of Caradon shareholders but of these only 12 per cent, mainly Caradon directors, have given irrevocable undertakings.
Caradon shareholders are entitled to retain an interim dividend of 4p a share.
Interim pre-tax profits rose by an estimated 10 per cent to £17m in the six months to 1 October.
Caradon shares closed 45p higher at 533p while MB Group, whose shares fell 8p on Monday amid speculation that it would bid for Caradon, recovered to close 2p higher at 208p.
The acquisition of Caradon, whose brands embrace Twyfords, Mira showers and Everest double glazing, will more than double the size of MB Group's building products business which feature Stelrad and Henrad radiators, Ideal boilers and Stelrad Doulton sanitary ware.
Hectic return as 15% of Ferranti changes hands
By JEREMY WARNER, Business Correspondent
FERRANTI'S shares encountered hectic trading when they returned from suspension yesterday as a host of conflicting rumours swept the stock market over the company's future.
Most stockbroking analysts believe it inevitable that the troubled electronics group will be taken over.
The only questions are by whom and at what price.
Frontrunners are said to be British Aerospace and Daimler Benz.
According to Seaq, the Stock Exchange's automated dealing system, about 115 million shares were traded, amounting to more than 15 per cent of the company's stock.
The shares closed at 56p — much higher than most analysts had been predicting given the £185m hole which has appeared in Ferranti's accounts as a result of the International Signal and Control fraud.
The shares opened at 47 ½ p and climbed rapidly to 56p as a number of brokers came in as heavy buyers.
Hoare Govett was identified as an early buyer, pointing the finger at British Aerospace, one of the stockbroking firm's corporate clients.
Another Hoare Govett client is STC.
British Aerospace added to the speculation by refusing officially to confirm or deny the story.
However, well-informed sources ruled out both British Aerospace and STC as buyers, saying they believed Hoare Govett was acting on behalf of normal investment clients or Middle Eastern investors with an interest in Ferranti's future.
Stock market sources said that the Hoare Govett buying dried up after about 60 million Ferranti shares had been traded, at which point Smith New Court stepped in and remained an aggressive buyer at 56p until the close.
Some market men said they believed Smith was trying to support the price because the firm was already heavily exposed to Ferranti, having picked up the bulk of shares placed at 81p in July by Jim Guerin, International Signal and Control's former chairman.
British Aerospace is said to be one of the key contenders to mount a rescue bid for Ferranti, a vital subcontractor providing navigational and radar equipment for BAe's military aircraft.
Another company to which Ferranti is known to be talking is Daimler Benz, the giant West German vehicles, aircraft and electricals group.
According to some stock market sources, Ferranti was in talks with Daimler about the possibility of a partnership before the fraud which now threatens its future came to light.
Parkinson rules out tunnel aid
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Correspondent
EUROTUNNEL'S share price continued to fall sharply yesterday as Andre Benard, the consortium's French co-chairman, conceded that the £2bn cost overrun on the Channel tunnel was causing ‘serious problems’.
Meanwhile, Cecil Parkinson, the Secretary of State for Transport, said the Government had ruled out any idea of helping to fund the ailing project.
Shares in Eurotunnel fell a further 50p to close at 600p, making a 15 per cent drop in the Anglo-French venture's stock market value in the two days since it disclosed a 50 per cent rise in the cost of the tunnel to at least £7bn.
Interviewed on the French TV channel Antenne 2, Mr Benard conceded that the underestimate of the project's costs ‘poses really serious problems for us’, although he added: ‘There is no question of stopping work at this time.’
The banks financing the huge project have given Eurotunnel until the end of the year to come up with an agreed costing for completion of the tunnel sufficient to enable them to release fresh loans.
Their technical advisers, the American engineering consultancy Parsons de Leuw Cather and the German consultancy Lahmeyer International, estimate the cost of the project now at £8.1bn.
Eurotunnel, which is already in default of its credit agreement with the synidcate of 200 banks, is seeking an extra £1.2bn to £1.6bn on top of the £6bn raised so far.
The Bank of England is understood to be keeping a watch as discussions continue between Eurotunnel and its four agent banks, which include the Midland and National Westminster.
Speaking during a visit to the Transport and Road Research laboratory at Crowthorne, Berkshire, Mr Parkinson said: ‘A way will be found around these problems.
Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton has a difficult job on his hands but he has shown he can handle it.
This is not a matter for the Government.’
Later in the day, following a meeting in Dartford, Kent, with Tory MPs and members of the public protesting over the route of the planned Channel tunnel high-speed rail link, Mr Parkinson reiterated his faith in a private sector solution to the funding crisis.
Peter Rawlins takes over at the exchange
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Correspondent
PETER RAWLINS, a former partner with accountants Arthur Andersen, has emerged as the International Stock Exchange's next chief executive following the decision of Jeffrey Knight to stand down from the post, writes John Moore.
Mr Rawlins, 38, has spent the past seven years working with the Lloyd's insurance market and was once personal assistant to the first chief executive of that community, Ian Hay Davison.
Since 1985 Mr Rawlins has been a director of Sturge Holdings, the publicly quoted Lloyd's underwriting and stockbroking group, and managing director of its principal operating subsidiary, R W Sturge.
He has been a director of Wise Speke, one of the largest regional stockbrokers in the UK since its acquisition by Sturge in 1987.
Mr Rawlins announced his intention to leave Sturge at some time in the future towards the end of last year although he had no specific plans for the next step in his career.
He said yesterday that he was approached by headhunters for the £150,000 a year stock exchange job in August.
Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the exchange, said yesterday he was delighted that Mr Rawlins had accepted the appointment.
‘He brings considerable outside experience and proven ability in defining practical business strategies and putting them to work in a market environment,’ Mr Hugh Smith said.
‘His understanding of the application of modern information technology solutions to complex business problems will be of particular benefit.’
Mr Rawlins takes up his appointment on 27 November.
Millwall Football Club seeks listing
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Correspondent
MILLWALL Football Club, which is playing only its second season in the First Division in its 104-year history, is to obtain a Stock Exchange listing.
The club has enjoyed a single year of profit since Reg Burr took over as club chairman three years ago.
The listing, which is to raise £4.8m through a 38.5 per cent placing, will give the club a market capitalisation of £13m, worth about the same as Tottenham Hotspur, the only other English football club to be publicly owned.
It is just a few years since the club — whose anthem was: ‘We are Millwall.
No one likes us.
We don't care’— had the worst reputation for hooliganism in the League.
In 1985, during an away match with Luton, Millwall fans invaded the pitch, forcing police to retreat under a barrage of seats ripped from the stands.
Millwall is now to join the junior Unlisted Securities Market while Tottenham has a full quotation.
The club is planning to sell its present ground in east London and move half a mile down the road to create a leisure and community centre.
Just over one-third of the company's shares — 20 million — are to be placed at 20p with institutional investors and a further five million will be put on offer.
Mr Burr said the rump of the shares on offer would be aimed at the 11,000 members of the club as Stock Exchange rules did not allow shares to be allotted to them directly.
Figuring out the typical company executive
By SARAH HOGG
BRITAIN'S typical executive is male, 44 years old and has a salary of £30,355 (including £4,826 in bonus pay), according to a comprehensive annual survey conducted by P-E Inbucon, writes Sarah Hogg.
But he probably received a pay rise of less than 10 per cent in 1988-89.
Only 36 per cent of managers and executives received double-digit pay rises, though top executives did markedly better.
The typical executive has a company car, private medical insurance and a company pension scheme.
He has probably been with his company for 13 years and in his present job for four.
The survey is large enough — covering 11,179 executives — to provide detailed information on particular groups.
It shows that: The average managing director's salary in companies with turnover of more than £1bn was £141,000.
In companies with turnover of less than £3m the average salary was £34,724.
Executive salaries in financial services and the communications industry were 18 per cent above average.
Low payers were public administration, wholesale distribution, metal manufacture and mechanical engineering.
London salaries were only 11 per cent above average, with executive salaries in Yorkshire, Humberside and the East Midlands 5 per cent below average, showing much less of a regional difference than is often assumed.
Bonuses are spreading to more than half of all managing directors.
They received an average cash payment of £12,468.
Executive share option schemes are also spreading.
More than a fifth of all executives were covered last year.
Although personal pension plans are now being taken up fast enough to alter the Chancellor's tax sums, there was little evidence of their popularity in the survey.
Wall Street closes at new high
By SARAH HOGG
NEW YORK (Reuter)— Programme buying and a rush of short-covering sent US blue chips to new highs, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average closing 40.84 points up at 2,754.56.
Richard Meyer, managing director of institutional trading at Ladenburg Thalmann and Co, said the market's strong gains were unusual in light of bellwether International Business Machines Corp's weakness.
IBM closed down 27 8 at 1053 4.
‘It appears that Big Blue does not lead the market.
The old rule of thumb does not apply,’ he said.
‘This is a market of the nineties.’
A strengthening in the dollar on reports of turmoil in Panama provided some overall support.
Donald Selkin, head of stock index futures research at Prudential-Bache, said ‘panic short-covering’ might have boosted prices toward the end.
Sterling slipped marginally yesterday in advance of a widely-expected increase in West German interest rates tomorrow, writes Peter Torday.
The pound eased 0.39 pfennigs to close at DM3.0283 in London and a stronger dollar pushed it down 1.3 cents to $1.6050.