

Najibullah urges US to face ‘reality’: Afghanistan's president tells Ahmed Rashid in Kabul that the powers backing the mujahedin will have to recognise that he is there to stay
By AHMED RASHID
PRESIDENT NAJIBULLAH of Afghanistan says he has no intention of resigning and the United States and Pakistan should accept reality and negotiate with him.
He urged the Western governments which withdrew their diplomats from Kabul on the eve of the Soviet military withdrawal in January to send them back and stop the psychological war they were waging against his government.
‘It is ridiculous that somebody should talk to a party and at the same time dictate to that party who should be heading it,’ he said in an interview with The Independent.
He was replying to demands that he should resign to pave the way for talks between the Pakistan-based mujahedin resistance and Kabul's ruling Peoples Democratic Party (PDPA) on a peace settlement.
The President said that if the United States and Pakistan were really serious in wishing to settle the Afghan problem they should acknowledge the new reality in Afghanistan, where seven months after the departure of Soviet troops the PDPA had become more united and strengthened, while the guerrillas were in total disarray.
He and his government colleagues were confident they could hold their own against the mujahedin.
Pakistan and the United States would eventually have to accept direct talks with the PDPA, he said, adding that neither country had so far implemented any peace process.
The West ‘gave us hours to survive, then days, then weeks and now they give us seasons, but they should learn from the time that has elapsed already’, he said.
He dismissed reports that his party was divided over tactics and personalities.
‘Rivalry within the PDPA is a phenomenon that more or less belongs to the past,’ he said.
The President said his government had the right to acquire any sophisticated weapon from the Soviet Union, ‘if Pakistani intervention in Afghanistan expands’, but he wanted a political settlement in which Afghanistan would be demilitarised and given international guarantees of permanent neutrality.
He criticised the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto, saying she had become ‘a cover’ for continuing the war in Afghanistan by providing military help and training to the mujahedin.
Afghans, he went on, had been optimistic when Miss Bhutto came to power but she had betrayed all her promises to settle the Afghan conflict.
‘Miss Bhutto has harmed her political career’ by bowing ‘to the militarists and ultra-right opposition in Pakistan,’he said.
‘The ruling Pakistan Peoples Party was a prestigious party that was popular and they have let its prestige be ruined.’
President Najibullah, like most Afghan officials, was cool about a possible role for ex-King Zahir Shah in any settlement: ‘For all forces who can play a role in the peace mechanism, the door is open directly to Kabul airport.
If anyone wants to come from some other way then he does not belong to us.’
The former king condemns the Kabul regime with the same tone he used when the Soviet troops were in Afghanistan and has also refused to endorse the mujahedin interim government in Peshawar.
President Najibullah has been helped since the Soviet withdrawal by a a revival of Afghan nationalism, which his government has cleverly exploited to present the mujahedin as foreign-backed invaders.
His government has had considerable success in winning over guerrilla field commanders and turning them into semi-autonomous militias with lavish handouts of money and arms.
‘The secret of our success lies in these militias,’ said President Najibullah.
Morale is high, especially after the mujahedin failed to capture Jalalabad as they said they would.
Although his personal popularity is difficult to gauge most Afghans in Kabul respect President Najibullah because he is the only Afghan leader talking peace.
Pressure grows to allow Marcos a burial at home
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Manila
HE ALLEGEDLY stole up to $10bn (£6.2bn) of their money, jailed 60,000 of them, and tortured and killed hundreds more.
But now they want him back.
Filipinos have not demonstrated in the streets, but it has become increasingly clear they want Ferdinand Marcos, the former Philippine president who died in exile in Hawaii last week, to be allowed home for burial.
But his successor, Corazon Aquino, has ruled that out, citing concerns over national security.
The issue has divided the country more than any since Mrs Aquino was swept to office on a wave of ‘people power’ in 1986.
She has suddenly become the oppressor, the Marcos family the oppressed.
‘A common public perception is that the Aquino government is doing something that goes against the time-honoured Filipino tradition and cultural values,’ said Alvin Capino, a newspaper columnist.
Others believe that Mrs Aquino, by making a political decision on grounds of national security, is transgressing her own leadership principles.
‘The death of Marcos offers a momentous opportunity for the Aquino government to rally the people behind the ideals which swept it to power: freedom and democracy, bread and justice.
The alternative is one-man rule, thievery and special privileges,’ said one newspaper editorial.
Aware of the strength of public opinion, Mrs Aquino ordered flags on government buildings to be flown at half mast in a conciliatory gesture.
Yesterday she emphasised again that her decision was based on ‘sensitive information’ that showed Marcos's return could be destabilising.
‘I am doing this in the interest of the great majority of our people,’ she said.
A group of Marcos loyalists yesterday filed a petition to the Supreme Court seeking to reverse an earlier ruling that upheld Mrs Aquino's decision to bar Marcos's return.
Mrs Aquino has said she will bow to its decision but is confident it will again rule in her favour.
Whatever the outcome, Marcos's death has opened old wounds.
Marcos loyalists now poke fun at the Aquino administration's boast that it has built a new stability, arguing it is pretty fragile if it won't allow a dead man home for burial.
They say Mrs Aquino is seeking revenge for the murder of her husband Benigno ‘Ninoy’ Aquino, at Manila airport in 1983.
The Marcoses are widely blamed for Ninoy's death.
Even some of those who suffered most under Marcos's dictatorial reign felt he should be allowed home.
Among them is Senator Orlando Mercado, who was hounded and jailed as a broadcaster, and Senator Wigberto Tanada, whose family was persecuted by Marcos through much of his rule.
They argue that Mrs Aquino can heal old wounds by allowing the former dictator to come home, at the same time disarming his supporters who scream that he is being done an injustice.
Though many analysts believe the desire for Marcos's return to be based on Filipino culture and tradition, others feel Marcos's 20 years of corrupt rule has produced a psychologically damaged people.
‘An entire generation of Filipinos grew up in the shadow of dictatorship,’ wrote Sheila Coronel of the Manila Times.
‘Their concept of politics has been warped and corrupted by Marcos.
No one is now demanding justice for the dead and disappeared (during Marcos's rule), today the clamour is for justice for one dead man.
There is something tragic about this.’
Others have overwhelming compassion for their former president.
Mr Capino, remembering the bloody massacre in Peking's Tiananmen Square in June, says at least Marcos did not turn the army on his own people.
‘For this reason alone, Mrs Aquino should allow Marcos a burial in his own country and with his own people.’
Rebels in Sri Lanka disregard ceasefire
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Manila
COLOMBO — Sri Lankan troops went on the offensive at first light yesterday after left-wing rebels defied a six-day government ceasefire and burnt dozens of vehicles and buildings, killing 61 people, Reuter reports.
A government spokesman said 59 post offices, 53 other buildings, 75 vehicles and a rubber factory had been set ablaze since security forces stopped searches, ambushes and raids against the People's Liberation Front (JVP) last Wednesday.
General Cyril Ranatunga, defence ministry secretary, said operations against the JVP resumed when the unilateral truce lapsed at 6am.
General Ranatunga said the leftist rebels had done an ‘unbelievable’ amount of damage during the ceasefire.
‘A large number of houses, post offices and government buildings were burned.
Last night two factories went up in flames,’ he said.
The JVP, fighting to overthrow the government for the past two-and-a-half years, did not respect the ceasefire, first imposed by the government for 72 hours on 27 September.
It was extended for three days after officials reported violence had dropped below the average 30 killings a day.
A government statement said that 1,120 ‘subversives’, the official term for the JVP, surrendered in the six days in return for rehabilitation and the promise of jobs.
It said 21 people were killed in the 24 hours to Tuesday morning.
Thirty official buildings, 17 post offices and six buses were set ablaze in the period.
Five members of a policeman's family, a soldier and an airman were among Monday's victims.
In one incident, rebels shot dead the father, brother, brother-in-law and a friend of a policeman at Gampaha in Western province.
A doctor was also gunned down at his dispensary at Hakmana, in the south.
Right to censure textbooks is upheld
From DAVID POWERS in Tokyo
A TOKYO court ruled yesterday that the Japanese Education Ministry was within its rights to ban a textbook which detailed Japanese war atrocities, even though the court couldn't fault any of the assertions made by the author.
What made the ruling even more surprising was that the Japanese government had pledged to correct bias in school textbooks after South Korea and China lodged diplomatic protests in 1982, when the book was originally banned.
The reason given for the ban was that Professor Saburo Ienaga, a noted historian, had refused to strike out a reference in his book to bacteriological and other experiments carried out on Chinese prisoners of war by the now-defunct Imperial Army.
He also objected to having to tone down a description of the 1937 Rape of Nanking, when Japanese troops went on the rampage, killing tens of thousands of Chinese civilians and prisoners.
The ministry demanded more than 400 changes altogether — which Professor Ienaga described as tantamount to censorship and a violation of the constituional right to freedom of expression.
Judge Kazuo Kato declared that ‘having received the trust of the people, the state has the authority to determine the content of a child's education’.
Consequently, he ruled, the Education Ministry had been perfectly within its rights to ban the book.
On only one point did the judge concede that the ministry had acted outrageously — in suppressing the description of how Imperial troops crushed a volunteer army more than 100 years ago.
In compensation, he awarded Professor Ienaga 100,000 yen (£435).
Professor Ienaga pledged to fight the case right through to the Supreme Court.
He is a veteran campaigner against the screening system, but at 76, time is not on his side.
Professor Akira Fujiwara, an acknowledged expert on the Rape of Nanking who was called as one of the witnesses in the case, said that ‘in spite of the government's promise to correct bias in history textbooks, the screening system has actually got worse since the 1982 diplomatic protests.
The people of Nanking, Korea and Singapore haven't forgotten the cruelties of the past.
The Japanese are now the only ones who don't know what went on.’
There was equal indignation from the other side.
Shigeru Tokinoya, who was in charge of textbook screening at the time Professor Ienaga's book was banned, said: ‘All of our corrections should have been upheld…
Screening is always carried out in an academic, conscientious and rational manner.’
MPs seek common ground
From ROBERT FISK in Taif, Saudi Arabia
A CONVOY of black limousines conveyed the 31 Lebanese Muslim MPs in Saudi Arabia on an extra-parliamentary pilgrimage to Mecca yesterday afternoon, leaving their 31 Christian colleagues behind in Taif to ruminate on how best they might protect Christian political power in a new Lebanon.
No-one is yet talking about a ‘new’ Lebanon but there is now widespread acceptance among both Muslims and Christians in the Lebanese parliament that the country's unwritten national covenant is now obsolete.
It is this covenant which ordains that the Christian Maronites hold the presidency, the leadership of the army and the head of the judiciary while Sunni Muslims provide the prime minister and Shia Muslims the speaker of the Lebanese parliament.
Already, however, a committee of assembly members -among them only one Maronite — has been instructed to draw up a report, once the debates are over, on the changes in the covenant which a majority of parliamentarians will accept.
While real political power still resides with the militia leaders back in Lebanon, it is perhaps misleading to regard the parliamentary meeting here in conventional terms.
Yet its debates are beginning to acquire a democratic flavour, even though they are along confessional lines.
One MP, Tewfiq Assaf (Druze member of the ‘National Struggle Front’ from Aley) is demanding a second parliamentary chamber in Lebanon to extend political power to the Druze — a Druze, he maintains, should be the speaker of this new parliamentary chamber.
Jamil Kebbe (Sunni member of the ‘Salam Bloc’ from Sidon) has dedicated himself to removing as much political power from the Maronites as possible.
Zaher el-Khatib (Sunni, of the ‘Marxist Bloc’ from the Chouf) and two other deputies are campaigning for an end to confessionalism.
There is still no consensus over the issue of a Syrian military withdrawal from Lebanon — which the Christian MPs have been obliged by their militia leaders and by General Michel Aoun to discuss, although the Muslims are reluctant to debate the topic at present.
The Lebanese parliament is expected to continue its informal sessions here until the weekend — when the MPs will face the real (and potentially frightening) task of returning to Lebanon to account for their words in front of the sometimes sinister figures who still control the land.
French balancing act tipped Beirut into war: In his concluding article on Lebanon's history, Robert Fisk examines how France's ‘political solution’ created a war
By ROBERT FISK
THE Second World War wrought as great a change in Lebanese history as the First.
It was also — although it is now forgotten in the West — the scene of some of the fiercest fighting between Axis and Allied forces in the Middle East.
The Vichy authorities in Lebanon ordered French troops loyal to Petain to stand their ground against the Allied invasion from Palestine in 1941.
The Australians won their first VC of the campaign in a tank battle outside a village called Marjayoun in the south of the country which is now the headquarters of Israel's proxy South Lebanon Army militia.
In the village of Damour, a young Jewish member of the Allied forces, Moshe Dayan, was shot in the eye.
During an attempt to outflank Damour, the Allies shelled the town of Moukhtara where Kemal Jumblatt, the father of Walid Jumblatt, the present Druze leader, lived.
The Vichy French drew up two defensive lines — at Damour and along the Dog River north of Beirut.
They did this to spare the city's civilians from artillery barrages.
It was a sensitivity not exercised in recent months.
When the Vichy French fled, de Gaulle's Free French and the British took over the capital.
A British officer also took over the Vichy commander's mistress, a fact noted by a young British intelligence officer named Quintin Hogg.
The French had promised independence to Lebanon but — to Churchill's deep concern — de Gaulle seemed intent on clinging to France's colonial power.
During a visit to Beirut in 1942, de Gaulle announced that, despite French promises to the contrary, elections could not yet be held.
Many Maronites and other Christian groups turned against the French.
A Lebanese writer, Eugenie Elie Abouchdid, was so appalled by French provocation during the Beirut Victory in Europe Day celebrations that she wrote: ‘Poor Lebanon — a beautiful and magnificent country, devoured by wolves and thieves.
Among the celebrating parties, you could see…those that were cheering for la France and de Gaulle, others for Stalin, others for el-Hussaini (the Palestinian grand mufti), but you could scarcely see any that were cheering for Lebanon.’
This has been the cry of Lebanon's distress since 1945.
The presence of foreign armies on its soil and the suborning of its communities by regional superpowers is a consistent theme.
The Maronite leader, General Michel Aoun, wants the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Lebanon, but there is nothing new in such an idea.
In 1946, Hamid Franjieh, Lebanon's foreign minister and elder brother of the surviving Maronite elder statesman, Suleiman Franjieh, asked the UN Security Council for ‘a total simultaneous and immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops’.
Under British pressure, the French eventually departed in humiliation, but only after presiding over a covenant that gave the Lebanese republic the system of power-sharing which is now disintegrating.
Under this system, the Maronites would hold the presidency and the leadership of the army while a Sunni Muslim would always hold the less important post of prime minister.
A Shia would be the speaker of parliament.
The Maronites believed they would control the new state.
Already, statistics were catching up on them.
Estimates in 1956 showed the Muslim population was increasing faster than the Christian.
By 1982, the Minority Rights Group in London was unofficially estimating the Muslim population was more than two million while the Christians numbered barely 1.5 million.
Power-sharing and Christian domination remained.
This unequal balance is at the heart of the Muslim (and Syrian) demand for political reform in Lebanon, a demand which General Aoun will only accept, he says, once the Syrians have left the country.
For the fact is that the Christians now hold a power out of proportion to their numbers, thanks to the French.
And while France formally supports the need for reform, it has given considerable support to General Aoun.
Indeed, the French press has produced the dangerous illusion in Lebanon that French soldiers might land in the Christian enclave to protect the Maronites.
In principle, it is not hard to see how political reform could be achieved.
If the presidency was given only a nominal role, for example, the Maronites would still hold the most honoured post in the country while more executive power could be given to the Sunni Muslim premier.
General Aoun's ‘war of liberation’ against Syria served the Christian cause because it effectively postponed discussion of the reforms which Muslims believe are essential if their numbers are to be fairly represented in a future government.
The general says the Syrians must leave before he discusses these changes.
But the Muslims, though they despise Syrian rule in Lebanon, need Syria's presence to ensure that real political reform takes place.
The last time the Maronites promised reforms — when the multi-national force was in Beirut — Christian units of the Lebanese army arrested hundreds of Muslim Lebanese and the reforms never materialised.
So what evidence is there to suggest that General Aoun would discuss the issue once the Syrians left?
In the meantime, the Lebanese parliament, whose members are meeting in Taif a year after their failure to elect a president led to the creation of rival Lebanese cabinets, is itself in the last stages of life.
For it is the president's job to reconvene parliament.
And if there is still no president when the current assembly session expires in December 1990, the very mechanism that is intended to ensure the continuation of the Lebanese state will cease to exist.
The unhappy truth is that foreign armies have been marching backwards and forwards across Lebanon for hundreds of years.
Weapons have flooded into the country since the 1860s when the Royal Navy delivered arms to the Druze.
Syria is still supplying guns to the Muslims, just as Iraq is supplying guns to the Christians.
It is the task of Lakhdar Ibrahimi, the Arab League envoy, to struggle through a tangle of sub-issues in the hope that he can persuade the Lebanese to renegotiate France's political legacy and the policies that began when General Henri Gouraud, who became the French high commissioner of Lebanon in 1920, stepped ashore.
Activist jailed for PLO contact
By FROM CHARLES RICHARDS in Jerusalem
ABE NATHAN, the former RAF Spitfire pilot who for 23 years has led an often lonely crusade for peace, was jailed for six months yesterday by a Ramla court for breaking an Israeli anti-terrorism law by meeting the PLO chairman, Yasser Arafat, in September last year.
He had travelled to Tunis for the meeting, using his British passport.
Mr Nathan, 62, is the first Israeli jailed under the law, passed in 1986.
He decided not to appeal in order to highlight what he regards as the absurdity of the law in light of the increasing acceptability of direct and indirect contacts between Israelis and the PLO.
His campaign for peace has been original, gimmicky and, above all, successful in securing publicity for a cause.
He has flown planes into Egypt, when it was still at war with Israel, and his ship has cast 100,000 flowers on the Suez Canal as a gesture of peace.
On the eve of his sentencing, Mr Nathan spoke to The Independent in the Tel Aviv office of the institution for which he is best known, his popular offshore radio station.
Its call sign —‘This is the Voice of Peace, broadcasting from somewhere in the Mediterranean’— is familiar to millions of listeners.
The office walls are covered with plaques and certificates testifying to his charitable works and his drug rehabilitation centre in the Negev.
‘Whatever happens, I don't care how long I spend in prison, because I'm going to keep fighting it (this law) from the prison depending on what the reaction of the public is…
Somebody's got to do it.
I believe I have got the means because of my radio station.
I believe especially I never came on this campaign until after I went to see Arafat.
And I never went to see Arafat since 1982 because we had not heard of any mood or climate of change in the attitude of the PLO.
The moment I heard there were rumours that the PLO is willing to be more moderate, that's when I went on the first plane and went to Tunis.
‘Having seen him about six times, and having spoken to most of their leaders, I believe that the time is right for us to talk to them now, to end this whole conflict once and for all.
All other things which are done instead of talking are a waste of time, are being used as excuses to delay the whole process, and will bear no fruit whatsoever, except the killing which is going on every day…
I refuse to stand by and do nothing.’
Mr Nathan lamented the fact that for 40 years Israel had been saying it had no one to talk to and now that the other side was prepared to talk, Israel refused.
‘This business of ‘I will never talk to the PLO’ is absolutely ridiculous.
Unfortunately we do not have today either a Ben Gurion or a Begin.
Either of them would have grabbed the hand.
For God's sake, unless we talk to these people, there's going to be no answer.
Look at this weekend.
Eight people killed.
It's ridiculous.
There are dangers people don't see ahead.
Every time somebody is killed, there's more hate.
It will be very difficult to subdue it.’
Mr Nathan said that once he was jailed, members of the Knesset planned to try to call a special session.
They need 25 signatures.
He also plans to take out full-page newspaper advertisements, listing the names and telephone numbers of all the members of the Knesset who opposed repealing the law.
‘It's no holiday to be in prison.
I did it before, when I flew to Egypt (in 1968).
I could easily appeal, or get off.
But I'm fighting the law.
The issue is the law.
Is it productive to peace?
Can men of good will play a role in the making of peace?
Is it not enough that the government has a monopoly on war?’
But is Yasser Arafat a man he can trust?
‘What's a man you can trust?
I managed to speak to the leader of the PLO.
I haven't managed to speak to my own government.
Who trusts whom in our government?
What's the meaning of this word trust?
Everybody says trust.
Can we trust the Germans?
The Germans killed six million and a few years later we invited them to be our guests over here?
How can anybody trust the Germans?
Where does trust play anything?
They said that about Sadat: ‘How can you trust him?
He's a Nazi.’
And what happens when Sadat dies?
You've got Mubarak.
He's even stronger for peace than Sadat.’
Out of France: A curious institution where the pendulum never swings
By PATRICK MARNHAM
PARIS — All this week France held its breath while the Senate, the upper house of parliament, chose its new president.
The previous holder of the office, Alain Poher, was aged 80 and had first been installed on his throne in 1968.
Since then he had been re-elected six times.
There was a feeling in the air that it might be time for a change.
The voting continued throughout Monday night, eight candidates putting themselves forward for the honour.
Then at 4am yesterday, France could breathe again.
After three ballots, the new president of the Senate, who ranks third in the French political hierarchy, was…
Alain Poher, for the eighth time.
If the good Lord spares him (and why not) he will probably run again in 1992, when the Single European Act will become law and the Senate will need an experienced hand at the helm.
For Mr Poher this long-drawn out struggle was something new — on the seven previous occasions he had been elected on the first ballot.
But so much the better; not every 80-year-old survives an entirely new experience so succesfully.
‘This is the first time anything unusual has happened here since Goering occupied the building in 1940,’ one veteran observer was heard to remark.
Other senators, responding to Mr Poher's insistence that his age was irrelevant, said in that case, why not vote for Senator Geoffroy de Montalembert, who is only 91 and was first elected in 1945.
(Mysteriously enough, one senator did vote for Mr Montalembert in the first two ballots; no prizes for guessing who.)
But the others didn't want an entirely new hand on the helm, so they gave it back to Poher.
The French Senate is a curious institution.
Unlike the House of Lords it is elected, but it is elected by local councillors, an overwhelming majority of them from small country ‘communes’.
This means that the cities of France are under-represented and there is a considerable right-wing majority, three-quarters in 1986 when the rest of France voted 52 per cent for the right.
There is no question here of ‘the swing of the pendulum’.
It is rather comforting in a way.
Chesterton said that ‘tradition is the democracy of the dead’ but in France ‘the dead’get a seat in parliament, together with three secretaries each, interest-free loans, subsidised foreign travel and an income of about £40,000, half of which is tax free.
Those who attack the Senate say that it should be abolished, that it is useless and corrupt.
Those who defend it say that it repesents ‘an area of moderation and wisdom in French democracy’ and that both are sorely needed.
In fact the Senate is important, but for quite different reasons.
It does represent two fundamental political principles, the first is hierarchy, the second is influence, or ‘le piston’ as it is informally termed.
The average age of the senators is just under 70.
This is usually seen as a weakness but it is equally a strength.
For what else could so many well-connected old buffers do if not manoeuvre themselves into and around the Senate?
When French politicians achieve a certain dignity and experience, and lose a certain up-to-dateness, off they go to the Senate, where the marble floors of the National Assembly are replaced by thick carpets (softer when they fall over) and where the young are kept firmly in their place.
The Senate is notorious for closing ranks against any young politicians who try to use it as a springboard for something grander.
As for‘le piston’, it is true that three senators have been accused of fraud, bribery and tax evasion in the past three years, but they have all been cleared of these charges by other senators.
And since senators are elected for 9 years, it is natural that they should keep in close touch with the local councillors who elected them — they don't want to be completely forgotten.
And sitting, as they do, in parliament, but without real power, they are perfectly placed to intervene with ministers who are making decisions which might affect their own region.
A mayor who cultivates his senator has a hot line to the ministry, and can always find his niece a job with a pension.
A senator who cultivates his mayors will be given useful things to do and will be re-elected.
It is a beautiful relationship.
Without the Senate both hierarchy and influence would be seriously weakened in France, and that would leave a lot of people not knowing which way to turn.
France sends army into prisons
By SARAH LAMBERT
PARIS — A strike that threatens to paralyse France's prison service spread yesterday as more prison officers were recruited to the cause.
For the first time in the history of the service, army units have been sent in to maintain order in prisons, writes Sarah Lambert.
According to the justice ministry, staff at 70 of the country's 180 prisons are on strike, compared with 22 at the end of last week.
In France's biggest prison, Fleury-Merogis, outside Paris, 240 soldiers are now supervising 4,500 detainees.
In some prisons, inmates have shown solidarity with their jailers by refusing to return to their cells after exercise.
The prison officers want pay-parity with the police force.
The prison authorities refuse to accede to their demands and have issued 176 dismissal notices.
Striking workers at Peugeot plants in eastern France are refusing to abandon their week-long sit-in until the management agrees to negotiate on ways to end the five-week stoppage.
On Monday, the managing director, Jacques Calvet, met the unions for the first time but said there could be no discussion of pay until production was resumed.
Transkei forges a link with Mandela
From JOHN CARLIN in Umtata, Transkei
IF THERE is one person who clearly has no doubt that the South African government shall release Nelson Mandela, it is Nelson Mandela himself.
Plans are under way, it was confirmed yesterday, to build a home for him, evidently on his own instructions, here in the capital of the so-called Republic of Transkei.
So-called, because, except for Pretoria, no one in the world recognises the sovereignty of the Transkei, which is otherwise perceived to be simply a geographical region in the south-eastern corner of South Africa.
Mr Mandela's son, Makghatho, has been visiting his father at his prison house near Cape Town on a weekly basis for some months.
It is he who is making arrangements with the Transkei government to decide when and where the house is to be built.
The Transkei's military leader, Major General Bantu Holomisa, said yesterday that he had no objection to Mr Mandela setting up home in his territory.
All of which tends to confirm a belief that General Holomisa has advanced far on a scheme to forge an informal alliance with Mr Mandela and his organisation, the African National Congress.
The General has frequent contact with Winnie Mandela — and through her indirectly with her husband -as well as with the ANC leadership.
Recently, he has met the ANC president, Oliver Tambo.
His younger brother, who lives in the same house in Umtata, met Mr Mandela in August and subsequently travelled to ANC headquarters in Lusaka.
The plan, evidently, is to hoist Pretoria with its own petard.
The Transkei had ‘independence’ imposed upon it by South Africa in 1976 as part of a broader scheme to brush the whole racial problem under the carpet by packing off the black majority of the population to a series of impoverished rural ‘homelands’dotted around the country.
General Holomisa, the first black officer to graduate from the South African army's War College, must have seemed to be the perfect instrument, or stooge, of such a policy.
Pretoria was wrong on both counts.
Things have backfired and the ANC, previously reluctant out of principle to have anything to do with the Transkei, has pragmatically leapt to exploit the opportunity.
The possibility of the Transkei becoming a base of operations for the ANC does not, suddenly, seem far-fetched.
Not least if Mr Mandela means to live there.
With the full blessing of General Holomisa, who came to power in a coup in December 1987, the ANC held its biggest public meeting on Sunday in the Transkei since Pretoria deemed the organisation unlawful in 1960.
The occasion was provided by a funeral for a local tribal king who defected to the ANC in 1980.
Mr Mandela, himself a royal member of the Tembu tribe, had a big hand in organising the event, as the General, a dapper 34-year-old in a double-breasted silk suit, readily recognised in an interview at his office here.
Were relations between himself and the ANC warm?
‘In a nutshell: Yes.
But not only with the ANC, with all those fighting apartheid.
We must close ranks with them because we talk the same language.
We say: Don't reform apartheid.
Scrap it.’
Unlike the leaders of the other three ‘independent’ homelands — all toadies of Pretoria — he is more than ready to pour scorn on the fundamental fraudulence of the nation he purportedly leads.
‘In the end the stipends come from Pretoria,’ he said, noting that more than half the Transkeian budget came out of the South African coffers.
Clearly a man with a future in the politics of liberation, he concluded the interview with a flourish: ‘Transkei will be used to liberate the black people of South Africa.’
That was not what apartheid's engineers had in mind.
EC adopts guidelines to limit foreign television programmes
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
THE EUROPEAN Community yesterday adopted common guidelines for the content of television broadcasts, designed to limit programme imports from America and ensure minimum quality standards on private, including satellite, channels.
The agreement, reached at a meeting of foreign ministers in Luxembourg, will barely affect BBC and ITV programming but has more sweeping implications for nascent commercial companies as well as for the poorer public channels in southern Europe.
It is also likely to provoke at least a verbal protest from the United States, which has warned against any attempt to stem the flow of American programmes across the Atlantic.
However a mixture of careful diplomatic packaging and the vague nature of some of the key provisions make a confrontation with Washington unlikely.
The key clause asks that all EC governments ensure that a ‘majority proportion’ of programming broadcast by domestic television companies should be European-made.
This is tougher than it first looks as it does not cover news, sport, game-shows or teletext services.
Under British and West German pressure, however, ministers agreed that even this requirement should be regarded more as a ‘political objective’ than a legal obligation (the non-respect of which would lead to prosecution in the EC Court of Justice).
The ministers reached their agreement despite lingering differences over the toughness of the text.
In the event, Denmark and Belgium were alone in voting against.
France, meanwhile, would have liked tougher quotas, while Britain wanted no import limits at all.
The British Foreign Secretary, John Major, attending his first EC Council meeting, stressed that the undertaking to maintain a majority of European programmes was non-binding, and should therefore not cause offence to the US.
The directive was ostensibly conceived to ensure the free flow of programming across EC frontiers after 1992.
However since almost all domestic broadcasts spill over borders nearly all EC programming will be subject to the new guidelines.
Among the provisions is the understanding that any country will have the right to ban broadcasts that may ‘seriously impair the physical, mental or moral development of minors’.
There are also rules on the placing of advertising that will bring minor changes to British practice.
Party members in Poland want change of name
From ANNE APPLEBAUM in Warsaw
WITH ITS power and prestige slipping away and its leaders calling desperately for unity, 72 per cent of Polish Communists have voted to find a new name for their party, the Polish United Workers' Party.
At a meeting of the Party's Central Committee yesterday, a Politburo member, Leszek Miller, said that a nationwide plebiscite also showed that more than half of the Party's two million members agreed that ‘the present form of the party is outdated and cannot face the new conditions’.
Party members voted to give the organisation a more democratic structure.
These results came as no surprise.
Unused to internal democracy, party members continue to vote as their leadership obviously wishes them to vote.
The plenum agreed a date for the 11th party congress, on 27 January, and called for elections for congress delegates under new democratic rules.
The congress, which will be attended by up to 2,000 delegates, is intended to re-make the Party in a ‘European’ image, as Party spokesman Jan Bisztyga has said.
Leaving behind their Stalinist-era organisation and programme, Poland's Communists want to become a left-wing parliamentary party capable of winning elections.
‘If we remain in unity for three months then we will win the battle,’ said Mr Bisztyga at a briefing before yesterday's Central Committee plenum.
‘If the Party is destroyed, then the Polish left will cease to exist.’
Privately, not all of Poland's Communist leaders believe the pro-democracy forces at the Party's local level to be as strong as the survey indicated.
One Communist member of parliament said the results were ‘all very nice, if they are true’.
Like other reform-minded Communists in Warsaw, he finds he has less and less in common with the Party's local base.
Party leaders are concerned at the growing gap between Communists active in parliament in Warsaw, and those in the provinces who have been slow to catch on to the change.
In a recent editorial, the Communist daily Trybuna Ludu alluded to this problem, when it warned that ‘many comrades don't see the danger which has appeared in recent months’.
With local elections looming in the near future, Communist leaders in Warsaw are already fearing another serious loss, possibly even more humiliating than the loss to Solidarity in national elections last June.
East Germany blocks refugees' last escape route
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
EAST GERMANY yesterday effectively barred its citizens from Czechoslovakia, but agreed to allow the second wave of refugees crammed into the West German embassy in Prague to leave for the West.
The news that ‘for the time being’ they can only go to or through Czechoslovakia with a visa, left East Germans stunned.
Czechoslovakia was the last place they could travel to without restrictions.
Now their country has become a prison which they can only leave with special permission — a situation which is guaranteed to fuel bitterness and resentment against the hardline regime.
‘I can hardly believe it.
Who wants to celebrate (East Germany's 40th anniversary) on 7 October?’ said one East Berlin resident.
East Germans now have to wait for weeks or even months for replies to their applications for visas to Hungary, through which more than 31,000 have escaped since August.
The East German government clearly felt this was the only way it could agree to the departure of more than 5,000 East Germans who had flooded into the Prague embassy since the first batch were allowed to leave on Saturday night.
Rudolf Seiters, the head of the Bonn Chancellery, announcing the move last night, said he expected that 11,000 East Germans currently in Prague would join the special trains heading west.
East Germany is obviously reluctant to see a repetition of the situation, especially before the all-important 40th anniversary on Saturday.
Mr Seiters said he was convinced a similar solution will be found for the 250 refugees in the embassy in Warsaw.
In a clear sign of the tension in East Berlin where, as in Bonn, crisis meetings were held yesterday, the East German leader, Erich Honecker, refused to have a telephone conversation with Helmut Kohl, the West German Chancellor.
The refusal to talk, believed to have been decided in a meeting of the Politburo, contributed to renewed speculation here that Mr Honecker may no longer be in full control.
It was also noted that Wolfgang Vogel, the lawyer to whom Mr Honecker had given the task of solving the refugee problem, had had his mandate drastically cut back.
At the same time, there are reports that workers' militias had been used to cordon off streets during the demonstration in Leipzig on Monday night when some 10,000 people marched through the streets chanting ‘Gorby, Gorby’ and calling for the legalisation of the opposition group New Forum.
Workers' militias — factory workers who are supposed to defend the Socialist system against its enemies — are reportedly also being trained in various parts of the country to control demonstrations and arrest supporters of the opposition.
Walter Priesnitz, the state secretary in the Inter-German Ministry in West Germany said yesterday that he feared the situation inside East Germany could become explosive as the anniversary approached.
Jurgen Warnke, the deputy chairman of the right-wing Christian Social party warned that there could be violence and the whole East German security apparatus could be deployed to ensure the survival of the regime.
Several politicians, including the opposition Social Democrat leader, Hans-Jochen Vogel, urged the East Germans to reform before it was too late.
EC keen to reward East Bloc reform
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
FOREIGN ministers of the European Community lent enthusiastic support yesterday to a Commission plan to give Poland and Hungary food and financial aid worth $215m (£140m), together with loans worth up to £700m.
The plan was put forward in Brussels last week in line with the mandate to orchestrate the aid effort given to the European Commission at a meeting of 24 Western nations in Paris in July.
A second meeting of the 24, including the US, Japan, Canada and Australia, took place in Brussels 10 days ago.
In its proposal for short-term action, the Commission suggests a five-point programme focussing on giving both countries huge amounts of food aid and concessionary loans to assist with reform, especially in the farm sector.
Proceeds from the food aid would be directed into funding reform.
Management training and assistance with environmental protection would be made available, and steps would be taken further to open Western markets to Hungarian and Polish goods.
Among EC ministers most supportive of the Commission's plan yesterday was the British Foreign Secretary, John Major, attending his first EC Council meeting.
He stressed that the aid was in recognition of the moves in both countries toward economic reform and democracy.
‘It is a historic moment,’ he told journalists.
‘It is very exciting what is happening in these countries’.
In a statement, the foreign ministers said political and economic reforms in Poland and Hungary had made considerable progress but added: ‘The process remains fragile and could be called into question by economic problems.
Bearing in mind the need for Poland and Hungary to reach rapid agreement with international financial institutions, the Council (of ministers) recognises the urgent need for additional measures of support.’
Most significantly, Mr Major gave no sign of questioning the generous financial provisions of the proposed package.
The Commission wants £140m written into the EC's 1990 budget for the programme and suggests that an extra £300m be provided bilaterally by all the 24 donor states.
Moreover, it is proposing that funds managed by the EC's own loaning organisation, the European Investment Bank, should be made available to Hungary and Poland.
EIB money has never before been offered to Eastern Europe.
A final decision on the details of the EC's own contribution is expected at a meeting of EC finance ministers in Luxembourg next week.
The level of EIB loans could extend to £700m over three years.
The Foreign Secretary stressed, however, that aid on its own can never ensure reform is successfully carried through in the two countries.
‘We ought to be under no illusion that the success or otherwise of what is happening in Poland and Hungary will substantially rest upon the actions of the two governments,’ Mr Major said.
He hinted, however, that greater sums of money could be made available by the Community to Poland and Hungary after 1990.
‘I have little doubt that more help will be needed after next year,’ he said.
Britain has already announced it has extended a £25m ‘know-how’ fund to Poland to help it cope with reform.
Pravda assails Bonn on refugees
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
IN THE FIERCEST Soviet reaction yet to the East German refugee crisis, the Communist Party daily Pravda declared yesterday that Bonn's ‘open door’ policy at its embassies in Warsaw and Prague was creating a situation which threatened to destabilise all of central Europe.
‘West Germany's actions are utterly shortsighted,’ wrote Pravda in the guise of a ‘commentary’by its correspondent in East Berlin.
They were an ‘assault on the stability in the centre of Europe, in which every nation of our continent places its hopes’.
What the paper scathingly called the ‘story of the refugees’ had been whipped up by a ‘noisy propaganda campaign dripping with chauvinism and nationalism’.
And behind the West German media stood the country's politicians, nursing illusions about the recreation of a new ‘German Reich’ with the pre-war frontiers of 1937.
Such language is infinitely more virulent that anything emanating from the Soviet foreign ministry after the deal four days ago between Bonn and East Berlin, which allowed some some 5,000 East Germans who had taken shelter in the two embassies to leave unmolested for the West.
Hitherto its spokesmen have insisted that the affair was essentially one for East Germany to settle, albeit urging that West Germany must operate its embassies abroad ‘in conformity with standard international practice’.
To an extent, the anger is to be expected from a newspaper which has become a strident mouthpiece of conservative elements in the Kremlin leadership.
But its anxiety on this occasion surely reflects the worries of Mr Gorbachev himself, who is to take part in this weekend's celebrations in Berlin of the 40th anniversary of East German statehood.
For some while, the trip has had uncomfortable similarities to the Soviet leader's visit to China last May, when the presence of the man who incarnates reform in the Communist world served as a combustible in the ‘Peking Spring’ that was to be forcibly suppressed a fortnight later.
Like their counterparts in China four months ago, East German demonstrators are chanting Mr Gorbachev's name, while another 4,000 would-be refugees are choking the premises of Bonn's embassy in Prague.
It was no co-incidence, said Pravda yesterday, that this ‘giant provocation’ from the West Germans had coincided with the East Germany's anniversary.
Battle chic
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
PARIS — The French Army, fatigued by khaki, is to get a new ‘modular’ uniform designed by Pierre Balmain and made up in a grey-blue colour known as Terre de France.
The Defence Minister, Jean-Pierre Chevenement, described it as ‘tres elegant’.
Rebels give up
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
DHAKA (Reuter)— Thirty-five Shanti Bahini tribal rebels in Bangladesh's Chittagong Hill Tracts surrendered during a month-long amnesty that included offers of land, money and jobs for those giving up.
Etna tremors
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
CATANIA (AFP)— Powerful new tremors shook Sicily's Mount Etna, increasing the danger that three villages in the path of flowing lava would be engulfed.
Back to barracks
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
SUVA (AP)— Major General Sitiveni Rabuka, leader of Fiji's two military coups, said he was returning to the army rather than accept the post of civilian deputy prime minister.
Turkey visas
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
ANKARA (Reuter)— Turkey will require British citizens to have entry visas from 1 November.
Britain cancelled a 1960 no-visa agreement in June and imposed entry visas for all Turks after more than 1,500 Turks flew to Britain and applied for political asylum.
Peru inflation
Foreign News Page 12
Political deaths
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
GUATEMALA CITY (Efe)— At least 18 people, including two children, were murdered in four days in a mounting wave of political violence in Guatemala.
President Vinicio Cerezo has blamed the killings on right-wing extremists trying to destabilise his government.
Strike call
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
JERUSALEM — The Unified Leadership of the Uprising, in a sudden hardening of the 21-month-old intifada, distributed a leaflet calling for general strikes in the occupied West Bank and Gaza strip on five days during the next week, beginning on Thursday.
Police evidence
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
CAPE TOWN (AP)— Lieutenant Gregory Rockman of the South African police, speaking at the trial of two white colleagues, testified that riot squad members with whips and clubs attacked peaceful demonstrators like a ‘pack of wild dogs’ at an anti-government protest on 5 September in the Mitchell's Plain township.
He said he witnessed repeated instances of police brutality in August and early September, when activists held almost daily demonstrations in townships outside Cape Town.
Apartheid talks
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
JOHANNESBURG (Reuter)— A French human rights group has invited South African government officials and exiled African National Congress leaders to meet in Paris on 20 November to discuss reform of apartheid, the South African newspaper, Business Day, reported.
The French embassy said the conference was a private initiative by the France Liberte Foundation, run by Danielle Mitterrand, wife of the French President.
Extradition of Marks seems close
By TIM MCGIRK
MADRID — Howard Marks, the Briton accused by US police of being the ‘Marco Polo’ who led an international ring of hashish smugglers, yesterday took one step closer towards extradition to the US, where he faces up to 113 years in jail, Tim McGirk writes.
A Madrid criminal court yesterday rejected Mr Marks' appeal for a re-trial of his extradition hearing.
His lawyers are protesting to the constitutional court, but if Spain's highest legal body refuses the appeal of Mr Marks he will be sent to stand trial in Florida.
Los Angeles plans to stop slowly choking to death: John Lichfield, in Los Angeles, finds out how California's biggest city intends to reverse 20 years of lax pollution control with an assault on its ‘drive-in’ lifestyle
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Los Angeles
SOUTHERN California is high-octane America; more self-confident, more optimistic, more prosperous, even more self-regarding than the other 49 states.
A bumper sticker on the San Diego Freeway speaks with the authentic, sunny voice of greater Los Angeles: ‘People are fantastic.
Business is booming.
Life is wonderful.’
But, despite 20 years of desultory pollution control, southern California has also become heavy-tar America (complete with government health warnings).
One day in two, judged by federal standards, the soft California air is not fit to breathe.
On any day, many of the lovely blue Pacific waves are not fit to swim, or surf, in.
The freeways are crowded and crumbling.
Los Angeles is the archetypal 20th-century conurbation.
Since the turn of the century, it has grown from 50,000 people to 14 million.
In the process it invented mass entertainment, the 10-lane freeway and smog.
LA now plans to become the first conurbation in the world to grapple comprehensively with the most pressing international problem of the next century: how to remain prosperous without choking to death.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District is a body with considerable powers over greater LA.
Earlier this year, after five years of agonising, it published the LA Plan, a document 5,500 pages long and a yard thick.
The Plan laid out a 123-point, three-stage strategy to make the air of Los Angeles 70 per cent cleaner by 2009.
The Plan amounted, according to the critics, to a declaration of war on the southern Californian way of life, assaulting everything from drive-in movies to Burger Kings and, most of all, automobiles.
Under the Plan, by 1998, 40 per cent of the cars in the region must run on methanol or other ‘clean’ fuels.
By 2008 all new cars, and lawnmowers, must run on alternative fuels or electric motors of a kind not yet invented.
Companies will be punished unless they give their employees financial incentives to commute by bus, car-pool, or by rapid-transit rail lines not yet built.
Restrictions will be placed on drive-in cinemas, banks, hamburger restaurants and, presumably, LA's solitary drive-through church.
New, less polluting designs will be required for a cornucopia of products made or sold in the city, ranging from aerosol sprays to roll-on deodorants, and paints and varnishes.
Non-radial tyres, which apparently launch miniscule fragments of rubber into the atmosphere, will be banned.
Breweries, bakeries and many other businesses will be forced to invest in new, cleaner machinery.
Some fast food restaurants will be obliged to install costly emission-control vents.
Back-garden barbecues will be barred from using chemical starter fluids.
To its critics, the Plan conjures a grim vision of a future in which the home of the Beach Boys, fresh air and freedom becomes a battle-ground between suffocating fumes and suffocating regulations.
Michael Antonovich, Los Angeles County Supervisor, was one of two members of the 14-man air management board to vote against the Plan.
‘Isn't it ironic?’ he said.
‘The Soviet Union and China are marching towards the open market and here we are, in southern California, the home of Ronald Reagan, talking about tying the economy down with a maze of petty regulations…
We should be looking for a market-based solution to our problems, not snooping in people's backyards to check out what kind of barbecue they are using.’
Jim Lents, executive officer of the Air Managment District, and one of the main architects of the Plan, responded: ‘The plan does involve an element of changing the life-style of southern California.
But the population of greater LA is projected to rise from 14 million to 19 million in the next two decades.
Our present life-style can't survive that kind of increase anyway.
It's questionable whether it's surviving now.
Either we make some sacrifices…or we gradually choke in our own dirt.’
The LA Plan has direct implications, practical and political, for the rest of the country, and the rest of the world.
The approach may well serve as a model for similar projects in other US conurbations.
The kind of technological developments demanded by the Plan, from new types of automobile propulsion to reformulated hair-sprays, will heavily influence technical research and development around the globe.
(LA is the biggest market in California; California is the biggest market in the US; the US is the biggest market in the world).
The Plan has already been approved by the state environment authorities and is likely to be approved shortly by the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington.
It was a series of financial penalties imposed by Washington for manifold breaches of the 1977 Clean Air Act which forced the LA authorities to formulate such an epic approach in the first place.
Some local politicians, led by Mr Antonovich, are threatening to block the necessary implementing regulations.
Attempts will be made to tag a Proposition (referendum) rejecting the Plan on to next year's congressional and state elections.
Mr Antonovich points out that air pollution in Los Angeles has been declining for a decade.
Why the need for such an ambitious plan now?
‘It's the last hoorah of the economic regulators,’ he said.
‘They lost the government spending argument in the late Seventies and Eighties, now they're trying the environmental route.’
On a good day the climate in LA is close to perfection: it is possible to understand what brought all these millions to a vast, waterless, resourceless basin, between the mountains, the desert and the sea.
But Dr Lents says the blue skies and soft breezes are misleading.
‘Sure, we have made some progress,’ he said.
‘The air is 15 per cent cleaner than it was a decade ago.
If nothing is done, the regulations already passed will continue improving air quality until the mid-1990s but then the growth in population, and car numbers, will send pollution rising again, indefinitely.’
The Plan requires a radical change in the structure but also the culture of the city.
In Greater Los Angeles area there are 7.5 million registered drivers and 8 million cars.
Scraps of the local railway system, which died in the 1930s, can be seen imbedded in Los Angeles boulevards like fragments of a lost civilisation.
At least 150 miles of new rapid transit and underground railways are envisaged in the next 20 to 30 years.
The first 4.4 miles from downtown Los Angeles towards Hollywood, under construction since 1986, is due to open in September 1993.
But how do you persuade the people of a drive-in city to cast aside their cars and walk, if only to the station?
Such are the present problems, Mr Lents believes, that it will be possible to persuade and coerce Angelenos to commute to work by train, bus or shared car.
‘But the real difficulty arises with leisure and shopping journeys…it's almost impossible, at present, to go shopping or to the beach or to a restaurant in LA without going by car…
To change that will be difficult.’
Britain concerned at Trident missile delays
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
BRITAIN has launched a significant lobbying campaign on Capitol Hill, including letters to Congressmen from the British ambassador, Sir Antony Acland, in an effort to prevent delays in the US Trident D-5 nuclear missile programme.
Britain is due to have four submarines armed with the new Tridents but has been worried that recent votes in the Senate to cut funding for production of the missile could delay delivery of the weapons, scheduled to start next year, to the Royal Navy.
The US Navy, distraught at the prospect of having its own timetable for deploying the new missile delayed by budget cuts, has emphasised that relations with Britain could be affected if the money is not restored.
Admiral Carlisle Trost, the chief of naval operations, has warned Congressmen in a letter that any cuts could result in a ‘significant potential for strained relations with the United Kingdom’.
Sir Antony, in a letter to Senator John Warner, who is the leading Republican on the Senate armed services committee, said that ‘any withholding of productive funding…would have a knock-on effect which could delay the arrival of the first missiles for the Royal Navy, and continue to impose time and cost penalties on the British Trident programme’.
Last month, the Senate appropriations committee passed a bill that would cut $1.8bn (£1.1bn) from the Trident D-5 programme, which has experienced a number of embarrassing failures in tests of the weapon.
Two sea tests, one in March and one in August, failed.
A second sea test in August was a success.
The budget cuts would mean significant delays in 1990 production of missiles, a handful of which are due to be sold to Britain.
An effort to restore half of the production funds failed in the full Senate.
Last summer, the House of Representatives passed a bill funding the full $1.8bn requested by the Navy, but the vote was taken before the second sea test failure.
The chairman of the House defence sub-committee, John Murtha, a Democrat from Pennsylvania, has indicated that he is open to the kind of budget cuts made in the Senate because of the continued restraints on total military spending.
‘Something like the D-5 could fall out (of the budget),’ Mr Murtha said.
The issue is now being considered in a House-Senate conference.
Officially, Britain is keen to present its lobbying effort as a ‘gentlemanly exercise’ that falls in behind those being conducted by the American Navy, by the Lockheed Corporation, which is making the D-5, and also by the White House.
British officals have to tread a fine line between registering the ‘UK dimension’, as they call it, in the Trident debate, and not offending Congressmen by being too heavy-handed.
The stern warning from Admiral Trost about possible effects on the special relationship between the United States and Britain came as a surprise to British officials.
In his letter to Congressmen, Admiral Trost added that if the budget cuts were sustained ‘there will be a catastrophic impact on the Trident programme’ that would involve losses of nuclear deterrent capability ‘for many years’.
Coup attempt highlights corruption in Panama
By ISABEL HILTON, Latin America Editor
HAD GENERAL Manuel Noriega been overthrown by rebel troops, it would have meant the end of a two-year political crisis that has wrecked Panama's economy and brought political embarrassment and frustration to the United States.
It began in 1987 when civil disorder erupted in Panama after the general's second-in-command publicly accused him of drug-trafficking, electoral fraud and the murder of an opposition politician.
The US government, which had supported General Noriega in his ascent to power, openly backed the opposition.
A two-year stand-off between the two governments followed.
US officials said the general would fall quickly, but he has proved a resilient and cunning opponent.
He has played on Panamanian nationalism to exploit resentment at US interference in Panamanian affairs and met charge with counter-charge.
In February last year, the then president, Eric Arturo Delvalle, backed by the United States, tried to fire General Noriega as chief of the Panamanian Defence Force, but was himself swiftly replaced by another Noriega puppet.
The US continued to recognise Mr Delvalle and imposed economic sanctions on Panama.
In March 1988, a group of junior officers attempted a coup.
It failed, and the general purged the armed forces and created a power structure that strengthened his supporters' hold on the military.
As US officials produced evidence of his involvement in drug trafficking and appealed for support from other Latin American countries in their campaign to oust him, their case was weakened by evidence that the US had been an important supporter in the general's rise to power and that the CIA had known about his trafficking for years.
Worse were the revelations that the CIA tolerated his activities and had continued to pay him $200,000 (£125,000) a year for at least 10 years.
At the same time, General Noriega had been flirting with the Soviet Union and, according to US intelligence sources, continues to receive arms from Moscow.
In spite of the sharp recession induced by US economic sanctions, General Noriega has played a skilful game of counter-propaganda.
He accused the US of attempting to destabilise him in order to revoke the Panama Canal treaty — signed by the former US president, Jimmy Carter, and the then strongman of Panama, General Omar Torrijos — under which control of the canal passes to Panama in the year 2000.
Attempts at negotiation between the US and General Noriega, formally indicted on drug trafficking charges in the US in February 1988, failed.
Presidential elections were held last May and the opposition candidate, Guillermo Endara, is believed to have won by a large majority, but the elections were annulled by the general amid renewed protests.
President Bush ordered 2,000 US troops to Panama in May, to reinforce the 10,000 troops based in the Canal Zone.
Although the option of US military intervention has often been canvassed, it has always officially been discounted.
The last hope of a mediated solution fell when the Organisation of American States failed to reach a constitutional solution before the formal expiry of the presidential term in September.
On 1 September, the general reaffirmed his defiance of US pressure by naming another of his collaborators, Francisco Rodriguez, as president.
UNITED NATIONS — Panama's provisional president barely touched on the military upheaval in his country yesterday in a 30-minute address to the General Assembly which was heavily critical of US policy towards Panama, Reuter reports.
In his only digression from prepared remarks, Francisco Rodriguez said: ‘The government today has had to control a new attempt at subversion frustrated by the will of our people and of our armed forces to wage struggle.’
He added: ‘The printed text which I'm delivering to the assembly today does not include the most recent examples of US action in my country.’
Vultures discover dark side of Disney
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
DISNEY WORLD, home to Mickey Mouse, 101 Dalmatians and all manner of furry creatures, has been charged with beating wild vultures to death and illegally trapping other protected birds.
The vultures began the trouble by congregating in their hundreds to scavenge at Discovery Island, Disney World's 11-acre wildlife sanctuary near Orlando, Florida.
‘They were a hazard to the Galapagos turtles, they were attacking the sand cranes and also the brown pelicans we brought in from the wild because they were injured,’ said John Dreyer, for Disney World.
So in May Disney obtained permission to move 100 of the bald, hunch-backed and unruly birds 60 miles away.
But after a four-month investigation, the State has charged that the methods used were abusive, worthy only of Cruella de Vil, Walt Disney's Dalmatian-murdering villain.
Nineteen of the birds died and others among the 149 moved were mistreated.
Disney initially claimed the vultures died while in a holding shed in which the ventilation system failed.
But witnesses later said they saw employees beating at least some of the birds to death, while the report found that the shed, which could properly hold only three birds, had been packed with 72.
Although common in Florida, the black vulture is a protected bird and so should be welcome at Discovery Island.
In fact, investigators found that migratory owls, falcons, hawks and ibises have been trapped at the sanctuary.
The company has now hired a consultant ornithologist, an interim manager and an advisory board for Discovery Island — all of whom have blue-chip animal rights credentials.