

Law Report: English proceedings over ancient art work stayed: Cleveland Museum of Art v Capricorn Art International SA and another —Queen's Bench Division (Commercial Court)(Mr Justice Hirst), 2 October 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
An overseas company dealing in works of art which used premises in London for viewing and storing works of art and controlled access to a secure vault at the premises had an established place of business in Great Britain on the premises, although other works of art not belonging to the company were also on the premises and no outward sign of the company, such as a nameplate, was displayed on the premises.
The company had therefore been properly served with English proceedings by an American museum in Ohio, but since the Ohio court was the more appropriate forum for the trial of disputes between the parties, the English action would be stayed.
Mr Justice Hirst ordered a stay of English proceedings brought against the first defendant.
The first defendant, Capricorn, a company registered in Panama, was the owner of a valuable reliquary which was an important piece of ancient Pakistan art of the Gandhara period, dating from the first century AD.
The reliquary was a fine specimen of that type of art and of very good quality and in fine condition.
Part of the reliquary consisted of a gold inscription plaque which referred to the fourteenth year of a particular Gadhara king, enabling the experts to date it precisely.
The reliquary was held by Capricorn in a secure vault at an address in St John's Wood, north London, which belonged to an associate company of Capricorn.
The house was occupied as the London residence of an art dealer.
Capricorn, giving that address, had placed insurance policies at Lloyd's up to £1.1m for a wide variety of categories of objects of art.
Capricorn agreed to loan the reliquary for display at an exhibition in Ohio, USA.
In September 1985, the second defendant collected the reliquary and packed it for shipment to the plaintiff, Cleveland Museum of Art.
After it was unpacked the plaque was found to be missing.
In 1987, Capricorn commenced proceedings in Ohio against the museum and the second defendant for negligence in handling the reliquary, claiming $400,000, representing the dimunition of value of the reliquary minus the plaque.
The proceedings had gone through interlocutory stages for two years.
The second defendant had notified the Ohio court it would decline to submit to the jurisdiction.
In 1989, the museum began English proceedings against Capricorn, with the object of forcing Capricorn to abandon its claim in Ohio.
The museum claimed that Capricorn or the second defendant, as Capricorn's agent, was responsible for the loss of the plaque.
The writ was served at the London address on the basis that it constituted a place of business established by Capricorn as an overseas company in Great Britain, rendering such service valid under section 695 of the Companies Act 1985, Capricorn had not registered the name and address of a person authorised to accept service.
Capricorn applied for the service of the writ to be set aside on the ground that the London address did not consitute a place of business in Great Britain or that if service was good, Capricorn sought a stay on the ground of lis alibi pendens in Ohio.
Simon Tuckey, QC, and Sarah Harman (Elborne Mitchell) for Capricorn; Nicholas Stewart, QC, and David Halpern (Reynolds Porter Chamberlain) for the museum.
MR JUSTICE HIRST said that the criteria in determining whether an overseas company had established a place of business in Great Britain were summarised in Palmers' Company Law, 24th edn (1987) page 1658.
Further, a visible sign or physical indication was not essential, though its absence was a factor to be taken into account: Re Oriel (1986) 1 WLR 180.
Evaluating the evidence, it demonstrated substantial storage by Capricorn of works of art on the premises in London.
The second defendant had made a large number of deliveries to and collections from the premises on Capricorn's account.
It was clear that the premises were used for viewing works of art stored there by Capricorn and that it controlled access to the vault.
The address on the insurance policy was also consistent with the premises being Capricorn's established business premises.
Storage and viewing were very important aspects of an art dealer's business.
The museum had demonstrated a sufficiently substantial scale of those two activities to make good its case that Capricorn had an established place of business on the premises.
The fact that other works of art not belonging to Capricorn were also on the premises did not affect that conclusion: nor did the absence of any outward sign of Capricorn on the premises have any significance, since it would be uncharacteristic for art dealers in objects of such high quality to place conspicuous nameplates on their premises.
It followed that the service of the writ was good service.
Turning to the stay of proceedings, the principles which applied were enshrined in The Abidin Daver (1984) AC 398 and The Spiliada (1987) AC 460.
There were a numbers of factors which pointed strongly in favour of Ohio as the more appropriate forum for the trial of the disputes.
The case had been under way in Ohio for more than two years and was now ready for trial.
Capricorn had already expended $75,000 in legal costs in those proceedings.
The law of Ohio was the proper law of the loan agreement.
Ohio was the more convenient forum for the witnesses.
Capricorn's choice of venue in Ohio was in all respect appropriate.
While it would have been preferable if the second defendant participated in the trial in Ohio, and that was a consideration to be taken into account on forum conveniens, that factor was insufficient to outweigh the other factors.
Further, pursuit of the English action would result in substantial additional expense, inconvenience and delay of the kind described in The Abidin Daver.
Following the approach ordained in The Spiliada, the Ohio court was another available forum, having competent jurisdiction, which was the more appropriate forum for the trial of the action.
Capricorn's application for a stay of the English action would be granted.
The Labour Party Conference: Executive votes show desire for unity
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
THE BED-ROCK culture of the Labour Party is shifting towards an emphasis on loyalty and unity, according to an analysis of constituency party voting for Labour's national executive.
The significance of the defeat on Monday of Ken Livingstone, Brent East MP, could only be calculated for the first time yesterday when the detailed voting figures were published.
The left-wing former GLC leader said yesterday that left-wing opposition to the leadership remained strong.
But he accepted that his defeat revealed ‘a general reluctance’ in the party to see that opposition voiced too vehemently in public.
Mr Livingstone argued that the move towards unity was merely the normal pre-election loyalty which the party usually showed; the only difference this time was that it was happening 18 months earlier than normal.
But the Labour Co-ordinating Committee said that there was clear evidence of a cultural change.
‘The oppositionist politics of the 1970s and early 1980s are over.
People want national executive members who are independent of the leadership, but not destructively critical,’ Mike Craven, its vice-chairman, said.
Between 30 and 50 per cent of constituency management committees voluntarily consulted their full membership before casting their votes.
The evidence showed, according to Mr Craven, that wherever individual party members were given the one member, one vote opportunity to voice their views, they rejected the hard left.
‘There can be no doubt now that one member, one vote ballots will become compulsory.’
Mr Livingstone agreed that the spread of individual ballots had undermined his vote.
‘I would have survived if one member, one vote had not been introduced in the constituency section,’ he said.
Its extension would now oblige the left to find new ways of campaigning among party members, because they tended to cast their votes according to what they saw on television.
But the most convincing demonstration of the spread of change is that support was withdrawn from Mr Livingstone in every part of the country except London.
His vote was more than halved in the party's northern region, and nearly halved in both Yorkshire and the north-west.
But even in the eastern region Mr Livingstone lost 10 constituencies more than last year, and in the southern region he lost 20 more.
The Labour Party Conference: Kinnock hails party as fit for government: ‘We will keep on winning with no wheeling, no dealing, no horse-trading and no electoral pacts’
By JUDY JONES and STEPHEN GOODWIN
NEIL KINNOCK yesterday hailed the Labour conference as a celebration of party unity and a demonstration to the electorate that the party was fit to govern Britain.
In his keynote speech, the Labour leader said it was an inspiration to see the party working together in support of its policy objectives.
‘It is not an empty claim to say that this conference is one of progress, indeed one of celebration, not of relaxation or complacency.’
The party was ‘not only telling itself, but exuding to the British public the feeling that we are fit to serve our country’, he said.
Its advances in the local and European elections this year had shown the tide was turning towards Labour.
Increasingly, the Prime Minister was seen by the public to be working against political trends, both at home and abroad.
‘Margaret Thatcher shows that she is from the Greta Garbo school of diplomacy: ‘I want to be alone.’
It's not splendid isolation, or cunning or sagacity.
It's a fundamental failure to perceive and secure Britain's role in a rapidly changing world.
‘She is out of touch, out of date and out of step with the British people.
We are in step.’
Mr Kinnock opened his leader's speech with a forthright rejection of the idea of electoral pacts being mooted by David Owen, leader of the SDP.
In by-elections, county elections and in the European Parliament elections, the public, he said, was telling Labour: ‘You are doing the right thing.
Keep on doing it.’
‘We will keep on because it is the winning way.
It is the best way to serve the people we want to stand up for.
And we will keep on winning with no wheeling, no dealing, no horse-trading and no electoral pacts.’
Labour would go on getting the public's support by constructing strong unity of purpose and by its conduct as ‘a serious, socialist, self-disciplined party’, Mr Kinnock told delegates.
The policy review had produced ‘relevant and practical’ answers that offered the kind of socialism the British people understood and supported.
It was the kind of socialism that insisted the NHS was not split up or sold off, that resented the injustice of the poll tax, and opposed the centralisation, control and censorship which had eroded civil liberties over the last 10 years.
He predicted the Conservatives would hit back with personal attacks on Labour leaders, by ordering civil servants to waste time trying to ‘cost’ the party's programmes and then, next week at Blackpool, with ‘the Team’.
At the back of the stage would be the new Tory slogan —‘The Right Team for the Future’.
‘Margaret Thatcher's team — that's a bit of confusion in terms isn't it.
Like David Owen's legions.’
Delighting delegates, Mr Kinnock likened the Cabinet to a team of sled dogs.
‘They bound along, eager and unquestioning across the icy wastes with the driver with the whip over them saying ‘mush, mush’.
And you know with huskies, if one of them drops dead, the rest of them eat him.
That's Tory team spirit.’
Mocking Mrs Thatcher's claim that Conservative policies had achieved an economic miracle, Mr Kinnock said after 10 years with oil revenues not enjoyed by any of Britain's competitors, the country had 2 million unemployed, the highest inflation, highest interest rates and biggest balance of payments deficit of the industrialised countries.
Worse still was the Tories' refusal year after year to make the essential commitment to the productive base of the economy — education and training, research and development, science, transport and communication.
‘The result of that was certain to be an unbalanced economy, under-equipped, under-skilled, inflating and increasingly importing.
Britain was bound to become a place of paralysing congestion in some parts, of miserable underdevelopment in others, a place of inefficiency, and because of the refusal to make public investment, a place of considerable danger too, for the travelling public and people working in those industries as we have seen so tragically demonstrated.’
Mr Kinnock predicted that by 1992 and the advent of the single European market, the pound would be part of the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
Britain would be in an open economic zone and subject to even more direct competition from economies which had made a much stronger commitment to skills, research, science and transport.
‘So that is the mess they are going to leave us, because some time before the completion of the single market, we shall have a Labour government.’
Every in-coming Labour government had inherited a mess from the Tories, Mr Kinnock said.
But he warned the next would be bigger and would bear directly on what a Labour government could do.
‘We are therefore going to have to be very deliberate in the choice of priorities.
And, having chosen them, we are going to have to stick to those priorities — and we will.’
There was ‘no single solve-all strategy that can catapult Britain to economic strength’, he said.
It had got to be worked for.
A Labour government would start to do what the Tories should have done in the oil-rich years.
‘We are going to start to combat the transport congestion and make the investment in communications without which commercial Britain will judder to an expensive and dangerous halt in a very few years.
‘We are going to build up the commitment to science, because if we carry on like the Tories are, Britain will be pushed down to the second or third division of industrial nations.
‘We are going to develop inducements and encouragements for a major expansion of research and development, because if we are going to rival our major competitors we have a long way to go in catching up with them.
‘Most importantly of all, we have got to increase the quality and the quantity of skills training and we have to make a new commitment to education.’
Education and training were now ‘the commanding heights of every modern economy’, Mr Kinnock declared.
Britain needed an economy of all the talents.
He said said the Government was keeping interest rates high because it did not know what else to do.
‘What they will be hoping for is that they can get to a few months before before the next election, take the brakes off and try to deceive the people once again things are back on course.
It won't work.
It won't work for political reasons — it's one con-trick too far.’
Everyone with a mortgage realised the Government's economic strategy was not working, he said.
Moreover, opinion polls suggested that huge majorities opposed the sale of the water and electricity industries.
The reasons were simple: ‘The British people are opposed to the sell-offs because they are more socially-responsible, more community-minded, more far-sighted, more patriotic than the Government that governs them.
‘Privatisation of electricity and water also puts a hole straight through the Government's claim to be guardians of the environment.
This government cannot prove green credentials simply by moving Nick Ridley and replacing him with Patten, a much better public relations person, the slick following the Nick.’
For the Tories to have any credibility as trustees of the environment they would have to have to change the whole basis of their philosophy.
Market sovereignty ‘the central canon of Thatcherism’ was incompatible with the investment in research and the co-operation that were essential to the conservation of the environment.
Labour would implement environmentally-progressive policies and press for reductions and possibly cancellations in third world debt.
This would help ensure the poorer countries did not repeat the environmental mistakes of the northern hemisphere as they pursued economic development.
Setting out Labour's case for international co-operation to strengthen world security and combat environmental degradation, Mr Kinnock said: ‘It is an argument for global citizenship — a recognition of the fact that in the world now and for the future, passive co-existence is not enough.
Active co-operation to defeat common problems is essential to environmental security for every country.’
Labour sought to play a role in achieving those goals.
‘We seek the power in order to do all that, to stop being spectators and start being negotiators, to take our country off the sidelines and put it in the mainstream of advance where it should rightly be.
That is what we shall do.’
Turning to the dramatic developments in East European countries, the Labour leader warned that the taste of freedom their people had been yearning for would turn sour unless they gained material advancement.
‘Those countries therefore have to make the leap from the command economy to the market economy, from the single party state to pluralism.
It is essential therefore that the West, and especially the countries of the European Community, give their support.’
The Labour Party Conference: NEC compromise on black sections defeated
By JOHN PIENAAR and JUDY JONES
NEIL KINNOCK'S fragile compromise on black representation was rejected by the Labour conference yesterday, threatening to prolong the internal conflict with black activists through the run-up to the next general election.
The leadership proposals — for an ethnic minority-led socialist society open to white voting members, and a future national executive seat — crumbled under pressure from supporters and opponents of separate ‘black sections’ at every level.
It left the Labour hierarchy acknowledging frankly that the long-running dispute had ended in stalemate, and with no clear plan for achieving a generally acceptable constitutional formula.
Yesterday's debate was dominated by black sections supporters who derided the compromise notion of a mixed-race ‘black and white minstrels’ society.
The outcome turned on the block votes of union delegations at opposite ends of the conflict; for and against establishing a separate body.
Or, in the case of the GMB general workers' union, backing an alternative federal grouping of ethnic minority organisations.
A call to implement an earlier proposal for a blacks-only society, amended by the leadership, was defeated by 3,363,000 to 2,715,000 Black activists were heartened by the support of the TGWU for a blacks-only body.
The union abstained on the NEC proposals.
But right-wing delegations, such as the AEU engineering union, came down against any ‘segregated’ affiliate.
Afterwards, Bernie Grant, the black Labour MP for Tottenham and chairman of the parliamentary black caucus, called for talks with Neil Kinnock to discuss a new compromise in which white members would join the organisation with no voting rights.
‘Next year could be the last conference before an election, and we don't want another debacle,’ he said.
Marc Wadsworth, the black sections national organiser, said: ‘We can live with a long struggle.
But it won't be good for the party.’
Narendra Makanji, the black sections' chairman, added that the unofficial organisation would continue to recruit locally, while campaigning to tilt the balance in trade unions such as the GMB.
In the conference hall, the debate was vitriolic, with only Jack Rogers, whose NEC working party proposed the mixed race organisation, defending the leadership's line.
Jatin Haria, national secretary of the unofficial black sections organisation, branded the NEC compromise the ‘choc-ice proposal — a thin coating of Uncle Tom black around a slab of white power.’
Wilbert Hayes, of Brent South, declared: ‘No black worth his or her salt would touch such a black and white merry-go-round.
We are losing votes by the bucketful because black people feel they are being abandoned by this party.’
The attack was stepped up by Raghib Ahsan, of Birmingham Ladywood, who told the conference: ‘We are offered scraps from the masters’ table, and hungry as we are for black representation, our response must be to spit them out.’
Many speakers highlighted the apparent paradox of a party which gave its blessing to separate internal organisations for both women and young people, but which denied the same privilege to its black members.
Mr Rogers, for the NEC, insisted that the leadership's blueprint for black representation was a sincere attempt to resolve the issue.
‘We have to recognise the strong feelings among black and white people that the party should not set up an organisation which is racially exclusive, and could be seen as a form of apartheid.’
The Labour Party Conference: Women ‘turning backs on Tories’
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
A PROFOUND shift away from the Tory Party among women voters was taking place, but many women still believed the Labour Party was too male-dominated, Clare Short warned the conference yesterday.
Ms Short, the Labour MP for Birmingham Ladywood, gave the warning as the conference agreed to give women a higher profile in the party with a 40 per cent quota for women on all party committees and local party delegations.
Ms Short said the women's vote could help Labour to win the next general election provided more women could be persuaded that Labour was sensitive to women's demands.
She said a majority of women had voted Tory since they got the right to vote, but a profound shift was now taking place.
An opinion survey by the party's communications group showed women had significantly different political views from men.
Women saw British society as too unequal, too competitive, too materialistic and too greedy.
Women wanted more equality, more social services, fewer weapons and less pollution.
But Ms Short added: ‘Women share our values but we are seen by these women as male dominated and the most unsympathetic of all the parties.
This debate should recognise our concern to put this right with more women at all levels.’
But some women campaigners later protested that the debate, chaired by David Blunkett, had been rigged to silence their objections.
Glenys Ingham of Deptford constituency women's section said: ‘Some of us feel very angry about the way the system of submitting speakers’ cards is being used to stop us being called.’
Several of the women who spoke in the debate represented trade unions.
They strongly denied that changes would be used to ensure that women's organisations were union-dominated.
But the protestors insisted that quotas would create ‘a caucus for careerists’.
The results of a card vote will be announced today on a proposal by the NEC for the creation of a Labour women's committee.
The Parliamentary Labour Party has agreed to enhance the chances of women getting onto the Shadow Cabinet in the next elections in November.
It has increased the number of seats by three to 18 and will require that the MPs vote for at least three women.
The Labour Party Conference: Paths out of poverty defined by Smith
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
LABOUR delegates were warned yesterday that the party would lack electoral credibilty if it promised increases in public spending which could only be met by higher borrowing or taxes.
Underlining last weekend's commitment by John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, to control spending, Giles Radice, MP for Durham North, told the conference that properly financed public spending was not only good economics, but good politics.
Voters had to be certain Labour's programmes were properly costed.
‘If we allow public spending to grow consistently faster than growth in output, then either public borrowing has to be increased or taxation,’ he said during a debate on the policy review report Economic Equality.
‘John Smith was right to tell the country that a Labour government will only spend what it can afford.
This commitment brings credibility to our social programmes and adds to Labour's electability.’
Opening the debate, Mr Smith did not return to this theme but dwelt on ‘the pathways out of poverty’ proposed in the review, notably the introduction of a statutory minimum wage and the restoration of a link between pensions and average earnings.
Initially the minimum wage would be 50 per cent of male median earnings.
Mr Smith said this first step would benefit some 4 million employees of which 80 per cent were women.
‘Our aim is to raise low wages in Britain over time so that the lowest-paid worker will receive an hourly rate not less than two-thirds of that received by the male median full-time worker.’
If the 50 per cent minimum were in force today, no worker would get less than £112 a week.
Mr Smith said ‘market forces’ meant, for example, a 25-year-old shop worker in Liverpool earning just £40 a week or a 35-year-old travel agent's employee in the Midlands being paid just £1.11 per hour.
‘The Conservatives may reject the idea of ‘a decent wage’.
But can't they recognise that these are examples of indecent wages that should be considered illegal and unacceptable in a civilised society?’
Pensioners, children, and people with disabilities were the groups with the first claim for an urgent improvement in benefits under Labour, Mr Smith said.
Supporting the pensions proposal, Alan Tuffin, general secretary of the Union of Communication Workers, said the Government had saved over £16bn by breaking the link with earnings.
‘I say to any pensioner in this hall or watching on the television, you have personally been robbed of over £2,000.
‘Since Mrs Thatcher came to power, the current weekly loss for a married couple by that callous act is £17.50 a week.’
Delegates gave overwhelming support to motions calling on the next Labour government to link pensions to average earnings or the retail price index, whichever was the higher; introduce retirement for both men and women at 60; and immediately reverse cuts in benefits for young people.
The Labour Party Conference: Philosophical Tendency jostles for literary recognition
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
MAYBE it is the hazy prospect of political power.
But if members of Labour's Philosophical Tendency, from Tony Benn to Bryan Gould, are choosing their words carefully it may be through fear of how they will look in each other 's diaries.
Weary constituency and trade union delegates, queuing for a cup of tea and a sandwich, constantly risk ending up with a signed copy of someone's memoirs.
Around the Brighton Conference Centre, academic tracts on the party's past and future course seem to proliferate daily.
To a fevered imagination, it seems no one can turn a corner in the crowded conference complex without running into a mug shot of one or other high-theoretician leering pensively from a wall of hardback dust covers.
Their debate on Labour's plight rages far above the brawling oratory in the conference hall.
No speeches have yet been greeted with ecstatic cries of ‘author, author’— probably because Denis Healey is not there — but the clash of rival socialist philosophies is no less cacaphonous.
It reached a pitch this week at a late night fringe meeting, appropriately held in the rooftop suite of a Brighton hotel, when four of the most saleable authors around turned out to promote their ideas and printed wares.
At one end of the book-strewn, red baize-covered table was Tony Benn (The Benn Diaries 1973-76).
He cited the experience of the last Labour government in being forced to deal with the International Monetary Fund as further proof of the need to stick to fundamental socialism.
His Cabinet experience, he unfolded, was but a small part of the assembled case.
‘The pleasure comes later, when you elevate yourself to the status of a student and a teacher — that's how I see the job.’
At the other end, Bryan Gould (A Future for Socialism) held his audience spellbound as he charted Labour's recovery from assumptions of unchallenged ‘rightness’, once taken for granted and shattered by Thatcherism.
Austin Mitchell (Beyond the Blue Horizon), and Giles Radice (Labour's Path to Power — the New Revisionism) were there too.
And although their analyses overlapped only in the margins, there was a burst of literary bitchiness when Mr Radice's enthusiasm for the opportunties of the Common Market was excoriated by the other three.
‘I happen to be the only person here who believes we have to make a response at the European level,’ Mr Radice said.
‘I believe Tony used to believe that, in the days before he became…different.’
The Labour Party Conference: Revised policy wins approval
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
The conference approved the Economic Equality policy review which proposes: Ending tax on childcare; Introducing a minimum wage starting at half of average male earnings (£2.80 an hour), rising to two-thirds the average; Income tax levels of no higher than 50 per cent at the top, down to less than 20 per cent at the bottom; ‘A significant and generous increase in child benefit over the lifetime of the Parliament’; To tax gifts and inheritance at the point of receipt; To crack down on tax loopholes; Raise pensions immediately by £5 for single people and £8 for couples; To introduce a new disability benefit; To simplify income support rules; To keep mortgage interest tax relief ‘at a single rate equivalent to the basic rate relief which we inherit’.
Decisions The conference: Called on the next Labour government to introduce retirement for both women and men at 60 on full pension, with the option of early retirement at 55 and to take emergency steps to restore cuts in young people's benefits.
Agreed a quota of 40 per cent for women's representation on all party committees.
Rejected the NEC plan for a separate society for black and Asian members that would be open to voting white members.
Delegates also refused to give official recognition to existing black sections.
Today the conference will debate the policy review reports Physical and Social Environment, including housing and transport; People at Work; and the education section of the Consumers and the Community report.
The Labour Party Conference: Conference quotes
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
‘I have progressed from being an underpaid woman worker to being an underpaid pensioner.’
Neil Kinnock trying to end his 3min 25sec standing ovation ‘Some of us are worried that the conference may trough too early.’
Frank Dobson, Shadow Leader of the Commons ‘I call upon the men in the party to prepare themselves to relinquish power and to loosen the male grip.’
Dominic Gough, Newham NW ‘Education and training are now the commanding heights of every modern economy.’
The International Bar Association conference: Punitive damages awards ‘necessary to protect public’
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
CIVIL and criminal courts should have a new power to impose punitive damages awards on companies which demonstrate wanton or reckless disregard for human life, a lawyer said yesterday.
Rodger Pannone, a solicitor involved in the Piper Alpha, King's Cross and M1 air disasters, told the International Bar Association conference in Strasbourg: ‘Unless there are damages awards — which must be uninsurable -of hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of pounds in certain circumstances, bad companies have no threat or incentive to make products and services safer.’
Only a small proportion of this extra money should go to the claimants, he argued, in addition to normal compensation for injury and loss of earnings.
‘The remainder, at worst, would go to the state; or better, into a fund to promote industrial safety.’
He said that a minority of companies demonstrated a reckless disregard for safety, and some intentionally put profit before safety.
Mr Pannone's comments reflect the philosophy of the American courts, where juries are able to award punitive damages.
‘I find it difficult to justify enormous punitive damages being paid to victims on a first-past-the-post system.
However, courts in America take far more seriously than European courts their role in encouraging safe products and company practices,’ he said.
David McIntosh, a leading insurance company defence solicitor, who opposed Mr Pannone in the Opren drug case, attacked claims that British levels of damages were ‘miserly’.
‘Others, including myself, believe that non-punitive but truly compensatory damages awarded by the courts of the United Kingdom are preferable to the exorbitance of emotionally-driven jury awards,’ he said.
‘Although it is argued that fear of punitive jury awards has made the US business safety-conscious, quite a price has had to be paid for that by way of corporate and insurance company bankruptcy, the closing of municipal facilities and the practice of defensive medicine.’
The way to police safety, which hits at those responsible without penalising innocent shareholders, lies in the risk of criminal prosecution of senior management and others, where profit is put before life and limb, Mr McIntosh added.
But Mr Pannone said that while the Director of Public Prosecutions had decided eventually to prosecute P & O European Ferries and directors and employees over the Herald of Free Enterprise tragedy, he had decided against prosecutions over the King's Cross fire.
‘It remains to be seen, if there is a conviction in Zeebrugge, what the penalties will be.
Previous experience suggests that the penalties will be almost minimal.’
Daniel Brennan QC, an English barrister, said that injury compensation awards should be based on generally accepted principles rather than the present ‘lottery’ of different rules in EC member states.
‘Harmonisation must be pursued as an objective for 1992,’ he said.
The International Bar Association Conference: Lawyer warns of coal sale dangers
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES
POTENTIAL investors in a privatised coal industry face hidden dangers which could be financially disastrous, a former legal adviser to British Coal warned, writes Patricia Wynn Davies.
Spelling out the pitfalls at the conference, Ronald Cowles, who left British Coal last year, said major new mining developments would be opposed by residents and conservation groups and new businesses would be subject to stringent planning, environment and health and safety controls.
His remarks will not be welcomed by his former employers.
Casting doubt on the competitiveness of coal compared with other fuels, Mr Cowles warned: ‘Coal combustion is under attack as a major contributor to pollution, acid rain and the greenhouse effect and increasing controls are likely to be imposed in this area.’
He predicted that the industry — which the Government has pledged will be privatised in the early 1990s — would be broken up before being sold, with each package containing a mixture of profit and loss-making pits.
Would-be investors would need their wits about them, he said.
‘While some parts of the industry are likely to be very profitable, other parts will have concealed dangers, which could well carry with them the seeds of financial disaster.’
He said that planning permission for a new pit would take two years and would normally involve a public inquiry.
Environmental impact assessments must accompany all applications and planning conditions covering subsidence, noise, traffic, dust, waste disposal and effluent were becoming increasingly strict.
There were also risks of legal liability for a growing number of pit accidents and industrial diseases.
Future mining disasters could well result in the criminal prosecutions of both the company and senior directors, Mr Cowles said.
British Coal is still handling claims from mineworkers for diseases contracted more than 40 years ago, before nationalisation.
Mr Cowles, who is a partner with Norton Rose, a firm of London solicitors, said a coal-mine also carried historical burdens of a physical kind.
Those included collapsing shafts, and escapes of contaminated water and gas.
Investors should expect to shoulder responsibility for any damage or injury arising after privatisation, and demarcation disputes were likely over liabilities from the past, he said.
Estuary plans ‘pose threat to wildlife’
By CARMEL MCQUAID
ULSTER'S bird and marine life stands to be seriously diminished by new plans to develop areas around its estuaries, environmentalists were told yesterday.
Extensions to Belfast's port facilities and to its harbour airport, announced last week, must encroach further on the mudflats at Belfast Lough, Alison McCloy, of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, warned in a lecture.
Already reduced to one-tenth of their original extent, these served as a breeding and wintering ground for 12,000 waterfowl.
Also, thousands of migrating birds from Canada, Iceland and Russia sought sustenance there on the way south, Ms McCloy said.
She added that other developments in Belfast dictated that the Kinneger Lagoon be filled in.
This would deprive wading birds such as curlew and snipe of an ideal breeding sanctuary.
What remained of Belfast's mudflats seemed certain to be diminished by unrestricted dumping.
A similar threat faced Lough Foyle, Londonderry, where the Culmore tip was encroaching on mudflats offering a winter home to hundreds of whooper swans migrating from Greenland.
Extensive stretches of mudflats also seemed likely to disappear at Strangford, Co Down, the province's most important estuary — endangering 50,000 waders, 25,000 wildfowl and 90 per cent of the pale-bellied Brent geese which wintered in the British Isles.
The threat came from proposals for a barrage across the lough's narrows to generate electricity from the tide's ebb and flow.
This would leave less of the mudflats exposed.
Gas explosion at maisonettes in Dagenham
By CARMEL MCQUAID
A WRECKED block of maisonettes at Dagenham, east London, where four people were taken to hospital yesterday after a gas explosion.
One of the victims was in a critical condition, suffering from severe burns, but the other three were allowed home after treatment for shock.
One-third of the block,(above) in Norton Road, was destroyed by the explosion and a fire brigade spokeswoman described the remaining structure as ‘extremely unsafe’.
A spokesman for British Gas said: ‘It appears that gas was involved, although it looks as if it was a deliberate release rather than an accidental one.’
Police could not say if charges would be brought.
Teachers ‘deprived of incentive pay by government error’
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
THOUSANDS of classroom teachers in primary and secondary schools in England and Wales are being underpaid by up to £2,500 annually because of a government error, one of the largest teachers unions claimed yesterday.
The Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association, representing about 131,000 teachers, estimates that about 7,500 teachers are not being paid incentive allowances worth £858 a year, while a further 900 are missing out on additional annual payments of £2,568.
The Government introduced incentive allowances for teachers in 1987 when it removed the profession's bargaining rights and imposed a pay settlement.
The payments were to be made to teachers with additional responsibilities; to outstanding teachers; to those teaching in shortage subjects; and for teachers taking posts that were difficult to fill.
However, the union says that when the incentive system was first introduced, the Government underestimated the number of senior teachers entitled to receive the new higher scale incentive allowances automatically.
The Government calculated that 88,000 teachers previously paid on the old Burnham pay scale were entitled to B, D or E allowances under the new system.
But government figures published this summer revealed that there were 93,720 teachers in this category, 5,720 more than it had thought.
Because insufficient allowances were allocated, the union argues, the local education authorities used much of the money that should have been paid in incentive allowances to classroom teachers to pay the senior staff their incentive entitlements.
The union estimates that local education authorities had to find an additional £7m, as well as awarding 8,400 fewer classroom teacher incentive allowances, to meet the cost of incentives for senior teachers.
It calculates that the Government has underfunded the incentive allowances scheme by some £12m a year.
The union is calling on the Goverment to correct its ‘mistake’ by making good the shortfall in allowances.
It wants the Interim Advisory Committee, which will determine the profession's pay increase for the 1990-91 year, to be allowed to remedy the error by using new money over and above the £600m limit the Government has set on the global sum available for any increase.
John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education, said yesterday that it was misleading for the union to say the Government had made a mistake.
All the teachers in 1987 who were entitled to an allowance received one.
Using union figures, allowances being paid at the start of this year exceeded the number originally intended by more than 3,000.
The smaller number of A and C allowances was more than made up for by the greater number of B and D allowances.
‘The whole point of the incentive allowances system is for local authorities and schools to decide for themselves how many allowances to award and at what rates in the light of their particular circumstances,’ Mr MacGregor said.
‘We would expect to see variations between authorities if the allowances had been used as intended.
Liberty chief
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
The civil rights organisation Liberty has appointed Andrew Puddephatt, 39, former Labour leader of Hackney council, London, as its general secretary.
He takes over from Sarah Spencer.
Water ban lifted
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
Anglian Water will today lift a ban introduced a month ago on windsurfing and fishing at Costessey Pits in Norfolk, Stoke Rochford lakes in Lincolnshire and seven lagoons at Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, which were affected by toxic algae.
The ban will remain at Rutland Water, Leicestershire.
Plea for review of boat inquest
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
An application for a judicial review of an inquest on three fishermen drowned when their vessel foundered in the Irish Sea in September 1988 will be lodged in the High Court in London today.
The Fishguard-based crabber Inspire went down in a calm sea when a huge wave swamped it.
An inquest earlier this year returned verdicts of misadventure on its skipper, Terry Jones, and crewmen Ronald Laugharne and David Webster.
The coroner, Peter Brunton, rejected a request to submit a technical report pointing to the possible involvement of a submarine.
Aer Lingus faces Iran jet charges
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
Aer Lingus, the Irish Republic's national airline, confirmed that it was facing two charges in the United States that a subsidiary company illegally supplied aircraft parts to Iran.
It is understood the airline could face fines and costs totalling more than £300,000 in connection with the case which relates to events over a six-year period from 1981.
Boeing components are alleged to have been sold to the Iranians by the London-based Aer Lingus controlled spares company Alpex, which has since been wound up.
The case arose through the servicing of small Iranian jets at Heathrow airport.
New firm in ‘unique’ link with Japan
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
JAPANESE technology will create more than 500 jobs in an umemployment blackspot in south Wales, marking a break from the ‘screwdriver’ plants which characterise much inward investment in the UK.
A new company is to be set up by Sanken Electric of Japan, and the Gooding Group of the UK, to manufacture special types of power supplies for the electronic and computer industry.
But, unusually, the venture will do everything from research and design through to manufacture compared with the now notorious ‘screwdriver’ assembly-only factories set up by many foreign investors in Britain.
The Gooding-Sanken company will be located at Aberaman in the Cynon Valley where unemployment is estimated to be 21 per cent— the highest in south Wales.
Four Japanese specialists will be sent to help train management and staff, but graduates and other workers will be recruited locally and sent to Japan for training as necessary.
Initially, the company will create 200 new jobs, rising to 520 over the next few years.
The venture, which will involve investment of £8m, is believed to be receiving regional development grants worth up to 36 per cent of the total investment.
Malcolm Sanders, managing director of the new company, said the complete transfer of the Japanese company's technology to the UK was unique.
He said it would be the first of a series of ventures which Gooding was discussing with Japanese companies, aimed at bringing research and technology to Britain rather than just final assembly of goods.
The Welsh company, in which Gooding has the controlling 51 per cent stake, aims for revenues of £70m within five years of operation.
The market for stable power supplies for sensitive equipment is worth £1.2bn in Europe and is growing at 10 per cent per year.
So far it is dominated by Far East suppliers, including Sanken, Panasonic and TDK.
Archaeological site at Bristol Castle
By DAVID KEYS
SOME OF the 17ft thick walls of Bristol Castle's keep, built circa 1135 by the illegitimate grandson of William the Conqueror, Robert of Gloucester, are being revealed by an archaeological dig, writes David Keys.
For the past 300 years the substantial remains of one of medieval England's most important fortresses have lain hidden beneath part of the city centre.
The dig has shown that the 90ft long north wall of the keep and fragments of the east and west walls survive to a height of up to 18ft.
Part of a turret has also survived.
Excavation has also uncovered the impressive rock-cut ditch of the Norman motte and bailey castle, believed to have been built in the 1080s.
The site is particularly important because it is one of the few such castles to have developed out of an earlier Norman stone-built ring-work fort.
Apart from the keep, the only other remains of Bristol Castle to have survived are a small rock-cut entrance, 23 rock-cut steps and the thirteenth-century entrance vestibules of the royal banqueting hall — now a restaurant.
The keep's remains will be preserved as a historic monument.
Nuclear law ‘absurdity’
By DAVID KEYS
A QC claimed yesterday it would be ‘absurd’ if the law did not allow people forced to leave homes made uninhabitable by radioactive contamination to be compensated.
Stephen Sedley was continuing his opening speech on the second day of a damages action against British Nuclear Fuels at the High Court in London.
Christopher Merlin, 48, and his wife, Christine, sold their home in Ravenglass, near Sellafield nuclear plant, Cumbria, at a loss after plutonium was found in house dust.
They say they are entitled to compensation against BNFL under the Nuclear Installations Act.
Mr Sedley said the court would have to decide if the damage to property under the Act included contamination by nuclear matter or waste or if it was limited to ‘injury’ to the fabric.
Psychiatrists explore hidden meaning of Thatchergate plan
By PETER DUNN
THATCHERGATE, the neo-nineteenth century railings which the Prime Minister wants to erect across the Whitehall end of Downing Street, sent a buzz of speculative excitement through psychiatric circles yesterday.
The 10-feet high palings, with their broad central gates and twin gas lamps, may not be as imposing as the metal fence around Buckingham Palace, but they do, in their modest way, suggest a sense of grandeur appropriate to a leader who has held office for 10 years.
Unlike the Queen's front gates, Thatchergate will also have a steel screen which will leap out of the Downing Street tarmac as an added defence against terrorists who manage to penetrate the fencing.
Lord St John of Fawsley, chairman of the Royal Fine Art Commission, who, as Norman St John Stevas, was an early ministerial victim of Mrs Thatcher's purge of the wets, has admonished the Prime Minister by reminding her she is not head of state; treating her as such, his lordship suggested, would simply arouse public hostility.
Psychiatrists see Thatchergate, the design of which has now been agreed with English Heritage, as evidence of the stress a decade in office has put on the occupant of No 10.
Dr Anthony Storr, author of the recently-published Churchill's Black Dog, in which he showed how senior politicans often turned stresses of up-bringing into strengths, said yesterday: ‘I'm interested because the gates must mean that she's feeling increasingly insecure and threatened in a simple, straightforward way; and that's an interesting phenomenum in itself because she's been so absolutely certain of herself.
I've found the increasing dogmatism and certainty that she's right the most sinister thing about her because that so often goes with paranoid feelings, and it may be that this is one manifestation of that.
‘On the question of regality, it's very much a characteristic, her feeling how important she is.
People who think they're being persecuted always think people are paying them a great deal of attention so they come to believe that they must in a sense be very important people,’ he said.
A psychiatrist who specialises in executive stress thought the fencing indicated that the person it protected felt an enormous sense of isolation and betrayal at the hands of people who had failed to be grateful for years of selfless public service.
‘At one level — and leaving out the executive stress — this woman has to cope with an enormous sense of personal threat,’ he said.
‘Internally she has to say, ‘It won't happen to me’ or, ‘It's part of the job.’
Externally she has to seek to diminish the threat by aggressive posturing and stamping and saying, ‘We'll get you, you bastards’, or taking real measures like these gates.
‘They must reflect some inner disturbance.
There must be an enormous sense of isolation, of being aware of being let down.
She's cut taxes, she's made concessions and somehow the British people simply haven't picked up the ball and run with it.
The gates are, in some way, an expression of anger towards the people she would like to trust.
That, in turn, makes her feel even more isolated.
Who can she turn to?
It's a reproach.’
Aesthetically, Londoners will have to draw what consolation they can from the fact that Nicholas Ridley, the former Environment Secretary and a water-colourist with an eye for broader horizons, had some influence in the siting of the gates.
In practical terms, the gates and fence probably have little advantage over the waist-high barrier and high-profile police presence which has effectively sealed Downing Street from the public for eight years.
Lord St John thinks they will actually increase the security risk because the very visible opening of the gates will draw attention to the Prime Minister's movements.
Opponents may draw comfort from the fact that they are described officially as ‘a temporary obstruction on the highway’.
Given the will, they could be pulled down within four hours.
Might that happen if Labour achieved office?
Peter Mandelson, the Labour Party's director of communications, said yesterday: ‘Mr Kinnock neither has the Prime Minister's folie de grandeur nor is he running scared of the British people.
I should not think that Mr Kinnock would have the same need for such structures.’
So would Mr Kinnock topple Thatchergate if he became Prime Minister?
‘That would be a decision Mr Kinnock would take at the time,’ Mr Mandelson declared loftily.
Hospital warned over emergencies
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
CONSULTANT surgeons at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London have warned managers that the hospital has ‘no alternative’ but to shut its accident and emergency department after the closure of 75 beds this week to head off a £2m overspend.
The closures at Barts have come amid signs of a growing cash crisis this winter in several London health districts.
In a letter declaring no confidence in management, the consultant surgeons have told Dr Ken Grant, the authority's manager, that the 36 per cent cut in surgical beds means ‘we will be unable to offer an emergency service’.
With the bulk of surgical patients consisting of urgent conditions, from cancers to vascular disease, Richard Wood, Professor of Surgery, has told Dr Grant that such surgery cannot be halted.
The surgeons, he said, are ‘unanimous’ that there is ‘no alternative to the closure of the accident and emergency department’.
They fear that as winter approaches medical emergencies, such as elderly patients with pneumonia and strokes, will spill over into surgical beds, halting urgent operations.
Dr Grant said yesterday that the accident and emergency department would not be closing, not least because surrounding hospitals appeared unable to take the load.
‘Everyone else seems to be in the same position.
‘There is nowhere else emergencies can go,’ he said.
The hospital would have to make choices: ‘We are going to have to weigh up a hip replacement against a breast carcinoma.’
After meeting the surgeons, he said they had agreed they could cope if medical emergencies did not spill over to their beds.
Dr Grant said that, since 1982, beds had been cut from 800 to 450, with Barts effectively running half empty and thus inefficiently.
‘We see our only hope as being the White Paper where the money would follow the patients and give us the funds to treat the patients that arrive.’
New guidance from the Department of Health says that with health authorities becoming purchasers of care from self-governing, directly managed and private hospitals, there has to be a risk of hospitals gaining a local monopoly of a particular service, or joining others in cartels.
Equally a health authority, as the dominant buyer in an area, might be able to dictate unfair terms to a hospital.
To deal with disputes over such matters, regional health authorities will act as conciliators.
Where that fails, the Secretary of State will have powers to arbitrate and impose a contract on the parties.
The guidance says that Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, ‘is minded’ to go for Japanese-style pendulum arbitration — where the arbiter would be free only to find for one party or the other, and would not be able to compromise.
Murder trial starts in sign language
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
SPECIAL interpreters assisted yesterday at the opening of a unique trial at Cardiff Crown Court, where a deaf man was accused of murdering a deaf woman who had speech difficulties.
Timothy Jack Robson, 28, a carpenter, denied murdering Suzanne Greenhill, 20, on 28 June 1988.
Her body was found at her flat where she lived alone in Tewkesbury Walk, Newport, Gwent, on 1 July 1988.
She had been raped and stabbed.
Mr Justice Roch said that because the defendant was deaf and had a speech disability a social worker, Jill Hughes, would sit in the dock and translate.
Another interpreter, Maurice Capewell, will assist at least four prosecution witnesses who are also deaf.
He will interpret their testimony for the court, and Mrs Hughes will then reinterpret it for Mr Robson.
Mrs Hughes used lip-reading, speaking, finger-spelling and British Sign Language to help Mr Robson, who has been partially deaf since he was three.
BSL involves simplification of terminology and has a different grammatical construction to spoken English.
Mr Robson has not been trained in more sophisticated and literal ‘sign supporting English’.
Mr Justice Roch said the court would start early at 10am and adjourn for 30 minutes at hourly intervals to allow the interpreters to rest and to ensure the defendant had understood the evidence.
The trial is expected to last six to eight weeks.
A computer system is also available whereby the record kept by the court stenographer is fed to a print-out on a screen for the defendant.
Powerful earphones are also available to him.
The trial continues today with the opening statement from the prosecution.
Art Market: High price expected for ‘lost’ Picasso
By GERALDINE NORMAN
AN EARLY Picasso painting, which most of the authoritative books on the artist recorded as lost or destroyed, is to be sold in Paris on 30 November and is likely to fetch one of the highest prices paid for a picture at auction.
Les Noces de Pierette, which is more than 6ft wide, dates from 1905.
Until recently it was only known from an early black and white photograph.
There was also uncertainty among experts as to whether it belonged to Picasso's Blue or Pink period.
It is now revealed to be Blue period — but one of the last paintings of this series.
It already uses the harlequin image which is characteristic of the Pink period paintings.
The harlequin is enamoured of a young dancer who has been forced to marry the proprietor of the troupe.
She sits at the marriage banquet, apparently in a cafe, and the harlequin has just presented her with a bouquet.
He bows before her and blows her a kiss.
The top-hatted old husband and three other, melancholy figures, are watching.
According to the French art magazine, Connaissance des Arts, the Picasso painting has belonged for more than 50 years to a collector who kept its existence secret — even from members of his family.
It is unclear whether it has recently changed hands.
Maitre Binoche, the auctioneer, says the picture belongs to a Swedish collector who is also a collector of contemporary paintings.
This is the field in which Binoche is noted as a specialist auctioneer and explains their acquaintance.
Binoche expects the painting to fetch about £30m, but the figure depends on whether it gets a French export licence.
The auctioneers say that they have been assured that a licence will be forthcoming.
The highest price on record for a Picasso is £28.1m which was paid in May for his self-portrait, Yo Picasso, of 1901; the highest price for any picture at auction is the £30.9m paid in 1987 for Van Gogh's Irises.
Sotheby's will sell another Picasso on 15 November — Au Lapin Agile, from the Pink period — which is widely expected to break the previous price records.
Australia was the moneyspinner in the Phillips auction of topographical paintings yesterday.
A view of Hobart across the harbour with Mount Wellington beyond, painted in 1855 by Knud Geelmuyden Bull, a convict, made £170,500 (estimate £150,000-£200,000).
A portrait of Commodore Sir John Hayes, one of the first men to explore the Tasmanian coast, sold for £23,100 to an unnamed Australian institution.
Painted around 1806, it was catalogued as by John Opie; the auctioneers later changed their minds and attributed it to George Chinnery.
‘Eye’ tells of newspaper's 25,000 pounds for Ripper wife
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
SONIA SUTCLIFFE, who was awarded £600,000 in libel damages against Private Eye, gave a ‘misleading’ answer in court when she was questioned about a £25,000 loan given to her by a friend, it was alleged in the Court of Appeal yesterday.
The friend was a newspaper reporter and the money was in fact paid to her by The Mail on Sunday, Gavin Lightman QC, representing the magazine in an appeal for a new trial, said.
The money was paid for articles concerning her life with her husband Peter, the Yorkshire Ripper, he said.
Mrs Sutcliffe, wearing dark tinted glasses, listened carefully in the packed public benches as Mr Lightman read out an affidavit by Oliver Duke, once the boyfriend of Mail on Sunday reporter Barbara Jones, in which he admitted taking part in a scheme to get the money secretly from the newspaper to Mrs Sutcliffe.
‘Mr Duke had lived with Miss Jones,’ he told Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, sitting with two other judges, ‘and she told him that Mrs Sutcliffe had negotiated a contract with The Mail on Sunday.
‘But before the payment could be made the owner of The Mail on Sunday, Lord Rothermere, issued a directive that no money should be paid to criminals or their families.
As a result, the payment to Mrs Sutcliffe had to be made in a roundabout way.’
In his affidavit, Mr Lightman said, Mr Duke described how £25,000 was paid into his bank account as a ‘consultancy fee’ and was later withdrawn in instalments and paid directly by Miss Jones — in cash — to Mrs Sutcliffe for the series of articles she had provided.
Mr Lightman said that at the time of the libel trial the defence had no idea that this payment had been made.
‘If we had known we would have subpoenaed the editor of The Mail on Sunday, Mr Stewart Steven, and if a retrial is granted we will subpoena him and Miss Jones to give evidence.
We have written to Mr Steven, but he has ignored our letters.’
Private Eye is appealing against the record £600,000 damages paid to Mrs Sutcliffe after a seven-day trial last May, in which she alleged the magazine had libelled her by claiming in its ‘Street of Shame’ column that she had made a £250,000 deal with the Daily Mail for her story after a night of ‘carousing’with the paper's journalists in a hotel.
The magazine calls for a retrial on the grounds of the new evidence of the alleged Mail on Sunday payment, the ‘excessive’ amount of damages awarded, and misdirection of the jury by the judge on the amount of ‘aggravated damages’they could award.
After listening to Mr Lightman's allegations, Lord Donaldson said that if Mr Oliver's affidavit was to be believed then The Mail on Sunday had acted in ‘a wholly hypocritical way.’
On the amount of damages, Mr Lightman said the Court of Appeal had a special responsibility to bear in mind the ‘dangerous precedent’ which could be set by such awards, and added that in this case the award was out of all proportion to the alleged libel.
He added: ‘No real crime was alleged in the libel.
It was not in a national newspaper.
It was not a front page spread.
Nor was Mrs Sutcliffe a national character or a character of national reputation.
Her evidence of damage was limited and established that her reputation was already damaged.’
The case continues.
Judge attacks ‘pools win’ libel payouts
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
IN A SUDDEN and scathing interjection during yesterday's hearing, Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, gave his view on the recent series of massive libel payouts by British juries, writes James Dalrymple.
After hearing defence submissions that the £600,000 payout to Mrs Sutcliffe was ‘perverse and excessive’, Lord Donaldson said: ‘It may be that the general jury approach to newspaper libel at the moment is tempered by some indignation at the way some branches of the Press are run — coupled with the feeling that, if you can get £1m on the pools, why shouldn't you get £1m on the newspapers too?
‘The chances of being libelled in a big way are probably much the same as winning the football pools, and the results are very much the same.’
Sitting below him in the well of No 3 Court, Private Eye's editor Ian Hislop nodded his head vigorously in agreement.
The court was packed throughout the day-long hearing, and Sonia Sutcliffe sat alongside her solicitor carefully taking notes on a clipboard.
Behind and to her right, impassive but occasionally smiling at a legal point, Richard Ingrams sat on his own.
He recently retired as editor of the Eye but he still spends much of his time at the magazine's cramped offices in Soho.
He, like other founders of the paper, fears that if the damages award is not lowered considerably it could be the end of the road for Pressdram Ltd, the Eye's publisher, after decades of public wars with the great and the powerful.
A few rows in front sat Peter Cook, the satirist, actor and comedian, who now owns a large slice of Private Eye.
He too listened closely to the arguments in the morning, but after a pub lunch with his staff, he did not return for the afternoon evidence.
Haddock skippers warn of crisis
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
SCOTTISH fishermen's leaders warned yesterday that Britain's North Sea haddock quota will be exhausted within three weeks, leading to crisis in the industry and large-scale dumping at sea.
They forecast that the Scottish white fish fleet of more than 600 boats will have little choice but to continue fishing for species such as cod and whiting, even though haddock will also be caught.
Skippers will have either to throw away the haddock or risk prosecution by bringing them ashore.
One industry expert said up to 10,000 tonnes could be dumped by the end of the year.
John Goodlad, secretary of the Shetland Fishermen's Association, added: ‘The fish taken on board are perfectly marketable.
But they will have to be shovelled over the side.
That leads to anger and frustration.’
The prospect of the North Sea quota of 54,800 tonnes running out this month has provoked talk of revolt by Shetland fishermen.
Their association has described the early closure of the haddock fishery as unacceptable, provoking speculation that the Shetland fleet will deliberately flout the quota regulations.
Skippers in the Scottish white fish fleet, which accounts for most of the UK's North Sea haddock catch, are particularly aggrieved at the EC's ‘swingeing’ cut in quota this year.
Last year it was 128,500 tonnes, but only 90,000 tonnes were caught.
George Sutherland, chairman of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, said skippers could not afford to remain in harbour, and would have to continue fishing.
‘There's no doubt that's going to lead to dumping.
That makes a total nonsense of conservation policy.
I know it's short-sighted and the politicians will point this out to us, but what alternative have we got?’
Mr Sutherland, skipper of the Fraserburgh-based Sanspeur, will lead a delegation today to discuss ‘the critical situation’ with Lord Sanderson of Bowden, the Scottish Office fisheries minister.
It will coincide with the expected appearance at Aberdeen Sheriff Court of 10 fishermen on charges relating to quota breaking.
Margaret Ewing MP, the Scottish National Party's parliamentary leader, in a letter to Lord Sanderson, has accused the Government of ‘massive complacency’ towards the fishing industry.
She said that ‘vicious adherence to market forces’ as a way of reducing the fleet would drive out the youngest and the best.
She criticised the Government for not introducing a decommissioning scheme or compensation.
‘Good, decent, hard-working men, dedicated to their tough industry, face financial ruin,’ she said.
The fishermen's response to the crisis will become clearer this week.
But they do not believe the solution lies in taking up the 15,000 tonne haddock quota available off the west of Scotland.
Mr Sutherland said the waters were dangerous at this time of year and contained almost no haddock.
Killer's voice may have been heard on M50 call
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A RADIO controller probably heard the voice of the killer of Marie Wilks as she telephoned for help from the M50 motorway, a court was told yesterday.
Within minutes of making the call, Mrs Wilks, 22, who was pregnant, was dead, having been abducted and then stabbed in broad daylight, the prosecution alleges.
Peter Lunnen, who took the call, said at Shrewsbury Crown Court that as he shouted down the telephone line to Mrs Wilks, he heard her speaking in the distance.
He heard a male voice, and then the ‘throaty’ sound of a car speeding away.
Her last words to him were ‘call my father’.
He dispatched a police patrol car, but when it arrived 16 minutes later the telephone was swinging on the end of its cord.
‘Of Marie there was no sign.
It was as if she had vanished off the face of the earth,’ Anthony Palmer, for the prosecution, said.
Police found only the broken-down Marina car, which had left Mrs Wilks, her 13-month-old son Mark, and her sister, Georgina Gough, 11, stranded on the M50 near the Tewkesbury turn off.
The two children, Mark in Georgina's arms, were spotted along the hard shoulder.
A few spots of blood were found near the telephone, Mr Palmer said.
But the body of Mrs Wilks was not found until two days later, at the bottom of a motorway embankment two-and-a-half miles away, when a motorist took police to a spot where he had seen a silver Renault 25 parked.
Mrs Wilks's body lay twisted, as if she had rolled.
There was grass and vegetation in her left hand; her maternity smock was bloodstained from a stab wound in the side of the neck.
A post-mortem examination disclosed she had died from a single knife wound, which had severed the artery.
Her jaw was also broken from a punch and a kick.
Mr Palmer told the jury of eight men and four women that the pathologist also found that she was carrying a normally developed male child of between 30 and 32 weeks.
‘She wore no pants, but there was no evidence of sexual interference, whatever her killer's intention may have been,’ he said.
Edward Browning, 36, a nightclub doorman and bouncer, of Vicarage Road, Cwm-parc, Mid Glamorgan, has denied murdering Mrs Wilks on 18 June last year.
The prosecution says he was the driver of the Renault 25.
Mr Palmer alleged that in a ‘wilful, impulsive and reckless’ frame of mind, he abducted, murdered and dumped the body of Mrs Wilks, in a matter of minutes.
Mr Palmer said that by any standards her killer's behaviour was extraordinary.
‘He must have seen her standing or walking, a lone pregnant woman, as he went past and decided to pick her up.’
Witnesses, including an off-duty police inspector, would describe how a silver Renault twice crossed the central reservation to go past the scene of the broken-down car.
One saw the driver talking to and touching Mrs Wilks at the emergency telephone box, the silver car parked near by.
Mrs Wilks had been visiting her husband, who was spending the weekend at a Territorial Army camp in the Forest of Dean, where he was a civilian instructor.
She had got lost, returning to their home in Ambleside Road, Warndon, Worcester, and found herself on the M50.
Her car started to overheat and she stopped on the hard shoulder.
Leaving her sister and her son in the car, she walked the half-mile to the telephone box.
Mr Palmer told the court that Mr Browning admitted being in his car at the time of the killing.
He was on his way to visit a friend in Aberdenn, more than 500 miles away.
But Mr Browning had told police his route took him via the M4, over the Severn Bridge, and not by the more direct route of the M50.
However, Mr Palmer said that a constant video of cars passing over the Severn Bridge at the time, showed no Renault 25.
In Scotland, Mr Browning's friend commented about blood on the rear wheel-arch of the Renault.
Mr Browning said it was probably a bird he hit on the way, and later cleaned the car.
Toxic waste monitoring row settled
By RICHARD NORTH, Environment Correspondent
THE TWO protagonists in one of the longest-running and most bitter rows about the conduct of Britain's toxic waste disposal industry settled their differences yesterday.
Rechem International, a major chemical incineration firm, and Torfaen Borough Council in Gwent, South Wales, agreed in an out of court settlement that a temporary injunction obtained by the company should be lifted.
Rechem also agreed to drop its request for a judicial review into Torfaen's monitoring of contamination supposedly caused by the firm, and of its publication of the results.
The injunction had forbidden the council from publishing results of monitoring around the site of the firm's incineration plant at Pontypool, which burns chemicals, including PCBs (polychlorinated byphenyls).
Rechem believes the results to be unscientific, and under the new agreement will be able to append its own commentary to the council's existing document, especially if it is to form part of a submission to the European Commission.
In future, Torfaen council will share with Rechem any samples it takes.
Both parties have also agreed that they will nominate representatives to begin discussions on setting up a community liaison committee.
Study finds ITV has most violence
By RICHARD NORTH, Environment Correspondent
PROGRAMMES on ITV contain far more violence than those on the other three channels, according to a psychiatrist.
In a study undertaken over a two-week period, Tom Tadecki, research director of the International Coalition Against Violent Entertainment, found that more than 33 per cent of its programmes involved some form of aggression, with violent acts occurring at a rate of 10 per hour.
By contrast, 1 per cent of Channel 4 programmes contained violence, with an average frequency of one violent act per hour.
The figures for BBC 1 and BBC 2 were 10 per cent, with violent acts occurring at a rate of 2.5 per hour on BBC 1, and two on BBC 2.
Although he found that television is far less violent than in Japan, the United States, France or West Germany, Dr Tadecki intends to campaign with Mary Whitehouse to curb violence on the screen.
Dr Tadecki said: ‘Research in America indicates that someone is up to 50 per cent more likely to lose their temper if they regularly watch violent television programmes such as The Equalizer.’
He said he was shocked to monitor Miami Vice, shown on BBC 1, in which characters Crockett and Tubbs killed 43 people in 18 episodes — more than the real Miami vice department killed in a whole year.
Coronation Street, Britain's longest-running and most popular television soap opera which is transmitted on Monday and Wednesday, is to add a Friday edition from 20 October.
The Monday edition will be repeated on Wednesday afternoons, with the omnibus edition, incorporating the Wednesday and Friday editions, switching from Sunday to Saturday afternoon.
It had appeared for a while that Coronation Street's rival EastEnders, boosted by a weekend omnibus, would oust it from top spot in the ratings.
But it has fought back.
EastEnders, regarded by senior BBC managers as having lost its way with sordid story lines, is being given a new producer.
Barman survived ‘cliff-top murder plan’
By RICHARD NORTH, Environment Correspondent
A BARMAN was pushed over a 200ft cliff after his wife agreed to a £2,500 ‘murder contract’, a court was told yesterday.
Stephen Brown survived because he landed on a narrow ledge about 18ft below the cliff edge at Sandy Bay, Exmouth, Devon, Charles Barton QC, for the prosecution, said.
He waited until his two attackers — each to be paid £1,000, with £500 expenses — disappeared in the dark before climbing to safety.
Mr Barton told Bristol Crown Court that neighbours of Mr Brown hatched the plot to rid Cathy Brown of her ‘unwanted and sometimes violent husband’.
James Shaw, 33, unemployed, of Nelson Drive, Littleham, Exmouth, denies conspiring to murder Mr Brown between June 1 and September 14 last year and attempting to murder him between August 13 and 16.
James Palmer, a painter, also of Nelson Drive, had earlier pleaded guilty to attempted murder.
Garlic ‘good for the heart’
By LIZ HUNT
PEOPLE who eat a clove or more of garlic a day are less likely to suffer a heart attack, high blood pressure or thrombosis, doctors said yesterday, writes Liz Hunt.
New clinical trials show that including garlic in the diet can significantly reduce cholesterol in the blood, according to Dr Jorg Grunwald, a research biologist from Berlin.
High cholesterol levels are associated with atherosclerosis, or ‘furring’ of the arteries with fatty deposits, which can lead to a heart attack.
Garlic could also reduce high blood pressure and prevent blood cells sticking together, risk factors for a heart attack, Dr Grunwald, head of the medical and scientific department of Lichtwer Pharma, a German company that manufactures garlic pills, said.
The active ingredient in garlic is thought to be the compound alliin.
Peer ‘falsely branded a war criminal’ over communist massacre
By STEPHEN WARD
LORD ALDINGTON, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative Party and Warden of Winchester School, was falsely branded a war criminal on the scale of the worst butchers of Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia, his counsel, Charles Gray QC, told a High Court libel jury yesterday.
Lord Aldington, 75, is seeking damages from Nigel Watts, a property developer, who circulated a pamphlet accusing him of arranging every detail of the repatriation of 70,000 Yugoslav and Russian men, women and children who were subsequently tortured and massacred.
The action is jointly defended by the historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy, who supplied much of the information for the pamphlet.
Mr Gray said the fact of the repatriations from Allied-occupied Austria in May and June 1945 was accepted, but what was at issue was Lord Aldington's role, and the allegation that he knew that they would be killed.
Mr Watts and Mr Tolstoy deny libel, claiming the allegations are true.
Mr Gray, opening his case, explained how the the pamphlet was the culmination of a campaign against the peer by Mr Watts, who was pursuing an unpaid life insurance claim on the death of his brother-in-law in 1975.
At the time, Lord Aldington was chairman of Sun Alliance, which had refused the claim on the grounds that the dead man had withheld details about his ill-health.
From 1984 on, Mr Watts had repeatedly telephoned Lord Aldington, as many as 28 times in a weekend, and gathered a dossier of other allegedly unpaid claims by Sun Alliance, which he circulated to insurance brokers.
By February 1985, he had started to include allegations that Lord Aldington was a war criminal, and had made contact with Count Tolstoy, author of two books on the repatriations.
Mr Watts sent 10,000 copies of the pamphlet to MPs, peers, the Press, neighbours of Lord Aldington, the parents of pupils at Winchester and to former pupils, in an attempt to force Lord Aldington's resignation as Warden.
The pamphlet said: ‘The evidence is overwhelming that he arranged the perpetration of a major war crime in the full knowledge that the most barbarous and dishonourable aspects of his operations were throughout disapproved and unauthorised by the higher command, and in the full knowledge that a savage fate awaited those he was repatriating.
The man who issued every order and arranged every detail of the lying and brutality which resulted in these massacres was Brigadier Toby Low…subsequently ennobled (in 1962) as the first Baron Aldington.’
Mr Gray said that Lord Aldington had a distinguished war record.
He had won the DSO in 1941 while defending Greece.
The citation described him as an officer of extreme gallantry, with the qualities of coolness and high powers of leadership under the most trying circumstances.
He had helped in the defence of Crete, and fought with the British Army in Italy and Austria.
Mr Gray said that, in February 1945, Britain and Russia had signed an agreement at Yalta under which Soviet citizens would be returned to Russia, and British prisoners of war held in Russia would be returned to Britain.
It was accepted that the British troops had used a substantial amount of violence and brutality to enforce the hand-over.
Witnesses told of beatings with rifle butts and sticks and the use of bayonets and guns, he said.
Many of the Yugoslavs and White Russians handed over were executed without trial by the Titoists and Russians.
This was criminal behaviour.
Many more were tortured, brutally treated and condemned to labour camps.
‘Lord Aldington did not know about the massacre and brutality.
He accepts it happened and he is appalled by it,’ he said.
The hearing continues today.
Health test for hatcheries
By RICHARD NORTH, Environment Correspondent
EGG HATCHERIES will be monitored for salmonella, following a decision yesterday to tighten controls on the bacterium which has caused a rising tide of food poisoning cases in recent years.
The Ministry of Agriculture had imposed monitoring on breeding flocks — which supply the hatcheries with eggs, which go on to be egg laying hens or meat producing poultry — and on laying flocks.
The hatcheries have until now been the missing link.
‘The idea of the new move is to get away from the possibilities of cross-contamination’, a ministry spokeswoman said.
There will also be a new requirement for owners to register all flocks of layers containing more than 100 birds, and of breeding flocks containing more than 25 birds.
John Gummer, the Minister of Agriculture, yesterday defended the testing of birds even in the smallest laying flocks.
‘The testing of all hens will continue to be compulsory if their eggs are sold to the public, however small the enterprise.
Our new sampling system uses the birds’ faeces and provides the same high level of protection.
It is done on a 12-week cycle and will lead to a reduction in the cost for a producer with, say, 60 hens, to about £24 over the laying period.
The present system, which is not more effective, costs £110 for the same result.
‘I believe that the public must have absolute confidence in the British egg industry.
That is why I cannot exempt even the smallest flocks selling eggs for human consumption from our strict testing requirements.’
Annesley dismisses RUC ‘inner circle’ claim as nonsense
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
HUGH ANNESLEY, Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, dismissed as ‘arrant nonsense’ yesterday the idea that a conspiratorial group of pro-loyalist politically-motivated officers existed within his force.
He was responding to Monday's claim in the Belfast Irish News that at least three dozen officers were members of a secret ‘inner circle’ which had the objects of ‘removing’republican suspects and bringing down the Anglo-Irish agreement.
Mr Annesley's strongly-worded statement came as the agreement ran into yet another patch of stormy weather, with Dublin taking exception to remarks made by Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland Secretary, about the Ulster Defence Regiment.
This latest dispute between the two governments indicates that tomorrow's Anglo-Irish ministerial meeting in London may prove difficult.
There were three official assurances yesterday that the inquiry by John Stevens, Deputy Chief Constable of Cambridgeshire, into security force collusion with loyalists is proceeding apace.
Mr Annesley said his senior officers were ‘rigorously assisting’ Mr Stevens, while Mr Brooke said the investigation was going on in a ‘thoroughly effective’way.
Mr Stevens asserted that he had received the total support of Mr Annesley, his senior officers and all levels of the force.
‘The investigation is being conducted vigorously and I am confident that that will become publicly clear in due course.’
In his statement, Mr Annesley attacked Seamus Mallon, the SDLP MP who is regarded by members of the force as its most unremitting political critic.
‘Mr Mallon stated that I was embarked on sweeping the RUC very clean and inferred for that reason that some senior people within the force did not wish that approach to continue.
I utterly repudiate that inference.’
He said that while he viewed the ‘inner circle’ story as nonsense, the allegations could not be ignored and he had asked Mr Stevens to investigate.
Irish police believe they have foiled a major IRA kidnap attempt led by Patrick Sheehy, who is wanted for questioning in connection with the discovery in December of bomb-making materials in Clapham, south London.
He has now been positively identified by detectives as one of two men who hijacked a police car when traffic patrol officers checked out a suspect van in Co Limerick three weeks ago.
Army experts last night defused a land-mine packed with a hatchet head, knives, forks and nails at Dungannon, Co Tyrone.
Police divers also recovered a quantity of ammunition and a large collection of gun parts from a reservoir at Dungiven, Co Londonderry.
Funeral of Royal Marines bandsman killed at Deal Barracks
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
The flag-draped coffin of Musician Richard ‘Taff’ Jones, 27, one of the 10 Royal Marines bandsmen killed by IRA bombers at Deal, Kent, being carried from the barracks church, St Michael and All Angels, after a joint funeral service for him and Musician Bob Simmonds, 34.
There was also a service for Band Corporal David McMillan, 26.
Walk back in time
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
John Evans, 112, Britain's oldest man was asked to give evidence at a public inquiry to help prove a footpath linking Fforest-fach and Gowerton in West Glamorgan, has always been public.
‘Eye’ damages
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
Teresa Gorman, Conservative MP for Billericay, accepted undisclosed libel damages at the High Court in London against the satirical magazine Private Eye.
On 27 May 1988 the magazine published an account of a social occasion at Mrs Gorman's flat, attributing to her an ‘unseemly and offensive’ remark.
Lead free
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
Nearly 19,000 motorists converted their cars to lead-free petrol on the AA's automobile association nationwide adjustment days last week.
Mother ‘peaceful’
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
Colin Barnett, the husband of Aisling Barnett, the liver transplant patient, said she was still in a coma and looking ‘quite peaceful’ after her 11-hour operation.
Mrs Barnett, 35, suffered acute liver failure after a rare reaction to a drug.
Bail seized
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
Magistrates in Harwich, Essex, confiscated £725,000 in cash after Jai Benie, 37, a rice importer, failed to answer bail on £1.3m fraud charges.
They also ordered £25,000 surety to be seized.
It is believed to be Britain's largest bail forfeiture.
Vauxhall strike
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
Car workers at Vauxhall's Luton plant staged an unofficial walk-out in protest at the company's 7.5 per cent pay offer.
Unions are claiming a £25 a week.
Sunday editor
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
The Daily Telegraph appointed Trevor Grove as its Sunday editor.
The announcement makes clear that the newspaper group is moving towards a seven-day-a-week operation.
The announcement comes six days before staff are told of proposals to merge most of the two groups of journalists, involving redundancies.
Captain fined over oil spill
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
The Greek captain of a ship responsible for Sunday's oil spill in the Solent was fined £3,500.
More than 400 birds were coated with oil when 50 tonnes of crude oil spilled out from an opened valve as the Cypriot-registered tanker Worthy discharged her cargo at Fawley Refinery.
Lymington magistrates found Captain Antoniades Ionnes guilty of negligence.
He was ordered to pay £350 costs.
Government to curb acid house parties
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
The Government is today expected to announce moves to stop acid house parties, Virginia Bottomley, the environment minister, said last night.
She told the Association of District Councils' housing conference in Southampton she would announce a review of the regulations to see how such parties could be controlled.
Meanwhile the BBC have refused to hand over film of alleged rioting at an acid house party without a court order.
Surrey police say the film would help identify participants at the weekend party, near Reigate, Surrey, where 16 police were injured.
Speelman blunder ‘fatal’
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
JONATHAN Speelman endured a dismal day in the Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-final at the Sadler's Wells in central London yesterday, losing the second game of his match against Jan Timman.
After his fine defensive effort in the opening game, Speelman's supporters had high expectations for the second game, in which he had the white pieces, but it all went horribly wrong.
After a quiet opening, Speelman committed a simple blunder, losing a piece for two pawns.
The game stuttered on to move 31, when the English Grandmaster resigned.
In his successful quarter-final match against Nigel Short last year, Speelman seemed full of energy and surprising ideas.
But so far, against Timman, he has unusually restrained and conventional, showing little of his usual creativity.
In both games, the Dutchman has sprung surprises in the opening.
After winning the second game, Timman immediately offered a draw in the unfinished opening game of the match.
Analysis had shown that, in spite of an extra pawn, he held no serious prospect of a win.
Timman now leads 1½ to ½ with six games left to play.
In the other semi-final, Artur Yusupov and Anatoly Karpov, the former world champion, drew an explosive and entertaining game.
Yusupov was surprisingly aggressive with the black pieces, launching a quick attack.
With dangerous sacrifices threatening, and black knights cantering around his king, Karpov looked in trouble, but he defended accurately and a draw was agreed at move 33.
Both matches resume tomorrow.
The first game between Yusupov and Karpov had been a solid draw, with the position staying near to equality throughout.
Grandmasters were a little surprised by Yusupov's decision to surrender his bishop for a knight on move 22, but the resulting position never looked like ending in anything other than a draw.
Botham scores with warmth and honesty
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
IAN BOTHAM, cricket's most entertaining all rounder, showed last night that as a comedian he is a great batsman and an even better bowler.
But he was able to overwhelm an audience of devotees by genuine warmth and frankness.
Discarded by England for their tour of the West Indies, Botham has launched an alternative and considerably more lucrative winter career, a grandly titled ‘Lecture Tour’ of Britain.
At Stourbridge Town Hall in the West Midlands last night, where Botham began his tour, those who came instead of a night out at the pictures were somewhat surprised to find themselves treated to a night out at the pictures.
The entire first half consisted of film of Botham's greatest moments, liberally interspersed with more film of him drinking the sponsor's lager.
But in the final hour he did deliver the goods, taking impromptu questions from the audience.
Not that it was going to be easy to improve on the earlier filmed interview when, asked why he rarely practised in the nets, he replied: ‘I don't like confined spaces.’
One was tempted to applaud such spontaneous wit, but serious faces all around showed that this was not meant in jest.
He came closer to jest, though perhaps not close enough, when asked about his favourite curry: ‘I wish I had got that many runs this summer.’
And whether his relationship with Ted Dexter, the chairman of selectors, was like Cane and Abel: ‘No, we're not that close.’
What did emerge though was a personable and seemingly deeply caring young man, claiming not to understand why sportsmen could not go to South Africa but could go to India, which imported South African gold.
He was asked whether he thought he would get back his record for taking the most Test wickets.
‘Probably not,’ he replied wistfully.
‘You have to play for England to get the records.’
One felt the full house would have preferred him a few thousand miles away this winter, rather than on the cabaret circuit.
US arrests mural artist
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
GERARD KELLY, a well-known Belfast mural artist, is to appear in court in New York today in an apparent crackdown on Irish republicans with prison records who enter the US illegally.
Mr Kelly, who was expected to paint the portraits of the IRA trio killed by the SAS in Gibraltar and possibly the IRA fugitive Joseph Doherty, was arrested upon arrival from Ireland.
Mr Kelly, 32, who has been fighting deportation from Ireland to Britain for seven years, was invited by a left-wing publishing house to help complete a mural of revolutionary figures whose works and writings it publishes.
He is accused of making a false statement prior to entering the US, which carries a sentence of up to five years in jail.
He has been jailed for explosives offences in Ulster and has previously been denied a visa.