

DAY OUT /Fields of human conflict: David Keys on permanent reminders of the Second World War…
By DAVID KEYS
The 50th anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War has largely been an armchair affair, commemorated in newspapers and magazines, on the radio and television.
However, outside your sitting room thousands of wartime military installations still survive as historically important reminders of Britain's epic struggle.
Fighter and Bomber Command airfields, anti tank defences, gun emplacements, prisoner of war camps — and some 6,000 pillboxes still form part of the landscape in many areas of the country.
In the heart of London's Whitehall visitors can explore the warren of cramped underground rooms and passageways which served as the nerve centre of Britain's war effort.
Known as the Cabinet War Rooms, the complex has only been open to the public since 1983.
Inside, one can still see the Map Room, where Churchill used to study the progress of the war, the Cabinet Room where many of the Second World War's most important decisions were made, and Churchill's personal accommodation from which he made several of his wartime broadcasts.
In the space of 12 months the War Office built 25,000 pillboxes — almost a quarter of which still survive — and erected hundreds of miles of concrete anti-tank defences.
On windswept lonely Chesil Beach — that great ten mile long pile of pebbles which stretches westwards along the Dorset coast from Portland — one can still explore the pillboxes and anti-tank defences which were built in 1940 to resist the threat of invasion.
And later in the war, in 1943, it was this imposing natural wall of shingle which was used by the famous Dambusters as a practice target before their attack on the Mohne and Eder dams in Germany.
Fifty miles inland, the remains of the wartime government's fall-back line of defence still survives, mostly along the line of the Kennett-Avon canal.
Between Bradford-on-Avon and Reading are some 200 pillboxes built in 1940 to house mobile two pound anti-tank guns and machine guns in the event of invasion.
The recesses in the pillbox floors where the guns would have fitted are still there today.
The various different types of pillbox can be seen from the canal towpath.
Larger scale gun emplacements, however, are much rarer.
The only surviving group of such installations can be explored at Curry Mallet near Taunton, Somerset, where three large gun emplacements with three-foot-thick concrete walls were built to house six-pounder anti-tank guns with a range of half a mile.
Nearby are pillboxes designed to accommodate heavy machine guns.
This formed part of a defence line erected to defend Britain in the event of a German establishment of a beach head in Cornwall.
But in the end the Battle of Britain was not fought on the land, but in the air.
Today, one of the original air operations planning rooms is still preserved intact.
At Duxford airfield, the operations table from which aspects of the Battle of Britain were controlled can be seen along with the original control tower, hangar and runway.
A similar air-war tracking table -with different symbols for British and German aircraft — can be seen at the Royal Observer Corps Museum in Winchester.
It was the ROC's job to pass flight tracking information over to the RAF.
At aircraft museums like those at Hendon and Duxford visitors can see the legendary Spitfire and Hurricane fighters.
The only large British World War Two surface warship to have survived to the present day, HMS Belfast, is located on the Thames, just west of Tower Bridge.
Visitors can wander round the vessel and explore everything from the engine room to the galley and from the bridge to the gun turrets.
The Belfast helped sink the German battleship Scharnhorst off Norway in 1943 and led the naval bombardment in support of the Normandy D Day landing at Juno Beach.
At the Imperial War Museum, wartime historians have recreated a London street as it would have looked during the Blitz.
The full horror which Londoners had to endure is commemorated in the re-creation — complete with the sounds of anti-aircraft fire and the acrid smell of burning buildings.
Harwich, Roughs Fort 7 miles out at sea (viewable with binoculars).
Kennet and Avon Canal, Avon Long pillbox defence line.
Margate, Tongue Sand Fort 10 miles out tosea.
Shoeburyness, Red Sand Fort 5 miles out tosea.
REGIONAL THEATRE /West of the West End: Paul Arnott tracks Shadowlands from Plymouth to London
By PAUL ARNOTT
As Elijah Moshinsky looked out from the roof-top coffee shop of the plush hotel overlooking Plymouth Hoe — in which he is ensconced during rehearsals of Shadowlands — he confessed that this was the first time he had been to Plymouth in his life.
As a star opera director whose career is becoming increasingly orientated towards the theatre, it is understandable that he hasn't often found the time to stray from the great metropolises to mount a production.
Yet here he was, a man who is a reasonable outside bet for the vacant crown at the RSC, reading favourable reviews for his previous work, Another Time with Albert Finney (which had opened the night before in the West End), and preparing to rehearse in a Methodist Hall in the middle of Wesley country.
Waiting in the Methodist Hall to rehearse the roles of CS Lewis and the woman he spent three blissful years with before her death, Joy Davidman, were Nigel Hawthorne and Jane Lapotaire, another pair of stars not usually to be found out west.
The Theatre Royal, Plymouth, is about to send a highly commercial product into the West End.
For Elijah Moshinsky, there are great advantages to starting a show out of town.
‘It seems to me that a new play like Shadowlands needs to be exposed to different audiences before it settles down.
It's especially important in a play like this, which is such a delicate and sensitive piece of writing, that the actors grow together as a cohesive group.
I think that it is much easier to create that atmosphere in a good out-of-town theatre like Plymouth rather than to prepare a star vehicle in a draughty rehearsal room somewhere in London.’
If theatre artists of this calibre are prepared to launch a production from Plymouth, it seems a fair bet that the Theatre Royal management has got its act together.
As Moshinsky went off to rehearsals, I headed back to the office of the General Manager, Andrew Welch.
Welch is the first to admit that when the Theatre Royal opened in 1982 it was widely regarded as a white elephant, which quickly became little more than a stopping off point for second-rate touring products.
But since his arrival at the theatre five years ago he has worked with the artistic director, Roger Redfarn, to make full use of his evident skills in business management.
Under Welch and Redfarn, The Theatre Royal has co-funded productions with other theatrical managements and a consortium of West Country businessmen, embracing such shows as Up On The Roof, Brigadoon and the about-to-open Buddy, as well as working with touring companies such as Paines Plough to launch a national tour of The Art Of Success.
With Shadowlands, another co-funded production, Plymouth ventures into the area of the commercial straight play which may well lead to more similar productions of new work.
Welch believes that if regional theatres are to grow they will have to learn from his example, and seek the backing of local businessmen as well as the more traditional sources of commercial theatrical managements.
As I left his office a young woman from a Polish theatre company came in to discuss with Welch the principles of controlling ‘income streams’.
Stage News
By PAUL ARNOTT
Direct from the Chichester Festival Theatre, Ian Judge's elegant production of A Little Night Music comes into the Piccadilly Theatre in preview from 6 Oct, opening on 11 Oct.
Peter McEnery and Dorothy Tutin (above) play the middle-aged ex-lovers who iron out the wrinkles and get together just in time for the final curtain.
The Independent can offer ten pairs of free tickets for Mon 9 Oct to the first ten readers who phone 01-436 0605 today (between 10am and 10.30am only) with the answer to the following question: which film is A Little Night Music based on?
A heartfelt plea to any theatre proprietors who have a venue available during November.
Laura Thompson is a young theatre director who is now in the middle of rehearsals for Romeo And Juliet.
Alas, Thompson and her chosen theatre were star-crossed and she now has a production but nowhere to stage it.
If you have a London theatre with a gap left in the November schedule, phone Laura Thompson on 01-969 6524.
Late news of an extra platform interview at the National to be held in the Cottesloe Theatre on Friday 6 Oct at 6.00.
Jenni Murray will be interviewing the excellent American actor Ed Asner (above) who, although best known to Brits as Lou Grant, has been involved in numerous political movements.
He is in England filming Not A Penny More, Not A Penny Less.
Tickets, priced £2.50, are available from the National box office on 01-928 2252.
THEATRE /Lady Betty — Wilde Theatre, Bracknell
By LOUISE LEVENE
‘What has Lady Betty done?
Why does blood seep from her son?’ runs the grisly ballad that tells the true story of a woman in 18th century Ireland, sentenced to death for the murder of a young gentleman who turns out to be the long-lost product of her liaison with the English gentry.
The sentence is commuted to a life within prison walls when she volunteers to hang those due to swing beside her.
‘Lady’ Betty pursued a career of hanging and flogging well into the 19th century and Declan Donnellan's account of her life is told with a distressing mixture of savagery and sentiment; the hangwoman herself is portrayed by Sally Dexter with hateful harpiness relieved by startling moments of tenderness.
The play is enlivened by the vicious energy of the performances and by a variety of Irish music and dance which ranges from mournful ballads to the jolliest of jigs, transforming what could have been a dreary harangue into an invigorating ensemble work.
Louise Levene
THEATRE /Patricia Routledge in Come for the Ride -Greenwich Theatre
By KATHRYN MEAD
One-man shows are the high-wire acts of theatrical repertory, and all too often performers miss the trapeze.
In this case, however, the performer is Patricia Routledge, and such is the assurance of her grasp that the occasion is a masterclass in theatrical craft.
The cloying PR bills the evening as ‘unashamedly nostalgic’.
This it is, but the miracle is not that Patricia Routledge can make the old weep with ‘Roses of Picardy’, but that she can still move the young with it.
No actress alive better captures the ferocious pathos of the little heartbreak writ large, and although her immaculate comic technique sustains whole passages of visual lunacy, she has in addition the much rarer theatrical gift of being able to transmit emotion in its purest form.
The highlight of the evening is a heartstopping extract from Alan Bennett.
Here is sentiment salvaged by wit, rapture lit with an inner grace.
And, in Patricia Routledge, a real treasure.
THEATRE /The Astronomer's Garden, Royal Court, SW1.
By SARAH HEMMING
The Astronomer's Garden, Royal Court, SW1.
A play about rival 17th-century astronomers sounds like an arid evening's theatre — which is partly the point of Kevin Hood's piece.
While its base is the vicious rivalry between Flamsteed (Trevor Baxter, above) and Halley calculating longitude, its true subjects are sex, class and the real world they cannot catalogue.
Hood paints the two, irresistibly, as bombastic old sticks, but the play's real strength is its exploration of relationships, showing how Flamsteed's wife and maid navigate male ego-infested waters.
He works huge ideas about reason and feeling into a witty pastiche of Restoration comedy, and Croydon Warehouse's production is excellent.