

FILM /Observing the breach: Kenneth Branagh's Henry V
By ADAM MARS-JONES
IN A culture and a century that have doubts about matching up to Prince Hamlet, feeling fitted at best to the role of attendant lord, it's astonishing that Shakespeare's Henry V should become, except at a time of national emergency, a resonant figure of any sort.
He has so few doubts, and his objectives are so suspect.
The England he represents is not so much irrelevant as antithetical to any modern image of Britain.
Nevertheless, Kenneth Branagh has saddled up the old warhorse and given it new colours.
As well as starring and directing, he has adapted the play for the screen, though that isn't to say, quite, that he has translated it into film language.
Branagh's version retains a Chorus — Derek Jacobi in voice-over or in twentieth-century mufti (greatcoat and scarf), sometimes even sharing the frame with the action — though arguably the camera can be trusted to set the scene unaided.
A camera tracking across an antiquated map of France, on the other hand, is being under-employed.
There are flashes here and there of more ambitious screen writing.
While Falstaff (Robbie Coltrane) is dying, Pistol (Robert Stephens) remembers him in former days, carousing and then pleading with Hal not to banish him when King.
But this flashback turns out not to represent a memory, or at least not Pistol's memory, since King-to-be Henry repudiates him in voice-over, without Hal's lips moving, though Falstaff reacts as if the words were spoken aloud.
Compression of this sort, practised more widely, might succeed in bringing the play over into a new medium.
In an isolated instance, it seems a sign of inexperience, of trying to include too much; and certainly the virtues of the film remain theatrical.
There are disadvantages to this, naturally, also.
Branagh himself, for all his vocal assurance, has a flat, thin-lipped, distinctly inexpressive mouth, a considerable drawback for a screen actor, especially in close-up, where a viewer's attention is likely to flicker back and forth between mouth and eyes.
The film reunites a number of the principal actors from the 1984 RSC production, but a true feeling of ensemble would be too much to hope for.
Inevitably, the impression is not of unified excellence, but of a sort of march-past of British theatrical talent.
Too many of the minor roles become cameos, and a cameo is either an ornament or a blot, but in either case tends to detract from the momentum of a film.
Before Bardolph opens his mouth, for instance, he is a strange-looking man with a nose like a pear marinated in port; but when he speaks, he is Richard Briers, trailing all his light-comedy associations.
Conversely, when a cameo works, it imposes its own dynamics on the film.
It is an irrelevant disappointment that after her delightful scene with Princess Katherine (Emma Thompson), Geraldine McEwan as Alice has nothing to do but adjust a veil or two and look pleased.
The irrational thought almost occurs that Shakespeare couldn't have been that smart if he didn't realise that he had here a performer who can turn sows' ears into silk purses, and silk purses into live butterflies.
How could he have failed to find some extra business for her?
Such are the perils of power-house casting.
To offset them, this new Henry V (PG) offers a well thought-out progression from peace to war, from council chamber to battlefield, from words to deeds.
Henry's court is a place of dramatic lighting and suppressed excitement, while the atmosphere of the French deliberations is more informal, full of frustration and weariness.
There is a certain amount of splendour at Harfleur, with Henry in the breached wall, back-lit by yellow explosions, but it doesn't last.
Before Agincourt, the French tents are well-appointed, and the mood is impatient, while the English soldiers huddle fatalistically under a hostile sky.
The battle itself is a welter of savage confusion.
It is in the battle scenes that the new film differs most from Olivier's prototype, and Branagh can fairly claim to have stripped the veneer of jingoism from the play, by showing war in its true horror.
But the situation isn't as simple as that.
For one thing, it is technically easier, and cheaper, to represent a battle as a series of muddy brutalities in slow motion than as an exhilarating spectacle.
But more to the point, Shakespeare didn't envisage Agincourt being fully enacted in the first place.
War in Henry V is a test of kingship rather than a subject in its own right.
Henry's achievement in the play is not military as such, but rhetorical.
He doesn't prove by feat of arms, but by words, that he is not any more the dissipated boy that he was; but that is enough.
He finds a way of talking about England, about right, about courage as a sort of secular sainthood, and it is his words, acting on his army, that bring France down.
The French messenger Mountjoy, bringing an insult from the Dauphin, is met with a fierce defiance that leaves him, in this version, visibly shocked.
There is no suggestion in the play that Henry's defiance might be hollow.
In this drama, words are deeds, and right from the start Henry talks like a winner.
At the siege of Harfleur, it is Henry's words that lead directly to the surrender of the town.
He gives a convincing account of what is in store for the inhabitants if they continue to resist, and his words acquire the force of the deeds he describes.
It is only late in the day that the weary French King (Paul Scofield) gears up his own hostile rhetoric, and then he entrusts the actual campaign to various representatives, the Dauphin, the Constable, Orleans, who cry up only their armour and their horses, and are rhetorically out-ranked even before the battle begins.
Seen from this point of view, the battle itself is actually irrelevant to Shakespeare's purpose.
So, what of Branagh's purpose, if the ‘realism’ of the film is beside the point?
Clearly, he has some sort of affinity with the part of King Henry, but it doesn't seem an actorly affinity.
Branagh, too, talks like a winner, and Henry V offers him better than any other play in the repertoire what might be called a yuppie dynamic, a mythology of success and self-definition rather than of struggle.
This is not to deny that Branagh is at his best as a performer in Henry's most anguished outpouring, his prayer to the god of battles before Agincourt; here Branagh the actor is least hampered by Branagh the self-publicist.
But it is fair to say that the real chemistry is not between actor and part, but between the idea of the star as entrepreneur and the idea of the king as a self-made man.
Both Kenneth and Henry, on the stage or battlefield and off it, talk their different ways to triumph.
This, though, unlike the identification that Henry makes in the course of the play between himself, his cause and his country, is not an identification easily shared by mere onlookers.
FILM /Tragic comedians, life in a miner key: Ariel, Wired, K-9, Cookie and Play Me Something
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
CINEMA outside Hollywood used to come in national waves, but no longer: China has been silenced for a while, and the work emerging out of Africa has been distributed too sporadically to seem like a movement.
But Aki Kaurismaki, who accounts, with his brother, for more than one-third of the Finnish film industry, makes a movie a year and has a stake in distribution, constitutes a national cinema, all by himself.
In Ariel (15) a miner who has been made redundant heads south to Helsinki and falls in love.
‘I've got a kid,’ she warns him.
‘Excellent,’ he ripostes.
‘We'll save time starting a family.’
Kaurismaki doesn't hang around either: dispensing with longueurs (Ariel runs 74 minutes, B-movie length), he traces the man's unsuccessful search for work and inevitable lapse into petty crime with clipped, deadpan comedy.
The cool narrative economy and unforced style recall early Fassbinder.
And, while none of the industrial townscapes could be described as pretty, he has a terrific eye.
Introducing Wired, his biography of John Belushi, Bob Woodward recalls how the rigours of research involved going to bed early so as to rise at 4am to visit one of the comedian's favourite watering holes.
Annotated, logged and indexed, his book scarcely illuminated Belushi's demons, or the system that supposedly destroyed him.
But it did summon up the delicious image of the straitlaced reporter gingerly dipping his toe, notebook in hand, into the showbiz underworld.
The film of Wired (18) features Woodward (J T Walsh) as straight man to the podgy comedian, but though subtitled ‘the laughs and times of John Belushi’, it is woefully short on the former component.
While the book charted his passage through Chicago, New York and finally Los Angeles, it largely skips the first two circles of hell.
The story begins in a morgue, with Belushi (honourably played by Michael Chiklis), dead from drugs at 33, hopping off the slab to review his life with a guardian angel.
This ill-advised conceit casts a pall on the piece from the outset, and it doesn't help that the skits (rewritten and reconstructed) are crushingly unfunny.
But the trouble, you feel, lies with Belushi.
It may be that his gifts lay in the thrill and risk of live performance, losing their savour in aspic; or, more likely, that his genius was always over-rated.
Wired purports to be about America not just Belushi, but this is trite stuff about decadence in Tinseltown; what it has to say about the nation is nugatory, unless you count a depressing scene in which an audience collapses in laughter while the Voice of its Generation (as Bluto in Animal House) stuffs a sandwich down his pants.
‘Belushi's a book,’ believes Woodward, but one is inclined to agree with the cop who pronounces him ‘just another fat junkie who went belly-up.’
K-9 (12), which stars James Belushi, hints at the less than glittering screen career that might have awaited his elder brother, had he lived.
It concerns yet another pair of mismatched cops, with the disposable novelty of one of them being a dog, which tends to restrict verbal sparring, along with the mangy dialogue and Belushi's lack of manic spin.
Cookie (15) is a disappointment, for its credentials look promising on paper.
Directed by Susan Seidelman and co-written by Nora Ephron, it is a ‘high-spirited comedy’ about the Mafia, not an easy genre as Married to the Mob and even Prizzi's Honour have demonstrated.
Emily Lloyd is charmless as the daughter of Peter Falk's ageing gangster, though Dianne Wiest has her moments as a fluffy moll with claws of steel.
Play Me Something (15) is set on a small Hebridean island where a group of passengers await their plane.
A dapper stranger hoves into view.
‘So many stories,’ he says with a puckish smile.
‘So many stories here.
Waiting to be chosen.’
Reason, one might think, for the wary traveller to duck behind the luggage lockers, but no, the assembly listens rapt as John Berger (for it is he) embarks upon a long yarn about two Italian peasants who meet at a Communist Party dance.
Timothy Neat directs tricksily; the aim is to reflect on different ways of telling stories.
But its insights rarely exceed the banal.
FILM /Rushes
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
COMING soon, maybe: a triumph for the gods of chaos, lunacy and bad taste -or, to put it more plainly, a film version of John Kennedy Toole's wonderfully funny cult novel, A Confederacy of Dunces.
As followers of these pages will know, this project was at one time to have been directed by a America's leading connoisseur of chaos, lunacy and bad taste, John Waters (who made Pink Flamingos and Hairspray).
This plan came to grief, however, when Waters, in an attempt to establish friendly relations, gave a prospective producer a copy of one of his books, which showed the idiosyncratic director palling up with one of Charles Manson's gang — a gesture which was in even worse taste than it might sound, as the producer proved to have been a good friend of one of the gang's victims.
Now, though, comes the word that Confederacy is being developed by Ivan Reitman — coming up soon in Ghostbusters II, which he also wrote — and if all goes well, he will be directing it for 20th Century Fox.
There is as yet no word on who will play the part of Toole's hero, the bloated medievalist Ignatius J Reilley, though earlier suggestions for the part have included the late Divine (Waters's idea) and the late John Belushi (the studio's idea).
As the part requires an actor of substantial proportions, the obvious choice would be someone like John Candy or John Goodman (of David Byrne's True Stories and Channel Four's Roseanne)— though he may be simply too nice to play Ignatius, and is anyway busy perfecting his bowling technique for his upcoming appearance as Fred in the live-action version of The Flintstones.
From a slightly more elevated plane of cinematic endeavour comes news to warm the heart of Woody Allen.
Ingmar Bergman, who for some years now has been insistent that Fanny and Alexander was his farewell to the moving image, has decided to stage a come-back with a project called The Good Will.
Set in Uppsala at the beginning of the century, it tells the story of Bergman's parents, and will be made for two different formats: as a four-part series for televsion, and as two feature films for cinemas.
Unfortunately, Bergman has decided not to direct his own script, but has instead put it in the hands of the Danish director Bille August, who made Pelle the Conquerer, which won last year's Palme d'Or at Cannes and which Bergman is rumoured to like so much that he has already seen it six times.
FILM — SET REPORT /Liver birds and lager louts: James Rampton visits Willy Russell's latest film
By JAMES RAMPTON
LOCATION shooting in Liverpool can present problems.
Failing to find an appropriate site for a shot, the location manager on the new Willy Russell venture, Dancing Through The Dark, decided to mock it up by erecting a spanking new bus shelter in Wavertree, one of Liverpool's livelier areas.
When the camera crew arrived three days later, the shelter was covered in graffiti and all its glass had been shattered.
Such unpredictability can offer advantages, however.
During a night shoot outside the Locarno Ballroom, a leather-clad punk skidded past on a skateboard — pulled by a pair of Dobermanns.
He was immediately roped in as an extra for the night.
There were no such thrills the day I visited the set of Dancing.
I had been promised a gripping afternoon's shoot in the Locarno Gents (where the original play was entirely set).
Unfortunately, they were behind schedule and I had to make do with a curry-house scene.
This turned out to be an object lesson in how to lay waste to an Indian Restaurant.
In welcoming the crew, the Rajah Curry House in Liverpool 13 cannot have anticipated the battlefield of cables, cameras and kormas it was to become.
The scene, a stag-party's post-pub, pre-dancing meal, was not going well: it was up to the fourteenth take, and the continuity man was looking frazzled.
Not only did he have to keep wafting a smoke machine to create that distinctive curry house fug, and smoking cigarettes down to the level of the previous scene; he also had to keep up a steady supply of fresh poppadums.
But I felt sorriest for the actor who had to down 14 half-pints of (non-alcoholic) lager.
With a tight budget of around £2m, the crew must watch how much it lashes out on lager.
Adapted from Russell's 1978 stageplay, Stags And Hens, about a stag-night and a hen-party which converge at the same venue, it is the first BBC-funded film ever to receive a full cinematic release (next Spring) before its television broadcast (September 1991).
Inspired by the success of Film On Four and the ITV companies' recent forays into film-making (like Granada's My Left Foot), the BBC has finally taken the plunge into the feature-film market, in partnership with Palace Pictures and British Screen.
The co-producer is Russell's wife, Annie, who has long considered Stags And Hens a suitable vehicle for a film: ‘I badgered Willy into it’.
Her presence now ‘makes script conferences a lot easier.’
An American studio had approached Willy for the rights to the play, but ‘they envisaged a Brat Pack movie, packaging first and script later,’ and he turned them down.
What with one Oscar-nominated script (Educating Rita) and another potential hit (Shirley Valentine) behind him, ex-hairdresser Russell was not sniffy about translating his own work from stage to screen.
‘Millions of people will see the film who'd never step into a theatre to save their lives.
You have to put on a completely different hat.’
For Dancing Through The Dark, Russell has also had to wear his composer's hat, scoring five new songs and all the background music.
‘It's a question of pragmatism, because we found to obtain rights to certain tracks would have cost more than the budget for the entire picture.
We were going to use a four-second snatch of The Hokey-Cokey, and were quoted £3,000.
It pays to write your own stuff.’
In a further cost-cutting exercise, Russell has volunteered to play a pub drunk.
He has confidence in the director, Mike Ockrent, experienced in theatre but a film debutant: ‘You don't do Follies or Me And My Girl by phoning it in.’
He and Ockrent go back a long way — to a jointly written screenplay for Paul MacCartney, which ‘never saw the light of day — a damn shame, because it was a lot better than Broad Street.
The only problem was it had to incorporate Wings…’
Ockrent is still trying to tone down his screen actors —‘remember there'll be twenty feet of grimace up there’— but he retains the keenness of a novice: ‘You get the excitement of a first night every ten minutes.’
Not to mention the Dobermanns.
TELEVISION /Classy product
By FIONA MADDOCKS
BENEATH an excess of plum-coloured satin, two well-matured dormant bodies stir grumpily to the digital blips and bleeps of a high-tech quartz alarm.
Open-mouthed and stale-breathed, they greet the day with a groan.
The wife, a book called Enjoy Your Menopause almost sharing her pillow (a privilege unlikely to have been enjoyed by her husband since early days of marriage), slumbers on.
Vic, though, is a man of action.
Dragging himself through the daily routine which gets him into his beige-toned synthetic fibres and out of his neo-neo house, he roars off in his Jag (number plate, VIC 100), fag in mouth, Carly Simon on cassette, ready to take on the world.
Elsewhere, the twin bells of a sturdily traditional wind-up clock squeal, wakening another slumbering pair, younger, fresher, clearly less ossified in their morning habits than the first but equally resistant to the day.
Here she, not he, is the anxious worker, soon dressed, pausing briefly over The Guardian Women's Page and muesli before climbing into her clapped-out Renault and heading for her own day of action.
The opening of David Lodge's television adaptation of Nice Work (BBC 2), his latest novel, immediately establishes the contrasting worlds inhabited by Vic Wilcox, Managing Director of Pringle, a Midlands engineering firm (or ‘J Pringle-and-sons-how-may-I-help-you?’ as the dolly receptionist intones) and Dr Robyn Penrose, temporary Lecturer in English at Rummidge University, devout feminist and campaigner against education cuts, bombs, racism and most other things.
That this first episode entailed a prolonged bout of frenzied cross-editing -from bed to bed, car to car, lecture room to board room, production line to picket line — was, perhaps, inevitable.
Until Vic and Robyn's lives coincide, when she goes to ‘shadow’ him for an improbable Industry Year project, the viewer needs as much information as possible.
They begin, after all, as caricatures who only take on further dimensions as the tale develops.
But the technique felt laboured, and may have confused anyone not familiar with the book to which Lodge, in his own screenplay, sticks fairly closely.
A few scenes stood out awkwardly: Robyn soothing her tearful female student who can't do her essay because has to do a bit of modelling to make up her grant ('It's not fair,’ she sobs, in one of the script's less ingenious lines); Robyn's unlikely outburst at a Pringle meeting when an Asian worker is nominated for sacking.
But these are also weaknesses in the original, which won't worry Lodge fans but tend to agitate the unconverted.
In general, Nice Work transfers perfectly to television.
The dialogue is crisp and stinging, the setting (in Birmingham University and environs) authentic, the cast ideal.
Warren Clarke makes a superbly unattractive and boorish Vic, face in repose like a flat tyre.
Haydn Gwynne, looking uncannily like Meryl Streep, makes a rather better-groomed Robyn than expected, versatile, spirited and wholly watchable.
On this showing, people who avowedly hate his novels may find themselves hooked to this series.
A sober and numbing Inside Story (BBC 1), ‘The Forgotten Holocaust’ related how the gypsy population of Europe, like that of the Jews, was wiped out by the Nazis.
Survivors quietly described how families were destroyed, women abused, men castrated; how the Gestapo made them play their gypsy violins even while they performed their atrocities.
By its restraint, George Case's programme provided a long-overdue and eloquent epitaph.
MUSIC /Indian ghost dance: An opera by Ravi Shankar premiered: Ghanashyam — Birmingham
By JAN SMACZNY
PART OF the City of Birmingham Touring Opera's brief is to involve and appeal to a broad community.
CBTO's brief to Ravi Shankar in their first commission was ‘to create a piece which would be both beautiful and meaningful to today's audience’.
What we were offered, if definition is needed, might be called ballet-pantomime: it was certainly not opera.
As in the best ballet-pantomimes, the message is direct in origin and presentation.
At times the method is decidedly crude, especially in a hint of West Side Story which concludes the overture, doubtless aimed at ‘today's audience’.
Oddly enough, Ghanashyam (A Broken Branch) approaches opera in the nature of the story it tells: originating in village festivities, the tale unfolds a rake's progress towards perdition, in this case via drugs, but with an extra metaphysical twist when the spirit of the departed returns to inhabit his wife.
While the intentions of the plot are clear enough, it is not significantly developed by the dance.
Rather, the story acts as a framework for a series of ornamental tours de force.
The mime and dancing is throughout spectacular, a delight to the eye.
The performance of Durga Lal in the title role is a masterpiece of versatility and concentration: his delirium at the end of the first act is nothing short of hair-raising.
To say that the recipe is naive would be to miss the point, but with the predominance of so much dance, drama is often lacking.
For instance, the death of Ghanashyam is, frankly, anticlimactic with most of the emphasis thrown onto the lovely succeeding threnodic dance.
In the first act, where the action is presented in a series of tableaux, the dance enhances the spectacle superbly.
By the second act, with its greater density of incident, I found my sympathies withdrawing.
CBTO's production is a splendid frame for the work of some prodigiously talented performers.
Graham Vick produces the work effectively and unobtrusively, and Paul Brown's convincing three-dimensional set was a near-perfect match to the action.
Ravi Shankar's score, drawing elements in from a wide range of sources, is both seductively lyrical and at times rhythmically complex.
Providing a continuous texture, the music never pales and only in the shock-horror theme associated with drugs approaches banality.
Apart from some relentless over-amplification, the music, directed by Ashit Desai, emerges with enormous verve.
As a whole, this grand spectacle was a rare hit with what seemed to be as varied an audience as any opera company is likely to find these days.
Ravi Shankar has given his audience a work of undeniable beauty, but whether this captivating setting has rendered the tale equally ‘meaningful’ is another question entirely.
MUSIC /On the Golani heights: Canadian Music Festival — QEH
By ROBERT MAYCOCK
SPENDING last weekend at the National Federation of Music Societies' conference, it was heartening to see the determination of the amateur promoters to match the skills of the professionals.
It is a pity some of the professionals were not there learning alongside them: back on the South Bank a full-scale festival of Canadian music is running all week, but its profile has barely risen to the Plimsoll line.
If you were one of the few to risk the Queen Elizabeth Hall on Monday, you would have been able to find no information about the composers being played.
No Canadian jokes, please, but doing this on the nation's behalf just plays up to stereotypes.
There is a crack group like Nexus here, for heaven's sake, and nobody knows.
Two of the Nexus percussionists played on Monday, along with another musician who is one of the finest current exponents of her instrument, the violist Rivka Golani.
Considered purely as a recital by Golani, this was a riveting evening: in such a degree of intimacy her restless prowling, crouching, rising to full height, even stamping, combines with the intense commitment of her playing not to impede the music but to dramatise it, to add a further dimension to its urgency.
The page-turner wisely sat far back, following his own score.
Most of the pieces, certainly, needed all the dramatising they could get.
The better of them were for viola alone, including Brian Cherney's Shekhinah, in its first performance: this alternates furious tremolando, sudden violent attack, and wistful melody, invented or quoted.
Cherney said (in the only programme-note) that he had been inspired by Golani's bearing as well as her playing, and although the density of events was not high, the sense of concentration and unity between music and performer was total as the wilder elements were gradually exorcised and a numb calm remained.
Prousse, by Jean Papineau-Couture, argued an intense and clearly delineated course from climax to climax: the most powerful of the evening's compositions, and the one most likely to attract other players.
These were both composers of the middle generation, known quantities by name at least, like Michael Colgrass whose Variations for Viola and Percussion ended the official programme in Bartok-and-Brittenish style, unfortunately with a built-in wrecking device for its own atmosphere: the drums must constantly be retuned.
Robin Engelman, who coped patiently with the percussion part here, had a marginally less exciting time in Bruce Mather's Gatinara, where easy-going alternations of viola and marimba once took off in a bout of vigorous hocketing, but not for long.
Messages IV suggested greater youth in its composer, Stephen Tittle, who used a sort of minimalism with interruptions to build up a spirited and engaging little number, though hardly one to overstretch the skills of Bob Becker, the percussionist this time.
Becker and Engelman combined only for a pleasantly smoochy encore by David Jaeger, composed this year and arranged by Engelman from a piano accompaniment to the viola.
But it was Golani's night, even when hidden by scores that sprawled along a row of eight music stands, of which the eighth always stayed empty — just another of those little unexplained things.
THEATRE /The Southern cross: Michael Church on From the Mississippi Delta at the Young Vic
By MICHAEL CHURCH
THE STAGE is a backyard bounded by a palisade of rusty corrugated iron; two ladders lead up to a balcony, a tap drips into a can.
A black girl wanders on softly singing a country blues, and is joined by two others also singing; the light is dreamy, the harmony sweet.
The opening scene of From the Mississippi Delta is both beguiling and assured.
The girls then settle to tell a story: of a lady called Aint Baby, born with no parents and no name, and raised by her own efforts to local prominence as a midwife; of Aint Baby's daughter Candy, product of a night of casual lust with a passing drifter, and of Candy's haphazard rise to an academic doctorate at a university in the liberal north.
The daughter's story proceeds serenely at first, then hits a sickening crunch; raped at 11, she is shot into wary adulthood.
Transitory moments are offset by big set-piece scenes with many characters: a difficult birth, and a fair where Candy discovers she can upstage the leading lady by a lewd trick with a cigar between her legs.
Then comes the train journey to Chicago, the low life amid the bright lights, and the dawning of wisdom in the form of the Civil Rights brigade.
The rest is not so much history as anti-racist herstory.
The events are presented in episodic form, as a continuous narrative tossed antiphonally to and fro between the actresses.
This was the method pioneered in the RSC's Nicholas Nickleby but, in contrast to that brilliant tapestry, the effect here is one of relentless monotony.
Endesha Ida Mae Holland, the author of this veiled autobiography, is described in the programme as a popular lecturer and ‘story-teller’: she works the same seam as Maya Angelou, Toni Morrison and Alice Walker (whose spirit she fulsomely invokes, and whose book The Color Purple she implicitly recalls at every turn).
But Holland's particular trademark is a cute and cloying sentimentality, with pathos laid on thick.
Her story-telling has no obliqueness, no mystery; everything is slowly and patiently explained, as though the audience was a fidgety bunch of six-year-olds.
The two directors have done their best, speeding the tale along on the wings of Bessie Smith and mouth-organ blues.
And the actresses themselves are a delight: Josette Bushell-Mingo has an extraordinarily mobile face and an infectiously comic manner, Joy Richardson shows an uncanny ability to get inside a 10-year-old's skin, and Angela Bruce, as the mother, has natural authority.
The rape scene takes place with breathtaking violence, the fair exudes riotous conviviality, and the Brer Rabbit japes come over with gusto.
The accents are entirely convincing and the authentically Southern atmosphere implies an ever-present threat from white oppressors lying in wait beyond the cosiness of the backyard palisade.
By the interval, though, the show already felt overlong; as Act Two ground into heavily didactic gear the procession of events seemed interminable.
I joined Endesha Holland's class eager to learn; I left it hating school.
THEATRE /An Inca's curse: Royal Hunt of the Sun — Palace, Manchester
By JEFFREY WAINWRIGHT
FROM Atahuallpa to Crazy Horse, whether represented as savage enemies of Christian civilisation or denizens of Utopia, the people of pre-Columbian America are a European invention.
Perhaps it is not possible to produce Peter Shaffer's 1964 play about the conquest of Peru in a way that is informed by our subsequently increased awareness of how such representation works.
But in wondering it is interesting to compare a much more recent success, David Henry Hwang's M Butterfly.
Hwang's devotion to theatrical effects suggests that he shares Shaffer's belief that ‘peacockery is one of the dramatist's obligations’, and both plays concern an effort at a human relationship across cultural difference: Pizarro's fascination with the defeated Inca god-king Atahuallpa, and Gallimard's desire for his Butterfly.
But whereas in M Butterfly the theatrical flash and illusion is entirely implicated in the theme of the representation and misrecognition of one culture by another, in The Royal Hunt of the Sun, at least in this revival, it has no such purpose.
If anything, Tim Pigott-Smith's touring Compass production accentuates the way that the Inca are conceived in European terms.
Atahuallpa, 33-years-old we are carefully informed, is unmistakably a Christ-figure, and throughout the second half Jack Klaff is dressed and posed accordingly, culminating in a pieta in Pizarro's arms.
None of the cumbersome religious debate dispels the fundamental message of ‘Christ re-crucified-again'.
Certainly the foreign mystery of the Inca — part of it feminine — stirs Pizarro's bluff existentialist heart, but the play and production defines it too readily in familiar terms.
At a more basic level this version of Incadom is not remotely convincing.
Paul Hernon's costumes feature several vivid patchwork quilts for the nobility (though one seems to have made a pioneering landfall from The Mikado) and others suggest cousinship with Little Plum.
Apart from the thrilling cries that try to resurrect the king, and the still figure of Jack Klaff, there is nothing radical or dynamic in either the vocalisation or the movement.
Among the conquistadores only Robert Clare's Venetian artillerist has the scale and style to compel the Palace, much less Peru, though Matthew Sim's young Martin convinces.
As Pizarro, Denis Quilley is suitably grizzled but the character's ponderous despair seems to have submerged his generalship.
Is this a play still capable of generating new meanings?
Tim Pigott-Smith and his team have not to my mind found them.
I wish they had done better with the peacockery.
THEATRE /Miseries of the New Man: Marrakech — Lyric Studio, W6
By PAUL TAYLOR
I'M NOT a New Man; I'm a failed house-husband,’ moans Walter in Graham Swannell's self-directed two-hander.
By the same token, Marrakech is not a new comedy; it is a failed feasibility study for one.
All that it demonstrates, through a three-hours-seeming 75 minutes, is that counter-stereotypes tend to harden into stereotypes in their turn.
Certainly, after a brief period of novelty, the hapless, aggrieved house-husband threatens to become as rigid and unexamined a comic invention as the grotesquely intrusive mother-in-law once was.
At first, you are led to think that Marrakech means to start where A Doll's House (or more accurately here A Guy's House) ends.
The person preparing to slam the door is Walter (charming Gregory Floy), a landscape gardener who gave up his job to look after his GP wife Vivien (Morag Hood) and their (inevitably) stripped-floor, stripped-pine flat.
Fed up now with being a domestic skivvy, he is seen typing out the goodbye letter before leaving for Marrakech, where he plans to write a novel based on their sex life.
For the rest of this unbudgeably static play, the couple lounge around discussing the pros and cons of doing a bunk.
Equipped by Morag Hood with an accent that sounds strangely reminiscent of Edward Fox as the Duke of Windsor, Vivien stops Walter in his tracks by announcing that she is pregnant.
He suspects this is a ruse.
That he evidently supposes that a 43-year-old woman, hitherto miserably infertile, could make cod claims on such an issue tells you rather less about Walter than it does about Graham Swannell's flimsy and opportunistic approach to characterisation.
You also notice that, because this plot development requires the couple to have been childless, there was clearly no previous necessity for either of them to stay at home.
Walter's position as house-husband is just an affectation, the result of having read ‘all the right books’.
Of course, handled well, this last fact could be a comic strength.
But, on the dodges and self-deceptions of role reversal, this play is indefatigably predictable.
Adjusting to middle-age is its other main concern, with Marrakech (perceived by Walter entirely through the lush vagueness of travel-brochure prose) standing for the life of exotic, unfettered opportunity that becomes increasingly unattainable.
In a couple of the play's best moments, Swannell craftily shows that the remembered adventurousness of youth is often just as illusory.
Walter claims to have journeyed as a student to Nepal ('didn't everyone? ') for purification, but Vivien reminds him that he only got as far as Ostend.
Middle-age is the time, Swannell deftly shows, when men say butch things like ‘I'm not going to die under a duvet,’ whereas, in truth, they would die if they couldn't.
Into the more general laments on modern living, Vivien inserts a couple of rather good jokes about the privatisation of the Health Service, but these feel like last-minute topical interpolations.
In any case, with her languidly top-drawer vowels and spaced-out grandeur, Morag Hood makes Vivien seem like the kind of woman who would find it taxing enough cutting the tape on the new ward, let alone fighting to keep the old ones open.
At one point, Walter tries to convince his wife that he has had a story accepted by BBC Radio.
Nothing in Swannell's direction of his play persuades you that this would not have been a better home for Marrakech.