

Commodities: Coffee
By PAUL TAYLOR
ROBUSTA Coffee futures saw further losses, with prices falling to fresh 14 year lows in mid-afternoon trading.
Contracts closed with losses of £32 to £44 a tonne despite late shortcovering and technical buying which helped the market stage a partial late rally.
There was a similar move in New York.
Continued liquidation and heavy selling followed Tuesday's developments at the International Coffee Organization talks, where Brazil said there was no chance of bringing quotas back near-term.
Dealers said near December continued to have a large open position, causing some concern at the exchange.
Volume totalled 9,489 lots.
Small Business: Cut European red tape, says minister
By ROBERT COLE
TIMOTHY EGGAR, employment minister, underlined the Government's policy towards small businesses this week by attacking the European Social Charter, the proposal by the European Commission to harmonise working practices.
‘The charter is ill-conceived and bad for small firms,’ he told the Confederation of British Industry's small firms council.
He argues that the small firms sector is particularly well situated to benefit from the wider enterprise opportunities offered by the single market and should not be tied down by EC red tape.
In the single market there was ‘more competition, more choice, more flexibility and a home market of 320 million people.
‘The Social Charter could destroy this tremendous boost for enterprise,’ he said.
‘The charter will potentially have a very large impact on small firms because it is about more regulation.’
The effect on small firms could be greater than on their larger counterparts.
The bigger UK companies, hardly enamoured with the charter themselves, might have the administrative capacity to handle it whereas independent operators did not.
Under the Social Charter every employee, whether full-time or part-time, will require a formal contract.
This, says Mr Eggar, will create more red tape and more regulations which will directly harm the growth and development of the small business sector.
‘Contracts of employment are agreements between employers and their staff -they are not the business of government,’ he said.
Proposals for minimum wage regulations also came under attack.
‘Minimum wage regulations, far from protecting workers, will fuel inflation, lead to job losses and price many smaller firms out of the market,’ he declared.
‘Part-time, temporary workers will be granted the same social provisions as full-time employees.
That will mean more costs for employers and businesses.’
Besides monitoring the EC proposals, Mr Eggar is also keeping an eye on other government departments which he said had the tendency to introduce measures which, however well intentioned, could have the effect of strangling small businesses.
Since moving from the Foreign Office in Mrs Thatcher's reshuffle in July, he has found that the small business portfolio promotes a softly, softly approach.
‘The Government has sought to get out of small firms’ way,’he said.
‘It is hands off.
We will create the conditions in which the small businessman can make decisions.’
The number of self-employed had increased from two to three million in the past decade.
‘New entrants put pressure on existing companies and make them change their existing practices,’ he said.
He also stressed that the personal satisfaction in working for a small firm was as important as the financial contribution the sector made to the economy.
Besides start-ups and growing firms, management buyouts exemplified the enterprise spirit.
‘Men with big company cars, big mortgages, big family commitments are prepared to risk all that in order to have control of their own destiny,’ he said.
In addition to the potential problems from a Social Charter, the Community Charge, or Poll Tax, to be introduced in England and Wales next spring, has created worries among small businesses.
Companies across the country will be subject to a uniform rate set by central government, although Mr Eggar is attempting to calm these fears by pointing out that a special case has been made for small firms.
This will involve reduced rates and an extension of the phasing-in period.
Alongside the challenges of the Social Charter and the Community Charge he has to keep a firm grip on the Government's sponsored schemes.
These include the Loan Guarantee, Enterprise Allowance and Business Expansion Schemes, which he likened to an a la carte menu from which entrepreneurs could choose.
The challenge for him is to improve the service of the ‘head waiter’.
Foremost in his attempt will be the Training and Enterprise Councils.
The first of the 100 private agencies, established to operate on a local basis, will start early next year.
Small Business: A go-between for recruitment deals
By ROBERT COLE
A TWO-WOMAN firm based in east London believes it has found a niche in the staff recruitment market by acting as a broker between companies and recruitment agencies.
Caroline Gordon, who has set up Beaver Recruitment Brokers with Joan Tannian, said that the market was flooded with recruitment agencies which created confusion among companies with positions to fill.
Companies can find it difficult to know which agencies they should approach and, according to Ms Gordon, often become frustrated with the agencies for sending along unsuitable applicants.
Instead of going through several channels to find suitable applicants, companies can simplify the selection process by going through Beaver Recruitment Brokers which will choose candidates drawn from a range of recruitment agencies.
Beaver has agreements with 15 recruitment agencies for 200 job vacancies that several companies are trying to fill.
Ms Gordon said the recruitment agencies were enthusiastic about broking as it meant less time was spent pairing applicants with jobs.
The company, based at Ms Gordon's home in Walthamstow, generates its income from the companies and pays the agency for supplying the successful applicant.
She has faced an unusual problem, however, in trying to get a licence to trade as a recruitment broker.
The Department of Employment said that the licence she wanted did not exist.
Licences are needed for other types of brokerage and she argues that it would give her business respectability.
The Department of Employment has now agreed and is processing her application.
Beaver hopes to recoup its £7,000 start-up costs within the next six months and possibly sooner if negotiations on a couple of large deals come to fruition.
Hewden Stuart offsets problems in housebuilding
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
STRONG demand from other segments of the construction market left Hewden Stuart, Britain's largest plant hire group, virtually untouched by current problems in housebuilding in the first half of the year.
Pre-tax profits in the six months to end July soared 43 per cent to £19.4m, with the help of £1.3m of property sales.
The interim dividend was raised by 25 per cent to 0.75p.
Sir Matthew Goodwin, the chairman, said: ‘We are delighted with the figures and face the future with confidence.’
This result continues the group's strong growth record.
Pre-tax profits in the last financial year were £28.3m, having been £9.4m in 1986-87.
City analysts are forecasting pre-tax profits of £38m this year.
The shares moved up 2p to 132p yesterday.
Sir Matthew said that Glasgow-based Hewden Stuart was used to difficult times.
‘We have operated in recessionary conditions in Scotland for some time so can cope with this.
‘Hewden Stuart increased its profits steadily through the Stop-Go policies of the 1960s and 1970s but experienced a hiccough in 1979-80 when there was a fundamental reconstruction of British industry,’ he explained.
‘In no way are we going back to a 1979-80 recession.
We have broadened our base since then and have strong finances.’
Hewden Stuart has spent £200m in recent years on plant replacement and modernisation.
This, together with depot refurbishment and tighter controls, will enable the group to deal with any falling off in demand, according to Sir Matthew.
Hewden Stuart has experienced some slackening in demand in the home counties and some pressure on margins, but direct exposure to housebuilding is apparently modest.
Even so, Sir Matthew admitted that the wider implications of the weak housing market on the industry were hard to quantify.
Orders from other market segments remained firm with demand patterns clear for more than two years, he said.
In 1988, Hewden Stuart made less than 15 per cent of its profits from selling equipment rather than renting.
This proportion is likely to fall in the current year as builders move from buying to renting plant.
Concrete cancer case dents Higgs and Hill
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
A SETTLEMENT dating from a project completed in 1973 knocked £2.77m off the profits of Higgs and Hill, the construction group, in the half year to end June.
The pre-tax result was unchanged at £11.3m, which included a £1.6m profit from the sale of a 14.9 per cent stake in Rush & Tompkins.
The commercial settlement was with the South Western Regional Health Authority and concerned an alkali silica reaction — concrete cancer — in the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital.
Construction and property profits were well ahead, offsetting poor housing results.
Higgs and Hill sold 500 homes in 1988, but volumes dropped by 35 per cent in the first half of 1989.
Sir Brian Hill, chairman and chief executive, said there was no sign of an improvement.
In a board reorganisation, Sir Brian is stepping down as chief executive.
John Theakston, finance director, is replacing joint managing director Derek Ridout, who becomes a non-executive director.
The other joint managing director is David Hill.
Colin Archer is joining as finance director from British Home Stores.
Company News in Brief 
Business and City Page 30
John Maunders ahead on buoyant demand
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
BUOYANT demand for homes last year helped John Maunders Group, the Manchester-based housebuilder to boost taxable profits by 50 per cent to £7.14m in the 12 months ended 30 June.
The profits growth came on the back of a 26 per cent rise in sales to more than £53m, with the total number of units sold up from 676 to 745 in the year.
The average selling price of its homes increased sharply from £52,000 to £78,000.
The results were achieved against a background of differing regional markets with margins in East Anglia and the South deteriorating while conditions in the North-west remained buoyant.
However, chairman John Maunders said selling prices in the North-west ‘appear to have stablised’.
He continued: ‘Assuming current market conditions do not deteriorate further, the group, with conservative borrowings, a prime land bank and a good forward sales position can look forward to another year of growth.’
The group's policy is to sell ahead of construction and is currently selling for completions next spring.
Forward sales for completion in the first half of this year are sufficient to meet internal targets, Mr Maunders said.
Grampian disappoints
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
SHARES in the Scottish pharmaceuticals and sportswear company Grampian Holdings dropped 26p yesterday to 190p as interim pre-tax profits fell short of City expectations.
In the six months to 30 June profit before tax was £3.7m, up from £3.2m, compared with analysts' forecasts of about £4.5m.
However, Dermot Coleman, an analyst at BZW, said the price drop was an over-reaction.
He added that a tight market in the company's stock exaggerates any movement.
Profits advanced in the transport and pharmaceutical division but fell back in sporting goods, and losses deepened in retail.
The company blamed higher interest rates and reduced consumer spending for the problems.
Armchair Investor: John Beales
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
THE GREEN bandwagon has provided a fillip for many companies concerned with tackling environmental problems.
But the market has neglected John Beales, the textiles to refrigeration group.
This, however, could soon be put right as investors begin to focus on changes which have taken place in the past few years.
The company was orginally involved in textiles but has diversifed into refrigeration and electrical activities.
The textile business is still ailing, but the two newer divisions have become increasingly important although their potential has not been fully appreciated by the market.
Demand is booming for modern refrigeration equipment for the food industry, and recent scares concerning food poisioning and legionnaires' disease have provided an additional boost.
Moreover, the refrigeration sector is fragmented and offers considerable scope for expansion by acquisitions.
The electricals side is also trading well and is poised to benefit from growing conern about CFC gases.
One of its subsidiaries has developed a machine capable of extracting the harmful gas from refrigeration plant with a environmentally sound technique.
Together the two divisions are likely to provide the entire increase in the company's taxable profits this year.
Profits should rise from £2.09m to £2.5m in the year to May 1990, rating the shares, down 1p to 242p yesterday, on a modest earnings multiple of around eight times.
Buy.
Column Eight: Sterling is part of DTI furniture
By SIMON PINCOMBE
Secretaries of State for Trade and Industry may come and go but Sir Jeffrey Sterling, chairman of the P&O group, has long been part of the furniture at 1 Victoria Street.
Sir Jeffrey, who has acted as unpaid and part-time special adviser to six trade and industry secretaries, yesterday added a seventh to his belt.
Nicholas Ridley, the latest incumbent, is retaining his silken skills to advise on ‘industrial and financial affairs’ and the Airbus programme.
Of course Mr Ridley already has Katharine Ramsay, his special adviser at both environment and transport.
The third member of the team is Michael Simmonds, a leading light in right-wing think tank the Adam Smith Institute.
The City continues to treat the Royal Yacht, Britannia, as its own.
Today, the barge docks in Kuala Lumpar where Sir Peter Carey, chairman of Morgan Grenfell, will trumpet the merits of the City on behalf of the British Invisible Exports Council.
Readers may have received mail shots with the Barclaycard logo suggesting that they stand a good chance of winning a six figure sum of money and a car in a prize draw.
With the possibility of recouping anything from Barclaycard, many have felt tempted to play.
When full details of the draw were finally dispatched it emerged that Readers Digest had a considerable involvement.
To stand a full chance of winning, contestants have to subscribe for a Readers Digest gardening book which can be paid for by Barclaycard.
Barclaycard admitted yesterday that there was a ‘financial arrangement’ with Readers Digest on the sales of the book.
‘We have received some complaints from cardholders,’ said a spokesman, ‘which we will be studying.’
Another victim of the high interest rate policy.
Shares in STC, the communications group, shot down 13p to 329p yesterday after chief executive Arthur Walsh unloaded 500,000 shares, almost half his personal holding.
An STC spokesman explained that the £1.7m sale was made by Mr Walsh to escape the rising cost of the loan he took out to pick up an option on 1 million STC shares in February.
However, the overstretched executive still made £1.3m profit when he sold at 339p.
He took up his options in February at 84p.
No prizes for guessing who Ian Chapman, the publisher sacked by Rupert Murdoch when he took over William Collins, was referring to yesterday when he launched his new company.
‘You might think that I would have been happy to go on improving my golf handicap,’ he said.
‘But no one man has the right to end a person's life.
Publishing is my life.
And I don't see why I should let him end it.’
View from City Road: Property profits underpin Sears
By SIMON PINCOMBE
SEARS' thriving property activities have partly offset a disappointing performance in shoes, specialist retailing areas like Wallis and Horne and a dire time in housebuilding to limit the decline in the group's half-year pre-tax profits to 10.4 per cent at £91.7m.
Indeed Sears points to £6.3m worth of special factors, such as the rail strike, accounting for almost half the profits set-back.
Rental income and development profits doubled their contribution to £10.5m and other property income brought in £1.5m more.
Interest earned on the £331m raised for William Hill offset the loss of £9.6m of profits.
But since the stock market has not yet found a consistent way of valuing the property based content of retailers' profits, it is progress on the high street that will dominate Sears' share rating and the news, particularly from footwear, is not encouraging.
Footwear, where trading profits slipped by 23.5 per cent to £31.6m or 40 per cent of the total before ‘one-off’ property income, has been especially poor.
The grand plan to segment the British Shoe Corporation's 22 per cent market share into four sections, catering to volume, family, fashion and quality has failed to shine.
With no volume gains and falling prices, like-for-like sales in shoes fell back by 1.5 per cent in the six months to 31 July.
Sears has been busily redirecting its 1,500 strong chain away from traditional sites and in the next 18 months a further 100 to 150 net closures are likely.
Like-for-like sales growth at Olympus was a hefty 18 per cent and Miss Selfridge chalked up gains of 17.4 per cent which owes something to comparatively grim weather in the previous year but also shows that mortgage pressures do not bear down on customers equally.
Selfridges did not do too badly, thanks to returning tourists, but a £7m cut in non-shoe retailing profits reflects a shocking period's trading at Wallis and Horne.
Home shopping held its profits at £13m which could well reflect the use of provisions raised on the Freemans acquisition to meet a net 10 per cent staff reduction.
Assuming pre-tax profits of £230m, before one-off property income, Sears shares are on a p/e of 10.5 at 118p, a 10 per cent discount to the market, and are on a yield of over 6 per cent, exceeded only by Next and Storehouse.
Assets more than cover the price and the balance sheet is almost ungeared so there is limited downside.
View from City Road: Dealing with a miscellany
By SIMON PINCOMBE
HARRISONS & Crosfield must really dislike being classified as an overseas trader if it is willing to go through the complex process of changing its listing only to end up as a miscellaneous industrial.
The move is symbolic of what has been going on at H&C since George Paul, the chief executive, took over two years ago.
H&C's management knows where it does not want to be, and has distanced itself from the previously volatile structure with some skill.
But it has never really shown that it has any new ideas about where it should end up.
All H&C's four major divisions — chemicals, timber, food and plantations -were there when Mr Paul took control.
True each of them has been finely tuned.
The minority stakes in plantations, notably Harrisons Malaya, have been sold, and the fragrances operation, Felton, will soon follow.
Southern-Evans, the timber yard chain, has been bought, along with another chain in the US and all sorts of chemicals operations.
But H&C has never really addressed the question of why these diverse businesses should be together.
The half-year figures showed an 8 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to £65.2m, and a similar rise in earnings to 7p.
A 13 per cent hike in the interim dividend to 3.4p was accompanied by the promise of a 10 per cent rise in the final dividend.
Beneath the bare result was the familiar curate's egg pattern of some bits doing well and some less well.
This time it was the turn of Pauls, the food division, to thrive on the back of high pig prices and strong demand for malt from the Japanese whisky industry.
Timber held its own, but needed a good showing from Southerns to do so.
Chemicals was flat, held back by shutdowns at two large plants, and the remaining plantations suffered from the weakness of world palm oil prices.
Selling the 30 per cent stake in Harrisons Malaya brought a £75.9m extraordinary first half profit, and the sale of Felton should bring a £25m excess in the second half.
That is significant given the group will be lucky to make more than £135m pre-tax in the year.
At 160p, down 7p, H&C's shares are on 9.4 times prospective earnings and have strong support from the dividend.
The discount to the market could be eradicated by some judicious pruning.
View from City Road: Gloom for ad agencies
By SIMON PINCOMBE
THERE does not seem to be much good news about for any bulls in the advertising agency sector.
Worries about an impending slow down in advertising spending have been a considerable drag on agency shares this year.
And now these fears have been compounded by a sixth profitability study by accountants Spicer & Oppenheim whose gloomy conclusions may well prolong the sector's agonies further.
Much of the concern is levelled at agency balance sheets which have been weakened by the sector's lust for acquisitions.
Quoted advertising agencies wrote off goodwill totalling £1.7bn in the year to November 1988, leaving aggregate shareholders' funds in the sector below £39m.
Some may argue that balance sheet numbers like these are not important for people businesses.
The figures are more a reflection of the inadequacy of accounting rules on goodwill than the quality of the underlying businesses.
Even so, the average debt to equity ratio in the sector has risen from 1.3:1 to 2.8 in the survey period, and Spicer suggests weakened balance sheets could bring liquidity problems.
And unlike in the past, fewer agencies are now earning investment income from surplus funds.
Spicer points out that the sector has thrived in a bull market but the advertising boom may be coming to an end.
That could have important implications for the industry.
In a tighter advertising market there could be a fall out among smaller and private agencies.
The spotlight may also fall on the managements of quoted agencies.
Many are still led by their founders whose skills are yet to be tested in a tougher economic climate.
They may well be tempted to take their businesses private again.
Market Report: Dearer money jitters as eyes turn to Germany
By DEREK PAIN
DALGETY, Delta and Jaguar were among the shares to march ahead yesterday as the stock market continued to fret and fuss about today's West German interest rate decision.
After a bright opening, inspired by Wall Street, prices retreated and by the close the broadly based FT-SE share index was down 6.5 points at 2,312.1.
Even a firm Wall Street opening failed to smother the dearer money jitters.
The market has probably discounted a 0.5 per cent German increase which may allow UK base rates to remain at 14 per cent.
But there is deepening pessimism that a full one point advance will be announced which will make it almost impossible for base rates to remain unchanged.
At one time Dalgety was up 16p as Elf Aquitaine, the French oil group, confirmed it had formed a joint company with Australian Robert Holmes a Court to hold a 5.5 per cent stake in the Dalgety agricultural and food group.
The shares closed 12p higher at 436p.
It is widely believed that Mr Holmes a Court, the so called Perth predator, is keen to buy Dalgety's extensive Australian land interests.
But the French connection is less clear.
An Elf spokesman described the link as ‘purely a financial investment’.
There are suggestions the duo already has its eyes on a French food business.
Mr Holmes a Court has trimmed his Dalgety stake which was at one time nearer 5.8 per cent.
Delta, the electrical and engineering group, gained 18p to 353p, reflecting a near 2 per cent stake built by Tomkins, the industrial group created by Greg Hutchings.
Tomkins shares fell 7p to 276p on fears it is planning to mount a bid.
Jaguar was inspired by stories that General Motors was preparing to bid.
The shares roared ahead 34p to 633p.
Ford, the US car giant, has already declared its interest in moving in on Jaguar.
There are signs GM is preparing the necessary US filings and there is talk that it has already approached Jaguar's union leaders.
The car group's shares were the most actively traded option.
More than 2,000 contracts were completed.
Standard Chartered, the banking group, rose 4p to 535p.
It is forging a trading link with WestDeutsche Landesbank, a West German group.
It appears the Germans are taking over the running of Standard's European branches.
But there is little chance of the Germans buying into Standard.
Ferranti International, the troubled electronics group, had another rousing session with Seaq volume put at 38 million shares.
The price rose 2.5p to 57.5p.
Eurotunnel remained depressed on the costs over run.
The shares tumbled another 40p to 560p.
BPB Industries, the old British Plaster Board, which has been firm lately on stake building stories, fell 9p to 253p.
James Capel has, it appears, lopped £25m from its profit forecast and now expects £165m.
Last year BPB achieved £202.3m.
Grand Metropolitan remained impressed by the thought that it could be Sir James Goldsmith's next target, The shares rose 6p to 604p.
The Whitbread brewing group was ruffled by stories it would be forced, under US legislation, to sell its US drink importing operations if it continued a trans-Atlantic restaurant build-up.
The ‘A’ shares fell 6p to 375p.
Whitbread's main US agencies cover Cutty Sark Scotch whisky and Beefeater gin.
Pearson, up 12p to 728p, was helped by a rumoured Kleinwort Benson upgrading, and Amersham International jumped 27p to 435p as Hoffman-La Roche, the Swiss group, emerged as a 5 per cent shareholder.
Hoffman has sold a US company to Amersham in exchange for shares.
Little Symonds Engineering rose 2p to 41p as JF Nash Holdings, a privately owned Midlands group, edged its shareholding up to 17.8 per cent.
BSG International rose 1.5p to 82.5p.
Sir Ron Brierley, the New Zealand financier, now has 12.6 per cent.
Redland, the building materials group, fell 4p to 550p.
Through stockbroker Cazenove it has purchased £90.4m of its £100m Euro-sterling bonds.
The bonds were issued seven months ago.
Amstrad was a weak market, falling 3.5p to 62.5p on worries that even more profit downgradings could be on the way.
WCRS Group, the advertising consultancy, enjoyed a late flurry, gaining 18p to 332p.
There is continuing speculation that the French Eurocom group, which has links with WCRC, could be preparing to bid.
WPP, the communications group created by Martin Sorrell, fell 9p to 709p.
Panmure Gordon rates the shares a buy.
Analysts Richard Sanderson and Chris Roberts expect profits this year, with the US Ogilvy group included for six months, to reach £75m against £40.3m.
Next year they see profits advancing to £113.9m with £143m pencilled in for 1991.
Cookson Group, which makes specialist materials for various industries, edged forward 3p to 324p following a meeting with the Society of Investment Analysts.
Share prices closed lower as fears of a rise in West German interest rates undermined the advances in early trading following Tuesday's surge on Wall Street.
The FT-SE 100 index closed 6.5 points lower at 2,312.1 after touching 2,331.1 at one stage.
The FT 30 fell 9.1 to 1,890.2 Boddington Group shares are a sell following the decision to dispose of its brewing operations, believe Martin Hawkins and David Baggs at Kitcat & Aitken.
They say there are cheaper leisure stocks around such as Midsummer Leisure, which once bid for Boddies.
Shorn of the brewing side, Boddies' assets are about 210p a share.
Yesterday they closed at 187p.
Allied Restaurants, which aims to develop as a broadly-based leisure group, could be tempted to sell its 20 Wimpy restaurants.
There is speculation that Grand Metropolitan, challenging McDonalds for supremacy of the fast food market, could pay up to £16m for the Allied branches.
The cash would eradicate borrowings, allowing Allied to expand.
The shares fell 2p to 72p.
Fraud office to get report on Ferranti
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
THE Coopers and Lybrand report on how Ferranti came to be defrauded of £215m after buying American arms firm International Signal and Control is expected to be handed to the Serious Fraud Office within days.
A board meeting of Ferranti was called to consider the report yesterday.
The SFO is expected to take a number of weeks to decide on whether to mount further investigations with a view to taking action against individuals and organisations.
Ferranti said the Coopers report confirmed what its own directors and accountants had already established — namely that ‘phantom’ assets and profits had been created in ISC's accounts worth some £215m.
The group has said the write-off against its reserves after tax relief will have to be £185m.
There had been suggestions that directors had jumped the gun by putting a figure to the fraud before Coopers had completed its report.
But Ferranti said yesterday: ‘The report confirms that Coopers & Lybrand have found no information which would lead them to suspect that the Ferranti International balance sheet exposure to fraud was any different from that referred to in the letter to shareholders dated 29 September.
‘Accordingly, the effect of the report is to confirm the conclusions the board has already reached on the financial effects of the fraud on Ferranti International.’
The company said that complex negotiations were proceeding quickly but it would be some time before there was progress to report.
On the stock market Ferranti's shares jumped 4p in another day of hectic trading before settling to close 2.5p up at 57.5p.
Smith New Court, which already has a sizeable position in Ferranti shares, was a heavy buyer for the second day, as was Hoare Govett, which includes British Aerospace among its corporate clients.
Ferranti was unsure of what to make of the feverish stock market speculation.
‘We believed the rumour on Tuesday that British Aerospace was building up a big shareholding but we are not so sure now,’ a spokesman said.
The Coopers and Lybrand report is believed to detail a highly complex fraud involving a string of bogus subcontractors and front companies to maintain the fiction of large contracts in Pakistan, China and Africa.
ISC is understood to have small contracts in each of these territories but further ‘phantom’ contracts are believed to have been invented to make the company seem more successful than it was.
The whereabouts of James Guerin, ISC's former chairman, are still unknown and he has yet to make contact with Ferranti's advisers.
Mr Guerin's lawyer said he had advised Mr Guerin to say as little as possible for the time being.
Dutch banks plan share flotation
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
AN INTERNATIONAL share issue and privatisation will follow the merger of two of the Netherland's largest banks, Nederlandsche Middenstansbank (NMB) and Postbank, the state-owned postal savings bank.
The merger agreement was signed yesterday after gaining approval from the Dutch regulatory authorities.
The new company, NMB Postbank, is listed in Amsterdam.
But the intention is for the 49 per cent Dutch government shareholding to be reduced later this year through an issue in Amsterdam, London, Frankfurt, Paris and New York.
The issue will complete the transformation of the Postbank, which is the world's largest postal savings bank, from a sleepy adjunct to the Dutch post office, which it was less than five years ago, to an international banking force.
Along with the merger, Postbank shareholders will be asked to approve a change to the bank's articles of association so that it can engage in wider areas of business.
It is not allowed to engage in securities trading or insurance, which would make the merger difficult as NMB is one of the leading options traders in the Netherlands.
NMB Postbank will have a dominant position in Dutch savings and money transfers.
Over 75 per cent of the Dutch population have accounts at Postbank, though many of these are dormant.
NMB Postbank estimates about 42 per cent of Dutch people will have active savings accounts with the new group.
PowerGen turns down cut price coal offer
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
BRITISH COAL yesterday offered to cut the cost of supplies to privatised electricity generators and guaranteed that price rises would be kept within the rate of inflation provided they agreed to sign long-term contracts.
The offer was immediately rebuffed, however, by one of the two big generating companies being created under privatisation, which said it would seek fuel from a wider range of sources, including imported coal.
Malcolm Edwards, British Coal's commercial director, told an electricity conference in London that the corporation was prepared to enter supply deals lasting eight years — the same period set down for the bulk of initial contracts between privatised electricity generators and distribution companies.
The proposal also included an offer to reduce the price of supplies in real terms over the first five years and a pledge that during the contract period prices would remain ‘within the general movement of prices in the economy’.
But, speaking at the same conference, Ed Wallis, chief executive of PowerGen, the company which will inherit a third of the Central Electricity Generating Board's stations, warned: ‘We plan to burn a wider range of fuels from a wider range of sources — and we owe it to our customers to get the best possible deal.’
Mr Wallis said there was ‘no way we want to see miners out of jobs’ but PowerGen's own survival would not be put at risk by limiting its range of suppliers.
He added that for environmental reasons PowerGen had ‘a considerable incentive to seek the low sulphur coals which are readily available on the international market’.
Securing long-term contracts is of critical importance to British Coal, which supplies 75 per cent of its output to the electricity industry.
Mr Edwards reiterated his warning that the Government would find it impossible to privatise British Coal without such long-term supply deals.
Hoffman takes Amersham stake
By TERENCE WILKINSON, Assistant City Editor
SHARES in Amersham International, the healthcare and life science research products group, rose 27p to 435p yesterday after news that Hoffman-La Roche, the leading drugs company, would hold a 5 per cent stake in the group following the sale of a subsidiary.
Amersham is paying $61.3m (£38.3m) to acquire Medi-Physics, the loss-making radiopharmaceuticals subsidiary of Hoffman-La Roche, to make the UK company the largest player in the £300m world radiopharmaceutical market, whose products are used for imaging organs of the body for diagnostic purposes.
The sale price is to be met in three ways.
Hoffman-La Roche will take up new Amersham shares to give it 5 per cent of the UK company at a price of 460p, a 12.5 per cent premium to Tuesday's closing price.
At the same time Amersham is to issue $30m of loan notes and will make a cash payment of $12m from its own resources.
In 1988 Medi-Physics made operating losses of $7.4m on sales of $53.2m and its unaudited net assets at the end of August were $63.2m.
According to Amersham finance director Bill Ellaby, the purchase of Medi-Physics, which has already started to reorganise its business to eliminate losses before completion of the deal, will have a neutral effect on earnings per share at Amersham this year but a positive effect in 1990/1.
Amersham has a strong position in the European market for radiopharmaceuticals and sees the acquisition of a complementary manufacturing base in North America as improving its chances of supplying the global market for such products.
The Japanese company Nihon Medi-Physics, a joint venture between Sumitomo and Hoffman-La Roche, is excluded from the current deal but existing commercial and manufacturing links with Medi-Physics will continue.
Failed firm's shareholders lose tax gain
By JASON NISSE
THE Inland Revenue has decreed that both the ordinary and the preference shares of Sound Diffusion, the electrical company that went into receivership in December, are of ‘negligible value’ for taxation purposes, writes Jason Nisse.
Sound Diffusion ordinary shares were suspended in December at 22p and the group asked its bankers to appoint a receiver.
The Department of Trade and Industry has started an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding Sound Diffusion's demise.
The administrative receiver appointed, Touche Ross, was instrumental in persuading the Revenue to allow shareholders to write off the value of the shares against capital gains tax.
Chris Morris, the joint receiver at Touche Ross, said that some payments had been made to employees and priority creditors — essentially the banks — but said the chances of ordinary creditors receiving anything was ‘only around half a per cent’.
A shareholders action committee has been formed to see if any value can be obtained.
Outlook: Europe heads for defensive mergers
By JASON NISSE
Professor Roland Smith, the chairman of British Aerospace, last night predicted that the European defence industry would be dominated by three or four major companies by the mid-nineties as a result of national and trans-national mergers.
Since BAe seems to be a front-runner to take over the ailing Ferranti group, Professor Smith may have a hand in self-fulfilment of his prophecy.
His reasoning, expounded in a lecture to an august gathering at the Royal Insitute of International Affairs, is nevertheless persuasive.
The slowdown in military spending and escalating costs of armament programmes will make it increasingly difficult for any company, even one the size of BAe, to go it alone.
The recent improvement in East-West relations must also make the market for military equipment less favourable.
But as Professor Smith himself notes, there is one important caveat to this argument.
Any increased concentration among defence suppliers will depend crucially on the attitudes of individual governments.
Past experience suggests that some governments, at least, may not be prepared to sit this one out.
Britain's Ministry of Defence was instrumental in blocking GEC's first attempt to merge with Plessey — and in extracting concessions in return for allowing GEC, in partnership with Siemens of West Germany, to acquire Plessey at the second bite.
It is one thing for a government to look benignly upon — say — a rescue of Ferranti; or on the swallowing up of much smaller players in the defence business.
It would be quite another to imagine it sanctioning full-blooded mergers between the likes of BAe and GEC, which is what Professor Smith's script implies.
It is not only defence ministries that would look askance at the creation of a defence oligopoly; competition authorities exist to keep a beady eye on such tendencies.
Even if cross-border mergers become a matter for Brussels -which might be expected to take a larger, continent-wide view — rather than national authorities, defence is specifically reserved for the attention of member governments.
Outlook: Income tax in disguise
By JASON NISSE
Budget tax cuts were a little late this year.
Nigel Lawson's most expensive change, to national insurance contributions, comes into effect today.
The boost to disposable income comes at an awkward time, when the economic slowdown is not sufficiently well-established to have even begun to close the trade gap; but the structural change is welcome.
There is a threshold level of income which is completely free of income tax.
But in the national insurance system, a bottom layer of income (up to £43 a week) is only contribution-free for those whose total earnings are below such a level; once they cross the threshold, they are obliged to pay contributions on the lot.
This system bore heavily on people earning only just over the threshold -and their employers.
Nigel Lawson has now made two attempts to smooth the system out.
The obvious answer is to fuse national insurance with income tax, but this would offend against the notion (it is really no more than that) that the national insurance system is ‘contributory’.
So it remains the case that everyone earning over the threshold has to pay contributions on every pound earned, up to the ceiling of £325 a week.
But today's changes mean that the contribution rate on the first £43 a week is only 2 per cent.
Previously, following changes made in 1985, the rate was 5 per cent of all earnings for those on between £43 and £75 a week, 7 per cent for those earning from £75 to £115 a week, and 9 per cent for those earning over £115.
Employers' contributions were similiarly arranged, though with a further jump to 10.45 per cent on all pay-packets of over £165 a week.
As the Institute of Fiscal Studies today points out, the new system in effect means there is a charge of 86p a week for belonging to the system; then there is a 9 per cent tax on income between £43 and £325.
The IFS argues that a similar change now needs to be made to employers' contributions.
But there is one change on the employers' side that needs to be mirrored for employees: the abolition of the ceiling.
And, as the IFS points out, the system still encourages perks in place of straightforward pay, because these still do not bear national insurance charges.
Nor, for that matter, does investment income.
It would make sense, at some stage, to equalise the tax treatment of earned and ‘unearned’ income; but then the perpetuation of distinct national insurance would look very silly indeed.
Which is what it is.
Outlook: High rises at the top
By JASON NISSE
Surveys of top pay are coming in thick and fast.
Top managers enjoyed an average increase in earnings of 17.8 per cent last year, according to the latest, from Charterhouse; like P-E Inbucon's, its results suggest that Lord King of British Airways was, shall we say, a bit ahead of the pack.
Even 17.8 per cent, however, was still more than double the growth of average earnings over that period.
Even excluding bonuses, British top managers beat their French, German and Dutch counterparts with a 12.1 per cent hike in basic pay (although their real increases — 5.1 per cent— were not much larger than on the continent).
Large companies still seem to be finding it increasingly difficult to retain top management.
The informal ceiling placed on share option deals by institutional investors is said to be one reason.
In any 10-year period managers should only be granted options on shares worth up to four times their annual earnings.
Most managers have already used up that leeway since share option schemes took off in 1985.
By moving to pastures new, successful managers can negotiate themselves a new package of options from scratch.
This partly explains London Weekend Television's battle with the institutions over its scheme for locking in key managers.
Meanwhile, salary surveys throw up evidence of the spread of cash bonuses.
Ian Chapman launches new publisher
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
IAN CHAPMAN, the former head of publisher William Collins who left in acrimonious circumstances when it was taken over by media mogul Rupert Murdoch, is back in the book business with a venture that links him with Sir David English, editor-in-chief of Associated Newspapers.
Mr Chapman yesterday announced the launch of Chapmans Publishers, which he said would be ‘an independent general publisher across a wide spectrum.
The main thrust will be in the middle ground, but we want to publish good quality literary works as well.
We hope we will give a voice to the authors of the '90s.’
The new company is a three-way partnership between the Chapman family (his wife Marjory becomes editor-in-chief), a property and leisure group called Taylor Clark, and Associated Newspapers.
The Mail and London Evening Standard group is to put its book publishing interests into Chapmans.
The partners will each hold 31.1 per cent of the equity, and Chapmans will have an initial capital of around £2.5m.
Sir David said that Associated would make further funds available for expansion.
Mr Chapman said: ‘I have usually got on well with newspaper proprietors, but this time I want to be in charge.’
Chapmans has not yet signed up any authors, but is clearly hoping there will be an exodus of well-known names from Collins.
‘We are opening up our store, and would be very happy to talk to them.’
Mr Chapman is expecting to publish around 25 books in the first year, and could float the company within five years.
Machinist strike brings Boeing to a standstill
From LARRY BLACK in New York
WITH $80bn (£50bn) worth of orders on the books and production already behind schedule, machinists at Boeing walked off the job yesterday.
The company's employees have embarked on a strike that could seriously disrupt international air travel if it lasts for more than a few weeks.
The strike by Boeing's 57,000 employees in at least seven states comes at a time when airlines with ageing fleets are already straining to find aircraft for use on their new routes.
The large aeroplane manufacturers have as much as 10 years' worth of future work on their order books, and an active market has developed among airlines and leasing companies for delivery slots.
The workers, members of the International Association of Machinists, are taking advantage of the boom to try to make up for years of contract concessions and stagnant income.
They are seeking wage increases several percentage points above prevailing wage settlements, and voted overwhelmingly to reject Boeing's three-year contract offer.
‘You'll never be in a better position than you are now,’ Justin Ostro, union vice president, told a rally of 30,000 machinists earlier this week in Seattle, Washington, the site of Boeing's headquarters and main production facility.
Some 43,300 of the union members are concentrated in the Seattle area.
The Boeing machinists have not gone on strike since 1977.
The union argues that the workers deserve a greater share of Boeing's prosperity.
The company, the world's largest manufacturer of commercial aircraft, has experienced five straight years of record orders.
This year alone, almost 750 planes, worth $38.5bn, have already been ordered.
Meanwhile, labour agreements covering 20,000 workers at Lockheed Aircraft have also expired.
Machinists there, members of the same trade union, are to take a strike vote on 22 October.
Boeing sells a third of its aircraft overseas, making it the biggest exporter in the United States.
Economists are warning that a prolonged strike in the industry — one of the few sectors where the US enjoys a positive trade balance — would have a serious impact on the American trade deficit.
IBM negotiating for role in European Jessi chip project
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
IBM, the leading US computer company, wants to become part of a Ecu3.3bn European effort to develop an indigenous semiconductor technology.
John Akers, IBM's chairman, said yesterday that Europe must become self-sufficient in key technologies such as semiconductors.
His group was negotiating to take part in the Jessi project, led by Philips, Siemens and SGS Thomson, which is intended to reduce Europe's dependence on chips from Japan and the US.
European companies, however, have argued that they are cut out of parallel efforts in America, and in particular from Semantech, a big industry project in which IBM plays a key role.
Mr Akers said: ‘We are the leaders in the semiconductor industry.
We are the largest manufacturer in Europe and I think we have a lot to bring to bear.’
He said it would be useful for the Jessi partners to consider his company's participation.
Europe depends for two-thirds of its chip supply on exports.
The aim of Jessi is to reduce that to one-third at most.
European Commission officials say the situation is totally unacceptable.
‘Chips are the beginning and end of information technology,’ said one.
‘We cannot tolerate such dependence.’
In June the European Commission said it would help to fund the Jessi project and the governments of France, the Netherlands, Italy, Germany and possibly the UK are also expected to help.
But industry will have to find at least 50 per cent of the funds.
IBM, which had revenues of $60bn and profits of $6bn last year, shook Wall Street last week by warning that earnings forecasts for the third quarter and for the whole year would fall significantly below expectations.
But Mr Akers reiterated yesterday that he saw no long-term change in economic assumptions or any downturn in demand for the company's products.
Delays on certain products, the strength of the dollar and a shift to leasing computers rather than buying them had caused the company to issue the warning.
Mr Akers said the industry would keep expanding at two to three times the rate of world economic growth and that IBM would participate fully.
Europe, which accounts for one-third of IBM's revenue, is growing at twice the rate of the US market, but Asia continues to be the fastest-growing region.
Cheating the wind in Swindon
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
(First Edition)‘MEN and women of metal (mettle?) must come together to cheat the wind,’ shouted the voiceover on the incomprehensible video, to the accompaniment of crashing cymbals and lurid flashing lights.
‘Earth, wind and fire.
A movement of elements.’
What men and women, including the DTI minister for Industry and Enterprise, Douglas Hogg, and the television celebrity Cliff Michelmore, had in fact come together for was the official opening of Honda of Japan's new engine plant at Swindon.
Soon it will also be the site of a £300m car factory.
Under a giant makeshift marquee, Tadashi Kume, the president of Honda, promised that the Japanese company would become a ‘good citizen of Europe’ buying 80 per cent of components for its Swindon-built cars from European suppliers.
The man on the video took a rather different view, describing Honda's decision to join the flow of Japanese car makers into Britain as an opportunity to conquer a Europe soon to be ‘unchained and unfettered by regulations’.
Quite what earth, wind and fire had to do with building a car factory on a former aerodrome in the Wiltshire countryside was never satisfactorily explained.
In any event, production at the plant will begin in late 1991 rising to 100,000 cars a year by 1995.
Rover, the British car maker, is taking a 20 per cent stake in the factory.
It is not thought to have had a stake in the video.
Business and City Summary
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
SFO to get Ferranti report: The Coopers and Lybrand report on how Ferranti came to be defrauded of £215m after buying American firm International Signal and Control is expected to be handed to the Serious Fraud Office within days.
A Ferranti board meeting considered the report yesterday.
Page 29 Property victims: Halifax Building Society announced a £14.5m loss from its estate agency chain and Leeds Permanent closed 60 branches with 243 job losses.
This page Accountants merge: Coopers & Lybrand and Deloitte Haskins & Sells are merging to create the country's largest accountancy firm with fees of £413m.
This page Top earner: Lord Hanson was the highest paid director of a public company last year with £1.24m, followed by ‘Tiny’ Rowland (£1.01m).
This page and Outlook, page 27 Sears slows: Pre-tax profits at Sears, the retailing group, slumped by 10 per cent to £91.7m in the six months to 31 July as high street spending waned.
This page and View from City Road, page 29 Chancellor's changes: Nigel Lawson's alterations to national insurance contributions, announced with the last Budget, come into effect today.
Outlook, page 27 Profits up: Pre-tax profits at Harrisons and Crosfield advanced 8 per cent to £65.2m, and there was a similar rise in earnings to 7p in the six months to 30 June.
View from City Road, page 29 Cheap coal: British Coal offered to cut the cost of supplies to privatised electricity generators and said price rises would be kept within the rate of inflation.
Page 29 Report due: Coopers and Lybrand are expected to hand the Serious Fraud Office their report on how Ferranti came to be defrauded of £215m within days.
Page 29 Market uneasy: Fears of a rise in West German interest rates today depressed share prices.
The FT 100 Index fell 6.5 points after rising 12.5.
Shares worthless: The Inland Revenue has said that ordinary and preference shares of Sound Diffusion are of ‘negligible value’ for taxation purposes.
Page 29 Going Dutch: An international share issue and privatisation will follow the merger of two of the Netherlands' largest banks, NMB and Postbank, the state-owned postal savings bank.
Page 29 Pound pressure: The Bank of England spent $1bn as the pound came under attack when it became clear that an increase in West German rates today is a virtual certainty.
This page Defence domination: The chairman of BAe says the European defence industry will be dominated by three or four major companies by the mid-1990s.
Outlook, page 27 IBM Euro link: IBM wants to become part of an Ecu3.3bn European effort to develop an indigenous semiconductor technology.
Page 27 World Markets New York: The Dow Jones Average reached a new peak of 2,772.80 at one point, but closed up 16.53 at 2,771.09.
Tokyo: Prices hardly moved all day in moderate trading, the Nikkei average ending just 16.43 points higher at 35,382.8.
Singapore: Reflecting Wall Street's overnight gains, the Straits Times index jumped 19.94 to 1,408.26 in brisk trade.
Sydney: Early buying petered out to leave the All Ordinaries index up 3.9 points at 1,775.6.
Bombay: Prices fell sharply for the second day running.
Frankfurt: Accepting an interest rate rise today as a foregone conclusion, the market continued to improve.
The DAX index gained 10.87 points to 1,613.27.
Zurich: Selected blue chips saw high turnover as shares firmed across the board.
The all-share index, at 1,178.8, was up 11.3.
Milan: The market edged up following several days of losses, but the underlying tone remained weak.
The MIB gained three points to 1,178.
Madrid: Shares closed weaker, with investors unwilling to take positions.
The general index slipped 0.69 to 324.62.
Amsterdam: Foreign demand boosted share prices, which ended a lively day firmer.
Istanbul: A frenzy of equity buying sent prices to their sixth consecutive high.
The index, at 1,834.83, is now 138 per cent up since the market was opened to foreign buyers on 9 August.
Sterling receives strong support
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
THE BANK of England yesterday spent a reported $1bn after the pound came under sustained attack once it became clear that an increase in West German interest rates today is almost certain.
Fears deepened yesterday that the West German Bundesbank might lift its key lending rates by as much as one full point — a move which could prompt a rise in UK base rates, now 14 per cent.
The Government is believed to be reluctant to push rates any higher, but City analysts predicted it would act if pressure on sterling became too great to hold with intervention alone.
Despite aggressive and highly visible intervention, which market estimates put between $750m and $1bn, the pound lost 1.8 pfennigs to close at DM3.0102, after sinking to DM3.009 at one stage.
Throughout the day the Bank sold both dollars and European currency units almost continuously in an effort to shore up the pound.
On the trade-weighted index, the pound fell 0.3 points to 90.9.
And in an indication of growing pressure for higher rates, the key three-month interbank rate firmed a quarter of a point to 1411 16 per cent.
Although the dollar ended lower against most other currencies in London, it finished unchanged at $1.6045 against the pound.
The US currency eased 1.07 pfennigs to finish at DM1.8748 and was 0.25 yen lower at Y140.90.
Analysts said that if sterling declined to 90 points on the index or plunged significantly below DM3 it would almost certainly trigger an increase in base rates.
Interest rate fears also drove down London share prices and the FT-SE 100 index of leading shares reversed a 12.5 point gain early in the day to close 6.5 points lower at 2,312.1.
Pressure on sterling resumed in New York late on Tuesday night after mounting speculation that the UK Treasury was extremely reluctant to raise base rates ahead of next week's Conservative party conference, and it continued in financial markets in the Far East.
The US Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England all stepped into the markets to defend the pound.
Margaret Thatcher, the Prime Minister, yesterday underlined that UK rates would remain ‘as high as necessary for as long as is necessary to keep downward pressure on inflation’.
Her comments on interest rates had little impact on financial markets but they appeared to underscore the Government's commitment to holding up the pound.
But the commitment to a firm exchange rate may pose a dilemma as many economists believe the economy is now poised to slow down sharply.
And another increase in rates could increase the risks of recession.
David Walton, economist with Goldman Sachs, the US investment house, said: ‘They do run the risk of overkill, quite severe overkill if they push rates up.’
Yesterday the Bundesbank drained funds in the German money markets pushing rates up to levels suggesting a full point increase in the Discount and Lombard rates, which stand at 5 per cent and 7 per cent respectively.
Official interest rates in several European countries are likely to be lifted when the Bundesbank decision is announced.
The leading central banks are expected to redouble their efforts to push down the dollar once the German decision is announced — something which may ease pressure on the pound if it changes the focus of attention in the foreign exchange markets.
But yesterday's sales of Ecus highlighted the conflict between official efforts to defend the pound and weaken the dollar.
The Bank's sales of Ecus for pounds were intended to shore up the pound against the mark, without resorting to outright sales of the German currency.
That could undermine the impact of Bundesbank sales of dollars for marks.
Anti-apartheid group End Loans to Southern Africa targets main banks
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
Demonstrators from the anti-apartheid group End Loans to Southern Africa outside National Westminster Bank's international headquarters in the City yesterday.
The group is targeting NatWest, Barclays and Standard Chartered -the three British banks on the technical committee negotiating the rescheduling of about $11bn of loans to South Africa.
The loans are due for repayment in June 1990.
Negotiations began last month in Zurich.
Photograph: Brian Harris 
Halifax and Leeds join list of casualties
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
THE property downturn claimed two more building society casualties yesterday, the Halifax announcing a £14.5m loss from its estate agency chain and the Leeds Permanent closing down 60 branches and sacking 243 people.
The Halifax, Britain's biggest building society, also disclosed that it had set aside a £20m provision against its loans to the collapsed London docklands developer Kentish Property Group.
On top of its building society branch closures, the Leeds is expected to dispose of 15 to 20 of its estate agency branches in what it called ‘selective pruning’.
The cuts add to the increasing bloodshed in the property sector.
Last week the Nationwide Anglia announced it was closing 170 branches with 400 job losses and warned of more estate agency closures to come.
Other large estate agencies, including the Prudential, Black Horse and Hambro Countrywide chains have also had to shed large numbers of employees as home sales dry up.
Building societies face the threat of a further slowdown in their mortgage sales as pressure intensifies for an increase in base rates, and therefore mortgage rates.
The Halifax estate agency losses for the six months to 31 July compare with break-even in 1988.
The society remains committed to its 700-strong chain, though it said plans to create some new offices had been mothballed.
There might also be a very few closures, it said.
Overall the society produced a comparatively strong 6.4 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to £237.7m for the half year.
Jim Birrell, chief executive, said: ‘The Halifax has proved its underlying strength in a subdued and difficult housing market.’
However, the number of loans slumped from 150,000 last time, when the housing market was booming, to 97,000.
The Halifax share of total building society lending slipped from 22 per cent in 1988 to about 19.5 per cent.
A Halifax spokesman stressed the £20m provision on loans to the Kentish development Burrell's Wharf was highly prudent and would not necessarily lead to a loss of the same magnitude.
Halifax was the lead lender on the project with total exposure of £26m.
There were no plans to make major cuts in the 1,145-branch building society network, though there could be ‘the odd closure’.
The Leeds said the plan to close 60 of its 481 branches across the country was part of its long-term strategy and had not been forced on it by the housing recession.
The closures are mainly smaller, less profitable branches or those with overlapping parishes: 150 full-time and 93 part-time staff will lose their jobs, some of them through voluntary redundancy and early retirement.
Some surviving branches will be expanded, others re-sited.
Mike Blackburn, chief executive, commented: ‘We will be able to reduce operating costs, increase branch profitability and take advantage of areas where there is more potential.’
The society's 145-office estate agency chain, Property Leeds, is also to be cut back.
However, it is not commenting on the size of the cuts.
It hopes to sell some of the offices as going concerns.
The whole operation is thought to be loss-making, though the Leeds does not disclose its results.
Coopers and Deloitte in UK merger
By SIMON PINCOMBE
COOPERS & LYBRAND and Deloitte Haskins & Sells yesterday confirmed that they are to merge their UK practices to create the largest accountancy firm in the country with a fee income in excess of £413m.
Brandon Gough, chairman of Coopers, said that heads of agreement have been signed and that the merger would be put into effect ‘as soon as is practicable’.
The move, which has been presented as a fait accompli, effectively heralds the complete break-up of Deloitte Haskins & Sells International (DHSI), which until the beginning of this week was ostensibly in talks with another Big Eight firm, Touche Ross International.
Mr Gough said that the merger discussions had been completed in just three weeks.
But John Bullock, senior partner at Deloitte UK, admitted that Touche Ross had only been informed of his decision not to merge with them ‘a few days ago’.
Touche Ross announced on Tuesday that it had formed a new international firm, Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu (DRT) without Deloitte UK.
There will now certainly follow a lengthy battle between Coopers and Touche Ross for the allegiance of DHSI members worldwide.
There is also likely to be a row over the name Deloitte, which neither party seems prepared to give up.
No name has been decided for the new UK firm.
But Mr Bullock said: ‘I can tell you that the name belongs to us.’
As things stand, the Deloitte firms in the US, Japan and France have agreed to join DRT, with Canada expected to follow.
Coopers has Deloitte UK, which is the largest and most influential practice outside the US.
But there are rumours that France might be about to renege on its decision and Holland, which voted yesterday, is understood to have gone to Coopers.
Australia is likely to follow suit.
There is bound to be considerable upheaval among the blue-chip client list which Deloitte UK is bringing over to the new firm.
Mr Bullock said he hoped to retain the UK audits of multinational clients such as General Motors.
But in reality these are likely to go with the US firm to DRT.
There will probably also be problems on the grounds of competition.
Deloitte, for example, audits Cable & Wireless, whereas Coopers audits British Telecommunications.
And there were reports yesterday that some of the major clients have not taken the news of the merger well.
Both Mr Gough and Mr Bullock said that the two firms had proved surprisingly compatible.
The new firm will boast a total staff of more than 10,000, including 637 partners, in 30 offices.
It will audit 175 out of The Times top 1,000 companies and 67 out of The Times top 500 financial companies.
Mr Gough is to be chairman and joint senior partner with Mr Bullock deputy chairman and joint senior partner.
Standard in 150m pound German deal
By PATRICK HOSKING
STANDARD Chartered yesterday announced plans to sell the bulk of its continental banking operations for £150m in a pan-European tie-up with Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale.
Standard is selling most of its continental commercial banking operations to WestLB for £100m.
In a second deal, netting Standard another £50m, the two sides are pooling their merchant banking units in Europe to form a 50/50 joint venture.
The deal has yet to be approved by the regulatory authorities.
Completion is expected by the end of the year.
The sale will strengthen Standard's balance sheet and improve its capital ratios, which have recently sunk close to limits set by the Bank of England.
Standard said it would add £60m to its precious tier 1 capital.
Dusseldorf-based WestLB is the fourth largest bank in West Germany with total assets of £55bn.
It has eight domestic branches and offices in 14 other countries.
Profit after tax in 1988 was £38m.
Standard's commercial banking operations in Switzerland and Frankfurt are excluded from the sale, which hands over assets of £2.5bn to WestLB.
The two sides will use one another 's networks for correspondent banking.
The merged merchant bank comprises London-based Standard Chartered Merchant Bank and WestLB's much smaller corporate finance and third world debt trading units.
Sears hit by downturn in consumer spending
By TERENCE WILKINSON, Assistant City Editor
PRE-TAX profits at Sears, the Selfridges, Dolcis and Olympus retailing group, slumped by 10 per cent from £102.3m to £91.7m in the six months to 31 July as high street spending waned.
‘High interest rates…have dampened consumer expenditure and impacted on retail spending,’ says the chairman, Geoffrey Maitland Smith.
‘Increased costs, particularly wages and salaries, have also affected net margins.’
The major setback to profits came in Sears' footwear division, about 40 per cent of total profits, where the trading surplus fell by almost a quarter to £31.6m.
Sales, spanning Curtess, Trueform, Dolcis and Saxone, fell by 1.5 per cent on a store-for-store basis as volume was flat and prices fell.
Michael Pickard, chief executive, says that the hot summer weather favoured sales of sporting shoes, where Sears' footwear division is under-represented.
Sales here rose by 18 per cent, and the Miss Selfridge subsidiary also put in a strong performance with a sales gain of 17.5 per cent on a store-for-store comparison.
Against that Wallis women's wear and Horne had a tough half-year while Selfridges, helped by a return of tourism, held up.
Mr Pickard says that up to £6.3m of special factors depressed profits.
These included a £2m bill for the rail strike, £2m on new catalogues, £1m associated with a credit card scheme and £1.3m on clearing out unwanted stock from the Horne menswear chain.
Although property activities forged ahead, the Galliford Sears housebuilding subsidiary saw profits fall from £16m to £9m as completions fell by more than 50 per cent.
The interim dividend is raised by 5.2 per cent to 1.525p.
Lord Hanson tops pay scales
By PATRICK HOSKING
LORD HANSON was the highest paid director of a public company last year, closely followed by Roland ‘Tiny’ Rowland.
The Hanson chairman earned £1.239m; the Lonrho chief made do with £1.015m.
Top pay increased by an average of 17.8 per cent, according to a survey and league table published yesterday by Charterhouse, the merchant bank.
A quarter of the country's highest-paid executives had pay rises of 36 per cent or more.
A quarter received increases of less than 7 per cent.
Fifth place in the top-earners league was taken by an unnamed director of Palmerston Holdings, the property company, who boosted his £20,000 basic pay to £911,608 with a bonus linked to growth in net assets.
There were 25 per cent pay cuts for Burton Group's Sir Ralph Halpern and John Gunn of British & Commonwealth, who sank to earnings of £996,000 and £740,700 respectively.
Using data from 1,000 1988 annual reports, the survey found a close correlation between industry performance and pay increases.
The stores and construction sectors, which were then booming, produced average pay rises of more than 20 per cent.
Consumer goods manufacturers averaged only 12.5 per cent.
Larger firms and international companies tended to offer the biggest pay rises.
Banking is the occupation yielding the greatest number of high salaries.
Directors of financial institutions occupy seven of the top 25 places.
Earnings figures exclude share options and pension contributions.
According to the author of the report, Tony Vernon Harcourt, a director on base pay of £100,000 typically enjoys a package close to £200,000 after adding in a £17,000 bonus, £20,000 company pension contribution, car and other benefits worth £10,000 and an annual profit on share options worth about £50,000.
Traffic estimates knock Eurotunnel
By MICHAEL HARRISON and SARAH LAMBERT in Paris
EUROTUNNEL shares continued to plunge in London and Paris yesterday as investors took fright at indications that the spiralling costs of the Channel tunnel would not be offset by increased traffic estimates.
By the close, the shares had fallen a further 40p on the London market to close at 560p while they ended the day on the French bourse Fr3.6 lower at Fr59.9 amid heavy dealing in both markets.
As the shares continued to fall in the wake of Eurotunnel's estimate that the project would cost at least £2.2bn more than forecast, Alastair Morton, co-chairman of the Anglo-French consortium was in Paris trying to persuade the French banks of the need for new financing.
Despite the jitters the cost escalation has caused in the City, the French appear to be taking a more sanguine view.
At Banque Indosuez, one of the French underwriters of the project, Jean-Michel Plou, said the tunnel had gone too far to fail.
Once Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link, the consortium of firms building the tunnel, had produced more precise figures detailing the projected cost over-runs, the banks would be more willing to stump up the extra money, raising borrowing costs if necessary, he added.
The fact that traffic estimates are not being increased to compensate for the rising construction costs is certain to raise fears that the cost of using the tunnel will be forced up by its scheduled opening in June 1993.
Mr Morton is certain to face a City grilling on the latest cost and traffic estimates when Eurotunnel presents its interim results next Monday.
Under the refinancing envisaged by Eurotunnel, private investors will be asked to raise up to £350m through a rights issue in return for the project's banks agreeing to provide a further £1bn in loans.