

BOOK REVIEW /Poetry and the people: ‘Under Briggflatts’-Donald Davie: Carcanet, 18.95 pounds
By KEVIN JACKSON
SOME years ago, the poets Hugh MacDiarmid and Basil Bunting dropped in to a bar in Moffat, Dumfriesshire.
It was a grim sort of place, and Bunting felt uneasy as a group of workmen began to stare at them and murmur ominously.
At length, Bunting recalled, ‘the largest workman rose frowning and came to our table; but what he said was: ‘Is it no the great poet, Hugh MacDiarmid?’
'. Within seconds, the locals started buying the poets round after round of whisky, quoting enthusiastically from MacDiarmid's work.
It seems no more than a charming anecdote, but when Professor Davie cites Bunting's tale in Under Briggflatts, his history of British poetry since 1960, he calls the incident ‘challenging’.
What prompts him to this unexpected adjective is that (as Bunting stressed) the poems these men admired were not ‘simplified to aim at the poor’, but ‘written for a hard intellectual audience’.
But there are further reasons for his choice of qualifier, and they involve Davie in cultural as well as literary criticism.
Though its accounts of individual poems are as searching as anything in Davie's earlier books (we owe Carcanet a debt: this is to be the first in a uniform edition of Davie's work), Under Briggflatts is also a mordant and compelling history of the social climates to which these poems were a response.
As such, it should command the attention even of readers who feel that they have no time for the art.
If that class is sadly numerous today, it may be because of a common belief that ‘British poetry has chosen to turn inwards, parochial, self-comforting and serviceable’.
It is Davie's contention that this view is quite wrong: there are a great many outstandingly talented British poets, including Charles Tomlinson, C H Sisson, Elaine Feinstein and others (Davie, as distinguished a poet as any of his subjects, modestly excludes his own work) who do not answer to this description, and one purpose of Under Briggflats is to claim for them the attention they have often been denied; in some cases, indeed, to rescue them from scandalous neglect.
The most important figure in the latter group is Bunting himself, so little read these days that many readers will need to be told that the title of Davie's history refers to his masterpiece Briggflatts (1966).
Why the neglect?
Partly, Davie believes, because the British are now too ignorant of prosody to be able to hear Bunting's precise, subtle music; partly because, as an associate of Pound and Zukovsky, he is ‘an embarrassment to the numerous English historians who would have it that modernism in poetry was a temporary, American-inspired distraction from a native tradition…’
In drawing attention to many such embarrassments, Davie's book is sure to provoke a good deal of rancour in certain circles.
Yet it would not be quite right to call Under Briggflatts ‘controversial’, for that deadened word implies a self-serving wish to shock which is far from Davie's considered anger.
And if Davie's principles make him what some might call ‘elitist’ or ‘undemocratic’, as in his stinging verdicts on ‘catchpenny enterprises…like the Arvon Poetry Competitions’, it is not without his having pondered the arguments about the place and function of elites and of high art in a democratic nation far more deeply than the bulk of his fellow countrymen.
Just as importantly, he is possessed of a generosity of mind which allows him to be calmly judicious about the merits of writers who can advocate militant homosexuality and drug-taking (such as Thom Gunn), sympathise with feminism (Elaine Feinstein) or adhere to some variant of Marxism (Hugh MacDiarmid).
Both in his sternness and in his generosity, Davie is strongly reminiscent of a much earlier writer, whose name is invoked towards the end of Under Briggflatts.
Here, Davie pays a handsome compliment to one fellow critic by implying that the best of his prose can stand comparison with an eighteenth-century writer's ‘sharp and exact delineations of what in one poet's work distinguishes him from all others’.
Davie's tribute applies still more precisely to his own writing in Under Briggflatts, a book whose perspicacity, range of learning and pitiless eye for cant can leave little doubt which modern critic most richly deserves comparison with Samuel Johnson.
Russian roulette: Dominic Lieven on the dangers in Gorbachev's bid to make strikes illegal
By DOMINIC LIEVEN
ON MONDAY the Politburo decided to ban all strikes for the next 15 months.
On Tuesday the Soviet parliament refused to accept this blanket ban, which it wanted confined to the railways and to other key industries, and only to remain in force until the new law on strikes was promulgated.
The Politburo has bowed to a considerable extent to the parliament's wishes.
The party leadership wanted to ban all strikes because it is terrified of an upsurge in Russian and Ukrainian working-class militancy which, it correctly realises, could be more dangerous to the regime than all the ethnic disturbances of the last few years combined.
The miners' strike in July showed how quickly workers' discontent can erupt, take organised and radical form, and acquire leaders.
The Politburo fears events similar to those in Poland in the late 1970s and the 1980s.
The scenario reads: pressure on living standards added to general contempt for the regime leads to massive strikes which cause the economy to nosedive and popular discontent to boil over.
The political consequences are first increasing loss of control and crumbling of the party apparatus, next the state's need to fall back on the army and police to preserve its own existence, public order and, it claims, the chance of imposing painful economic reforms.
Martial law, capable of preserving order but not reversing economic decline, in turn yields to semi-pluralism as the principle of the party's monopoly of power is jettisoned to create a national consensus behind measures to salvage the country's economy.
Army rule and multi-party democracy are, to an almost equal degree, anathema to the Soviet party leadership, Mikhail Gorbachev included.
Moreover the Politburo can argue both that political pluralism is no panacea for economic problems, and that it is much easier to apply in Poland than in the vast multi-ethnic Soviet empire.
In proposing a ban on strikes, the Soviet leadership therefore wished to nip the incipient labour movement in the bud.
But the Supreme Soviet has, at least temporarily, put a spoke in the wheels.
The parliament's deputies have displayed not only independence but an intelligent unwillingness to panic in the face of economic crisis.
For this, Mr Gorbachev will have cause to be grateful, for a 15-month total ban on strikes is dangerous and unworkable nonsense.
The ban would be a major blow to Soviet civil liberties, none of which is long-established or firmly rooted.
Nor is there any sense in banning strikes ‘temporarily’, since the economic crisis which gives rise to labour unrest is anything but temporary, and the radical measures of economic reform (such as market prices) which might ultimately solve this crisis have not yet been adopted and will take years to yield results.
Above all, a ban on strikes is dangerous as it could only be implemented at the cost of Mr Gorbachev's package of political reforms.
Banned or not, strikes will happen, for the population is beyond the stage when harsh words will cow it into submissiveness.
Nor, when illegal strikes occur, will halfway measures of repression end them.
As the Polish authorities learnt in the 1970s, and the Soviet ones recently in Georgia, shooting strikers or demonstrators does not deter a mass movement but merely infuriates it and provides it with martyrs.
Woe betide a Soviet regime which shoots Russian and Eastern Ukrainian miners, the elite of the working class in the supposed land of the proletariat, and does so moreover in an era when suppression of news is no longer possible and society is rapidly organising itself autonomously of the state.
Such an event would represent the parting of the ways between Mr Gorbachev and the Slav masses, and would lead him almost inexorably down the road towards a full-scale assault on glasnost and civil liberties.
If Mr Gorbachev believed he could acquire a breathing space through repression, during which the economy could be transformed by unpopular but necessary reforms, he might be willing to pay the price, but this would reverse his strategy of the past three years.
In this period he came to believe that, to be effective, economic reforms must be accompanied by political liberalisation.
To crush strikes and abandon political reform would be to throw himself into the arms of those groups wedded not just to authoritarian politics but to neo-Stalinist economic institutions and principles.
At which point Mr Gorbachev's strategy of turning the USSR into a prosperous society in which intelligent Russians can take pride will be doomed.
In a capitalist country, political dictatorship is not incompatible with economic modernisation and can even facilitate it.
In a neo-Stalinist society in the 1990s, this is not the case, and therein lies one of Mr Gorbachev's key dilemmas.
His support for a 15-month blanket ban on strikes suggests that he is still not wholly aware of this fact.
When miners, chemical workers or railwaymen do actually defy the ban and strike this winter, he will need to be reminded or disaster will ensue.
The immediate casualty would be Mr Gorbachev's reform programme.
The longer-term one might be the Soviet regime itself.
There is more to it than tactics
By PETER JENKINS
BRIGHTON: This afternoon's debate about electoral reform is unlikely to lead very far, given the adamant opposition of the leadership.
All the same there is a growing swell of support for electoral reform within the Labour movement and a good deal of support among MPs.
According to a Mori poll conducted for the Electoral Reform Society, a commitment by Labour to proportional representation could result in a 2.5-3 per cent swing to Labour in a general election.
It would come predominantly from middle-aged, middle-class voters in the South and be chiefly at the expense of the Social and Liberal Democrats, Social Democrats and Greens.
These are exactly the sort of voters Labour needs in the South, where the Conservatives retain a 14-point mid-term lead.
On Sunday the national executive committee firmly rejected the proposal to set up a working party to study electoral reform.
The item is simply not on Neil Kinnock's agenda.
He said the proponents of proportional representation were advocating a gigantic and fundamental constitutional change for short-term tactical purposes.
And so they are.
The drive behind the campaign for so-called ‘fairer voting’ comes predominantly from leftish groups who believe there is an anti-Thatcher majority in the country which the electoral system enables her to flout on the strength of a 42 per cent minority.
This is a dubious proposition.
The last few years suggest that if there is a majority in the land it has been an anti-Labour majority.
The burgeoning of the Liberal-SDP Alliance was largely the consequence of Labour's perceived unfitness to govern.
Opinion polls suggested that the centre parties would have been hard put to deliver many of their supporters to Labour under an electoral pact.
Many would have preferred Mrs Thatcher.
A simpler solution than electoral reform is to abandon the policies and attitudes which have barred Labour from power, which is what Mr Kinnock has been about.
An unholy alliance with other minorities to preserve ideological positions otherwise unacceptable to the electorate does not appeal as a noble enterprise.
Refuting the argument that proportional representation would mean trimming to minority centrist positions, Robin Cooke, one of Labour's leading advocates of reform, said: ‘We have already gone to endless lengths to placate the centre ground.’
Exactly.
A properly functioning two-party system has a centrifugal dynamic.
The growth of third parties in the Seventies and early Eighties was in a large part a product of the malfunctioning of the two-party system, partly as a consequence of Mrs Thatcher's rejection of the post-war consensus but chiefly as a result of Labour's leftward lurches.
Mr Kinnock is correct to insist that fundamental changes in the voting system should not be undertaken for short-term, tactical reasons.
Nor is there much in the fairness argument, although this is the reason offered by 46 per cent of the people interested in PR.
I cannot see that one voting system is intrinsically more fair than another.
It is not fair, perhaps, that with 23 per cent of the vote the Alliance should have won only 3 per cent of the seats in the House of Commons.
But nor is it fair that with 6 or 7 per cent of the vote, the West German liberals should be the sole arbiters of who rules in Bonn.
The case for electoral reform is best discussed in terms of the question: what kind of political system do we want?
Our electoral system strongly favours two-party government; other people's systems, in varying degree proportionate, result in coalitions of a usually centrist tinge.
The difference goes far deeper than the political complexion of the government.
The strong tendency of pluralistic systems of Europe is consensual and, in some cases, quasi-corporatist; on the other side of the coin, they enable extremist minorities to thrive.
Our system is adversarial in style, friendly to class-based, ideological parties, it effectively excludes minorities from the parliamentary arena, and results almost invariably in one-party rule.
Which has been better governed since the war, Britain or, say, the Federal Republic of Germany?
Economies, it would appear, thrive on the kind of continuity which coalition government helps to provide.
They also benefit from the higher degree of social solidarity which seems to accompany more pluralistic systems.
Such systems, moreover, encourage incrementalist rather than ideological approaches, which have resulted in a successful mix of market economics and welfare.
In Britain, the home of strong government and political stability, the post-war years — or, at least, since 1964 — have been marked by an instability of policy, intensifying social conflict and a record of economic failure.
These unfavourable contrasts were commonplace at the beginning of the decade and were at the heart of the centrist critique of two-party politics as then played.
Since then three things have happened.
First, Mrs Thatcher has, through policies of liberalisation, put the economy on a footing similar to the more efficient continental economies.
Second, Labour under Mr Kinnock is belatedly making the transition to continental-style social democracy.
Third, the centre has collapsed as a political force — although not as a constituency — and this obliges both major parties to compete more assiduously for middle-of-the-road votes.
The outlines of a new post-Thatcherite consensus begin to be visible.
Electoral reform would help to entrench this style of politics.
In debating it today the Labour Conference should focus not on its tactical advantages but on the kind of political system it wishes to see.
There is no more fundamental question.
Making the change with body talk
By TERRY COLEMAN
As I drove into Brighton, I did not see one sign to the Labour Party conference, but many directing me to something called Bodytalk.
And there was, as it turned out, a lot of body talk about Neil Kinnock.
For him to blow a kiss to the gallery was one thing.
But when last did a politician make such copious use of a handsome wife?
Taking his curtain calls after a successful speech, he drew her to him by the hand and entwined his arms with hers until she gently shook him off, whereupon he enjoyed his triumph for a while manfully alone, until he again resorted to his wife Glenys, going to fetch her, leading her again by the hand, and holding her by the waist.
He had, as it were, taken to heart Labour's advice to constituency parties on the display of their leaflets and other electioneering wares: ‘Use rose at the correct angle, and do not cut off stem.’
He had after all had a good conference.
He had got rid of Ken Livingstone from Labour's national executive committee, and got rid too of Labour's unilateralist nuclear policy.
I suppose it does not matter that this was a policy until lately dear to his heart, and even dearer to his wife's.
I suppose he had forgotten that when Bill Jordan, president of the engineering workers' union, asked him during the 1987 election campaign to announce then that he would hold a referendum on unilateralism after the election, he declined and replied that people would come round to it once they understood.
I suppose he had, in good faith, forgotten — though Tony Benn in conference reminded him — that in 1987 every Labour MP, every one, was elected on that unilateralist promise.
But, as the conference slogan told us again and again, ‘Meet the Challenge: Make the Change.’
Mr Kinnock has made the change all right, and, since he told us in his speech that he has acted with candour, we must believe him.
He says he has now produced answers that the people understand.
That's entertainment.
All in all, he has done well.
A Labour conference is a tricky thing.
It is not a well-drilled rally like the Conservatives'.
At a Labour conference you get Gerry Adams turning up at a fringe meeting, and he the leader of Sinn Fein, which is cousin to the IRA, which in 1984, in this same town, blew up the Grand Hotel in an attempt to murder the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
It is at Labour conferences that you hear international co-operation praised to the skies, while multinational corporations, presumably because they are mostly American, are big bad wolves.
It is at Labour conferences that you get the sweet nuttiness of Baby Milk Action, which proclaims, ‘Breast Milk: a World Resource,’ and tells you, as a fact, that it would take 114 million lactating cows to replace the milk of the women of India.
It is at the conferences of Labour, the party that killed the grammar schools, that you see one fruit of that enlightened policy, which is that many of the younger delegates are incoherently illiterate.
But change there is.
‘Make the change’, and Labour is a party on the make.
It is still a mix of ancient and modern.
Delegates are still addressed as brother, sister, or comrade, but this year there are electronic signs in the hall giving the speaker's name — as there have been at the Conservative conference for quite a while.
This is a conference which keeps very much in mind the symbolic advice offered in that pamphlet, to which I alluded just now, the one which tells you how to lay out election leaflets.
‘Don't,’ it says, ‘confuse people by using out-of-date logos from years ago, such as flags, fists, or the pen/spade/sword.’
Change, then.
But it was not Mr Kinnock whose speech brought about the miraculous change of heart on unilateralism.
I heard no trace of the word in his speech.
It was Gerald Kaufman, shadow foreign secretary, who did that for him, in a speech of vast sweeping grasp.
Most notably it swept southern Africa, though he did talk about a visit to Russia where his hosts had told him Labour would be good partners in disarmament.
No doubt.
But he dreamed of a free Namibia, and asked the conference to send Swapo a message of solidarity and support for a massive victory in a free Namibian election.
Of such an election, and its conduct, I trust he will give a report next year.
And then there was his visit to the Republic of South Africa.
Two months ago he went there and saw the usual places and people.
He said he had also been offered interviews with ministers in the South African government, so that he could form a balanced judgement, but had declined.
He had, he said, got his balanced view without shaking those bloodstained hands.
What a mind is Mr Kaufman's, so sure there is nothing to be learned but what it wishes to learn, so serenely confident in its own perfected little judgement of what is a great and complex tragedy.
He ended by saying that the prospect of a Labour government was a beacon of hope for millions of striving and oppressed people throughout the world.
If he believes that many of those millions have even heard of the party, he will believe anything.
Enough of him.
Now we come to the grey sections.
Labour, with its reasonable and historic fears of parties within the party, has often rejected the idea of separate black and Asian sections.
But this time the executive had come up with a compromise of sterling dimness.
OK, there should be an affiliated ‘socialist society’ for blacks and Asians, but whites could join too.
All this was to combat racism in all its manifestations.
At which the manifestations of blacks and Asians from the floor were as downright as might have been expected.
It was an insult: they didn't need white nannies — did more than two black people in a room constitute a riot? -were they to step back to the old plantation days?— had Kinnock and Hattersley been drunk when they drafted the proposal?
At which poor Jack Rogers — a former bricklayer and union leader, and the member of the executive taking the can back as he replied to the debate — innocently protested they hadn't been drunk, they hadn't even had a cup of tea.
(Consolatory cries of ‘Aah.’)
The grey sections were chucked out.
‘So,’ said the chairman, ‘we're back to square one.’
At a Fabian fringe meeting, Andrew Neil, editor of The Sunday Times and executive chairman of Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television, made a speech, of course in his own and his boss's interest, which had a sense and vigour that the conference platform could dearly do with.
How was it, he asked, that Labour was opposed to a poll tax in local government, but in favour of a poll tax (the BBC licence fee) in television?
Then we went back for the long-service merit awards.
These, for me, are often the best bit of the conference.
The recipients are the party's living history.
This year they were Annie Huggett, aged 97, and Roy Hughes, aged 80.
Between them they had served the party for 139 years.
Mr Hughes's mother was a suffragette.
His wife's grandfather helped found the ILP (Independent Labour Party) in 1893.
Himself, he was a railwayman who travelled all over the country, campaigned in more than 20 constituencies and was elected a Labour councillor in three towns.
He was in hospital and unable to come to Brighton.
But Annie Huggett was there, alert and bright.
She has been a member of the party since 1911, and for 50 years, until a few weeks ago, collected subscriptions.
She addressed the conference.
She was plainly delighted.
She said one of her most memorable times was in 1924, when Malcolm Muggeridge's father was the candidate in her constituency.
Her dearest wish was to live another couple of years and see Neil Kinnock as prime minister.
The conference stood to her.
She is Labour past.
Labour present is Neil Kinnock, who speaks for 63 minutes and quotes Robert Frost about miles to go and promises to keep, and about a brighter dawn when poverty, privilege, fear, disease, woe, and war shall live only in the memory of time.
And who then talks about the security and liberty of the planet.
When, I wonder, did it become fashionable for politicians to talk not about the world but about the planet?
‘Planet’ is greener.
But is Mr Kinnock wise, having trimmed — having trimmed to a wiser policy, but all the same egregiously trimmed — is he wise to insist that the British people respect Labour for the changes it has made?
Is he wise to say, and make much of it, that people come up and tell him so?
Having trimmed, a man might shut up about it.
But back to Bodytalk, whose convention happened to be at the Metropole, next to Labour's conference hotel.
It is all about health, fitness, training, tone and tanning.
There are acres of exercise machines for men and slimming machines for women.
Girls lie on machines which move their bodies in quasi-sexual transports — falling, opening, rising.
Weird.
I was found wandering by Mr Ozzy Dunk, a salesman for Golden Touch Sunbed Centres.
He demonstrated to me an Ergoline 35-tube sunbed in which a man lies full length.
He said it would change and tone a man in three five-minute sessions over a period of a week.
The Ergoline would tan a man top to toe and front and back.
The face was hardest to tan, and this model, which was for professionals and cost £5,912 plus VAT, featured three facial tanning units, one to tan the front of the face and two others to tan the sides.
This is the easy way.
Thus can a man, in three five-minutes sessions, attain a multilateral tan.
Leading Article: Strike mentality at Brighton
By TERRY COLEMAN
THE vague and ill-considered commitment to dilute the Government's industrial relations reforms which was endorsed so easily yesterday by the Labour Party conference will return to haunt the party's leaders, rather as the question of nuclear weapons did until it was, apparently, laid to rest earlier this week.
Conservative Central Office will be able to make much of the suggestion that, under a Labour administration, secondary picketing would once again be lawful, that unions which ignored the courts would no longer face the possibility of sequestration and that it would not be possible for employers or other interested parties to apply for interim injunctions postponing precipitate strikes.
Yet union activists will read into the same policy review an endorsement of the main thrust of Conservative legislation.
Bill Jordan of the engineering workers and Eric Hammond of the electricians, the two union leaders who have consistently opposed law breaking and whose unions have long and honourable records of support for secret ballots, were, significantly, given a rough ride yesterday.
But Arthur Scargill, who repeated his contempt for ballots, was roundly applauded.
Moreover, the important, though limited, concessions to the unions which Neil Kinnock has now made, are based on the false premise that current legislation is unbalanced and unfair and renders effective strike action impossible.
For example, Ron Todd of the Transport and General Workers' Union blamed the systematic bias and ignorance of the courts, and the new freedom to dismiss strikers granted by this Government, for the failure of the dock strike which was called by his union this summer.
Mr Todd and his allies are mistaken.
The dock strike failed because the transport workers did not have the strength to defend the labour monopoly enjoyed by registered dockers in a number of ports once the Government removed its statutory underpinning.
At much the same time, however, workers on British Rail successfully defended their procedures in the courts and subsequently went on to conduct a very effective strike from which they emerged victorious.
Unions are demonstrating a growing sophistication and success in their use of the law, while the courts are increasingly aware of the difference between an employer who is frivolously testing his rights to its limits and an enterprise with genuine reason for seeking an interim injunction.
But the most dispiriting aspect of yesterday's debate was the preoccupation which union delegates had with rendering the strike weapon more effective.
In the present climate it is hard to see the function of strikes except in public-sector monopolies.
Unions such as the engineering workers and the electricians, which have been most successful over the past decade (and which, incidentally, embraced democratic reforms years ago), have attempted to improve the terms and conditions of their members by other means.
A Labour movement looking to the 1990s would have been been debating single union, no-strike deals and profit-related payment systems rather than how best to call strikes and whether a system of labour tribunals was needed to compensate for the supposed bias of the capitalist courts.
Letter: Police raid on the Broadwater Farm estate
From Mr MILLARD SCOTT and Mr SHAUN WATERMAN
Sir: Now that the dust kicked up by the mass raid on the Broadwater Farm estate last week has begun to settle, it is time to embark upon an assessment of its effects.
Dealing in drugs, particularly hard drugs, is not an activity condoned by any of the community organisations on the estate.
Indeed, the Broadwater Farm Youth Association has expressed its concern about the situation to the police on a number of occasions, and in August 1989 went so far as to close the youth centre on the estate for some time in an effort to stop dealers congregating there.
Police reports on the night claimed that ‘substantial’ seizures of cannabis and cocaine had been made — thus effectively labelling those arrested as ‘crack barons’and prejudicing their chances of a fair hearing in court.
However, since then the police have been remarkably reticent about the exact quantity of drugs which they recovered.
It is our understanding that less than two grammes of cocaine were seized and that the police recovered no evidence whatsoever of any dealing of hard drugs on the estate.
Moreover, the tactics that the police employed raise wider questions about their motives in mounting this massive — and very costly — operation.
The police have had the estate under video surveillance for many weeks.
They claim to have carefully identified those that they wanted to arrest.
Why then did they seal off an area of Tottenham more than one mile across?
Why were a woman and her 10-month-old baby strip-searched, and other mothers separated from their terrified children?
Why are more than one-third of those charged accused of public order offences?
Why were the offices of the Broadwater Farm Defence Campaign illegally searched, and why were Defence Campaign staff arrested practically on site as they tried to enter the estate?
Why, in short, was it necessary to criminalise and terrorise our entire community?
In any other part of the country, police would have apprehended the drug dealers in a series of dawn raids.
Because of the Farm's history, they used the occasion to mount a show of force, and to do so at 5pm, when children playing on the estate would be terrified by the raid, but when they could be sure of a good spot on the Six O'Clock News.
Tottenham police are fond of saying publicly that they want to ‘build bridges’ with the community here.
They made much of the participation of so-called ‘community leaders’ in the raid, and of the ‘accountability’that they demonstrated through the involvement of hand-picked representatives of the media.
If the police are truly interested in being accountable to and building bridges with those that they police, why did they not discuss their plans with representatives of the community organisations on the estate?
The observers that took part in the raid do not in any way represent the residents of this estate and are widely regarded here as being little better than police stooges.
The record of the police with respect to this estate is frankly appalling.
Hardly a week passes in which the Defence Campaign does not monitor incidents of harassment or malpractice by officers from Tottenham.
If the police hope to gain the trust of the people of Broadwater Farm, they must begin by showing good faith towards those that the residents have chosen to represent themselves — the local council and the community organisations here.
It is we, after all, who have to pick up the pieces and begin again the struggle to live our lives with dignity, and in freedom from arbitrary and authoritarian policing.
Leading Article: America's Panamanian legacy
From Mr MILLARD SCOTT and Mr SHAUN WATERMAN
GENERAL MANUEL NORIEGA, the military ruler of Panama, is largely a creation of the Americans, but one of whom Washington is now anxious to be rid: hence the unvarnished disappointment there at the failure of the latest attempt to topple him.
As head of its armed forces, General Noriega rules a country which was itself brought into being by the United States.
The territory through which President Theodore Roosevelt was determined to build a trans-oceanic canal belonged, inconveniently, to Colombia.
With the help of co-operative Panamanians, it was duly seized and a provisional Panamanian government established, with an American warship in the background.
The canal was completed in 1914.
For several decades, Panama was juridically a protectorate of the United States, and effectively an American colony.
Power was in the hands of the army, which the Americans had created.
But in the 1960s, thanks in part to the charismatic leadership of General Omar Torrijos, a strong sense of nationalism emerged.
The canal treaties were revised under President Carter, with control passing to Panama at the end of the century.
Meanwhile, American troops (12,000 of them at present) remain to protect the waterway and American lives.
General Noriega became head of intelligence under General Torrijos, and strengthened his links with the CIA by providing information about Cuba and left-wing movements in Central America.
He has ruled Panama since General Torrijos's mysterious death in a plane crash in 1981.
Until two years ago he was, despite his flirtations with the Soviet Union, seen as an ally in President Reagan's obsessional war against the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua.
His involvement with the drug barons of Colombia was known, but -like his thuggish way with political opponents — considered to be of secondary importance.
For the past two years, Washington has been desperate to unseat a ruler who, across the world, had come to symbolise the crass stupidity and shortsightedness of American policy in Latin America.
Ironically, the deep-seated mistrust, even hatred, left by a half-century of American support for despots and oligarchs in that region has helped keep General Noriega in power.
His defiance of Uncle Sam has even earned him a grudging respect.
The United States thus finds itself in a no-win situation: the more it is seen to be intervening against him, the more it is likely to reinforce his position.
Since Washington imposed economic sanctions on Panama last year, its economy has gone into a steep decline.
Yet General Noriega has not fallen, and evidently has sufficient funds to maintain the loyalty of the larger part of the armed forces: thanks in part, it is suspected, to the support of the drug barons of Colombia.
Several of the main fugitives from the present Colombian crackdown on the drugs industry are alleged to be sheltering in Panamanian safe-houses.
Against him are ranged Panama's middle classes and officers with a grudge: when promotion is based on loyalty rather than ability, there will always be those who advocate a coup.
But until there are enough to ensure success, the Americans will have to live with the legacy of their own poor judgement.
America: land of the rising Sony
By MILES KINGTON
I READ that the US is in the grip of Japanophobia following the purchase of Columbia Pictures by Sony.
Can this be right?
No.
‘Phobia’ is from the Greek.
‘Japan’ is a word of Eastern origin.
Therefore they should not be used together in the same word.
No, what I want to know is whether the US is gripped by a wave of fear of the Japanese.
Why not?
Nobody likes an absentee landlord.
Very droll.
Any other reason?
Yes.
Because it is Japan's turn.
Could you explain that?
Certainly.
You must remember that Americans are afraid of nobody.
They stand tall, jut their chins out, call no one Sir and can lick any man in the house.
They do not know fear.
But they have been dead scared of the Russians for 40 years.
That is what happens when you are afraid of nobody all the time.
It gets very tiring jutting your chin out, standing tall and being able to lick anyone in the house if you have nobody to do it to.
So the Americans, as well as not knowing fear, have to have an enemy to be afraid of.
But they are not afraid of the Russians any more.
Well, they have been afraid of the Russians for so long that they have learned to live with it.
So they need fresh enemies ordered up from time to time just to keep their chins jutting.
The Chinese.
The Vietnamese.
The Iranians.
The Libyans.
The Panamanians and Nicaraguans.
And now the Japanese.
But the Japanese are their friends.
No, they are their allies.
That is quite different.
The Americans have no real friends.
Goodness, how sad.
Not at all.
No other nation has any real friends either.
What is an ally, then?
An ally is a nation which you beat fair and square in a war some time ago and which is now on your side.
America put Japan back on its feet, dusted it down, shook hands with it and said let bygones be bygones.
As a result, Japan now wants revenge and sees peace as the best way of getting its own back.
How is it doing that?
By taking over ownership of America.
This will culminate in a celebration in 1991 to mark the 50th anniversary of the start of the war in the Pacific.
Japan will take America by surprise by storming in early one morning and buying Pearl Harbor.
Meanwhile, what are the immediate effects of Sony buying Columbia Pictures?
David Puttnam will be going round with a quiet smile on his face for a few days.
Apart from that.
Will Sony remake The Bridge on The River Kwai?
Very droll.
Of course not.
It is the Americans who remake foreign films, not the other way round.
Think of The Seven Samurai.
Think of Breathless.
Think of Three Men and a Baby.
Think of…
All right, all right .
So why does Sony want Columbia?
Sony has been working on a new Walkman which allows you to watch films as you go around.
Sony has made no films.
But Columbia has a library of 2,700 old pictures.
Why doesn't someone buy up Japan before it owns everyone?
It shouldn't be too difficult.
Unfortunately, their trade barriers are such that nobody can get inside and buy anything.
But wasn't Mrs Thatcher telling the Japanese to break down their trade barriers the other day?
Yes.
They did the opposite, as usually happens when she tells people to do things.
What is it with Mrs Thatcher?
Well, basically her problem is that she is afraid of nobody.
She juts her chin out, stands tall, and could lick any man in the house.
Hello, this sounds familiar.
Does this mean that she has to invent enemies too?
Sure.
That gate across Downing Street…the dismissal of the IRA as monsters…the same attitude to the train drivers, the doctors, the miners, Sue Lawley…
Good heavens.
By the way, I notice an increasing tendency for her critics to psychoanalyse Mrs Thatcher.
Is that because she is paranoid?
No, it is because they are.
They are siblings who feel they have to disagree violently with mother to demonstrate their own independence.
Incidentally, I notice you have steered the talk right away from the Japanese, to whom in fact you were rather nice.
Any reason?
Yes.
I have just discovered that this column is 75 per cent owned by a Japanese company.
I feel I ought to be nice to them wherever possible.
Thank you.
Letter: The Archbishop's critical duty
From The Rt Rev D. R. FEAVER
Sir: If, after the return of the Archbishop of Canterbury from Rome, the Church of England, without the concurrence of the Orthodox churches and of the Church of Rome, alters the nature of the Sacred Ministry, which we claim to hold in common with them, it will behave as a sect and will become a sect.
The bishops will betray that which is entrusted to them; and the irresponsible silliness of the Synod will be seen to be sinful.
I could have no place nor part in it.
No talk about ‘caring for conscience’ nor ‘compensation’would mask the treachery and betrayal.
Letter: The Archbishop's critical duty
From The Ven WILLIAM PALEY
Sir: You refer to the Prime Minister (4 October) as ‘not so much a Pharisee as a Philistine’, owing presumably to her supposedly vulgar tastes.
The Philistines were a people organised into a federation of five city states, who ruled over parts of Palestine from about BC 1175.
They are known by archaeologists for their distinctive ceramic work.
There is little to suggest any aesthetic vulgarity or antipathy to culture on their part.
The contemporary defamation of their name manifestly derives from Jewish (and thereby Christian) hostility and prejudice.
To quote one of your letter writers: ‘It is high time to abandon that caricature, too long perpetuated by dictionary definitions’.
Anti-Philistinism and anti-Arab sentiment may have a nasty way of feeding on each other.
Letter: The Archbishop's critical duty
From The Rev Canon PAUL OESTREICHER
Sir: The Archbishop of Canterbury would be the first to agree with you (2 October) that personal generosity is a Christian duty.
But it is no substitute for social justice.
These are not alternatives.
Both are necessary.
Practice has shown that social justice cannot be achieved where the free market is idolised.
Our Prime Minister believes neither in the desirability nor the possibility of creating a compassionate society.
So, compassion, like virtually everything else, is to be privatised.
An archbishop who failed to challenge that kind of economic fundamentalism would virtually have abandoned the social hope of the Christian Church.
Dr Runcie affirms the need to create wealth and makes no plea for its collective ownership.
At least by implication he is calling for a social market economy.
In this he is at one with most Christian Democrats and most Social Democrats in Europe today.
No wonder Mrs Thatcher is so afraid of European integration and firmly rejects a social charter that the rest of Western Europe readily accepts.
It is fanciful to assume that a tight-fisted state will produce open-handed citizens.
Even if it did, personal generosity simply cannot cure basic social injustices.
Strange, that a Prime Minister who so passionately believes in military security rejects social security with such disdain.
In challenging such assumptions the Archbishop is simply minding his own business.
Whether or not that helps to fill church pews is totally irrelevant.
Letter: The rail and road links to the North
From JACK THOMPSON, MP for Wansbeck (Labour) and others
Sir: Although we are not necessarily personally supportive of the Channel tunnel, we accept that it will be completed and become part of the transport network of Europe.
Present planning, however, on this side of the Channel will not provide our industrial and commerical community with a reasonable chance of exploiting new opportunites in Europe.
Unless action is taken, increasingly more congestion will result in the already over-crowded South-east.
Investment in road and rail links, particularly the rail link from Folkestone to the north of London — and we would argue beyond there — is vital.
Without that investment and infrastructure, twenty-first century companies in the North will find difficulty penetrating the European market with a nineteenth-century transport system.
The Government must speedily ensure that the necessary public and private resources are made available to guarantee the investment takes place.
Failure to do so would confirm the fear of those who say that the Government is so hell-bent on pursuing ideology that it ignores the pressing needs of our industrial community in the build-up to 1992.
Future generations in both the North and the South will not forgive our generation if they have to bear the future cost.
Letter: Recycled plastics
From Mr D. J. BUCKLER
Sir: Increasing the recycling of plastics ought to be near the top of Britain's environmental priorities, as your article ‘The search to escape a plastic nightmare’(27 September) suggests.
But those of us in the recycling business must take issue with the statement from the British Plastics Federation that recycled plastics cannot safely be used to package food.
Recycled plastic can be used, quite hygienically, to package eggs, tomatoes, apples and all manner of skinned food and vegetables.
The recycling of polystyrene, for instance, requires temperatures above 200C and the materials are extensively filtered during the procedure.
This produces materials which are as clean as first-use plastics.
Companies which make first-use plastic might prefer recycled plastic to be used in opening up new markets, rather than competing with their products -for example, by substituting for timber.
But if we are to move towards the maximum recycling of plastics, and the maximum environmental benefit, then food packaging should not be ruled out.
Letter: Shortage of donor organs
From Ms CAROLINE TAHOURDIN
Sir: Sunday's television appeal for a donor liver highlights the acute shortage of replacement organs but not its true extent.
Only a life-or-death issue such as a liver or heart will hit the headlines.
I recently had a liver transplant at Addenbrooke's Hospital and still feel guilty that inevitably the decision was made to give me a liver rather than someone else whose life expectancy may have been marginally longer.
Had I needed a kidney, where the demand is much higher I am sure my guilt factor would be far higher.
I am also extremely grateful that someone was generous enough to donate their relative's organ at a time of extreme personal stress.
Now that transplant technology has improved so much, is it not time to change the system for organ donation?
Dr Williams is quoted (3 October) as favouring mandatory requests to the relatives of all suitable donors.
I feel an opting-out system would be probably less distressing to the donor's relatives (who may find an approach for donation insensitive when they have just been told of an — often — unexpected death).
Few people are unwilling to give their organs posthumously — those that are, usually make their views clearer.
Letter: Coleman's jaundiced eye at the UN
From Mr EDWARD BRADBY
Sir: A few hours after reading Terry Coleman's article on the United Nations General Assembly (30 September), I came across this passage in Trollope's Barchester Towers, which exactly expressed my feelings, and, I hope, those of many others of your readers: I know no life that must be so delicious as that of a writer for the newspapers…to thunder forth accusations against men in power; show up the worst side of everything that is produced; to pick holes in every coat; to be indignant, sarcastic, jocose, moral, or supercilious; to damn with faint praise, or crush with open calumny.
What can be so easy as this when the critic has to be responsible for nothing?
Letter: Coleman's jaundiced eye at the UN
From Mr MICHAEL STOPFORD
Sir: Terry Coleman's sanctimonious report on the latest United Nations General Assembly (30 September) gives a pretty distorted view of proceedings in New York.
Foreigners (of whom there are quite a few at the UN) can do nothing right for Mr Coleman.
He can find only delusion, tyranny or demagoguery among the various heads of state and assembled representatives.
Dismissive of the ‘corridor opportunites’, he fails to mention that, so far, the Foreign Secretaries of the UK and Argentina have had their first meeting since the 1982 Falklands War, that the Israeli and Soviet Foreign Ministers have got together as has the US Secretary of State with his Israeli and Egyptian counterparts, or that the two German Foreign Ministers have held extensive talks on the current crisis — all with apparently good results: quite useful when several of these countries have no diplomatic relations with each other.
Concentrating on the foreigners' comic aspects, Mr Coleman passes over, in almost complete silence, the Assembly's preoccupation with the environment, drugs, Aids and human rights, questions at the top of the agenda for the UN.
For his universally lauded efforts, successful or continuing, to help resolve diplomatically such issues as Namibia, Afghanistan, Iran-Iraq, Western Sahara, Central America, Kampuchea, Cyprus and the Middle East, Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar is deemed a ‘classic bureaucrat’, while the peace-keeping forces are recalled for their funny names rather than for their receipt of the Nobel Peace Prize last year.
I wish Mr Coleman a safe trip home and a less xenophobic piece next year.
Letter: Libel and charity
From Mr STEPHEN CAMPBELL
Sir: Am I alone in seeing the debate focused at the wrong end of the argument?
If libel awards (decided by juries) appear high relative to, say, personal injury awards (made by judges against published scales), surely the latter ought to be revised upwards, not the former downwards.
Letter: Libel and charity
From Mr M. D. VARCOE-COCKS
Sir: Dr Paul Robertshaw (3 October) suggests that the frequent practice of the rich (typical libel plaintiffs) to pass on their damages to charity acts ‘as an additional and self-legitimating, incentive to take awards through the ceiling’.
If the purpose of damages is to compensate a victim rather than punish the perpetrator, then a successful plaintiff who passes his award to charity cannot be said to have been compensated in any way.
As a matter of law, it is arguable that a plaintiff who announces before his case that he will pass on any damages to charity is not entitled to anything except costs if he wins.
Of course, it is difficult to pre-empt a jury's or judge's decision on damages, but the fact that a very rich plaintiff might hand over his damages to charity should and could be taken into account in any assessment.
It is even difficult to say that a very rich person could be compensated in money terms; thus, however heinous the libel, such a person should get not more than a nominal sum and his costs.
Letter: Scientific notes
From Mr NORMAN E. BUTCHER
Sir: Dr Beverly Halstead (letter, 2 October) should note that Scotland's banks still value science.
The Clydesdale Bank £20 note bears the head of the physicist Lord Kelvin, and on the reverse side one sees his nineteenth-century lecture theatre in the University of Glasgow.
Letter: On the ball
From Mr MARTIN THOMPSON
Sir: Just before John Paul II was elected there was speculation that Cardinal Hume could become the first non-Italian Pope for several centuries.
The Newcastle Evening Chronicle reported the story under the headline ‘United supporter to be next Pope’.