

The price that motorists must pay
By TERENCE BENDIXSON
Urban motorways have proved no solution to Britain's chronic traffic congestion — indeed some say they have made it worse.
Politicians are now making favourable noises about other countries' experiments with road pricing.
Terence Bendixson reports on an idea whose time may have come.
THE spectre of road pricing — charging for the roads on the basis of pay-as-you-drive — is again lurking in the political shadows.
‘Moving Britain into the 1990s’, the Labour Party's transport policy document, promises ‘a range of measures to restrict car use in the most congested areas, including road pricing’.
The Government is, more discreetly, looking the same way.
Earlier this year, Paul Channon, then Secretary of State for Transport, agreed to a wide-ranging study of London's traffic problems.
Road pricing is part of it.
‘If it cannot be avoided, it will have to happen,’ he told the Chartered Institute of Transport on 4 May.
‘The Government has shown in the past that it is willing to grasp nettles that others have shied away from, and I have no doubt we shall grasp this one if we have to.’
Cecil Parkinson, his successor, has yet to reveal his thinking on this awkward subject.
Of all transport policies, road pricing seems most likely to cause apoplexy everywhere, from the Royal Automobile Club to the bar at the Rover's Return.
It would be a new tax, involve paying for something that is at present free and would hit hardest at low-income car-owners.
It also conjures up fears of a huge Swansea-style computer keeping a Big Brotherish eye on every car.
What on earth can have induced Labour and Conservative politicians alike even to consider hitching their wagons to something which, at first sight, makes the poll tax look like a pre-election bonus?
The idea of road pricing first surfaced in the early Sixties.
Britain under Harold Macmillan was booming and new Austins and Morrises were flooding on to the country's antiquated roads.
New car registrations — only half a million in 1958 — jumped in 1963 to more than a million (Today, they are running at two million.)
Traffic in the bigger cities was chaotic.
Ernest Marples, Macmillan's Transport Minister, appointed two working parties to find solutions.
One led to Sir Colin Buchanan's ‘Traffic in Towns’ report — which, for the first time, counted the environmental cost of providing lebensraum for cars.
The second, much less well-known, was chaired by Dr Reuben Smeed, the outstanding transport statistician of his generation.
Smeed's report, ‘Road Pricing: The Economic and Technical Possibilities’, is a classic of Anglo-Saxon economic pragmatism.
In it, a group of star economists, including Sir Alan Walters, Mrs Thatcher's personal adviser, showed how, in any stream of traffic, every additional vehicle slows down those already there — and that the slower the speed of the traffic stream being joined, the greater the hindrance caused by every joining vehicle.
Smeed went on to argue that if drivers were charged for the delays they impose on one another, some of them would travel at different times, by different means or to different places — and that time wasted by everyone in jams would be reduced.
Smeed's logic was overwhelming.
The Department of Transport awarded contracts to firms to develop electronics that would identify cars passing over buried toll ‘gates’.
The data would be sent to a computer and, as with telephone calls, logged, costed and sent out in the form of a periodic bill.
Fear of the political consequences frustrated a public trial of the technology in Britain, but a low-tech variation was successfully pioneered in Singapore in 1975.
Singapore was then a fast-growing city-state of more than two million inhabitants.
A financial district was mushrooming, a proposed underground was years away from service and every rush hour saw a rising tide of cars jamming the roads.
The Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew's dictatorial government moved with characteristic speed and confidence.
A central pay zone was marked out with huge signs and, during the morning peak, drivers were obliged to pay US$26 (£16) per month and US$1.30 per day to drive into it.
Company cars were charged a double rate and — a master stroke — cars with four or more occupants were allowed in free.
At every point where a road entered the ‘restricted zone’, Singapore's equivalent of Securicor officers stood, radios in hand.
Cars without stickers (or four-plus occupants) were reported and quickly fined.
The World Bank, which was keen for other cities to follow Singapore's example, reported a 44 per cent fall in traffic entering central Singapore between 7.30am and 10.15am.
Through traffic was driven out.
Many commuters took to car pooling.
Others drove to work before 7.30am or scheduled business calls first thing so that they could drive in later.
Bus travel increased hugely.
Road pricing is now firmly established in Singapore and the windscreen stickers are about to be superseded by electronics.
The pay zone will, for the time being, remain the same.
During the Seventies, several London-based studies of supplementary licences and electronic road pricing were made, all involving a pay zone covering the City and West End, but what officials proposed, politicians never disposed.
In 1975 a Labour Greater London Council backed down and in 1979, although the Evening Standard said ‘Londoners ready for the 50p toll’, Sir Horace Cutler, leader of the by then Conservative GLC, dismissed such charges as ‘unfair and impracticable’.
Movement for London, a road-users' pressure group, called them ‘totally ridiculous’.
Confidence in road building has taken knocks too.
The state of the M25 has led to suggestions that bigger and better roads may lead only to worse jams.
And Dr Martin Mogridge, of London University's transport studies group, has persuasively argued that, in London, speedier trains and tubes will make road traffic go faster while new roads will do the opposite.
Another important development was the death, as far as road pricing is concerned, of Big Brother.
In 1985 the Hong Kong government, faced with 350,000 vehicles and only 1,227km of roads (an unequalled density) decided on an experiment with electronic toll collection.
Black boxes the size of video-cassettes were welded on to 3,000 cars and hundreds of loops were buried in the roads.
The boxes sent signals to the loops and thus to a central computer which clocked them up as tolls.
The tolls, which varied with the level of congestion and the time of day, were displayed on road-side signs.
The aim of the traffic engineers was to cut car journeys by up to 10 per cent, creating congestion-free running for buses, goods vehicles and the remaining cars.
The experiment gave every indication that this would be possible and was a great technical success — but when the elected representatives were asked to agree a city-wide scheme, they voted against it.
They feared among other things, that the records logged by the central computer would be a threat to the privacy and freedom of drivers.
The transformation of road pricing technology followed swiftly.
The latest proposals involve the use of pre-payment cards comparable to British Telecom's green phonecards.
Drivers would insert one of these ‘smart cards’ into tiny black boxes fixed to their windscreens.
Out on the roads, these boxes would be interrogated by toll collecting beacons.
Provided there was a valid card in the box, the beacon would deduct some of its value and record no details.
Only if there was no card or a dud card would the car be photographed as evidence for prosecution.
No less important is the work of the European Commission.
The EC rightly saw that with France and Italy moving towards electronic toll collection to save labour, and the Netherlands moving towards road pricing to deal with congestion, drivers travelling around Europe could be faced with having to plaster numerous different black boxes all over their windscreens.
‘Drivers want to be able to put the same smart card in a holder (or a different card in the same holder) whether driving in the Netherlands or on a French autoroute,’ says Ian Catling, a member of an EC group which is ensuring that electronic Babel is avoided on the roads.
The work of the EC group illustrates the global significance of the electronic toll.
In its various forms it could be used to finance private roads, regulate traffic on the M25 and bring order to inner-city roads.
It could also become commonplace throughout Europe.
Electronic tolls could replace fuel and vehicle taxes as the main form of highway revenue.
Notwithstanding this promise, the use of road pricing to change travel habits still seems some way off.
The Dutch are widely expected to be the first to try it.
Not only is traffic on their motorways obstructing lorries going in and out of the vast Europoort, but public opposition to air pollution and the taking of scarce land for new roads is intense.
Economic and environmental arguments are thus in harmony.
Will Cecil Parkinson, the new Secretary of State for Transport, follow suit in London?
It is a daunting challenge.
More than a million and half vehicles enter or leave central London every working day.
Yet this area, which stretches from Hyde Park to Liverpool Street station and from the Angel, Islington, to the Thames, is the minimum practical initial pay zone.
Enforcement would be one problem.
Road pricing would soon fail if paying the charges could be as painlessly disregarded as parking fines.
No one should underestimate these problems, but nor should the waste and unfairness of existing conditions be overlooked.
Hidden in the cost of everything that goes by road in London is a tax imposed by congestion.
A recession would cut back London's traffic but so long as the economy keeps growing, the result will be more cars, more traffic and more pollution.
Mr Parkinson can turn his back on all this but if he decides to confront it, road pricing is one of the few tools at his disposal.
And if he can count on Labour support, it could be a brilliant move.
Dr Phil Goodwin, Oxford University's director of transport studies, believes that pricing could gain wide support provided that a ‘rule of three’ is followed in allocating its benefits.
Under Goodwin's rule, the road space freed by reducing traffic would be distributed: one-third to wider pavements and better pedestrian crossings; one-third to bus lanes; and one-third to increasing the speed of other traffic.
The revenue from road pricing would be allocated one-third to reducing general taxes, one-third to improving the roads and one-third to improving public transport.
Pay-as-you-drive charges would also bring cleaner city air and reduced rat-running.
If the new Transport Secretary can negotiate this kind of deal with the Treasury, he could give the phrase Parkinson's Law an entirely new meaning.
Note this man's words carefully at the Conservative Party conference.
The author's report, ‘Transport In The Nineties: The Shaping Of Europe’ is published on Monday by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Driving the hard bargain: Pay-as-you-drive would solve little and penalise motorists cruelly, Kenneth Faircloth argues
By KENNETH FAIRCLOTH
IN 1905, when the Automobile Association was founded, ownership and use of a car was the privilege only of the rich.
Today, most people regard cars as essential to family life.
There are now 18.5 million cars on Britain's roads, and by the year 2000 there will be 25 to 28 million.
We need to discover how to live with them.
The cost of running the car is already, in many families, the biggest item of household expenditure, after food and housing.
Road pricing — charging for road space as it is used — will merely add to the burden.
People choose to spend a high proportion of their disposable income on buying and running a car because car ownership enhances their lives.
The family that owns and uses a car, for work and play, is usually better off…simply because it owns and uses a car.
One of the most important uses of the car is the journey to work.
AA research shows that 64 per cent of motorists use their cars for this purpose -among them, semi-skilled and unskilled workers for whom the car is an absolute necessity.
Road pricing is inflationary: through demands for higher pay from car-users, and businesses passing on costs in prices.
Transport academics argue that road pricing would make drivers pay for the cost of congestion.
But drivers already pay — substantially — for the privilege of using their cars.
In 1988-89, the Exchequer received some £17bn from motoring taxation.
Yet during the same period only £3.8bn was spent on providing, improving and maintaining Britain's road network.
For every £4 collected in motoring taxes, less than £1 is spent on roads.
Britain collects far more and spends far less than any other EC country.
Of course something must be done to reduce road congestion: revenue taken from road-users urgently needs to be invested in roads.
Investment and commitment are also needed to rebuild a viable public transport system.
Where public transport is available, and where it is clean, efficient, safe and reasonably priced, commuters will use it.
Many commuting drivers, given the opportunity to combine use of the car with use of the bus or train, would happily park out of town in well-sited, inexpensive car parks.
London's traffic difficulties will never be ‘solved’ in the sense that every road will miraculously become congestion-free, and public transport suddenly meet the needs of every traveller.
But there are short- and medium-term measures that can contain and ease the problems.
All roadworks in peak-traffic hours should be prohibited.
Currently highways authorities and main services providers are allowed to cause chaos by digging up roads whenever and wherever they wish.
Much of the capital's road space is used for only part of the day.
More could be done to encourage flexible or staggered working hours and spread the traffic load.
Developers should pay for the cost of the additional traffic that they generate.
In urban areas especially, major developments place sudden and immense extra demands on the transport infrastructure — but no one considers this at the planning stages.
It would be a pity if talk of road pricing were to divert attention from commonsense action needed now, or if it were seen as a substitute for a properly funded roads programme.
The AA asks for more of the money taken in taxation from drivers to be put to work, and for road pricing proposals to be acknowledged as unnecessary, inflationary and, ultimately, inequitable.
A problem for the taxman: An extra levy on fuel would be a quick and cheap solution, Dr Mayer Hillman says
By DR MAYER HILLMAN
THE commonly-cited reason for opposing a charge for driving on particular urban roads is that it is a further restriction on those who have sufficient constraints already, what with parking meters, wheel-clamping and towing-away.
In any case, it is argued, motorists already pay a fair ‘whack’ in taxation for use of the roads.
Alternatively, it is claimed, such a system would be inequitable since poorer motorists would be driven off the roads.
However, road pricing is rapidly claiming widespread support — from organisations as different in their political perspectives as the Institute of Directors and the new Institute for Public Policy Research.
They claim this is the most effective way to eliminate road congestion in city centres.
It can be simply introduced, either by supplementary licensing, with a daily charge to drive in certain areas or by applying more sophisticated under-street and on-vehicle technology that would allow ‘fine-tuning’ of the charge according to the need to reduce traffic in particular areas prone to jams or at particularly congested times of day.
Such an approach would be widely welcomed.
It would demonstrate the Government's willingness to get tough with an influential sector of the community for an increasingly obvious worthy cause.
Drivers themselves cannot take the initiative since they can do nothing to relieve towns and cities of the extraordinarily wasteful and environmentally distasteful conditions which both they and the general public have to tolerate every day.
Indeed, there is no incentive for drivers to take any account of the environmental and social impact of their transport decisions on other people.
The question is whether road pricing is the best response to the problem, since it focuses on just one aspect — inadequate road space in central areas — as if road congestion and delay were the primary issues to resolve.
But the inordinately high volumes of traffic, forecast to rise substantially, bring in their wake a much wider range of adverse consequences.
First and foremost are road accidents and the impact of the risk of accidents — the two are not synonymous — on the behaviour of other road users such as the elderly and children.
In spite of higher volumes of traffic in urban as compared with other areas, the fatality and serious injury rate is lower.
Then there are toxic, corrosive and carcinogenic exhaust fumes and the spreading intrusiveness of traffic noise, which again are by no means limited to city centres.
Unless road pricing is applied to all roads, irrespective of their current state of congestion, it is likely to lead to further decentralisation as the motoring public and commerce move out to avoid extra transport costs.
Why not instead institute an additional environmental/carbon tax on motor fuels?
This would lead to a decline in the volume of less essential traffic in urban and rural areas and bring an overall reduction in all its adverse effects, including its contribution, through carbon dioxide, to global warming — certain to be very high on the political agenda in the next few years.
Such a tax could be introduced almost overnight.
It could be raised if found to be effective in achieving public interest objectives.
Moreover, it would not require the high administrative and technical costs of road pricing.
History shows that the long-term effect of altering the price of motorised travel does not necessarily affect the amount of money people and organisations spend on transport.
The likely effect of the additional tax would be to reverse the general direction of our increasingly motor-dependent patterns of activity, with all its attendant problems.
Meanwhile, still taking the strain…:
Gerald Kaufman negotiates an obstacle course of cancellations, malfunctions, meaningless messages and mountains of litter
By GERALD KAUFMAN
9am.
InterCity train from Manchester Piccadilly to London Euston.
A comfortable trip, apart from the almost incessant announcements over the public address system which interrupt work, leisure reading and, worst of all, an attempt at a nap.
The call that particularly mystifies me, when I am subjected to it on journey after journey, is the admonition from catering staff to intending consumers of their junk food to be sure to bring their small change with them.
Is it feared that, without this request, passengers would take small change out of pocket or handbag and deliberately leave it on their seat before they proceed to the buffet car? 11.33am.
Train arrives at Euston seven minutes late — not bad compared with recent performances, but still late.
On the suddenly silent intercom, no explanation offered, still less an apology.
Euston underground station.
Of 11 ticket machines, two are not working and only two provide change.
The southbound Northern Line train is litter-ridden.
Charing Cross underground station.
On my way to the District and Circle platform I pass a notice stating that an escalator is out of service.
The station is litter-ridden.
There is litter on the seats of the train I take to Westminster.
Mid-afternoon.
On my way to my London flat, as I walk through a passageway leading from the Strand to Charing Cross underground station, I pass two young men sitting on a sheet on the floor and begging.
Both down-escalators to the Jubilee Line are out of service.
I walk down one of these stationary escalators.
It is littered with rubbish.
On the next level, once again both down-escalators are out of service and once again the stationary escalator is littered with rubbish.
St John's Wood station.
As I ride the up-escalator, I see that the down-escalator is out of service.
A cheery hand-written notice recommends that passengers use the ‘Keep Fit Stairs’.
St John's Wood station was closed for two months from February to April for repair of the escalators.
Since then, they have been out of order frequently — seven days in August alone.
Late afternoon.
On my way to an engagement in Bracknell.
St John's Wood station again.
The down-escalator is still out of order.
I walk down the steep flight of stairs.
A middle-aged disabled woman attempts to do the same, edging gingerly down the exactly 100 Keep Fit steps, one by painful one.
Baker Street station.
Change from Jubilee to Bakerloo Line.
No litter on floor or seats of train, but a youth sprawls with both his feet on the facing seat: a sort of human litter.
Waterloo underground station.
Of two up-escalators, one is out of service.
Hundreds of passengers are converging on the one in operation.
If there was a fire or other emergency, there could be panic and havoc.
I walk up a flight of steps, carpeted with discarded copies of a give-away magazine called Ms London, into Waterloo railway station.
I have some time to spare and would like to sit down and read my copy of the biography of Berlioz.
However, unless I want junk food from one of the many establishments purveying it in this thoroughly commercialised station, all I have available to sit on in the huge concourse is a grubby metal flip-up slat a few inches wide.
There are also red-painted railings, on which I assume I am invited to lean.
Hundreds of people are standing around, gazing up at the indicator and waiting for the platform of their train to be flashed up.
Many seem anxious, not surprisingly since a large notice announces, ‘Due to a shortage of train crews, the following services will not run.’
Four services are listed, mine fortunately not among them.
I go into the information office and ask about times of return trains from Bracknell.
There is a queue.
When I reach its head the man in charge goes away to conduct a transaction involving cardboard boxes.
On returning, he very politely gives me a timetable.
I decide to take the 9.49pm back to London.
My train to Bracknell is announced.
I get into a No Smoking carriage and, since the station interior is rather dark, switch on a light so that I can read Berlioz.
No light comes on.
There is no bulb in the socket.
At least I have a seat.
People are standing in the corridor.
The carriage, however, seems very hot.
All my fellow passengers feel it.
We realise why.
The heating is full on, on this warm day, noon-time temperature 21C.
I look at the temperature controller.
It is turned to Cool.
We passengers discuss among ourselves what to do and, as their designated representative, I try turning the controller first to Hot and then midway between Cool and Hot.
No change.
A man walking through the carriage on his way to the corridor advises, ‘Blame the Government.’
I wish I could join him in the corridor, but now it is so crammed that there is no room.
At Richmond a lot of people get off the train and I take refuge in a Smoking compartment where the heat is not on.
The train arrives at Bracknell seven minutes late on its 51-minute journey time.
Return to Bracknell station following my engagement, to catch the 9.49pm train back to Waterloo.
While I am waiting on the platform, a railway employee shouts across the track that the 9.49 is cancelled, and that the next train will be at 10.19.
I call across asking why the 9.49 is cancelled.
He calls back, ‘I've no idea.’
The platform is chilly, and there is no waiting room.
The only waiting area is the equally chilly station foyer.
I go to a pub across the road to await the 10.19.
The train arrives on time.
I get into a carriage and take Berlioz out of my briefcase.
I turn on the light above my seat.
No light.
No bulb.
I turn on the other light on my side of the carriage.
No light.
No bulb.
Both lights on the other side of the carriage work, so I change seats.
It is now cold.
I turn the temperature controller to Hot.
Nothing happens.
A ticket-collector comes along.
I ask why the 9.49 was cancelled.
He says he did not know it had been.
‘Management doesn't tell us.’
Waterloo station.
The train arrives three minutes early.
One of the escalators down to my underground platform is out of service, but two others are working.
I change at Baker Street.
Litter on the train.
11.45pm.
I arrive at St John's Wood station.
The down-escalator is still out of service.
A London Underground employee descends the Keep Fit Stairs, wearily sweeping rubbish before him.
The author is Labour's foreign affairs spokesman.