

Obituary: Mark Dignam (CORRECTED)
By OSSIA TRILLING
Correction (published 10 October 1989) appended to this article.
MARK DIGNAM was one of England's foremost actors, both as a juvenile and as a character actor, ready to tackle anything going, from cameo to leading roles, an expert in the classics, above all Shakespeare, and a keen student of modern drama.
‘I never went to drama school,’ he would say without a hint of regret, ‘but learnt my craft the hard way.’
He entered the profession after an apprenticeship at the Jesuit college he attended in Sheffield, where his father, a salesman in steel, had moved from London with his young son.
Dignam used to joke about how his priestly teacher, a devotee of the classical drama, invariably cast him in the leading roles of Shakespeare's heroines, Portia, Juliet, and Ophelia among them.
He took lessons in elocution as an amateur actor from Rosalind Iden, Sir Donald Wolfit's wife and leading actress, at that time with the Sheffield Rep, which Dignam himself later joined.
Dignam must have had unusual stamina.
His entry in Who's Who in the Theatre is almost as long as Olivier's, if not longer.
He certainly enjoyed perfect health, helped, he claimed, by being a teetotaller and in later life a vegetarian.
He threw himself vigorously into the work in hand, and presented the aspect of one who did not know when to stop.
Up to his last days, he regularly walked his dogs, and was on the point of doing so on his usual route from his home — the oldest lived-in wooden house in London, built in 1483 — when he had his fatal fall.
All his adult life, Dignam had been one of the most involved defenders of the rights of actors.
He served intermittently on the Council of Equity and on its Executive Committee, from his election to both in 1941 until the day of his death.
In his eighties he was a recipient of his union's rarely given citation for ‘services to the acting profession’.
He made his stage debut in 1930 in St Albans, his West End debut in Macbeth (as The Bleeding Sergeant) in 1932, and his New York debut, as Carson in Oscar Wilde, in 1938.
He had cut his teeth on Shakespeare with Ben Greet in 1931 and went on to enlarge his Shakespearian repertoire throughout the rest of his life.
I first saw him in a supporting role at the Croydon Rep in 1936, where another young actor, seven years his junior, by the name of William Devlin, who dared to tackle King Lear at about the same time.
Dignam then enrolled in Michael McOwan's company at the Westminster, appearing in Ibsen, Chekhov, O'Neill, Turgenev, Hamlet (the Ghost and the First Player), skilfully differentiating his performances without ever falling into idle routine.
For McOwan he played Justin O'Connell in Waste in 1937, the same Granville-Barker play to which he returned 48 years later, as Russell Blackborough, with the Royal Shakespeare Company.
He was in the Lilian Baylis 1937 season at the Old Vic and returned to the Westminster for Pygmalion, Richard III, and more O'Neill, including a memorable portrayal of the old Ephraim Cabot in Desire Under The Elms in 1940.
After four years in the Royal Artillery, Dignam was invalided out of the army and went straight to the Arts Theatre, where he was a delightfully tongue-in-cheek Shavian Angel and a foxy Claudius, proving Stanislavsky's adage, as Agrippa in the Anthony Quayle/Edith Evans Antony and Cleopatra, that there are ‘no small parts’.
He went to the Edinburgh 1947 Festival in more Shakespeare.
Dignam's career blossomed in no uncertain manner.
At the Old Vic seasons at the New Theatre (now the Albery), he was the tetchy Cauchon in Saint Joan and Claudius with the company at Elsinore in 1950.
After more exposure in the West End, he spent three years at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, playing 12 large Shakespeare roles with distinction.
In 1969 he was Polonius in the Roundhouse, prior-to-Broadway, Hamlet, before returning to the RSC in 1972 and making his National Theatre debut in 1974.
From then until 1980 he commuted between the two, never disappointing his admirers, from Cardinal Bellarmin in Galileo (1980) to Perchikhin in The Philistines (1986).
He played numerous cameo roles both on the large and the small screen: in The Charge of the Light Brigade and Hamlet for the cinema and in Hess, Disraeli and Suez for television.
Nothing was too daunting for him and each new part was dispatched with the same intelligence and mental and bodily concentration.
CORRECTION Margaret Wolfit writes to correct an error in this obituary.
She says: ‘Rosalind Iden was not (to my knowledge) at Sheffield Repertory Company.
It was my mother Chris Castor, a fine actress, who was leading lady there and gave Mar Dignam lessons in elocution.
She had trained under Kate Rorke at the Guildhall, where she won the silver medal for elocution.
POP /The Who face up to a new generation: Giles Smith anticipates the return of Daltrey, Townshend and Entwistle
By GILES SMITH
THE WHO will be 25 years old next month, and not one of the band looks a day over 50.
Actually, not one of its members is a day over 50 (although all of them are coming close) but you might reasonably have expected age to leave Daltrey, Townshend, and Entwistle looking worse than well-travelled.
When they weren't trashing their equipment (something which kept them occupied deep into the Seventies), they were trashing each other.
Townshend is most famous for beating his guitar against speaker stacks, but it is also worth remembering that, on stage at The Ricky Tick Club, Windsor, in May 1966, he attempted the same stunt against the head of Keith Moon.
For his part, Moon managed to fry a sizeable portion of Townshend's hair by misjudging a flash powder explosion in his drum kit during the making of an American TV Special.
The on-stage arguments and bust-ups practically became a feature of the show, with Daltrey almost permanently poised to quit, but somehow hanging on.
And when they weren't trashing each other, they were trashing themselves.
Moon died in 1978, after an overdose of the prescribed drug he was taking to ease himself out of alcoholism; Townshend had his own dark periods of excess; even Entwistle, the quiet, static one, felt inclined to release a solo album entitled Smash Your Head Against The Wall.
Daltrey has always seemed the keenest to reform The Who for live shows (they split up officially in 1983), and he has finally got his way: these British dates follow an American tour.
Accusations of cynical pension-planning inevitably follow, as do questions about whether this is the sort of thing that grown men should be up to.
But if your repertoire includes standards like Won't Get Fooled Again, Substitute, and My Generation, it must be galling to be made to justify your desire to go out and play them.
SELECTED THE SUGARCUBES Inspired bohemians from Reykjavik, determinedly evading the clutches of the major record companies.
Tonight Newcastle Mayfair; Sat Glasgow Barrowlands; Mon Edinburgh Usher Hall; Tue Nottingham Rock City.
LENNY HENRY Benefit concert on behalf of Sickle Cell Anaemia Research.
Henry will run through a few soul favourites, backed by the Womack & Womack Band.
Numerous scheduled guests include Aswad, and Karen Wheeler from Soul II Soul.
Fri London Brixton Academy.
VAN MORRISON The sombre balladeer, currently on form which you might almost describe as chirpy.
His band includes Georgie Fame on organ, and saxophonist Pee Wee Ellis, in a combination rarely known to disappoint.
Fri Leeds University; Sat Birmingham Hummingbird; Sun Bristol Studio; Mon-Wed London Town & Country.
THE MIGHTY LEMON DROPS Their new LP, Laughter, marries an adventurously large guitar sound to some pop tunes of equal ambition.
Live, the mix seems likely to work well.
Fri Leeds Polytechnic; Sat Newcastle University; Tue Manchester Ritz; Wed Leicester University.
Tonight Sheffield University; Fri Newcastle Polytechnic; Sat Leeds University; Sun Norwich UEA; Mon Cambridge Corn Exchange.
Fri London Africa Centre.
Sun London Purcell Room.
Tonight Bristol Bierkeller; Fri Hereford Park Hall; Sat Leeds West Indian Centre; Tue Newcastle Riverside Club.
OPERA /The magical voice of the Flute: Joan Rodgers explains her role in The Magic Flute to Mark Pappenheim
By MARK PAPPENHEIM
Mozart is my whole life at the moment,’ says soprano Joan Rodgers.
‘I keep telling myself that it will stand me in good stead when I'm about 40 and doing my first Isolde!’
But she's not really complaining: Mozart launched her international career at the 1982 Aix Festival when at short notice, and at only 25, she took on the role of Pamina in The Magic Flute.
She's since sung Pamina, Zerlina and Despina under Barenboim in Paris and, before the axe fell on the conductor's brief reign at the Bastille, was to have done the three Da Ponte pieces with him and Patrice Chereau.
Concert work fills the blanks in her diary left by the Bastille debacle.
She sang Susanna earlier this summer in Simon Rattle's period Figaro for Glyndebourne (due to be seen on BBC TV before Christmas) and is now back at the Coliseum as Pamina in Nicholas Hytner's luminously hieroglyphic Magic Flute.
Rodgers has little difficulty reading between the lines of Hytner's stylish staging, which apes the hairpin role-reversals of Mozart's convoluted Masonic fable by itself, neatly reversing the racial and sexual stereotypes of the original.
Here we have a black prince and a white ‘blackamoor’, a male hero but a female lead.
‘It's clear that Pamina is just as much on trial as Pamino.
Even more perhaps.
After all, he's been told what's going on, she hasn't — and is almost driven to suicide by his mysterious silence,’ she explains.
In fact, it's Pamina that really grows in this production, from her first encounter with Monostatos ('a real pantomime villain'), through the cataclysmic change in her relationship with her mother, the Queen of the Night, from blind devotion to ultimate aversion.
‘She starts as a naive young girl and ends as a grown woman, and quite a strong one too,’ Rodgers adds proudly.
And when this Pamina finally enters Sarastro's all-male Brotherhood of Man, it's clear she's really won her place.
As a final gesture, Tamino removes the hard-won Symbol of the Sun from his own neck and places it round Pamina's: ‘It's a breakthrough — a new order breaking the mould of the past.’
TICKET OFFER English National Opera, in association with Ticketmaster, is offering Independent readers a 20 per cent reduction on its Stalls, Dress Circle and Upper Circle seats (£8.80 to £26.40) for the performance of Mozart's Magic Flute on Wednesday 18 October (7.30pm).
In addition, readers will receive a complementary glass of Taittinger champagne at the interval.
To book, call Ticketmaster on 01-379 4444 and mention The Independent offer before Thursday 12 October.
English National Opera, St Martin's Lane WC2.
MUSIC & OPERA /Selected concerts and productions in the week ahead, including Norwich Festival, City of Birmingham Touring Opera; ticket offers
By MARK PAPPENHEIM
NORWICH FESTIVAL Swedish trumpet virtuoso Hakan Hardenbeger plays Jolivet's Concerto, British organist David Titterington plays Poulenc's, Richard Hickox conducts the City of London Sinfonia.
Plus Ravel (Tombeau de Couperin), Bizet (Symphony in C) 7.30pm St Andrew's Hall £3-£12 but half-price to Independent readers on presentation of this page at the Box Office (0603-618499) SATURDAY BBC Philharmonic Brahms (Symphony No3) and Wagner (Prelude and Liebstod) frame Schoenberg's Violin Concerto 7.30pm RFH £3.50-£15 but Independent readers can get 2 tickets for the price of 1 on presentation of this page at the Box Office Echoes of Venice 17th-century cantatas and motets by Rossi, Legrenzi, Stradella and Carisio sung by the Baroque Consort of Singers 8pm St Mary's, Putney Bridge SW15 £4/concs £2 RPO Nicholas Cleobury conducts Mendelssohn (Fingal's Cave), Handel (Water Music), Rachmaninov (Piano Concerto No2, soloist Piers Lane), Beethoven (Pastoral) 8pm Barbican £7-£15 Emma Kirkby with Anthony Rooley.
Dowland lute songs 7.30pm Wigmore £5-£10 Rendezous Canadian Music Festival Concert Acousmatique introduced by Claude Schryer 5pm PR £3.
Chilingirian Quartet with oboist Lawrence Cherney and soprano Ingrid Attrot: Tippett (Quartet No2), Harry Freedman (Short Story), Cherney (In the Stillness of the Summer Wind), R. Murray Schafer (Beauty and the Beast) 7.45pm QEH £3-£6.
Gregory Levin's Medicine Wheel ('a shaman journey into the electric present'), plus John Oliver (El Reposo del Fuego), Micheline Coulombe-Saint Marcoux (Miroirs), DX7 player Sergio Barroso (La Fiesta) 8pm PR 32.50-£5 READING Andrew Litton conducts Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra in Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante and Mahler's Symphony No5 7.30pm Hexagon (0734-591591) £6-£15 SUNDAY Seta Tanyel The rising Armenian star of the keyboard joins Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos and the LSO for Beethoven's Emperor Concerto, plus Mahler (Symphony No1) 7.30pm Barbican £4.50-£20 Immortal Diamond Gerard Manley Hopkins, poet and priest, celebrated in poetry and song.
7pm Wigmore Hall £4-£7 Pinchas Zukerman The American violinist's only London recital this season.
Beethoven (Sonata Op12 No3), Schumann (Romances Op94, Sonata Op105 No1), Stravinsky (Suite Italienne) 4pm Barbican £5-£12.50 Bach Vespers Cantata 38 (Aus tiefer Not), plus Vivaldi (Double Violin Concerto) in context of Lutheran service 7pm St Anne's, Gresham St, The City NORWICH FESTIVAL Dorothy Tutin joins the Endymion Ensemble for Saint- Saens's Carnival of the Animals and Poulenc's Babar the Elephant, plus Ibert, Milhaud 3pm St Andrew's Hall £2-£8. l TUESDAY Verdi Requiem ECO and Tallis Chamber Choir with soloists Jo Ann Pickens, Sarah Walker, Jeffrey Talbot, Gwynne Howell 7.30pm Royal Naval College Chapel, King William Walk, Greenwich SE10 £5.50-£9 (317 8687) Olli Mustonen The brilliant young Finnish pianist-composer joins fellow Finn Esa-Pekka Salonen and the Philharmonia for a Grand Gala in aid of the Council for the Protection of Rural England: Ravel's breezy G major Piano Concerto is framed by aptly Green pieces by Vaughan Williams (Greensleeves Fantasia) and Stravinsky (Le Sacre du Printemps) 7.30pm RFH £18 incl donation; £35-£125 incl reception and private view of Legacy exhibition (12 photographers' views of Britain's countryside) NORWICH FESTIVAL The Field of Cloth of Gold: A musical celebration of the 1520 meeting between Henry VIII and Francois I of France, played on period instruments by Musica Antiqua of London 7.30pm Cathedral £2.50-£7.50 (0603-618499) LES PARISIENNES Pianist Diana Ambache and her Ambache Chamber Orchestra offer musical portraits of four femmes de Paris — two of them composers, two of them inspirations for the compositions of others.
Emilie Candeille, opera singer, grande tragedienne and composeress, is represented by the first performance in 199 years of her Piano Concerto in D, Op2.
Louise Farrenc, who numbered Schumann among her fans, is remembered by her Nonet for strings and wind of 1849, while the hapless Marie Antoinette is immortalised in the nickname of her favourite symphony, Haydn's No85, La Reine de France.
Finally, the masculine sounding dedicatee of Mozart's Piano Concerto No9, dubbed the Jeunehomme, stands revealed as a certain Mlle Jeunehomme, virtuoso pianist 7.30pm St John's Smith Sq £5-£11/concs £5 WEDNESDAY11 The Creation Period Orchestra, the Age of Enlightenment: Haydn's Handelian oratorio 7.30pm QEH £5-£15 THOMAS ALLEN Second recital this week (after Blackheath on Thursday 5) by the vibrant Geordie baritone.
Here it's English song by Britten, Butterworth, Quilter and Vaughan Williams.
With Geoffrey Parsons (piano) 8pm Royal Opera House, Covent Garden (240 1066) £1.50-£15 ADDRESSES AND BOOKING Barbican Centre, Silk Street EC2 (638 8891) South Bank Centre (Royal Festival Hall, Queen Elizabeth Hall, Purcell Room), South Bank SE1 (928 8800) St John's, Smith Square SW1 (222 1061) Wigmore Hall, Wigmore Street W1 (935 2141) OPERA CITY OF BIRMINGHAM TOURING OPERA ‘Ghanashyam — A Broken Branch’ CBTO's most adventurous project so far unites 16 of India's leading classical performers with nine British-based Asian artists in the premiere performances of Pandit Ravi Shankar's new musical theatre piece, a spectacular marriage of Indian classical music, song and dance (Kathak, Bharatanatyam and Kathakali) set in an idyllic early 20th-century India and exploring the destructive effects of drink and drugs upon a village dancer, played by Kathak wizard Durga Lal.
Crawley 7.45pm Fri The Hawth.
Farnham 8pm 12 Oct Maltings.
DANCE /Louise Levene with details of Rambert's national tour plus nationwide booking details
By LOUISE LEVENE
LONDON Anthony d'Offay Gallery (499 4100) Michael Clark Heterospective.
Small- space performance by this most trendy of dancers.
Dress up.
Only 50 seats per performance for a £23 donation to the Michael Clark Foundation which finances his company 14-23 Oct.
Ealing Town Hall (579-2424 ext 55057) Common Ground Dance Theatre A Stranger Disintegrates — exploration of urban isolation by deaf and hearing dancers tonight.
BASILDON New Towngate Theatre (0268-532 632) Second Stride Heaven Ablaze in His Breast rehashed Coppelia based on Hoffmann's ‘The Sandman’ about a man's dangerous obsession with a mechanical doll to Sat.
GLASGOW Tramway (041-227 5511) Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker Mikrokosmos cult Belgian choreographer with four women performing to Gyorgy Ligeti and Bartok played by the Dutch Mondrian Quartet Sat & Sun.