

ROCK /Definite articles: LLoyd Bradley on The The at the Town & Country
By LLOYD BRADLEY
UP UNTIL Mind Bomb it was easy to see why Matt Johnson had never toured The The during its 10-year life span: the group was never more than a shifting collection of session players and ‘guests’, songs so devoted to doom and gloom limited audiences to Exit members, the lunacy of the extended format Infected video implied visions far beyond the confines of the stage, and an inflated sense of his own worth would have made the risk of failure too great.
But the new album changed all that, with gutsy, chart-orientated pop music, spiced by thought-provoking lyrics.
Built around this album, The The at the Town & Country provided as near perfect a late-Eighties rock show as anyone could want.
The PA was the same system The Eurythmics used at Wembley and offered clarity and balance.
Ex-Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr worked perfectly with Johnson, adding both inspired flights of fancy and substance to the rhythms.
Drums and bass were as solid as they come and the keyboards filled in any gaps.
While concert performance cannot reproduce all the subtleties of a recording, the band was drilled to precision and communicated the necessary edge with solid strength.
After a two-handed version of ‘Beat(en) Generation’(Marr and Johnson)— its natural swagger becoming almost music-hall syncopation — they dipped into the four-album back catalogue with aplomb.
‘Out Of The Blue’ was fractured in the extreme, ‘Heartland’became a loose-limbed skank, and Marr more than proved his worth on ‘Violence of Truth’.
Good as the concert was, it was rather too middle of the road for a tour titled ‘The The vs The World’ and, sadly for fans of the more paranoid earlier work, Johnson's attempts to darken the proceedings ended up looking silly.
By not uttering a word to the audience, then keeping the stage shrouded in smoke, lit only from the back in lurid purple, orange and red, and reducing the band to shadowy figures looming out of a fog, he put so much distance between them and anybody past the regulation front-of-stage pogoers that attention easily wandered.
And the over-use of an extra microphone, giving his voice the qualities of a US TV cop with a bull horn, made many of the lyrics unintelligible, removing the thrust of his carefully-penned portraits of despair.
Under the weight of such cliches, The The were about as dangerous as the average heavy metal band.
Still, the level of maturity achieved in the studio, combined with the musical excellence on stage, suggests these irritations may still be ironed out.
INTERVIEW /Academician in peril: John Cale, Velvet Underground graduate, has just written an orchestral suite.
Martin Aston met him
By MARTIN ASTON
NICO, PATTI SMITH, The Stooges, Jonathan Richman, La Monte Young, John Cage, Nick Drake, Eno, Squeeze, Happy Mondays — John Cale's CV is studded with the most intriguing of collaborations; he has traversed more ground and confused more expectations than the average musician has a right to.
The fields of classical music, the avant-garde, pop, rock and ambient music have all felt Cale's impact, and he has has zig-zagged between careers as a producer and A&R man and a composer of film soundtracks.
But Cale is always likely to be best remembered for his work alongside Lou Reed in the The Velvet Underground.
‘I still kind of don't believe it,’ Cale mumbles into his sleeve, although modesty is not one of his foremost traits; frankness, bravery and literacy are.
Nearly two decades after his first solo album, and four years since his last, Cale has signed to the Opal company (run by his old friend Brian Eno) who have just released Words for the Dying, the bulk of which is Cale's first extended classical work, The Falklands Suite.
‘I figured I'd better get started before I ended up like Brahms or something,’ he deadpans in a voice that betrays his Welsh origins (he was born in 1942 in Garnant) rather than the last 25 years living in New York.
The 30-minute score for orchestra and boy's choir completes more than one personal circle.
The suite's core is a setting of four Dylan Thomas poems while the work as a whole finally makes good young Cale's music lessons, when he diligently mastered the viola as well as the high church organ.
But on escaping from Wales to study music at Goldsmith's College in London under the auspices of Aaron Copland, Cale decided that ‘the best thing for a classical musician in London at that time was to get involved in avant-garde.
I didn't know The Rolling Stones had started playing just down by the river.’
Regular correspondence with the revered minimalist La Monte Young introduced him to the Dadaist movement Fluxus, but by the time he had won a Leonard Bernstein scholarship to the Berkshire School of Music in Massachusetts, ‘I felt I'd run my course as far as the avant-garde was concerned’.
The dream ticket to America led to Lou Reed's primitive melodies and documentary realism, not John Cage.
Not that that prevented Cale from screaming at a potted plant sitting on his piano, or suddenly demolishing a table beside his stool with an axe in mid-performance.
‘A lot of the things I did were done for shock value.
But when I joined the Velvet Underground, then it became a little bit more subliminal.
Something I always liked about Lou's lyrics was their unstated threat.’
The post-Velvets solo albums dealt with the experimental, from Vintage Violence's California-light pop and rock mix and Church of Anthrax's systems music collaboration with Terry Riley, to The Academy in Peril's sombre classical brew and Paris 1919's lavish romanticism.
The trio of mid-Seventies snarl-toothed rock albums, Fear, Slow Dazzle and Helen of Troy were the best-received work of his career.
Cale became famous for violent demonstrations on stage; there were plenty of screams, stage props, a green surgeon's outfit, the odd tooth-spitting, the beheaded (but long dead) chicken episode which lost him half his band, the time he wore the Cambridge Rapist's mask…
The classical piece Cale always claimed was in him never emerged, mainly because the showman in him wouldn't let it go: ‘there was just so much chaos going on, in my personal and creative life, that I couldn't finish…
As the shows progressed, it got more outlandish.’
What frustrated his old fans was that when he went it more or less alone, as on 1982's masterfully stark and turbulent Music For A New Society, Cale produced what he also regards as his best album, ‘because all the old pain was right there.’
The four year hiatus has been a good old-fashioned period of reappraisal; he's learnt to become a good father, he says, while the composing has flourished.
His ballet music Sanctus and Carnival and self-explanatory Four Sketches For String Quartet have been performed, he supervised the film soundtrack for Jonathan Demme's Something Wild, and a Canadian documentary on the Falklands has already used Cale's score.
The choir came via Llandaff Cathedral Choir School, but (through Opal's Moscow connections) the Orchestra of Symphonic and Popular Music of Gostelradio recorded the suite.
After premiering in Amsterdam in 1987, Cale dropped its piano and pedal steel parts —‘the cabaret aspect’— because, ‘the Soviets played it better than I'd ever imagined, with so much passion.
They dug out every inch of expression.’
Cale also had misgivings about setting Thomas's poems to music, ‘because they sound really beautiful and I didn't know whether I could take something with so much noise in them, so much built-in jazz, and maintain it.’
Out of nine poems he set to music, Cale eventually chose four, ‘that seemed to hang together, especially ‘Lie Still, Sleep Becalmed’.
It all became a kind of tribute to the Falklands which was going on at the time of writing.
We'd get to one poem four or five days into the war, or after The Belgrano or Sir Galahad, and then you have ‘Lie Still’…which is sombre, like a tribute, and then the others, like ‘Do Not Go Gentle Into That Good Night’, which started off as a camp throwaway as a tango; but the poems put together with an orchestra gives them much more depth.’
Besides two short piano pieces from Sanctus, Words For The Dying also includes the luminous The Soul of Carmen Miranda, one of three spontaneous and highly promising recordings with Eno that will set the tone for the next album, ‘a rock'n'roll record I can be happy with because the percussion won't hit me over the head.’
Projects with long-term Dylan sidekick Bob Nuewirth, Ralph Steadman (a theatrical version of ‘The Big I Am’ book) and contributions to William Burrough's new album are all underway, but the collaboration with Lou Reed is the one most people will be waiting for.
Songs For ‘Drella, their 14-song tribute to mentor Andy Warhol, who subsidised The Velvet Underground, will be performed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Festival in November before the pair enter the studio.
Cale talks solemnly about unfinished business, ‘in terms of the arrangements that we worked so hard on on that first Velvet Unferground album.
I don't think Lou remembers how hard we worked, but it was every weekend for 18 months, going over and over these songs until we had all these dismembered arrangements we became famous for.
There's going to be a real tug-of-war: ‘here comes the past, and is it going to take over?’.
But we'll see.’
RECORDS /Girls next door
By JIM WHITE
KYLIE MINOGUE Enjoy Yourself (PWL Records HF9) According to a poll in the magazine Just 17, Kylie Minogue is the person most young girls in Britain would like to be.
Two million of them bought her first album (and probably bought all the tracks when they were released as singles as well) thus, in a self-fulfilling arc, making her very rich indeed, and even more enviable.
A sensible choice as a young girl's role model, she appears to be so attainable; nothing particularly talented, beautiful or clever about her, just a pleasant-looking girl-next-door who won the pools when she met Stock, Aitken and Waterman.
In her second album, which takes a sensibly modest manifesto for its title, the mix is as before; you will hear all the tracks over the next few months if you follow the charts.
The songs exhibit change of pace, from disco shake to waltz, but it is difficult to marry the lyrics to the rhythm at which they are sung.
This poetic sentence for instance, should it be quick or slow?
‘You can't keep me hangin' on /Now the magic's gone’.
A trick question: as it happens it appears on a sort of in-between track.
This is pop music without guts, without pattern or consistent thought, sung by a voice as thin and weedy, if the sleeve photo is to be believed, as the performer's own physique.
No parent in Britain should be remotely alarmed if their daughters are Kylie fans.
Which is probably the most offensive thing about her.
LIZA MINNELLI Results (Epic EPC 4655111) After toying with Dusty Springfield, the Pet Shop Boys have linked up with another old trouper and produced a scorching collection.
‘I want you now /I won't take no for an answer,’ runs the first line, and who are we to object?
Liza sings it to reverberate round the Albert Hall and the final syllable has more tone and depth than Kylie manages in a whole album.
Despite the up-front vocals, it is really a Pet Shop Boys record, all but three of the tracks are their compositions.
The exceptions are Stephen Sondheim's ‘Losing My Mind’, which was a Top 10 single, the old Motown number ‘Love Pains’ and, rather curiously, Tanita Tikaram's ‘Twist In My Sobriety’, presumably reprised as a nod to Liza's unhappy past acquaintance with the bottle.
Even on these, though, the Tennant and Lowe arrangement replaces the lush Nelson Riddle-style orchestral arrangements she is used to with something called ‘Fairlight Programming’.
The lyrics, too, have a recognisable touch of PSB cynicism, but are perfectly tailored to Liza's strengths: ‘I love you, you pay my rent,’ she sings on a number you could just imagine undermining the foundations at Caesar's Palace, Las Vegas.
JULIA FORDHAM Porcelain (Circa 10)‘You make me feel vulnerable and totally exposed,’ is not a lyric you would expect from Kylie Minogue, or even Liza Minnelli.
The British public appears to have an increasing appetite for the work of sensitive female singer-songwriters telling us about their tangled emotional lives, and Julia Fordham is the latest high-flier to fulfill the need.
The album's title is a rather self-conscious reference to her delicate frame of mind, and if you are of more robust taste the cover portrait of a blonde with an impossibly white complexion climbing up the wall will indicate that you should explore no further.
But if you are in mellow frame of mind, there is plenty here to be commended: a good voice, pleasant melodies, clever arrangements and, in among the depression, some light touches of humour: ‘I cried the Solent, the Tyne, the Severn and the Rhine, The Thames and The Seine over again'.
But, throughout it all, it is hard not to be reminded of the debt owed, yet again, to Carole King.
THE KINKS UK Jive (London Records 8281651) Unlike his chums, Pete Townshend and Keith Richards, Ray Davies has remained so prolific that another Kinks album isn't an event, it's another Kinks album.
This one, like all the others, shows that Ray has kept his eyes open.
There's an ecological number sung in typically spacey fashion ‘The world's spinning round, like a looney balloon’; there's an anti-Thatcher song summarising the Prime Minister's lack of sensitivity in the one charge that she doesn't like rock n roll; and, proving that they are probably the only pop band ready for the single European market, there is an EC tribute: ‘Down All The Days (to 1992)’.
In this, the line ‘Bon soir my little senorita, c'est magnifique /Au revoir, my little frauline baby, it's so tragique,’, would qualify Ray, if all else failed, as a script-writer for ‘Allo ‘Allo.
ROCK /Wicked French dressing: Absurd, brilliant performance from French Pogues: Les Negresses Vertes — Town & Country Club
By GILES SMITH
SHORTLY before the show began, four carpets were winched down behind the drums to form a backdrop.
They matched the rugs draped over the equipment on stage, so you appeared to be looking into a stall at a bazaar.
With the lights dimmed, a solo accordion played a brief, preliminary waltz.
Then somebody let the livestock loose.
If Les Negresses Vertes tend to jostle on the stage like animals being herded down a narrow street, it is partly because there are so many of them (11, when all the strays are rounded up), but also because, even as the show begins, several key members appear to be too drunk to be capable of motion in a straight line.
This might sound like irresponsibility, but, given how the performance pans out, you could also read it as professional commitment; the longer the show goes on, the more the drink goes down and, in a remarkable contradiction of physics, the tighter the playing becomes.
In fact, midway through the first song, only the size of the band dissuaded you from buying a round to speed up the process.
You only had to compare the opening version of Zobi la Mouche (lumpy drums and shuddering halts) with the neatly turned performance eventually wheeled out as an encore, to realise how this is a machine which runs the better for being well-oiled.
Les Negresses put on, above all, a comic performance where timing is at a premium.
The humour inheres not just in the daffy selection of cultural allusions (their native French accordion, some flamenco guitar, a few African horns) but also in the way they take stiff, formal tempi (waltzes and tangos) and mockingly squeeze them for their stateliness.
It also comes naturally to them to include any musical form with a sharp sense of its own absurdity; ska, for instance(there are touches of Madness here) or a hyperactive brand of rhythm and blues (they become almost a French Blues Brothers on Marcelle Ratafia).
And with all of these forms, unless the delivery is precise, the comic energy simply drains away.
Consequently things only started to get funny around four songs in, just as the band began bringing the stops off cleanly and ending in the same places.
At this point the stunt that was being pulled off in the music found its visual equivalent rising to meet it.
Helno, the singer, is possibly the worst dressed man in rock.
The yellow nylon shirt with the frothy frill amounts to an offence against taste bordering on the criminal, yet it somehow works to offset his complexion (pale blue) and the ensemble enables him to come on like a chat-show host from Hell — vast smiles and arms flung out in gestures of mock formality.
He was the worse for wear in another sense, come the end of the evening.
Misty-eyed when he first appeared he looked practically fog-bound during the closing numbers.
His voice, though, was getting stronger every minute, which might have been why he alone dispensed with the formality of leaving the stage between encores.
Like so much of the show, it gave a touching twist to the common run of things; it was as if he couldn't bear to see us go.
TELEVISION /Being beastly to beasts
By KEVIN JACKSON
PASSIONS run high when the subject of animal rights is raised; so high that the warring factions can be at odds even over ownership of key metaphors in the argument.
‘Unnecessary suffering?’, last night's Natural Concern programme (BBC 2), began with shots of the cuddly toys and cartoons with which modern children are sold the lie that ‘animals are whimsical, endearing extensions of ourselves’: the emotions which lead people to stick up for animals, that is, can be branded as essentially childish.
On the other hand, a pro-rights clergyman suggested that it is our traditional despotic treatment of the non-human creation which has been truly infantile, and that it is only in this century that we have begun to grow up a little.
The programme scrupulously refused to attribute full maturity to either faction, dwelling on the bestial acts committed by animal rights terrorists — the Bristol University bombing and so on— as well as on the vile surgical mutilations which had provoked them, and Ian Breach's presentation script was both deft and literate; a model guide through these complex issues.
But the very process of putting pictures to the argument tended to weight the case in favour of the critter lobby.
It's easy to sway the emotions by showing monkeys with their brains cut open, genetically stunted pigs or smoking beagles, less so to drag on someone suffering from a vile disease and say ‘this person will die unless we keep on chopping up small furry creatures.’
(Indeed, the anti-vivisectionists were allowed a small but notable coup on this score: Sue Crowshaw, badly disabled by rheumatoid arthritis, made a moving speech denying scientists the right to claim they were experimenting on her behalf.)
Evidently wise to this fact, vivisectionists refused the Natural Concern team access to all their experiments save for some brain operations on rats.
It seems a fair bet that Joe Public finds it as hard to feel sorry for rodents as Winston Smith did, and though these lobotomised specimens were of the cuter white kind, it was possibly to watch this sequence without feeling many qualms.
The emotional complexity of the debate was deepened by the fact that neither side had the monopoly of logic or charm: Dr Colin Blakemore, though known as ‘Dr Frankenstein' to the yellow press for having experimented on animals’ eyes, seemed reasonable, persuasive and put-upon; Douglas Hogg, MP, also on the vivisectionist side, was quite startlingly and pointlessly rude.
Perhaps the most resonant phrases in the whole debate came from the pro-rights organiser who suggested that future centuries would come to regard our attitude to animals with the same horrified disbelief we now feel for the periods which practised slavery.
In fact, the whole programme had an unsually philosophical undercurrent (quoting, for example, philosopher Mary Midgeley)— so much so that it sometimes seemed less like a current affairs report than an enquiry into a fundamental shift in Western attitudes to nature.
All in all, very far from kid's stuff.
DANCE /A burden of gravity: Judith Mackrell on The Joel Hall Dancers at the Shaw Theatre and Altynai Asylnuratova in La Bayadere
By JUDITH MACKRELL
JAZZ DANCE has caught on slowly in this country, and most of what we see is attendant on musicals, cabaret acts or pop videos.
There are few choreographers who try to develop its raw appeal — its punch, slink and sex -into independent dance.
So Joel Hall, whose Chicago-based company is currently touring an evening of jazz-derived choreography, might have proved a useful model.
But, disappointingly, Hall seems less interested in mining the rich idioms of the form (lindy-hop, tap, Broadway and disco) than in trying to smooth out its vernacular with the classy accents of ballet and modern dance.
In works like Compassion (set to Albinoni's Adagio for Strings) and Now You See It, Now You Don't (a solemn confused piece dedicated to the homeless) Hall abandons the drive and sass of works like Nightwalker for emotional and sociological uplift.
We are clued into Artistic seriousness by an arabesque or a beaten jump, into Moral seriousness by a hungry contraction or protracted lift.
And the weakness of these works is not just that Hall cannot integrate ‘arty’ steps into jazz without them looking like destitute cliches, it is that his dancers are not adequately trained to look comfortable in mainstream styles.
Watching one of them wobble through a developpe in glazed desperation or another sickle his foot in an over-extended arabesque, you feel how cruelly Hall's ambitions tax his company.
Yet the same dancers can look confident and articulate when they are performing a style that suits them.
In Nightwalker, set to a medley of Duke Ellington, Hall shows that he can dovetail a strong variety of jazz elements without looking derivative, and the men in particular pounce on his choreography with eagerness and panache.
With their coiled energy, jumps, louche shoulder work, insinuating hips and limber backs, they look like real dancers.
And Hall himself, long and loose, with his body articulated into a thousand joints, shows how naturally this style comes to him.
If the programme had continued in the vein of Nightwalker, it would have been highly recommendable but after three examples of Hall in earnest, I felt bludgeoned into beating a retreat.
Seeing a great performer dancing true to her native style is part of Altynai Asylnuratova's astonishing impact in La Bayadere.
Although the Royal Ballet has acquired a certain Russian expansiveness for this production, Kirov-trained Asylnuratova simply recasts the ballet with the fierce lucidity of her movement.
The plot's dramatic excesses, which can be comically absurd, take on a brief reality as she dances.
Other Nikiyas — Durante or Guillem — may for instance assume a charming Oriental fluidity in their arms, but only Asylnuratova's urgency and amplitude of gesture can convey the destructive extremes of Nikiya's nature.
Only she can phrase her movement so that its rhythm speaks so legibly of high spirits or despair.
And if Asylnuratova does not possess the imperturbable technique of a Guillem, the expressiveness of her dancing is matched by so mobile and luminous a face that everyone else on stage looks slightly blank.
Everyone, that is, except 20-year-old Darcey Bussell, who, as the rich fleshpot's daughter Ganzatti, stands up to Asylnuratova's presence with a staggering authority.
She paces dangerously around the stage claiming everything in sight, including Solor, with the naive greed of a woman indulged since childhood.
Technically she still has some rough edges — a peremptoriness in her phrasing, an uncertain control over her own force -but the full easy strength of her dancing and the scale of her projection promise important things to come.
THEATRE /Lovers and gamblers: Jeffrey Wainwright reviews Romeo and Juliet
By JEFFREY WAINWRIGHT
THE ACTORS march on to the stage of the New Victoria in Newcastle-under-Lyme as an Italian town band, with Chorus in a red hat and sash beating the bass drum.
It is an immediate, positive image which embodies the character of this production, and indeed of the long tradition at Peter Cheeseman's Vics Old and New.
As an image within the action of the play, however, it is soon shattered, as the Montague-Capulet brawling begins.
Anny Evason's atmospheric evocation of the Piazza del Erbe, with its salamis, live chickens, fruit barrow and cafe tables, is spectacularly wrecked as the young bloods go to it in the first of Terry King's convincing fights.
The period chosen by director Bob Eaton and his designer is late nineteenth century, enabling a potent combination of bourgeois respectability and tight-trousered machismo brought to town from the stiletto world of Cavalleria rusticana.
As the stags go play they sustain this tone, especially in the humourless hauteur of Graham Fellows's excellent Tybalt.
His foil, Mercutio, is given both lightness and intelligence by Paul McCleary, poring over a table to evoke the tiny fairyland of Queen Mab before shaping the speech outwards as she roams abroad.
Romeo has none of his friend's worldliness, and one of Timothy Welton's best moments in the part is the animal way he leans and pushes at Richard Hague's Benvolio in trying to do dying Tybalt further hurt; another is his early gaucheness approaching Juliet.
While the best thing about the lovers is the way they convey adolescent awkwardness towards each other, their sexual excitement is less marked and both underplay the eloquence of their ecstatic speeches.
Frances Fielding (as Juliet) finds her way through the conceits of Shakespeare's early verse style intelligibly, and though her voice modulates little from a high, anxious note, her portrayal of Juliet's final loneliness is still affecting.
A welcome novelty in this production is the inventive presentation of Friar Laurence.
Edward York makes him more of a Friar Larry, Romeo's dishevelled contemporary, one of the lads who has unaccountably found himself a Franciscan.
Though this means Romeo's assumption that the Friar knows nought of love seem misplaced, it does at least make his rash engagement with the lovers more comprehensible.
It is Mr York who bangs the drum in John Kirkpatrick's apparently authentic, and certainly suitable band music.
The whole cast performs with similar versatility.
If this is not a production that scales the utmost heights of passion, it is one that is thoroughly realised by a team well worthy of the traditions of the house.
MUSIC /Flamboyant fantasy: Philharmonia /Salonen — City Hall, Newcastle
By WADHAM SUTTON
BALAKIREV'S Oriental fantasy Islamey exists in several versions — the composer's original, for piano solo, and at least two orchestral transcriptions, one by Lyapunov (a pupil of both Balakirev and Tchaikovsky), the other by the Italian Alfredo Casella.
The piano version is a tour de force demanding the prodigious technique of a Brendel or a Cherkassky.
The transcriptions are no less taxing, with virtuoso writing for all the orchestra.
In Newcastle on Tuesday, the challenges of Lyapunov's scoring were met magnificently by the Philharmonia under the young Finnish conducter Esa-Pekka Salonen.
The leader's chair was occupied by the familiar and welcome figure of Bradley Creswick, who recently moved to the Philharmonia from the Newcastle-based Northern Sinfonia.
Islamey is a dangerous work with which to start a concert, the agitato semi-quavers of the opening bars requiring considerable precision from an orchestra which has not had time to warm up.
The Philharmonia carried it off well.
The frantic whirl of the outer sections framed a warm and full-blooded Andantino with some clear woodwind playing, while the well-handled lowering of dynamic in the final pages permitted an exhilarating ascent to Lyapunov's noisy ending.
Islamey was followed by a rather quirky performance of Beethoven's Third Piano Concerto, in which the soloist was the 22-year-old Olli Mustonen, a compatriot of the conductor.
Comparisons are sometimes drawn between this work and Mozart's great K491 Concerto in the same key, which Beethoven is known to have played and admired.
The similarities, however, are mostly in matters of device (the piano arpeggios in the first movement Coda, for example, and the six-eight ending of the Rondo, tragic in Mozart, brilliant in Beethoven).
Mozart's heroic brand of oratory is very different from Beethoven's much more robust variety.
Mr Mustonen is a young man of flamboyant gesture, and his constant rolling body movements, even when he was not actually playing, soon became irritating.
In his hands the concerto was over-dramatic, his tendency in the louder passages to attack the keys from some height with a hard pecking action, and to shorten the staccato and overdo the sforzandi, being foreign to Beethoven's style.
Even in the central Largo, for the most part sensitively played, he risked a quite unidiomatic accelerando which, miraculously, the orchestra paralleled.
Mozart would not have survived the treatment.
Somehow Beethoven did, though it was not, one feels, a reading he would have approved.
The concert finished with Stravinsky's Rite of Spring.
The story of its ill-fated Paris premiere in 1913, which provoked fighting in the audience, is well known.
As it has become familiar over the years, the constant discord and the rhythmic complexities have ceased to shock.
Tuesday's performance was outstanding, vivid and of surpassing clarity.
The orchestra was in stunning form.
As for the conductor, Mr Salonen is making the going just now.
On this showing, it is easy to see why.
MUSIC /Guiding hands: Gothic Voices — Wigmore Hall
By TESS KNIGHTON
IT SEEMS that even in its own time the thirteenth-century motet was considered by many to be a sophisticated, subtle genre, only likely to appeal to the literati.
That these generally complex, polytextual pieces can today appeal to an almost capacity house at the Wigmore Hall is largely due to two factors: the superb singing of Gothic Voices, and the ability of their director, Christopher Page, to unlock the musical secrets of the past.
Over the years, Page has established himself as a medieval raconteur, delighting his audience with tales of, say, thirteenth-century Paris; but anecdotes aside, he has also been refining the presentation and programming so that, almost without realising it, his audiences learn a good deal about the often totally unfamiliar music being performed.
This concert, part of the Early Music Centre Festival, was one of the most overtly educative so far, with even, at one point, an illustrated guide to composing a motet in five easy stages.
Yet there is nothing condescendingly didactic in Page's manner, nor anything textbookish about Gothic Voices' performance.
Beyond this, what might appear just to be a way of illustrating how motets were put together — singing the two or three different, often highly contrasted melodies individually before putting them together as a polyphonic, multi-texted whole — may equally well represent a valid reflection of the manner in which they were originally performed.
More often than not, each melodic line stands perfectly well by itself, and hearing it thus at least lends something of the sense of familiarity and recognition that the thirteenth-century literati might have enjoyed if they attempted to disentangle aurally the separate strands of the motet.
The members of Gothic Voices (on this occasion five, of whom two were singing with the group for the first time) sing these melodies — often complex and wide-ranging — as if they really love them; sensitive to the ebb and flow of the text, they nurture unexpected melodic twists, always allowing the structure to unfold and mould.
Of the purely monophonic items included in the programme, Can vei la lauzeta mover was movingly performed by Leigh Nixon, while Rogers Covey-Crump brought out perfectly the sophistications of the courtly love-song Autres que je ne seuill fas.
Page's choice of motets illustrated how the different texts could be closely interrelated — as in Par un matinct l'autrier /He bergier /He sire /Eius, which could be summarised as ‘aspects of pastoral love’— or how each might furnish a satirical commentary on the other — as in Ypocrite pseudopontifices /O quam sancta /Et gaudebit, with its antithetical opinions of the high clergy.
In the former, the emotional trefoil — disdain, envy, indignation — might have been more decisively distinguished, though, it is true, the melodies themselves were not so clearly differentiated.
The contrast, however, between the patter song of invective against the ecclesiastical hierarchy and the dignified paean to that estate was exploited to the full.
The Early Music Centre Festival continues at the Wigmore Hall this evening (Friday 6 October) with the Gabrieli Consort and Players, and on Saturday (7 October) with Emma Kirkby and Anthony Rooley.