

Law Report: Parents must act reasonably in opposing adoption: Re L (a minor)— Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Balcombe and Mr Justice Harman), 25 August 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
When considering whether a parent was unreasonably withholding consent to a child's adoption, the test was not whether the court agreed with the parent's reasons for withholding consent but whether a reasonable parent would withhold consent in the circumstances of the case.
The Court of Appeal dismissed a mother's appeal from an order of Judge Wroath in the Portsmouth County Court on 11 May 1989 that a girl should be adopted and that the parents' consents to the adoption be dispensed with on the ground that they were unreasonably withheld.
The child was born in January 1984 and lived with her parents until 1986 when, on suspicion of sexual abuse, she was taken into care and placed with foster parents.
The local authority decided that it would not be possible to rehabilitate the child with her natural parents and that her welfare required that her future lay elsewhere.
The mother had not had access to her since January 1987.
In 1988 the foster parents gave notice of their application to adopt the child.
By section 16 of the Adoption Act 1976, an adoption order should not be made unless the parties agree or the court was satisfied that making of the adoption order should be dispensed with on, inter alia, the ground that the parent was withholding agreement unreasonably.
The mother had had three children who were living with her.
Her position had improved but was not totally settled.
Although the mother accepted that the child's immediate future lay with her foster parents and there was no immediate prospect that she could have her back, she wanted to keep the door open and therefore she refused her consent to the adoption.
She said that adoption should be postponed and that custodianship would be sufficient.
The judge held that the child's welfare required that she be adopted by the foster parents with whom she had lived for three of her five years, and that the parents were withholding agreement unreasonably.
He was satisfied the reasons which the mother advanced against adoption were not ones a reasonable mother would advance in the circumstances and were not reasonable reasons and that a reasonable woman in her position would give her consent.
The mother appealed.
Paul McCormick (Anderton & Co, Portsmouth) for the mother; Barry Coulter (Sherwin Oliver, Portsmouth) for the foster parents.
LORD JUSTICE BALCOMBE said that the point of substance in the case was whether the mother's consent was unreasonably withheld.
The leading authority was the House of Lords case of Re W (1971) AC 682 where it was held that when dealing with the question of withholding consent, the test was reasonableness, not culpability or indifference, and although the child's welfare per se was not the test, it was relevant.
Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone, LC, said that the question was whether a parental veto came within the band of possible reasonable decisions and not whether it was right or mistaken and that there was a band of decisions within which the court should seek to replace the individual's judgment with his own.
Those tests presented the court with a difficulty.
It was very difficult for a court to say what a reasonable mother would have done in circumstances which were almost hypothetical.
Applying those tests, first you did not substitute your own decision for that of the parent.
There was a band of decisions and you had to say that the parent's decision was outside the band of reasonableness.
Second, the welfare of the child was important in the sense that the reasonably parent, however anguishing the decision might be, would put his or her own child's welfare right in the forefront of the decision.
Any judge faced with cases of this type found it very difficult because whatever the decision, somebody was going to be grievously hurt.
The welfare of the child was the first consideration and other tests had to be applied.
But no judge was unsympathetic to the dilemma in which a natural mother found herself.
Mr McCormick submitted that if any one of the mother's reasons was possibly valid then it could not be said that the mother's refusal to consent was outside the reasonable band.
The judge clearly adopted the right test — was this mother's decision in the circumstances of the case within the bank of what a reasonable mother would do — and he was entitled to say ‘No, it was not’.
As said in Re W, the Court of Appeal should not intefere unless satisfied that he was wrong in law.
Further the test set out in Hitchcock v WB and FEB (1952) 2 QB 561 had been replaced by the test in Re W which set out all that any judge needed to do in making a decision.
Judge Wroath applied the right test in deciding whether or not the mother was unreasonably withholding her consent.
He came to a decision to which on the evidence before him he was entitled to come, and it was not a decision with which the court could properly interfere.
Law Report: Jury should not have known of co-defendant's guilty plea: Regina v Mattison — Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)(Lord Justice Mustill, Mr Justice Nolan and Mr Justice Saville), 5 October 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
Where a defendant was charged with committing an act of gross indecency with a co-defendant who had pleaded guilty to a charge of gross indecency with the appellant, evidence of the co-defendant's plea of guilty, although relevant, should have been excluded from the jury, since such evidence would have an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings against the defendant as the jury was likely to treat it as going to prove the defendant's guilt.
The Court of Appeal allowed the appellant's appeal against conviction of committing an act of gross indecency.
The appellant, Norman Mattison, was charged with committing an act of gross indecency with his co-defendant.
The co-defendant pleaded guilty to a charge of committing an act of gross indecency with the appellant.
The Crown's case was that the men were found by the police in a public lavatory behaving indecently towards each other.
The appellant pleaded not guilty.
His case was that he had been using the public lavatory for proper purposes when the the police burst into his cubicle and arrested him, and that he had had no contact of any kind with the co-defendant.
The trial judge admitted in evidence under section 74 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 the co-defendant's plea of guilty.
In his summing up the judge said that the co-defendant's plea of guilty was not the issue and the jury knew of it to make the background accurate.
After retiring the jury returned with a notice asking whether the co-defendant was charged with gross indecency with the appellant only.
The trial judge directed that the answer was yes.
The appellant was convicted and now appealed.
Judith Nutt (Registrar of Criminal Appeals) for the appellant; Hugh Allardyce (CPS, Croydon) for the Crown.
MR JUSTICE SAVILLE, giving the judgment of the court, said the appellant did not suggest that the co-defendant's committing of an act of gross indecency with the appellant was not relevant to the question whether, at the same time and place, the appellant was committing a like act with the co-defendant.
The appellant appealed on the ground that the co-defendant's plea of guilty should have been excluded by the trial judge in the exercise of his discretion under section 78(1) of the 1984 Act.
Mrs Nutt submitted that it would be difficult, if not impossible, for the appellant to try and set about to prove that the co-defendant had not committed an act of gross indecency with him, that he was in effect deprived of any opportunity of cross-examining or otherwise challenging the co-defendant and that to admit the evidence would be simply to render the proceedings against the appellant wholly unfair.
It was clear beyond doubt that the jury were not treating the guilty plea as merely making the background accurate: but, on the contrary, after the judge's direction in reply to their question, must have treated it as going to proof of the guilt of the appellant.
The likelihood that that would happen should have been appreciated from the outset: if A committed an act of gross indecency with B, it was a strong inference that the converse was also true in the absence of special circumstances to indicate otherwise.
There was nothing to suggest that had the evidence been excluded that result would necessarily have been the same.
Accordingly, the appeal was allowed.
City prepares defences against influx of gypsies
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
YORK IS preparing to repel a band of gypsies who have been travelling to the city for centuries.
The city's council has decided that it no longer wants an unlimited number of gypsies or travellers, many of whom are using illegal pitches, descending on the city.
The authority has worked out a scheme which may well be copied around the country by councils faced with an increasing number of travellers.
The council has agreed to spend more than £22,000 to block access routes to some 13 sites around York that the gypsies are using.
Concrete pillars and barriers will be erected to prevent them moving caravans on to the land.
Legal moves are also being made against the gypsies.
The Assistant Recorder for York, Jacqueline Davies, has granted an order for committal against ‘persons unknown’ who can be identified by ‘unlawful occupation’of land in York.
The area named in the court order has been used by gypsies but is earmarked for a new £125m business park.
Theoretically, any gypsy using the land in future could be in breach of the order and face imprisonment.
York has traditionally been a favourite halting spot for gypsies.
However, many travellers have set up more fixed camps around the city, which does not have an official site.
Under the Caravan Sites Act of 1968 all local authorities are required to find sites for gypsies ‘residing in or resorting to’ their own area.
But many authorities have either not been able to find suitable sites or have not complied with the ruling.
Recently residents of some of the smarter areas around York and in Harrogate, have objected strongly to the influx of gypsy caravans.
Protest petitions have attracted thousands of signatures.
Aware of the strength of public feeling, the council, which is trying to promote York to southern companies as a relocation area, put up restrictive height barriers at some of its open car parks forcing the travellers to move on to council land elsewhere.
Trevor Phillips, the council's director of environmental services, said: ‘We have to demonstrate to the public that we are doing something about this problem.
‘We accept that some of the gypsies, the traditional travellers, do not want to be settled and wish to remain mobile.
But the problem we have here has to be dealt with.’
York does not have a permanent site for travellers although one is planned.
The gypsies say they need a site for up to 40 caravans but there is continuing opposition to such a plan.
Consultants are looking at various sites and will report to the council in November.
Mr Phillips said: ‘We have 13 areas in and around the city that travelling people have started to use.
We do have traditional travelling people but we also have a lot of people these days who are dropping out of society and who do not want to stay put anywhere.’
Hughie Smith, president of the National Gypsy Council, a body set up to fight for the rights of gypsies, said: ‘The point is that York does have hundreds of acres of land.
There are areas that are perfectly acceptable to the travelling people who use York.
There is no reason why York could not provide a site like other neighbouring authorities.
‘It is not a function of a district council, which York is, to provide accommodation so they have an eviction policy for gypsies.
The quicker a site is provided the better it will be for everyone…
It is not the fault of the gypsies this is happening but short-sighted legislation.’
International Bar Association Conference: Special tax to cover costs of legal aid urged
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A SPECIAL tax or a levy on lawyers should be used to pay for legal aid work, it was suggested yesterday.
The public could be charged a tax specifically to pay for publicly funded legal services, in the same way as the National Health Service, Stephen Gilchrist, a London solicitor, told the International Bar Association conference in Strasbourg.
‘In the same way as a working person and a taxpayer makes a specific contribution to the upkeep of the national health system, so could a specific premium or tax be levied to support publicly funded legal services,’ he said.
Replacing the present legal aid system — which costs the Treasury about £410m a year — with a specific tax would protect public legal services from spending constraints which had prevented legal aid from being extended.
Mr Gilchrist said the second alternative would be to impose a levy — linked to profits — on lawyers who did only privately paid work, to subsidise those who did legal aid work.
The idea was radical, but if lawyers accepted the principle of access to justice, acceptance by the legal fraternity was not unthinkable, Mr Gilchrist said.
A supplementary legal aid scheme started five years ago in Hong Kong was helping personal injury litigants in the middle income trap, the conference heard.
Patrick Moss, director of legal aid in Hong Kong, said that under the scheme, a successful litigant paid between 10 and 12 per cent of his damages to a central fund which financed other cases.
The scheme was now financially viable, and the last instalment of a private start-up loan of substantially less than £1m was about to be repaid.
‘Although the number of applications is small, there is little doubt that the scheme fulfils a need for those most deserving of assistance,’ Mr Moss said.
The British law reform group, Justice, proposed a similar scheme for the UK more than 10 years ago, but it never found favour with the Government.
A trial scheme to test the viability of the proposal was called for at last weekend's Bar conference.
International Bar Association conference: Price-rise warning over package tour proposal
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES
HOLIDAYMAKERS could face average price rises of 10 per cent if a proposed EC directive aimed at increasing consumer protection is implemented, the Director of the Association of British Travel Agents warned yesterday, writes Patricia Wynn Davies.
The average £350 package tour would jump by 10 per cent, with more exotic trips likely to incur larger increases, Sidney Perez told the conference.
The draft EC package-holiday directive could make tour operators or travel agents responsible for personal injury claims and losses as well as tour accommodation and facilities.
They would be liable for ‘any deficiency’— including those of third parties -in goods or services provided in connection with the package, and any contract clause limiting liability would be void.
‘This will mean absolute no-fault unlimited liability for any eventuality,’ Mr Perez said.
‘We believe much of what is proposed is uninsurable and the rest will be very expensive.’
He predicts, however, that the proposal would be opposed by most member states when it comes before the Council of Ministers.
The conference was also told about an invention which could curb kidnapping and the illicit sale of Third World babies for adoption.
Biotab, developed by the British inventor Leighton Evans, involves taking palm-prints of the baby and its mother on a film which is then attached to an identity card.
The device costs just a few pence and is ready for commercial production.
Higgs determined to return to Cleveland: Nicholas Timmins talks to the doctor facing an uncertain future after a child sex abuse controversy
By NICHOALS TIMMINS
MORE THAN two years after the word Cleveland became synonymous with child sexual abuse, Dr Marietta Higgs remains clear about what she wants to do -go back there, and in time go back to work dealing with child abuse there.
‘That is what I would like to do when the time is right.’
She recognises that after the furore of two years ago any return would have to be ‘graded’.
She would have to start working only with the new-born in the new neo-natal unit at Middlesbrough General Hospital which she was initially recruited to run as part of her job.
But ‘at some point in the future’, she wants to become again what she is trained to be — a general paediatrician, work that would inevitably involve dealing with child abuse.
‘Because of all that's happened,’ she says, such a move would have to come one step at a time.
‘All I am asking, is to be treated in exactly the same way as Dr Wyatt’.
Right now she is not being.
For of all those peppered by the shotgun blast of criticism that came out of the Cleveland inquiry, where in little more than three months 121 children were diagnosed as actual or possible victims of child sexual abuse, only Dr Higgs still does not know her future and faces effective dismissal.
Dr Geoffrey Wyatt, the paediatrician who was her ‘partner in crime’ to those who cannot believe they were even remotely right, still works in Middlesbrough, though not on child abuse.
The two police surgeons who so bitterly opposed them and who scarcely emerged from the inquiry untarnished, work on, while Sue Richardson, Cleveland's child abuse adviser, still works in the county, but with abused adults.
Dr Higgs is the only one left for those who believe someone must be seen to pay for the Cleveland controversy.
Her employers, the Northern regional health authority, want to prevent her returning there, to end her secondment as a neo-natologist in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and for the foreseeable future prevent her working in child abuse.
They will, they say, try to find her another post as a neo-natologist in the region, but cannot guarantee her one.
On 16 October Dr Higgs is due in the Court of Appeal, attempting to stop the authority acting without a full disciplinary hearing.
Her frustration over the chaos that became the Cleveland controversy is palpable.
For the layman, the question that matters is was she right?
Could that many children, in one small part of England, really have been sexually abused?
It is a question that cannot be answered.
For the diagnosis of child sexual abuse is, she says, a process.
A child may ‘disclose’ abuse; a paediatrician may spot signs that indicate it; abnormal behaviour may alert a social worker, teacher, GP or health visitor to the possibility.
But answering the question of whether abuse has taken place takes time and the involvement of many people other than doctors.
Time Cleveland did not provide.
Amid angry parents, contradictory medical opinion over whether the signs were consistent with sexual abuse, a huge caseload, Stuart Bell, MP, and a baying media, children were lost to follow-up and not fully assessed.
The inquiry report did not even attempt to answer the question ‘how many of the children were abused?’
But Dr Higgs defends her role.
Of the 82 ‘index’ children — those brought in by social workers or others with suspicion of abuse, or those where the paediatricians saw signs they believed consistent with abuse — 86 per cent, she says, fall into the Department of Health guidelines, issued since Cleveland, as having medical signs which should raise the question of sexual abuse.
The figure would be even higher, she adds, if the guidelines included children who live in a home where an adult has been convicted of a sexual offence with children.
Someone, she says, has to start the process.
‘If you are asking whether I am still confident about the children in which I raised the concern to begin that process, the answer is ‘yes’.
Whether or not the ultimate diagnosis is correct in every one or not, the answer is I don't know because many children didn't go through the process that was needed.
‘But the grounds on which I raised the concern are still valid.
I've not seen anything since then to make me doubt that.’
How those concerns are managed is another question.
‘We can all learn from that.
I can go through the case notes and say maybe that parent could have been helped better, this child helped more.’
Mistakes were made.
Links between the doctors, police, social workers and others did not work well.
Better arrangements now exist, in Cleveland and elsewhere.
‘I don't think there's anyone now who thinks we've got it right, but we are all struggling to do that.’
In addition, she maintains, Cleveland was not that exceptional.
More than 2,700 children went through the paediatrics department at Middlesbrough General in the five months she was there.
The cases came in a rush, in part because social services started referring a backlog of children because there was someone at the hospital prepared to diagnose, she says, and because Dr Wyatt started asking whether sexual abuse might be the problem in cases which had failed to respond to previous treatment.
But she maintains that as a percentage of all children seen over the five months, the numbers in which they first raised the question of possible abuse were little larger than those found in a recent survey by the NSPCC in a dozen areas of England.
‘The figures we found are not significantly different to those anywhere else where people are looking for the problem.’
What did boost the numbers was that once the question was raised they also looked for, and found, possible sexual abuse in siblings.
‘Not everyone does that.’
Good has come out of it all, she says.
At the beginning, she was very isolated.
Colleagues believed Cleveland would lead to the issue being ‘swept under the carpet’.
That has not happened.
Many more adults are now prepared to admit to abuse as a child.
She has had hundreds of letters from adults sexually abused as children saying ‘keep going, that they wished someone had diagnosed it in their childhood and describing the trauma they still suffer as adults even though to the outside world they are perfectly normal, respectable people.
I had one from an 80-year-old woman who had carried the secret all her life’.
New services for adult survivors of sexual abuse have been set up.
‘All that's been good.
I'm not sure it is the same for children yet.’
She says the crucial issue is not in how many cases was she right or wrong, but are doctors allowed to raise a cause for concern?
‘Is it safe to do that, knowing one outcome may be that at the end of the process we exclude sexual abuse?
‘We have to ask why this is such a horrendous issue to raise.’
Society, she says, may need to change its attitude to the perpetrators, from a climate where they are seen as ‘monsters’ faced with imprisonment to one where they can admit what has happened.
She asks how it can be made easier for abusers, who suffer a compulsive behavioural disorder, to say ‘doctor I've got this problem and I need help?’.
But can she really believe it is possible to go back to Cleveland over whose dead bodies she will return?
‘At present anyone who deals with sexual abuse is going to come across people over whose dead bodies they are going to continue to work,’ she says.
Whatever the media reporting, she claims, Cleveland was not hostile to her.
‘When it was all over the papers I feared that when I went shopping people would abuse me, spit at me.
It didn't happen.’
All through the furore, the numbers attending the hospital's paediatric department did not drop, she says.
She met no open hostility.
Of the few poisonous letters she received, none came from Cleveland.
She would ‘have to make a very special effort’ to build the links with other professionals — GPs, the police, consultants and others on which she had barely had time to start in the five months she was there.
There are times when something happens to raise an issue high in the public consciousness — as Cleveland did child sex abuse — but the person responsible pays the price.
Does she fear that is her?
‘I hope not.
I think I have already paid a certain amount.
I think it has got to stop because apart from anything else it has knock-on consequences for other paediatricians over how strong they are going to feel in dealing with this problem.
‘At the moment, with me sitting in my position, it is easy to say ‘well, I'm not sure, I'm not going to begin the process of investigation here’.'
As a mother, she says she sees the parents' point of view.
‘I look at the mothers to whom I am going to have say it and I say ‘bloody hell, if I was in her shoes how would I feel, what would I do?’
‘I hope I know how I would behave, but you don't know until it happens to you.
But you also have to think on behalf of the child.
If I was a child being sexually abused, would I want it stopped, would I want someone to notice?
From the hundreds of letters I have received from adult survivors the message is quite clear: they wish that someone in their childhood had stopped it.’
The Labour Party Conference: Victory for Kinnock as demands for PR are firmly rejected
By JUDY JONES
NEIL KINNOCK won a decisive victory yesterday when his party rejected demands to embrace proportional representation by a three-to-one majority.
Conference delegates endorsed their leader's determined stand after Roy Hattersley, Labour's deputy leader, warned that for the party to concede demands for PR would be ‘an act of historic folly’.
He insisted: ‘The inevitable result of proportional representation is coalition government.
I do not believe that at the end of a week in which we have honed a new policy we are going to even contemplate bargaining that away in smoke-filled rooms with Paddy Ashdown, David Owen, or anyone else.’
Post-election pacts were the inevitable consequence of PR.
‘We would never have a Labour government able to carry out a Labour programme — even when that programme had won far more votes than any of the other parties.’
Although Labour accepted that a second chamber to replace the Lords could be elected by a method other than the present first-past-the-post system, that chamber did not make or break governments.
‘It is in the House of Commons that governments must build their majorities.
For the House of Commons, proportional reprentation would in consequence be a reduction, not an extension of democracy.’
However, Jeff Rooker, MP for Birmingham Perry Barr and a prominent advocate of PR, said the House of Commons would continue to be ‘largely, middle class, white, and male dominated’ without a new system.
‘You cannot be satisfied with a system which means votes do not have equal value and where, unless you live in a marginal constituency elections pass you by on the other side.
You cannot be satisfied when our fellow citizens are saddled with an electoral system which leads to elective dictatoriship, and the corruption of parliamentary law-making processes.
And all on the basis of 42 per cent of the vote.
‘Electoral reform cannot be held in reserve in case things go wrong.
It would be unprincipled, and undemocratic to take that view.’
Gavin Laird, general secretary of the AEU engineering union, said PR would be the remaining burning issue within the party in the run-up to the next election.
‘The NEC report on this issue is a sham.
There was no debate on the national executive, merely an expression of prejudice and fear of change.
How can this party stifle debate on such a crucial issue?
How can this party join with the Tories to defend the status quo?’
Sheila Cunningham, of Norfolk North, said the present system was unfair and perpetuated the elective dictatorship which had developed in the 1980s.
Both the Tories and Labour had 46 per cent of the vote in the 1955 general election, yet Conservatives were elected with a majority of 55.
But many speakers saw the issue as a damaging diversion from Labour's efforts to win the next election.
Alan Duncan, of the GMB, said: ‘It is absolutely irresponsible to waste the next year on a debate of no interest or concern to the people we represent.’
He was supported by Alun Michael, MP for Cardiff South, who argued that for Labour to take the issue seriously would be a gift to the party's opponents.
‘PR involves voting for the least worst, and we want the best for the country as a whole.
Just as we are on the way out of the desert, it would be plain daft to turn back because someone thinks they have seen a hazy mirage on the horizon.’
The Labour Party Conference: Variations on the PR theme: Colin Hughes describes the main systems of proportional representation in use abroad
By COLIN HUGHES
Apart from First-past-the-post, the main majority systems are the Second Ballot (used in French parliamentary elections), and the Alternative Vote (used in Australia).
All three use single-member constituencies and therefore have the common drawback that substantial minorities are not necessarily represented.
With the Second Ballot the winning candidate must poll more than half the votes to be elected at the first ballot.
Where no candidate polls more than half of the votes, a run-off ballot is held a week later between the leading candidates.
The second ballot is final, and the candidate with the most votes is elected, whether he or she wins more than half the votes or not.
Under the Alternative Vote voters mark their ballot papers in order of preference — first preference with a figure ‘1’, second with a figure ‘2’, and so on.
If no candidate wins more than half the first preference votes, the candidate with the fewest first preference votes is excluded, and his or her votes are transferred to the remaining candidates, according to the voters' second preferences.
That process is repeated until one candidate clears 50 per cent.
Proportional systems elect several candidates in multi-member constituencies, giving due weight to minority votes.
The Party List requires voters to support parties, rather than individuals.
Each party puts forward a list of candidates for election in multi-member constituencies, which can often be geographically very large: Rome, for example, has 53 MPs.
The votes cast for each party are counted and the seats are allocated according to the proportion of votes each party receives — so a party polling 30 per cent of the votes would take 30 per cent of the seats.
In some countries (Israel, Portugal and Spain) seats are filled by candidates according to the order in which they are nominated by the party.
In others (Belgium, Finland, Italy and Switzerland) voters are able to vote for candidates within the list, as well as casting a vote for the party.
The Single Transferable Vote gives voters a free choice of candidates in multi-member constituencies — but the number of members is limited to between three and eight.
Each voter has one vote which transfers according to preference.
Voters therefore list candidates according to preference, as with the alternative vote — but their vote transfers according to a different principle.
Candidates are elected according to a quota: in a four-member constituency, for example, the quota would be one-fifth of the votes, plus one.
Once a candidate has enough votes to fufill a quota, other votes for that candidate are transferred to their second preferences, and so on.
Voters can therefore express clear preferences for individuals within or across party boundaries.
The hybrid West German Additional Member System combines first-past-the-post with the party list.
Each voter has two votes — one is used to elect half of the Bundestag seats in single member constituencies, and the other is apportioned proportionally to party lists across each region (in effect, treating the region as a party list multi-member constituency).
The Labour Party Conference: Opt-out hospitals would be returned to NHS
By JUDY JONES
LABOUR will restore to NHS control any hospital that opts to become a self-governing trust under the Government's controversial health service changes, the party's social services spokesman said yesterday.
Robin Cook told delegates that tax concessions for private medical insurance would also be abolished and charges for eye tests scrapped.
Mr Cook also repeated demands for arbitration to settle the ambulance staff pay dispute.
There could only be one reason why Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, was refusing to accept binding arbitration in the dispute.
‘He knows he could not find an independent panel anywhere in Britain which would accept it is right to make an offer which is less than the rate of inflation to people who work in a service which is already underpaid and understaffed.’
Steve Gazzard, who appeared in his ambulanceman's uniform, won a standing ovation after he told delegates: ‘Mrs Thatcher and her ministers are extremely quick to exploit photo-opportunities when disasters occur.
Here in Brighton not so long ago, she and members of her Cabinet experienced at first hand all the skills, courage and dedication of my colleagues.
I challenge the Government to repay their debt to Brighton ambulance staff by agreeing to go to arbitration.’
While the police had been offered a rise of 9.25 per cent, ambulance staff, who earned only £10,000 after qualification, were being offered 6.5 per cent .
For too long it had been treated as a Cinderella service.
Lorraine Monk, of Kingston-upon-Thames, said Labour would have to do far more than merely reverse NHS cuts.
Party leaders should consider taking the major drug companies into public ownership so that their products were developed on the basis of need rather than profit.
David Blunkett, replying for the national executive, persuaded delegates from Kingston-upon-Thames not to press the motion calling for a commitment to sack all the health authority chairmen and senior managers appointed by the present administration.
‘We cannot commit ourselves to sacking senior managers who have simply been doing their jobs.
Labour will expect all staff in the civil service, and publicly-owned industries to carry out each policy irrespective of their point of view.’
The Labour Party Conference: Old songs and some new lyrics
By JOHN PIENAAR
LABOUR'S hard-left crammed into their Campaign Group meeting.
It was hot, and everyone was very cross by the time Tim Peacock from Broxtowe summed up the general consensus: ‘We've been stuffed,’ writes John Pienaar.
One by one, Tony Benn, Eric Heffer, Audrey Wise and the formidable Joan Maynard — dubbed ‘Stalin's granny’ by the ungallant right — blazed away at the mood of meek obeisance abroad in Brighton.
‘I was a shop steward at Cammell Laird,’ reminisced Eric.
‘When I was sacked the workers stopped work — they didn't have a bloody ballot.’
But no-one denied that times had changed.
For all the earthy language and talk of struggles to come, it sounded more like community singing in a bomb-shelter than a call to arms.
Some things never change at a Labour conference.
The expensive seafront hotels still heave each night with political and trade union cameraderie; though, tellingly, the Grand Hotel once ran out of Perrier water.
The odd Militant supporter appears at the conference rostrum and is easy to spot.
They always.
Punctuate their slogans.
In the wrong places.
But, the odd unscripted upset aside, the chairmen and chairwomen find it hard to keep up with torrential voting in favour of the leadership line.
Bryan Gould, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, yesterday posed for photographers with a Co-op credit card the size of a tea tray: ‘There are middle class Labour supporters…no, it won't contribute to the credit boom…change your credit card and help Labour win.’
His morning photo-call clashed with a coffee-table press conference by Norman Buchan, the left-wing MP for Paisley South.
Mr Buchan is also a conoisseur of socialist folk-singing: he made it clear that he would find it hard to set the policy review to traditional music: ‘I am a primeval socialist.’
Behind him was Stuart Bell, MP for Middlesbrough and a strategic thinker of the right.
He arrived at the conference hall after having a Campaign Group leaflet thrust into his hand.
It was a demand for his own deselection.
As he told the story, he did not seem too worried.
The Labour Party Conference: Poll tax protest fails to sway delegates
By JOHN PIENAAR
A SCOTTISH woman tore up her poll tax payment book at the conference rostrum yesterday as the row within the party over non-payment policy continued.
Christine McVicar, Glasgow Shettleston CLP, said she would not pay the tax, but failed to win conference support for a motion committing the party to a campaign of non-payment.
David Blunkett, Labour's local government spokesman, said: ‘Does anyone really believe in their heart of hearts that this Government under this Prime Minister is going to abandon the poll tax, return to the rates, because people don't pay and public services are under threat?
If you believe it, you are naive, and if you don't you are dishonest in arguing for a non-payment campaign.’
Mr Blunkett said the party was refining an alternative which would be fair between people and between areas.
‘Above all, our proposal will be based upon ability to pay.
If there are more in a household earning good money, they will pay more.
If there is someone living alone, who is retired and their income drops, they will pay less.’
Ms McVicar said 3.9 million payment books had been issued in Scotland, but even the ‘official doctored figures’ showed that 700,000 people had not paid.
Challenging Labour councillors to join the non-payment campaign and ‘fight Thatcher’, she said: ‘The poll tax is designed to impoverish our class.
Such unjust laws deserve to be broken.’
Kathy Wilson, Liverpool Riverside CLP, said income support claimants would lose £25 a year from the tax.
‘I have never broken the law, but I will stand with my class, my community, my councillors and my MPs on this issue.’
But Garfield Davies, general secretary of the shop workers' union USDAW, said non-payment campaigners were giving false hope to the vulnerable.
‘They persuade the poor and the low paid to play this game — leaving them exposed to massive fines and levies,’ Mr Davies said.
The Labour Party Conference: Gay anger at NEC over age of consent
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
LESBIAN and gay delegates yesterday vented their anger at an attempt by the Labour leadership to abandon past conference calls to reduce the age of consent for homosexual acts from 21 to 16.
The National Executive Committee was warned that watering down the party's commitment to sexual equality in the policy review, out of a fear of losing votes, could backfire.
Peter Purton, an executive member of the Labour Campaign for Lesbian and Gay Rights, said the party was losing lesbian and gay votes ‘in droves’.
‘Hard on the heels of the policy review came the hunting hounds of the SLD and Green Party scraping up votes in bucket loads’.
The Social Democrats passed a motion at their conference in Brighton last month calling for a common age of consent at 16.
Yesterday a card vote was called on a composite motion from Birmingham Selly Oak Constituency Labour Party demanding the same, but the result will not be announced until today.
Debbie Epstein, moving the controversial composite, said ‘full equality’ had been supported by Labour conferences in 1985, 1986, and 1988.
Last year it received a clear 84 per cent majority and then the Campaign was then asked to submit a draft statement to the policy review.
‘Imagine our anger, and the anger of all lesbians and gays when we heard that the NEC, led by Roy Hattersley, had voted to exclude the commitment for an equal age of consent of 16 for gay men,’ she said.
Furthermore, ‘full equality’ had been replaced by ‘greater equality’.
Jo Richardson, though replying on behalf of the NEC, pointedly distanced herself from its stand.
‘I have been instructed by the NEC to recommend opposition,’ she said to some laughter.
The Labour Party Conference: Conference quotes
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
‘Point of information.
The chair called a ‘cuddly’ man.
Am I not cuddly enough to be called?’— Irate woman delegate.
‘After years of having gentlemen call us ‘duck’ and ‘darling’, surely we can call one of them ‘cuddly’without being offensive.’
— Gwyneth Dunwoody MP, chairing the democracy debate.
‘I have been called many things by my political opponents, but I have just been given the kiss of death.’
— The ‘cuddly man’, Geoff Dixon, delegate from Old Bexley and Sidcup.
The Labour Party Conference: Motion rejected
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
The conference voted by 4,592,000 votes to 1,443,000 to reject a motion advocating the setting up of a working party to consider options for electoral reform.
The Labour Party Conference: Policy review documents approved
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
The conference yesterday approved the Consumers and the Community review report, which proposes: A Department of Consumer Affairs; Special funding to create local, regional and national consumers' groups; Quality and standards controls in local government, and the health and education services; A Quality Commission to replace the Audit Commission, an Education Standards Council, and a Health Quality Commission; ‘Go local’ health services, increased preventive medicine, and regular health check-ups; Records of achievement for pupils, a flexible national curriculum, a home/school partnership agreements, and a national schools award.
It also approved the Democracy and the Individual review, proposing: To replace the House of Lords with an elected second chamber; Devolved assemblies for Scotland, Wales, and the regions of England; Unification of Ireland only by consent of the majority in the North; A Freedom of Information Act; A Ministry for Women; A Department of Legal Administration to run the courts; Extend legal aid; A statutory duty on local councils to provide integrated child care services for the under-fives; A Children's Commissioner to act as an ombudsman on childrens' rights; Firm opposition to reform of the voting system for the House of Commons.
Viewpoint: Union law policy remains unclear
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
AS THE Labour leadership congratulates itself on a virtually unprecedented exhibition of unity and moderation, they should be aware that knives are being sharpened at Conservative Central Office.
The object of the attentions of Tory apparatchiks — and ministers — is the new policy on employment law, moderate and sensible as it may seem.
Bluntly, the Shadow Cabinet and unions need to get their fingers out — with some expedition — to set the limits of the proposed legal framework.
True, the conference ignored the call for complete immunity in tort which the TUC passed to the conference.
Under the resolution overwhelmingly passed by Labour delegates, unions would be subject to fines and there would no such immunity from civil action if they acted illegally.
Strikes without ballots, for instance, would not enjoy the protection of the law.
There has, however, been a confusing flurry of paper involved in the evolution of the policy.
First there was the broad statement of intent in the policy review document and then there was the controversial TUC composite resolution — an incompetently constructed mosaic of competing interests.
Last Friday came a statement of ‘clarification’ issued by the party and the unions and finally there was the debate and another statement by Michael Meacher, Labour's employment spokesman.
There has been nothing remotely resembling intellectual coherence.
Basically, the clarification needs clarification.
Within the next few months, for instance, the party and unions should set the level of fines that recalcitrant unions would incur.
Mr Meacher should also spell out his plans for limits on picket lines.
It is not sufficient to tell the conference that there will be no return to mass picketing.
Most important, he will have to explain how far sympathy action should be allowed and precisely what would constitute a lawful trade dispute.
Would it be lawful for instance, for workers to refuse to handle imports from South Africa; would meat porters be allowed to take action in support of nurses.
The first would demonstrably be a political strike and the second would hardly be a trade dispute.
The key phrase used by Mr Meacher is that there should be a ‘genuine interest’ involved before industrial action was within the law.
Jimmy Knapp, leader of the National Union of Railwaymen, argues that his members who took action in support of the miners during the coal strike had a genuine interest in the fight to keep pits open: fewer mines mean fewer coal trains.
Setting limits to action will not be easy for Labour.
If workers hold a democratic vote to go on strike for whatever reason, it ill becomes a Labour government to legislate to make it unlawful.
But that, according to Mr Meacher, is what they will have to do.
Within the next few months — and long before the next election — they will have to settle these questions or see the spectre of the Winter of Discontent raised to haunt them by gleeful Conservative politicians.
It simply is not enough for Mr Meacher to say that such details will be worked out after the next general election by Labour ministers and Whitehall officials.
Mr Meacher intends within the next three to six months to work out precisely what form of specialist industrial relations courts a future Labour government intends to set up.
Difficult as it may be, he should attempt to settle more delicate issues.
If Mr Meacher is not the man to bang the heads of union leaders together, then surely Mr Kinnock is.
Celebration in Colour flower festival in St Albans
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
Visitors admire some of more than 200 floral displays yesterday at the opening of the Celebration in Colour flower festival at St Albans Cathedral in Hertfordshire.
All furniture had to be removed from the nave to make room for the flowers.
The festival, which ends on Sunday, also includes displays of embroidery and tapestries 
Art Market: Historical footnotes put value on clocks
By GERALDINE NORMAN
What apparently made all the difference to the price was that the clock came from a historic house, Cassiobury Park, and that it is illustrated in an important book on the craftsman — Thomas Tompion, His Life and Work by R W Symonds.
Collectors love to be able to show friends the book with their own clock illustrated in it.
A monthgoing longcase clock of about 1710 by Daniel Delander also profited from a good footnote, selling for £104,500 (estimate £45,000-£55,000) although the case which was originally ebonised is now painted blue.
The key thing appeared to be that Delander had fitted it with double wheel or duplex escapement — and it could be the first of the rare group of his clocks that include the feature.
He obviously changed the clock around — there are many filled in holes in the front — which implies it was a pioneering, experimental piece.
The other high price in the sale was £88,000 (£15,000-£20,000) for a rare George II carved mahogany combination angle barometer, thermometer and mirror — a real curiosity in a handsome carved frame.
The sale made £943,000 with 13 per cent unsold.
Renaissance medals, portraits of famous or infamous figures carefully realised in bronze, made an unlooked for advance in price at Sotheby's coin and medal sale.
Medical check on crack use urged
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
SENIOR POLICE officers have called on the Home Office to co-ordinate a more accurate system of detecting how many people are using crack, the cocaine-based drug, by gathering information from doctors and hospitals.
Such a move would mean a fundamental change in how information is gathered and acted upon.
Drugs squad officers want doctors and hospitals to pass on information about any traces of crack found in patients during emergency treatments.
No patients would be identified and the information would be confidentially passed to the British Medical Association and then on to the Home Office.
Police say the only barometer being used to measure crack usage is the number of arrests made.
There is some dispute about the level of abuse in this country.
The latest figures from the Home Office show that the largest of the 60 seizures of the drug made up to the end of June this year was 40 grammes in Nottingham.
The rest has been on average just over one gramme.
But police believe these figures disguise actual use.
David Owen, Chief Constable of North Wales, who also heads a senior crime committee, told the Association of Chief Police Officers' conference in Lancashire yesterday that there was genuine concern about the use of crack.
Mr Owen met the Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, on 20 September and suggested that senior officials within the Department of Health, the social services and various community bodies should meet to discuss the problem.
‘We are concerned and the scenario for us is not a particularly good one.
We do have cause for concern but it is not a problem which can be solved by law enforcement alone.
We need to work together with all agencies concerned about community care,’ he said.
He believes there is now a need for a more precise method of monitoring crack abuse nationally, similar to the Dawn (Drug Awareness Warning Network) method, used in the United States, which compiles statistics through information taken from hospitals.
‘Private Eye’ must wait for decision over libel retrial
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
THE MAGAZINE Private Eye will have to wait two to three weeks to find out whether it has won a retrial on libel damages of £600,000 awarded against it to Sonia Sutcliffe, wife of the Yorkshire Ripper.
Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, sitting with Lord Justices Nourse and Russell, yesterday reserved their judgment after Private Eye had rejected an offer from Mrs Sutcliffe to allow the Court of Appeal to set the amount of damages.
In his final arguments in the three-day hearing, Gavin Lightman QC, for the magazine, said that if a retrial was ordered it intended to subpeona the editor of the Mail on Sunday, Stewart Steven, and two senior journalists from the company in an effort to discover the truth behind a £25,000 payment to Mrs Sutcliffe.
Mr Lightman claimed that if the jury which had awarded the £600,000 had known that Mrs Sutcliffe was not adverse to taking money for her story, the outcome could have been different.
He said evidence of private conversations between journalists of Associated Newspapers about the secret deal, and of Mrs Sutcliffe's deliberate concealment of The Mail on Sunday's actions, could throw ‘completely new light’ on the case.
He agreed accounts of the alleged ‘roundabout’ payment were based on hearsay, but added: ‘The journalists will be questioned about what they knew and even journalists will tell the truth when they are called.’
Earlier, Geoffrey Shaw, for Mrs Sutcliffe, said she would be willing to accept whatever damages figure the court substituted for the £600,000 award.
He said: ‘If…the court's inclination at the end of the day is to interfere with the £600,000 award of damages, then she, for her part — although she does not fear a retrial and again does not relish it -would be willing to accept whatever your lordships should decide is the right figure.’
After a brief adjournment, and huddled conversations with Ian Hislop, editor of Private Eye, Mr Lightman rejected the offer.
He said that at the original trial, the magazine had no idea £25,000 had been paid to Mrs Sutcliffe by Mail on Sunday reporter Barbara Jones -and nor had the jury.
He argued that if a jury had the benefit of ‘this further evidence’ it ‘might take a very different view’of Mrs Sutcliffe's attitude to deals with the Press.
‘Suddenly the light is thrown,’ Mr Lightman said, ‘and the matter can take a very different complexion’.
‘The magazine's primary concern is the size of the damages award,’ he said.
‘A retrial on this issue is absolutely vital.
If this award stands there is precious little scope in this country for any investigative journalism, and that sort of investigative and critical journalism is an essential feature of an informed democracy.
‘There must be inevitable mistakes made in any such journalism and a lacunae will appear in regard to evidence, and indeed trials will go wrong.
But damages awards like Mrs Sutcliffe's would put out of business all but the biggest media moguls.
This kind of award would create not merely fear, but despair.’
After the hearing, Dave Cash, Private Eye's managing director, said if the retrial was refused the magazine could well go under.
Mr Hislop said a fund to raise money from readers stood at about £100,000.
Computer users prepare for an attack of viruses
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
(First Edition) COMPUTER experts fear ‘virus hysteria’ as Friday the 13th, a date beloved of perpetrators of computer viruses, approaches.
Several viruses are expected to be launched on computer users next week, including Datacrime 2, which can wipe information from computer hard discs.
The virus is also thought to have started in The Netherlands in March and to have surfaced in the US and UK.
But, according to Peter Sommer, a computer forensics expert, a hard disc ‘is more likely to be wiped out by glitches in the electricity supply’.
He said computer networks would not be affected and copies of information should be made on floppy discs.
Infected programmes activate the virus when started up and it looks for other programmes to infect.
Experts say on 12 October it will wipe out the hard disc of any machine it has entered.
Computers can catch it by using floppy discs holding infected programmes, or from programmes copied off an electronic bulletin board, which is where it was probably first planted.
The date is said to have been chosen to thwart those taking precautions by adjusting computer clocks, which trigger the virus, to avoid the notorious date.
Other viruses, say some experts, might be triggered on 14 October for that reason.
Aircraft carrrier HMS Invincible first ship to be fitted with Goalkeeper short-range weapons system
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
The Goalkeeper short-range weapons system being fired during test trials aboard HMS Invincible.
The aircraft carrier is the first ship to be fitted with the gun, believed to be the most accurate, reliable and sophisticated close range anti-missile system in the world.
Warning on funding as enrolment at polys rises by 47%
By NGAIO CREQUER, Education Correspondent
ENROLMENT of full-time students in English polytechnics has increased by 47 per cent over the last eight years, compared with a rise of only 3 per cent in universities, Her Majesty's Inspectors said yesterday.
The huge expansion had been achieved without a reduction in quality, the inspectors said, but they warned that the polytechnics were seriously underfunded.
Buildings had deteriorated steadily, and there was a serious lack of equipment.
‘Good teaching cannot be sustained indefinitely in inadequate and underequipped accommodation.’
In 1988 more than 60 per cent of polytechnic buildings had ‘shortcomings in important areas’.
Nearly half the science departments had deficiencies in equipment.
‘In some cases the lack of up-to-date equipment which reflects modern industrial practice is impairing the students’ experience.’
The report, which looks at all 29 English polytechnics, said there is a need for substantial investment in new capital equipment in most.
‘Much of that which is in use is obsolete and expensive to maintain.’
Half the polytechnics have poor computing provision.
A lot of accommodation was unsuitable for its purpose.
There were not enough classrooms and staff had to work in overcrowded conditions.
The polytechnics, faced with the problem of increasing access or maintaining the level of money spent on each student, had made access their priority.
The universities had taken the opposite view.
The report will be seized upon by ministers who argue that a further expansion in student numbers can be achieved by higher education becoming more efficient.
The contrary view is that a huge capital investment will have to be made soon to maintain buildings and provide equipment.
Polytechnic directors yesterday called for more government funding.
Students should not be expected to learn in ‘cowsheds’, they said.
The rise in student numbers in polytechnics has not been matched by an increase in teaching staff.
Class sizes have risen, and between 1981-2 and 1985-6 expenditure per full-time equivalent student fell in real terms from £3,800 to £3,150.
Over the same period university expenditure, where more research is undertaken, was fairly constant at about £5,200 per student.
The inspectors said the quality of courses was often better in polytechnics than in colleges.
The HMI does not inspect universities, except teacher training departments, by invitation.
There is some ‘outstanding teaching in most subjects in most institutions, but as a proportion of the total teaching effort the amount is comparatively limited’.
The great majority of teaching is at least satisfactory, but 10-20 per cent is less than satisfactory ‘in some important respects’.
Where teaching was unsatisfactory this was because of an over-dependence on formal lectures.
There was some ‘spoon-feeding’ in lectures, seminars and practical work, lecturers failed to identify or correct poor work, and assessment placed too much emphasis on the ability to recall factual information.
Monty Python star dies on eve of 20th anniversary
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
IT WAS, said Monty Python member Terry Jones yesterday of the death of his colleague Graham Chapman the worst case of party pooping he have ever come across.
Chapman had died of cancer on Wednesday on the eve of the twentieth anniversary celebration of the first Monty Python show.
It was not the first time the 48-year-old comedian and doctor had pooped the party.
In 1967 Chapman, who had cultivated a conventional image with his ubiquitous tweed jacket and pipe, by his own later admission stunned a party attended by his friends and future Python colleagues by coming out as a homosexual.
John Cleese and Eric Idle who had both been at Cambridge with him had had no idea.
Chapman said later that Cleese, his writing partner at Cambridge and afterwards on the Frost, Marty Feldman and At Last the 1948 shows, ‘was still in a state of shock’.
After the last Python show in 1974 Chapman pooped the party again.
While the others went on to further success he fought and eventually won a battle against alcoholism, but his writing partnership with Cleese did not survive it, and, at his own choice, he was not a member of the Python film company Prominent Features.
The sometimes uneasy relations between Chapman and the rest of the team received a boost recently when they filmed an introduction to a twentieth anniversary special to be screened later this year.
All assumed then and indeed until two days ago that Chapman was recovering from his illness.
Cleese and Michael Palin were with him when he died.
The painfully early death of someone who was part of a youth cult normally prompts obituaries for that cult.
But in the case of Python that could not be more inappropriate.
Books, records and films continue to sell well.
The original shows were last year sold to MTV in the US.
Only Chapman really failed to capitalise on Python's success.
Cleese's successes are well known.
Palin, among many film triumphs, co-starred with Cleese in A Fish Called Wanda; Eric Idle has also been consistently on screen.
Terry Jones has moved into film direction, as has Terry Gilliam, the show's animator.
The Python mixture of surrealism and Oxbridge set texts — a ‘summarising Proust’ competition in a municipal baths; phoning Sartre's wife ‘Is John Paul free?’'He's been asking himself that for years' — is as familiar as the silly walks, deceased parrot and other images that have gained cult status.
But if Chapman's death is to provoke any analysis it might be to ask whether the Pythons achieved their original aim of breaking the mould of English television comedy, doing away with the studio applause, the guest star, the musical interlude, even on occasion the punchline.
That ambition has only been partially fulfilled.
John Lloyd, producer of Not The Nine O'Clock News, Spitting Image and Blackadder, says that for his generation of university students 20 years ago Python was the seminal programme.
The first Not the Nine O' Clock News series had a sketch about Python worshippers but that team, while itself worshipping Python, went out of its way not to be derivative, eschewing silly voices, dressing in drag and what they later realised to be a misogynist trait in Python.
‘In some ways,’ he said yesterday, ‘Python does look very old-fashioned now, yet when I arranged a compilation of all 45 shows for the BBC I found that we had on the Not The Nine O’Clock News unintentionally pinched a number of things, putting the signature in the middle of the programme, parodying famous TV interviews.
It impresses itself upon you subliminally.
‘But the irony of a mould-breaking programme like Python is that it is a dead-end, a spoiler for the rest of us.
Because it is so bizarre it is not possible to go down a very new route of comedy without appearing derivative.
And as not everyone can be a mould-breaker there are still a lot of traditional comedy shows on television.’
Indeed, the formula for the majority of comedy on television remains as it was before a ragged man struggled along the seashore, collapsed and panted seemingly with his last breath: ‘It's…’
Peer ‘was sure Yugoslavs would be well treated’
By STEPHEN WARD
LORD ALDINGTON told a High Court jury yesterday he remembered making inquiries to ensure that thousands of Yugoslavs repatriated by the British at the end of the Second World War would be properly treated.
He was continuing evidence in a libel action against Count Nikolai Tolstoy, the historian, and Nigel Watts, a Tunbridge Wells property developer, who circulated a pamphlet in 1987 describing him as responsible for repatriating 70,000 Russian Cossacks and Yugoslavs to be massacred by the communists in 1945.
The defendants say the accusations are true.
In evidence earlier this week Lord Aldington, 75, formerly Brigadier Toby Lowe, said the first he had heard that the men, women and children sent back from the British-occupied zone of Austria had been tortured and massacred was from Count Tolstoy in 1979.
He said yesterday: ‘I'm sure I had been making inquiries (in 1945) about what would happen to people who we sent back.
I have in my memory a feeling that we had satisfied ourselves that international law would be obeyed.’
He referred to two documents where the Yugoslavs gave undertakings about treatment of repatriated citizens.
Lord Aldington was asked why the Yugoslavs had not been told their destination before repatriation.
‘We did not wish to create conditions which led to possible violence.’
This would have meant extra guards were needed on the camps, and would have forced the British soliders to use force.
He also told the court he had been acting in accordance with an order from Allied Forces Headquarters on 14 May 1945.
That said: ‘All Russians to be handed over to Soviet forces and all surrendered Yugoslav nationals serving in German forces to be handed over to Yugoslav forces.’
Asked whether he had screened the Yugoslavs before they were sent back, he said there had been no requirement under the order.
He was asked why he had repatriated the women and children ‘camp followers’ with the captured troops.
He said that had been a concession to them to allow families to stay together.
‘I assume that we thought that these dependants would wish to accompany their soldiers and that the soldiers would wish to have them with them.
It was a concession, not an extra burden.’
But he did not order the return of other civilians, he said.
At the time, he and his commanding officers were more concerned with preparing to fight Tito's partisans, Lord Aldington added.
In May 1945 Yugoslav partisans had been spreading through Allied-occupied Austria, trying to annexe much of it to their own country.
The British Eighth Army's V Corps, where he was a staff officer, had been giving top priority to Operation Beehive, preparing a strategy to fight the Yugoslavs if necessary.
He said it had been vital to keep Operation Beehive secret from the Soviets and the Yugoslavs, so many people within V Corps had not known about it.
Fears of global trade battles
By SIMON MIDGLEY
THE THESIS that liberal democracies will be the prevailing political form of the future may be premature, a conference of planners and leading industrialists was told yesterday.
John Roper, of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, warned that economic failure combined with growing nationalistic fervour in some East European and Third World countries could lead instead to the emergence of extremely right-wing, authoritarian regimes.
He told the conference — which is considering future world political, economic, social, scientific and environmental trends — that with the relative decline in the economic importance of the United States and the diminishing military threat posed by the Soviet Union, the new civil super powers of the 1990s were likely to be Japan and Western Europe.
While the Cold War evaporated as Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, realised that there was little point in the USSR being a military giant if it remained an ‘economic pygmy’, the world would not, Mr Roper said, necessarily become a safer place.
The growth of Islam, and regional tensions in the Middle East and parts of Asia would have an impact on the northern industrialised world.
‘The issues of drugs, terrorism and global environmental challenges will fill any gap that the end of the Cold War might have created,’ he said.
Dr Barry Bosworth, senior fellow at The Brooking Institution, Washington DC, warned that the decline in the US's global economic hegemony, would lead to increased conflict between the major industrialised nations over trading issues and international financial relations.
In future the responsibility for preserving a stable international economic system would rest with ‘a committee’ of the major industrial nations.
However, while the growth of the international financial system would seem to imply the need for increasingly centralised decision-making, individual countries were unlikely to be willing to relinquish the freedom to conduct their own economic affairs for the sake of the greater international good.
The US's foreign trade deficit was likely to continue for the forseeable future, he said.
But there was no reason why this imbalance could not be sustained indefinitely.
North America, Dr Bosworth, said was on a ‘consumption binge’ but it could continue to live off its assets.
With real assets worth $15 trillion it was a very rich country.
It was currently financing its deficit by selling off $150bn worth of assets a year to other countries and by borrowing money from Japan and Europe.
While America currently lacked the political will to tackle its trade deficit, there was increasing talk of ending free-trade access to its vast domestic market.
In the past the US had tended to trade off economic advantages for political gains, but in future it would become much more single-minded about its own economic interests, he predicted.
National Trust to restore Uppark House after blaze
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
UPPARK HOUSE in West Sussex, one of Britain's finest seventeenth-century houses, which was virtually gutted by fire in August, is to be restored, the National Trust announced yesterday.
The work could take 10 years and will be the trust's biggest single building conservation project.
Many ornate plaster ceilings will have to be recreated, wallpapers reproduced, silk hangings rewoven and the staircase rebuilt.
Angus Stirling, the National Trust's director-general, said: ‘Far more of Uppark and its contents survive than has been lost.
There is a real phoenix, not a false one, to be raised from the ashes.’
The ground floor has largely survived beneath the rubble, including 95 per cent of the contents such as furniture, paintings, books and china, the trust says.
Carved and gilded ornament, chimney pieces, floor boards, the saloon chandelier, window shutters and the dining room carpet have survived.
The basement is virtually intact.
Uppark will first be made weatherproof and opened to the public for six days in November before restoration work begins.
One alternative option had been to preserve the house as a burnt-out ruin.
This was rejected on the grounds that there was nowhere else to put the rescued artifacts, many of which were designed for the house.
Branson sets his sights on crossing Pacific by balloon
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
RICHARD BRANSON, head of the Virgin entertainment and airline empire, will make his next assault on the record books in November when he tries to cross the Pacific in a hot air balloon.
The balloon, twice the height of Nelson's Column and the width of the Albert Hall in London, is the largest yet built.
It will ride the jet stream between the troposphere and stratosphere at speeds of up to 320 kilometres per hour (200mph) and will carry atmospheric experiments for the Japanese meteorological agency.
The 10,000km journey, which is being supported by Virgin and the Japanese pharmaceuticals firm, Otsuka, will begin in south Japan and should end just off the Californian coast, or in open countryside near Los Angeles.
While Mr Branson and his colleague, Per Lindstrand, hope to use the flight to get into the record books.
Japanese meteorologists want to take advantage of it to examine the levels in the jet stream of freon gas, one of the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which contribute to the depletion of the earth's ozone layer.
The project will also donate funds to Cambridge University, which is carrying out a study into ways of protecting the flora and fauna of the Indonesian rain forests.
Diabetics benefit from insulin-cell transplant
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
DOCTORS in Canada have pioneered an operation to transplant insulin-producing cells into the livers of diabetic patients.
More than six months after surgery the two patients involved have ‘significantly’ reduced their insulin injections, according to a report in New Scientist.
Transplanted cells are taken from the pancreas of a donor.
Several transplants have been tried before, but this is the first time they have continued to function for a long period, according to the researchers at the University of Alberta, in Edmonton.
Insulin regulates the uptake of sugar from the blood by all the body cells and tissues.
In diabetics, the insulin-producing cells produce only small amounts of the hormone.
As a result, diabetics suffer from very high levels of sugar in their blood.
They are at an increased risk of a stroke, heart disease, kidney failure and blindness and nerve disorders.
Insulin injections allow the majority to live a normal life but the control over blood sugar is not as efficient as the body's own mechanism.
The recent introduction of genetically engineered insulin has lead to some problems for diabetics who have changed from animal-derived insulin.
Researchers say the grafting of pancreatic cells may eventually free many from daily injections.
Transplants of the whole pancreas have been successful for some severely ill patients, however, they need to take powerful drugs for life to stop rejection of the organ.
Transplants of small groups of cells require less drug treatment and the risk of rejection is much reduced, according to the report.
Researchers in Oxford have found the first evidence of a genetic cause for unexplained mental retardation in children.
A minor abnormality in the chromosomes which control development has been found in a brother and sister, both of whom were mentally retarded, according to a report in tomorrow's edition of The Lancet.
The chromosomes carry genes which contain all the genetic information needed to control development.
If they are abnormal, the information is no longer correct and various physical and mental problems develop.
About 3 in 1,000 people suffer from moderate or severe mental retardation.
In about half of those cases there is no apparent cause, according to the report.
Jeanette Lamb, a research team member at the Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, said: ‘We have found a cause for mental retardation that may account for a large proportion of the unexplained cases.’
Rape case report
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
The Crown Prosecution Service is to prepare a report on the case of a man cleared of raping a 16-year-old girl because his alleged victim was not considered mentally capable of giving evidence.
The report, to Michael Harvey, head of the CPS in East Anglia, will include a transcript of legal discussions.
‘Sun’ standards
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
The Sun newspaper is to set up a service called ‘Hard Views’ aimed at ‘cleaning up and improving the standards of journalism in television’.
It is asking readers to say if they have been misrepresented in a programme, to ‘expose the tricks and deception used by TV to deliberately mislead people’.
Patient improves
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
Aisling Barnett, 35, who underwent an emergency liver transplant, at King's College Hospital, London, regained consciousness after 72 hours.
Her husband, Colin, said: ‘She's in discomfort but she's doing really well.’
Westland jobs go
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
A further 420 jobs, are to go at Westland, the Somerset helicopter maker, in its high-technology division.
The latest redundancies, 345 at Yeovil and 75 at its Bournemouth plant, bring to nearly 3,000 the jobs lost since its rescue in 1986.
Children killed
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
Three children died and their mother Sharon Outlaw, 27, was injured in a fire at their home in Helensburgh, Strathclyde.
Acid house curbs
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
The Government is urgently to review powers available for councils to control acid house parties, Virginia Bottomley, the Environment Minister, told chairmen of local authority associations.
Search ends
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
Police in Edinburgh were satisfied no more bodies are buried in the ruins of the six-storey tenement building destroyed in an explosion on Wednesday morning which killed a man and a woman.
They said everyone living in the building was accounted for.
Investigators for British Gas Scotland said tests had revealed that a section of nearby gas main was not gas tight.
Two Kurds injured in fire
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
Two Kurds were injured, one seriously, in a fire inside their locked room at Harmondsworth detention centre near Heathrow airport a day after they were told their application for political asylum in Britain had failed.
The Home Office could not confirm reports that the two men set fire to themselves.
One was taken to Stoke Mandeville Hospital, Buckinghamshire, suffering from 30 per cent burns.
The other went to Mount Vernon Hospital, Hillingdon.
LWT criticised for ‘golden handcuffs’ share scheme
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
LONDON WEEKEND TELEVISION is facing difficulties over its ‘golden handcuffs’ share scheme designed to lock 40 top managers and programme-makers into their jobs.
It is arousing controversy within both LWT and ITV as independent television companies prepare for the fight to hold on to their franchises.
Under the scheme, the top 40 staff will pay about £3.3m for a five per cent share stake in LWT.
If the company wins its franchise back in 1992, and then trebles its share price by mid 1993, their stake will expand to 15 per cent.
But those who participate have to sign a non-competition deal preventing them from leaving to work with a rival consortium.
It appeared last night that some of the staff entitled to 10 to 15 per cent of the shares might not take them up, but all the key board members will, thus ensuring the success of the scheme.
One programme department head is believed to have rejected it.
The proportion of shares expected to go to Christopher Bland, chairman of LWT Holdings and architect of the scheme, is also being questioned, both within the City and the company.
Details will not be fixed until the final scheme, part of a major capital reorganisation of the company, is published, within the next two weeks.
But reports that he is taking a quarter of the £3.3m portion of shares were firmly denied yesterday.
Richard Dunn, chairman of the ITV Association and managing director of Thames Television, said: ‘It is sending out the wrong signals.
The managers appear to be enriching themselves.’
The scheme is being widely debated within television because it sets a precedent for other companies.
The 40 executives are divided into an inner group of 15, who will buy three- quarters of the shares, and an outer group of 25, who divide up the remaining quarter.
The outer group includes the heads of programming departments.
Mr Dunn, who is currently devising an incentive plan for Thames Television, said he believed ITV had to motivate and retain the services of all its staff, but that schemes should be devised to spread profit sharing and share ownership company wide.
He added that special incentives should perhaps apply to the top 10 managers, whose performances will be crucial in retaining the franchise.
Mr Bland said last night: ‘Our scheme is designed to ensure that LWT is in a position to make and broadcast programmes at the weekend from 1993 onwards.’
Barry Cox, LWT communications director, said that the company was unable to comment or discuss the scheme before publication.
ITV has been thrown into disarray because the current franchises have been extended for three years while the Government introduces a new free market framework.
They have to re-apply and pay, by competitive tender, for franchises which they have held for many years.
This switch is expected to put a premium on the top handful of managers, who have track records in arranging programming for television stations.
These people will be highly attractive to would-be new entrants, who are expected to head-hunt them.
Ford unions want double-figure rise and cut in hours
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
ONE of the most important wage claims in the pay round was submitted yesterday when leaders of Ford's 33,000 manual workers called for a double figure increase.
Management were told at the ritual claim submission in London that Ford workers at the 21 plants wanted to be the best paid in the motor industry.
Unions would accept a two-year deal provided there was an ‘inflation plus’ element in the second year.
A central part of the claim was a reduction in the working week from 39 hours to 35, to coincide with a similar demand by the leaders of two million engineering workers who are conducting strike ballots at key sites.
The eventual settlement will form a target for other workers and the Government will be anxious that the traditionally independent company will keep the award nearer the inflation rate, currently 7.3 per cent.
Union leaders, however, were already invoking probable mortgage rises as a reason for an increase in excess of 10 per cent.
Jack Adams, the unions' chief negotiator, said they would be seeking to ensure production staff were paid the same as those doing similar jobs at Jaguar — in which Ford recently took a stake — who were earning up to £34 a week more.
Next month the present two-year deal runs out.
In 1987-88 they received 7 per cent and in 1988-89, 8.9 per cent(or the rate of inflation plus 2.5 per cent ).
In the 31-page submission, the profitability of Ford is adduced as one of the main reasons for the claim for a ‘substantial’ rise.
Mr Adams pointed out that the profits of Ford of Britain had risen for the third year running to a record £673m and he calculated a further increase to £710m was likely this year.
It was the most profitable car company in Britain and earned the highest margins of any Ford plant in Europe.
The largest section of blue-collar workers, those on grade three, are presently paid £215.31 basic plus an attendance supplement of £8.49.
Line workers get an additional £3.55.
Part of the submission concentrates on ‘social aspects’ of the claim including an inflation-proofed pension scheme, paternity leave and removal of the ‘clocking on’system.
John Hougham, Ford's personnel director, refused to comment yesterday but agreed to reply to unions on 26 October.
Negotiations are likely to last into next month.
A company request that the normally prolonged negotiations be ‘concertina-ed’ into a week-long brain storming session has been rejected.
On Wednesday leaders of 12,000 white-collar workers at Ford put in a similar claim plus a call for low interest mortgages and a car leasing scheme.
The Ford Pay claim coincides with negotiations at Vauxhall where leaders of the 9,000 manual workers have turned down a two-year offer giving 9.1 per cent in the first year and inflation plus £3 in the second.
Further talks are scheduled for 16 October.
Ministers claim ‘progress’ on UDR
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
BRITISH and Irish ministers last night ended eight hours of talks in London about the reform of the Ulster Defence Regiment without reaching agreement but claiming progress had been made.
Peter Brooke, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, said no major changes would be made to the UDR, in spite of the demands from the Irish government for a thorough review of its role.
However, Gerry Collins, the Irish minister for foreign affairs, later made it clear that progress had been made and he reaffirmed his Government's commitment to the Anglo-Irish agreement.
He firmly denied that he had emerged from the meeting empty handed.
Mr Collins told The Independent: ‘These are long standing, difficult, complex, sensitive issues relating to security, which have to do with the preservation of life or acts which result in the deaths of innocent people.
We can never walk away without resolving problems which have such importance.
We would be reneging on our total commitment and our obligations to the Anglo-Irish agreement.
That we will not do.’
The Irish urged the British Government to withdraw the UDR from operations in all sensitive areas in Northern Ireland, which the British will not concede.
That comes after growing Irish annoyance at the continued failure of the British to ensure that the RUC accompanies the UDR on all its operations.
The British Government has promised tighter vetting of recruits to the UDR.
But the Irish ministers will be under pressure to obtain greater concessions.
Yesterday's meeting resumed talks broken off after eight hours in Dublin last month.
The failure to reach accord, and the spate of security leaks, intensified speculation that the Anglo-Irish agreement was under threat.
Mr Brooke said yesterday it was now stronger than before.
The two sides agreed to hold a further meeting soon which is expected to produce firm proposals for resolving some of the Irish concerns on security.
The names and addresses of senior judges in the Irish Republic, together with a document which purports to come from the office of the Chief of Staff of the Irish Army, surfaced yesterday as the latest in the series of security leaks, writes David McKittrick.
The material was sent to RTE, the Irish broadcasting service in Dublin and to the Newsletter, the Belfast Protestant newspaper.
It was marked ‘UVF’-the illegal Ulster Volunteer Force.
Government meets costs of ‘Spycatcher’ bookseller
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A BOOKSELLER who sold thousands of copies of the banned book Spycatcher was awarded £1,725 legal costs in the High Court yesterday after the Attorney General dropped contempt proceedings against him.
The case arose out of a letter sent by the Attorney General in the summer of 1988 to booksellers handling Spycatcher warning them they were in contempt of court, because an injunction had been obtained to stop publication of extracts of the book in several national newspapers.
All but a handful of booksellers agreed to sign a written undertaking not to sell the book, but Peter Marsh, 45, who owns Bilbo's in Bath, decided to take on the Government.
He said: ‘I was outraged they thought they could tell a bookseller what to do.
The big traders were so supine, they just caved in after one letter.’
He said that only a couple of other booksellers in the country had been brave enough to ignore the letters.
The Government initiated proceedings against Mr Marsh in September last year, but after a lengthy delay while he unsuccessfully tried to obtain legal aid, the case was dropped because it was judged to be ‘no longer in the public interest’.
The case against two other booksellers was also being dropped.
Mr Marsh was so incensed by the attempted prosecution that he took out a summons to obtain his costs, and yesterday at a brief hearing in the High Court the Attorney General agreed to pay his costs and not to take any further action on the matter.
Mr Marsh said: ‘I am happy that they have got egg on their face.
I have taken a stand for freedom against tyranny.
They could have sent me to prison for two years but that would have been political suicide.’
The European Commission of Human Rights will rule today on whether a complaint by The Sunday Times, The Observer, and The Guardian that the UK broke freedom of expression guarantees during the Spycatcher affair can go ahead.
Speelman matches Timman's aggression
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
CHESS fans at Sadler's Wells for the Pilkington Glass World Championship semi-finals witnessed remarkable play yesterday with a draw in the Timman-Speelman game and Karpov set to win against Yusupov.
Timman started the game very aggressively.
Speelman responded with a vigorous counter-attack and the game dissolved into massive complications.
When Speelman seemed to be getting the better of it, Timman suddenly sacrificed two pieces to expose his opponent's king.
Speelman had to give up his queen to avoid being mated, but by that time he had so many pieces for it that he was still able to draw comfortably.
Timman leads in the match by 2-1.
The Yusupov-Karpov game was even more exciting, if full of inaccuracies.
Yusupov had prepared an unusual opening variation: taking only six minutes over the first 14 moves, while Karpov used almost an hour.
But things went Karpov's way when he found a move that had clearly been overlooked by Yusupov's analysts.
At move 40, Karpov seemed to have only a small advantage.
But by move 50 he seemed to have lost the thread of the game completely and his position was considerably worse.
Then it was Yusupov's turn to wilt under the strain.
Karpov bamboozled his opponent with a string of unexpected moves.
At move 59 Yusupov blundered.
The game was adjourned at move 60, but Yusupov's position now looks hopeless.
The game is scheduled to be resumed today.
Clarke ‘to blame for ambulance dispute’
By ANDY GLINIECKI
AN AMBULANCE workers' union leader yesterday accused Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, of intransigence, as union officials prepared for today's meeting at Acas.
Roger Poole, the staff's chief negotiator, and a senior Nupe official, said: ‘Kenneth Clarke's refusal to talk proves conclusively who is responsible for the continuation of the dispute.
Mr Clarke knows how serious this dispute is but he is prepared to risk people's lives rather than talk.’
He warned that if anyone was hurt in the dispute the minister would be ‘faced with calls for his resignation’.
Mr Poole said there were signs that the Army was being put on standby to intervene in the three-week-old dispute.
He had received reports that army ambulances were being ‘spruced up’ at a Gloucestershire army depot.
But an army spokesman denied that it had been asked to prepare to intervene.
Union officials were due to meet the arbitration service, Acas, this morning for a briefing session.
They say they will abandon the dispute over the Government's refusal to raise a 6.5 per cent offer if both sides agree to binding arbitration.
During a debate on the dispute at the Labour Party Conference in Brighton yesterday, Steve Gazzard, an ambulance worker, said that by allowing arbitration, ministers would then ‘repay their debt’ to ambulancemen called in after the bombing during the Tory party conference which was held in the town in 1984.
Salesman led police to pregnant woman's body
By DAVID THOMAS
A SALESMAN turned detective and led police to the bloodstained body of the pregnant wife Marie Wilks, the M50 murder trial heard yesterday.
William Farrell had seen a Renault 25 car parked beside a crash barrier as he drove past.
When he heard of the disappearance of Mrs Wilks, 22, he drove back down the motorway and noted the marker post number where he saw the car.
Then he took two detectives to the Queenshill Bridge over the river Severn, Shrewsbury Crown Court was told on the third day of the trial.
Mr Farrell, of Ross-on-Wye, Hereford and Worcester, showed them where he saw the car parked and pointed out a skid mark on the hard shoulder.
‘All three of us looked down the embankment and it became apparent there was a body there,’ he said.
Mackay is urged to clarify view on rights of audience
By ANDY GLINIECKI
Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the Lord Chancellor, was last night urged to clarify the government position on who should be allowed rights of audience in the higher courts.
Lord Alexander of Weedon QC, chairman of the Society of Conservative Lawyers, told the annual dinner of the Bar Association of Commerce, Finance and Industry that the Government should accept judges' views.
He said there was a danger acrimony created by the Green Papers would lead to a ‘legacy of distrust between the Government, judiciary and the profession’.
He said the White Paper failed to indicate the Government's attitude to the judges' response to the Green Papers.
Judges indicated advocates in higher courts should be independent and not bound to partners practising in other areas or involved in preparing cases.
Advocacy should become their predominant activity.