

Days Like These
By IAN IRVINE
4 October, 1941 LORAN HURNSCOT writes in her diary: ‘Mist and cold, after yesterday's Indian summer.
It was one of the perfect days — the high tide of this present time.
I went out for a walk, then picked blackberries on Periton Hill, in that far clump at the edge of the downs.
For a long time I sat out on the crumbling turf, with the blue distances below, and warm sun lying over this lovely autumn land.
And suddenly I was swept out of myself — knowing, knowing, knowing.
Feeling the love of God burning through creation, and an ecstasy of bliss pouring through my spirit.
I'm ashamed to put it down in these halting words.
For it was ecstasy — that indissoluble mingling of fire and light that the mystics know.
There was a scalding sun in my breast — the ‘kingdom of God within' — that rushed out to that All-Beauty, its weak rays met those encompassing ones and the bliss of heaven filled me.’
6 October, 1835 FELIX MENDELSSOHN writes to his family from Leipzig: ‘The day after I accompanied the Hensels to Delitzsch, Chopin arrived here; he would not stay more than a day, and so we spent it together entirely, and played music.
I must confess, my dear Fanny (his sister), that I found your judgement of him was inadequate; perhaps, too, he may not have been in the mood for playing when you heard him, which is probably often the case; but I was again enchanted by his playing, and I am convinced that if you, and Father too, had heard some of his best things in the way he played them to me, you would say the same.
His manner of playing the piano has something so basically individual about it, and at the same time so masterly, that he may really be described as the perfect virtuoso.’
7 October, 1814 JOHN WILSON CROKER to the Secretary of the Wellington Fund: ‘I quite agree with the Committee in its predilection for a pillar.
I was one of the pillarists in the Nelson case and only wish our column had been one of more magnificent dimensions.
Great height is the cheapest way and one of the most certain of achieving sublimity.
Ten thousand pounds will build you the highest column in the world, and will produce an astonishing effect; fifty thousand pounds would not serve to erect an arch, and when it was erected you would have doubted which, it or the Royal Exchange, was the more magnificent object; therefore I exhort you to keep to the columnar form.
Whatever you do at least be sure to make it stupendously high; let it be of all columns in the world the most lofty.’
THEATRE /Lonely parts club: Mark Steyn reflects on one-man shows, including John Sessions's ‘Napoleon’ and Edward Petherbridge's ‘Muse’
By MARK STEYN
THE SET is a luxuriously-upholstered leather chair alongside a small mahogany table, on which rest a glass of water and a handsomely-tooled volume.
The distinguished thespian wanders on, picks up the book and begins to read a letter from Wilfred Owen to Siegfried Sassoon or, perhaps, David Owen to Vidal Sassoon.
Faced with an actor reading, as Alan Bates did for much of his one-man show at Edinburgh this year, you're tempted to conclude that he's a little under-rehearsed.
In fact, it's part of a shrewdly calculated subtext.
‘Look at me,’ he's saying.
‘I'm not just a monkey dancing to the organ-grinder's tune.
I'm the sort of fellow who, after a hard day slogging away at the National Theatre, goes home and dips into a much-treasured, well-thumbed copy of Pope or Pepys.
If you — the audience — came round to my place, this is the sort of evening we'd have.’
In image terms, the one-man show is a dramatised version of a colour supplement ‘Room Of My Own/Life In A Day’ feature.
The most favoured option is to pick a well-known name and either anthologise him or produce what is now grandly referred to as a biodrama.
As most actors are looking for someone they'll be happy to hang around with for years to come, they tend to choose subjects they like and approve of.
Peter Barkworth ends his Sassoon evenings by waving triumphantly a battered copy of the memoirs; even with a more controversial figure such as Lillian Hellman, Frances de la Tour only accepted because she felt sympathetic and compatible.
Few performers would be entirely happy touring the country as, say, Oswald Mosley, although it might make for a more interesting evening dramatically.
Most of the literary superstars have already been snapped up: Alec McCowen's done Kipling, Emlyn Williams Dickens, Michael Pennington Chekhov, Robbie Coltrane Dr Johnson and currently in the West End Leo McKern is playing Boswell.
If he finds the right character, the actor effectively claims the role for life.
For the Broadway run of Edmund Kean, Ben Kingsley was paid $12,500 per week.
His Equity-required understudy received $800 per — without having to learn a line.
The producer sent him the script, in case he was curious, but assured him there was no question of him appearing on stage in the role.
Had Kingsley been ill, the performance would have been cancelled.
The play's the thing, but, in a one-man show, the actor is the play: not Ben Kingsley in Edmund Kean, but Ben Kingsley as Edmund Kean or even, as those ultra-butch radio commercials put it, Ben Kingsley IS Edmund Kean.
We are there to attend not a play but a performance.
You can see why this appeals to actors.
Of the greatest player of her day, Jane Austen wrote only that ‘We were quite satisfied with Mr. Kean,’— which may not look so good splashed across the marquee but which is all many of the experts demand: as far as Miss Austen is concerned, he didn't get in the way of the drama.
If we're honest, most of us reviewers prefer to engage in a dialogue with the author and director, addressing concepts of political theatre rather than the actor's little trick of twitching his left ear.
So, we bang on about the play and the staging and the big themes, and, if there's any space left, then, as the chairman of Critics' Forum wearily intones, ‘I suppose we ought to say something about the performances.’
In his own solo, Edward Petherbridge quotes James Agate's comparison of actors with puppets: ‘Punch and Judy have no understanding of their show.’
What better way for the hired hand to disprove the notion than to dispense with writers and stagers entirely?
So, the star compiles and writes the evening, and calls in a fellow thesp to direct: Petherbridge's The Eight O'Clock Muse is staged by Peter Barkworth, John Sessions's Napoleon — The American Story by Kenneth Branagh (a promising young actor, in case you hadn't heard).
In both these shows, there's an odd sense of being in some sort of parallel universe: it all looks the same, but the power structure has been weirdly distorted.
Petherbridge mentions Chekhov and Shakespeare, but, for him, theatre is something made by performance not writing.
‘That's character,’ he says, after doing a few undulations.
‘Truly it is.’
Sessions's show endorses Petherbridge's point as forcefully as possible, reminding us that, in 20th century drama, the big stars have always been bigger than the big roles.
Mention Abe Lincoln and most of us visualise Raymond Massey.
True, he went to a lot of trouble to make his performance as authentic as possible ('he won't be satisfied till he's assassinated,’ friends used to say), but in the end what we see is still Massey, not Lincoln.
Telling the story of Napoleon through impressions of Marlon Brando, Phil Silvers, Diane Keaton, Gregory Peck and dozens more, Sessions simultaneously mocks and celebrates such overpowering casting: ‘Robespierre is no Henry Fonda.
He is Lee J Cobb through and through.’
Where Sessions's military history is filtered through Hollywood, Petherbridge for his ‘pop-up guide to the theatrical imagination’ seems to have taken Ronnie Corbett's rambling monologues as his model.
As it happens, he paces himself much better than Corbett and other stand-up comics, and in his own sober way milks the material ruthlessly.
‘Sorry to mention a critic's name so early on in the proceedings.
(LAUGH) But it is a dead one.
(BIGGER LAUGH) And not currently writing, either.
(HOUSE COLLAPSES)’ 'Edward, it's all in the timing,’Cicily Courtneidge once told him, ‘so do your bit faster and then I'll come on.’
This could have been just the usual self-indulgent actor's reminiscences.
Instead, Petherbridge has created a charming eccentric shambles, demonstrating the movement exercises of a 19th century Professor of Stage Deportment and Declamation, speaking Shakespeare while spinning plates and splashing the wilder shores of directorial ambition: ‘One can't,’ he purrs with delight, ‘walk across the stage without bumping into several concepts.’
It's a practical guide to theatre, which subtly extends the eunuchs-in-the-harem sneer about critics to directors and authors.
In the end, only actors can do it.
Unfortunately, Petherbridge rather undermines this theory by reciting his own atrociously-rhymed poem.
Shakespeare had his moments, after all.
If the one-man show is as close to ‘actors’ theatre' as we'll ever get, perhaps it's just as well.
‘Conflict is the essence of drama,’ Petherbridge concedes, ‘which is difficult in a one-man show.’
He and Sessions, in their different ways, have found entertaining, imaginative substitutes, but, elsewhere, you're all too aware of what's missing.
Alan Bates's Muse Of Fire, for example, could have been compiled by a computer: its selection of all the biggest blazes in world literature lacks any sense of dramatic propulsion, a shapeless cabaret-set without music.
Bates gets by because his theme is so universal that practically all the heavyweights have something to say on it.
Doubtless, Muse Of Earth and Muse Of Wind will prove equally lucrative sequels.
But even carefully built evenings cannot avoid the whiff of compilation.
Whenever anybody reads a letter on stage, I'm reminded of one of those Radio 4 features where Martin Jarvis corresponds with Anna Massey, or vice-versa.
It's all very agreeable, and all terribly undramatic.
Even when a playwright has been drafted in, you can still see the joins.
Patrick Edgeworth's Boswell For The Defence has a plot of sorts — the barrister's defence of Mary Broad, an escapee from the penal colony at Sydney Cove — but, in the end, the form defeats any narrative thrust.
Unable to show his client or the Home Secretary or any of the other protagonists, Edgeworth is left with Boswell alone in his lodgings and is obliged to spin out the evening with the great man's reflections on extraneous matters -principally the size of his member and a certain actress's ‘snow-white boobies of the most generous proportions’.
Leo McKern has some fun answering frequent calls of nature and waving a huge condom around, but he's doing no more or less than passing the time until the phoney climax of the First Act curtain, by which time you're aware that as a play Boswell is a fraud.
‘Will delight fans of Boswell and Rumpole alike,’ claims one critic, but it's McKern's TV incarnation which is the draw, and such audience involvement as exists is not with Edgeworth's text but with the actor's genial clowning.
There's nothing necessarily wrong with that.
Actors, after all, are routinely ill-served by playwrights.
The last time he was at the Phoenix, in Simon Gray's The Common Pursuit, John Sessions was lost in a soggy, unsympathetic part, while co-stars like Rik Mayall and Stephen Fry hogged all the limelight; he seemed a non-entity.
Now, without help from anybody else, he fills the stage.
Napoleon has graduated from the fringe circuit to the West End because, despite the size of the cast, it is, in every other sense, a big show.
That's a point not always appreciated by those who think solos belong down the local community centre.
When Louis Benjamin was looking for a stopgap for Drury Lane between 42nd Street's closure and Miss Saigon's opening, the only production which could fill London's biggest theatre was Dame Edna's one-woman show: one Australian housewife outdrew the huge casts of the big-budget musicals.
Impressive as it is, however, Dame Edna's show is no more or less than a star vehicle.
In that respect, Willy Russell has accomplished a considerably trickier feat than Dame Edna: his Shirley Valentine is a one-woman show in which the show is more important than the one woman.
In both London and New York, the play has survived the departure of Pauline Collins, justifying for once the usually pretentious term of monodrama.
Even though the cast has been inevitably expanded for the new film, dramatically Shirley could have stood on her own.
It's a reminder that, occasionally, an author can have narrative drive and conflict within the confines of a single character.
Producers may favour one-man shows for economic reasons, but that doesn't in itself mean that the audience is being short-changed.
TELEVISION /Boxing far too clever: Mark Lawson in the ring
By MARK LAWSON
THE obituaries for Philip Larkin included an account of his attendance at an amateur boxing match in Hull.
It was a bout of poor quality and the writer is supposed to have murmured: ‘Only connect.’
This tension between the cerebral and the visceral was usefully explored in Kim Evans' film for Omnibus (BBC 1) about the connections between two professions where the work, though very different, is done with the hands.
It is a widely held prejudice that the closest boxing gets to Art is that the guy who holds the towels at ringside might just be called that.
‘Art In The Ring’ was a film about why so many writers are drawn to the sport.
Nobody pretended that it was other than a one-way process.
A number of poets like boxing but, on the other side, only Muhammed Ali has ever liked verse.
Vernon Scannell, an English poet and (spectator) pugilist observed that boxers were ‘not primarily men of words.’
To put it more brutally, there is no other sport in which the participants are so habitually semi-literate.
Of the literati in their thrall, Budd Schulberg emerged as the writer who told you most about the bouts.
His was a rolling, jabbing prose, with an undertow of weariness; the best stuff on the subject somehow steals the speeds of the sport.
Mailer does that too but both his fight reports and his contributions to the film were proxy autobiography.
More than any other novelist, Mailer has narrowed the lines between writing and fighting.
Every publication or public appearance is a demarcation dispute.
When Mailer claims that ‘When the heavyweights become champions, they develop inner lives…like Dostoevsky, Joyce, Faulkner, Proust.
..‘, the really interesting reflection is why so many of the big American writers crave the inner life of Sonny Liston.
Whatever Mailer says, more great heavyweights have their roots in crime and punishment than in Crime and Punishment.
Equally, Mailer's reflections on the similarities between the condition of the writer and of the boxer ('There is a support system but you are alone…‘) led you to a parallel which the programme tactfully left unstated.
After that great 1000-page bout with Gary Gilmore in 1979, Mailer has been displaying the typewriter equivalent of punchdrunkness.
Thursday's The Late Show (BBC 2) was presented by Cynthia Rose, to whom someone should speak about her big, swinging earrings.
Medically, they will surely pull her ears to destruction, which is her own problem, but, televisually, they pull the viewer's eyes to distraction, which is ours.
Also, the late Graham Chapman might have had a tribute more fitting to his debunking spirit than a discussion in which the presenter appeared to say the words ‘epiphany-oriented.’
These moans apart, The Late Show long ago clinched the case for its existence and this edition also included a thoughtful report by David Walker on the bidding for television interviews with ministers.
Kenneth Baker, when at Education, was fingered as the smartest manipulator of his position and opposition in a programme.
So all the more thanks for Question Time (BBC 1), showing simultaneously on the other side, in which Mr Baker had no choice but to sit opposite Arthur Scargill and John Smith, all marshalled impartially by Peter Sissons, controversially and expensively replacing Sir Robin Day.
Regrettably, the new presenter is settling down slowly.
The moment when he playfully slapped the wrist of Baroness Seear, saying ‘No!
No!
No!’, looked more like a presenter in search of a Day-like persona than one in control of the show.
Significantly, it got a laugh but didn't shut the lady up.
THEATRE /French without leers: Paul Taylor on ‘Paris Match’ at the Garrick Theatre
By PAUL TAYLOR
WATCHING Paris Match is like tucking into a plate of meringues and discovering that they are all Styrofoam fakes.
It also offers the spectacle (increasingly common this season) of crack British acting talent hurling itself down a lucrative drain.
Admittedly, Jean Poiret's congealed froth of a farce is a cut above the spurious Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune and Exclusive, the most radically merit-free play in town, if not history.
But it still gives you a pang to see performers of the calibre of Stephen Moore, Sian Phillips and Sheila Steafel trapped voluntarily in a vehicle heading nowhere.
The trouble with Paris Match begins with its premise.
It is Easter weekend in Paris and, while his wife is away, middle-aged Jacques (Stephen Moore) brings home Julie, a sexy little bimbo played by Leslie Ash in a mini-skirt that is no broader than a cummerbund.
Re-enter (naturally) wife Claire (Sian Phillips).
To give the farcical complications a kick-start, Poiret asks us to believe that a man, finding himself in this predicament, would try to pass the bimbo off as his daughter from a former marriage, and that the girl, required to account for her surprise visit, would blurt out that she was pregnant.
This dodge would not be completely incredible, of course, if the participants were dense or desperate enough, but in Christopher Renshaw's production, they seem to be neither, and particularly not the latter.
Throughout, the atmosphere is too casual, and in addition to a grave lack of frantic drivenness, there is a marked absence of the erotic.
After all, the situation bulges with seedy potential: a man about to have sex with a girl young enough to be his daughter is suddenly forced to pose as her father.
Farce likes to tinker with such taboos.
But, although Jacques claims that it is massively frustrating to watch Julie tripping round the flat half-naked and not be able to touch her, Mr Moore fails to project the necessary dashed and deviant desire.
Looking more like a bewildered Old English sheepdog than a thwarted child-molester, he throws himself around the place, lying on his back and waggling his feet in the air, as if by an excess of physical effort he could make up for the thinness of the script.
Modelling a succession of gasp-provoking Balmain outfits, Sian Phillips maintains a nice, self-amused poise as his wife.
But the play, because it wants its bread buttered on both sides, keeps its options open until the end on the issue of whether she is genuinely taken in by her husband's lie or whether her insistence that the girl stay the weekend, her broody concern for the future of the fictitious baby, and marriage-broking on behalf of Julie are just ways of stoking up Jacques's embarrassment.
To my mind, the excellent Ms Phillips would be able to give a much funnier performance if she were allowed to let us in on the truth from the outset.
There are other incidental delights.
Sheila Steafel, in particular, turns in a sharp cameo as the girl's vulgar, port-tippling mother, a disaster area in fake leopard-skin and stacked heels, whose irruption into the proceedings powerfully increases the confusion.
Twice, though, Poiret gives a hostage to fortune by invoking the name of Feydeau.
‘The most difficult thing in a situation like this,’ says Jacques, ‘is to find words that haven't been used already in a Feydeau farce,’as though imitating Feydeau's words and situations was something that any fool could do.
Paris Match richly demonstrates the error of that view.
MUSIC /In praise of cheapness: Producer David Pountney argues that modern composers should not despise the idea of entertainment
By DAVID POUNTNEY
TO DENY the spirit of opera would mean to deny the development of the human spirit; indeed of human thought'.
This is one of many gems to be found in Janacek's Uncollected Essays on Music.
Janacek writes words as he writes music — the two were for him virtually indivisible, and in these abrupt, epigrammatic paragraphs, sometimes brutally down to earth, sometimes fanciful, you can hear him talking — often shouting in your ear.
Words like these are something to hang onto when people ask ‘Why is opera fashionable now?’
Of course there are the ephemeral reasons — the admen's discovery of opera's blend of corny emotion with glamour and spectacle; the unpredictable cravings of yuppy culture snackers.
But the tide runs deeper than that, and it is surely at one with the desire to reassert the place of the human figure at the heart of all forms of creative life.
‘What is more useful in art, to be bound up with mankind and the world, or to be wary of it?’
Opera was rejected in the 60s because modernism found its dependence on human emotions embarrassing and messy, and because it seemed politically inept — a medium housed in monuments to the establishment and inadequate for the expression of political ideologies.
Yet political feeling, rather than ideology, is at the heart of all great opera.
Opera is too clumsy for ideology — it has no time for its sub-clauses and selective hatreds.
But its massed forces instinctively address the unspoken areas of emotional politics that are in the long run more fundamental.
And it illumines too the politics of personal relations: the vital fabric of social life that exists in the silence between people — exactly that space which is filled by music: ‘As the person talked to me in a conventional conversation, I knew, I heard that, inside himself, the person perhaps wept.’
Opera is the communal act of listening to this silent voice from inside: it is not surprising that so many people are hungry for the experience it awakens.
The result of this hunger could simply be that opera houses survive the dog days of Thatcherism with full houses for Carmen etc., or it could be the creation of new works that express and mirror the social and political needs of our culture in opera's emotive language.
But are there composers ready to seize this chance?
Many composers now crave the chance to write operas, but will they acknowledge the duty to communicate with the audience?
There has always been a sense in which music is a secret, arcane, almost Cabbalistic, art.
But this introspective isolation, now compounded in so many cases by the fact that universities are the only institutions able to support a composer's existence, perpetuates the sense that the only right path for a serious composer is the romantic path of high seriousness and absolute individual integrity.
Robert Saxton, in these pages, recently denied that there was any longer a problem with contemporary music, and instead lectured the audience about paying closer attention.
He did not mention that one definition of a composer's talent is that he can write music that compels an audience's attention.
If the Orphic myth defines the power of music, it is because Orpheus compelled an entirely hostile audience to listen to him.
Mr Saxton also dismissed the idea of music as ‘entertainment’.
ENO, I am glad to say, is proud to be dismissed by him to the purgatory reserved for this despicable activity, and more than 450,000 people pass through our doors each year to prove it.
If a composer remembers to keep this audience entertained, think what he can say to them all at the same time.
An entertained audience is actually there and listening: a bored one has usually gone to dinner.
Rehearsing Kurt Weill's Street Scene, I am in daily contact with a composer who was not embarrassed to entertain, nor to adapt his vision to the audience.
When he arrived in America, Weill did not automatically expect New York ears to take to the music of the Berlin avant-garde in which he had played so prominent a part: instead he set himself the task of learning to write music with an American accent.
Weill correctly perceived that the voice of the American nation was to be found in the musical, but as this form commanded no intellectual respect, the musical establishment has ever since accused him of selling out politically as well as musically.
In fact Weill's American years represent a serious struggle to find a way of addressing his lifelong political concerns in a popular language that spoke directly to the American public.
Street Scene is the climax of this quest, an opera that speaks with the accents of Broadway, but which holds up a typically critical and compassionate mirror to the face of his adopted city.
It is also a vindication of the lesson Weill, though one of Berlin's most intellectual musicians, had taken from his mentor: ‘My teacher Busoni, at the end of his life, hammered into me one basic truth which he had arrived at after 50 years pure aestheticism — the fear of triviality is the greatest handicap for the modern artist, it is the main reason why ‘modern’ music got more and more removed from reality.’
Being trivial is not the whole answer, but it has its place.
Janacek's contemporary Krenek wrote a jazz opera called Jonny Spielt Auf.
For Janacek, this deserved only contempt: ‘Today's opera…
Look, here is street art!
The street makes art, Jonny Spielt Auf makes good box office.
What a desert, my dear sir, what a desert!’
But wasn't this kind of work the best that Krenek could do?
It was topical, entertaining and ephemeral — so ephemeral that it has survived long after Krenek's excruciatingly boring serious works are forgotten.
Like most works that over-reach themselves by striving for unattainable seriousness they are probably simply bad.
On the other hand, intelligently entertaining and communicative works provide a background from which works of genius can emerge.
As Weill reminds us: ‘Good light music is appreciated as being more valuable than bad serious music.’
Independent readers, with their heroic sponsorship of The Garden Venture, have already been part of the quest for a new operatic voice.
ENO too is launching a new Opera Studio — placing special emphasis on the collaboration between writer and composer (and are also desperately seeking a sponsor!).
Both these vital seed-beds must be clear about their objectives.
They cannot expect to affect the development of a genius like Janacek.
But that realisation should not be a disappointment: rather it liberates us from the job of creating masterpieces, and gives us a much more achievable task.
That is quite simply to reduce by say 25 per cent the amount of time the eager opera audience wishes to spend listening to famous old works about famous old people and places, and instead increase the amount of time it wishes to spend listening to new works about ordinary people now.
This is an exercise in persuasion, and requires composers who will focus their art on the simple and fundamental act of communication with their enthusiastic but tired, inattentive, restless, distracted and easily bored fellow human beings who none the less long to hear themselves in a not necessarily flattering mirror of music.
Our society needs to be given the chance to hear its own heartbeat in its own music — for pleasure first, then also for knowledge and understanding.
Langston Hughes, the black poet Weill chose to write the lyrics for Street Scene, puts it pithily: Cheap little rhymes A cheap little tune Are sometimes as dangerous As a sliver of the moon.
A cheap little tune To cheap little rhymes Can cut a man's Throat sometimes.
MUSIC /Canada ducks: Allegri String Quartet — Queen Elizabeth Hall
By ADRIAN JACK
THE CANADIAN series on the South Bank this week has had a somewhat diluted flavour.
Wednesday's concert at the Queen Elizabeth Hall featured the Canadian clarinettist, James Campbell, and the viola-player Rivka Golani, who is based in Toronto.
The other players were British.
Only three of the five works in the programme could be described as Canadian, and the whole evening left an impression it would be kind to call elusive.
It opened with a piece for clarinet and tape by Gregory Levin (born 1943), typical of its time (1975) in its title, Crossroads, and correspondingly anonymous in its taste for weaving of atonal melodic threads.
Mr Campbell played it well.
He was then joined by the Allegri String Quartet in the Clarinet Quintet by Sir Arthur Bliss.
He wrote this long four-movement piece in 1931 for the clarinettist of the day, Frederick Thurston, but might have had in mind his predecessor by 40 years, Richard Muhlfeld, so mellifluously Brahmsian is the style of writing.
The Allegri sounded a bit under-nourished against Mr Campbell's easy delivery, particularly in the second movement, which should have had more force, though if one expects a bracing scherzo-like piece at this point, Bliss surely over-wrote it, producing instead the effect of a finale.
Miss Golani had only one piece to play — as one of three irreconcilable characters in Michael Colgrass's Strangers.
She livened things up considerably, but then she had the most interesting part — by turns urgent, sinister and weird, against the clarinet's rather bland melodiousness and the pianist's all-purpose provision of harmony and counterpoint.
John York was neat and a little too tactful at the keyboard.
Why ever did this easy-on-the-ear but over-long piece get the 1986 Jules Leger Prize for Canadian Chamber Music?
Silly question.
Eclecticism rules these days, and traditional patterns may be thrown together with all the flair for ill-assortment of current Top-Shop fashions.
Which brings us to the next item, the String Quartet No 1 by Srul Irving Glick (born 1934).
The exotic folklore-ism towards which Colgrass's piece had eventually groped its way was here unleashed in all its succulence and schmaltz.
Real yearning for the old country.
The Allegri must have loved playing it.
There were only two movements, and the first was a lot more striking than the second, which tended to lose energy with time-filling sequences.
Prokofiev, in the final piece of the evening, showed what to do with that kind of thing: his Overture on Hebrew themes, written in 1919 for a group pretending to raise funds for a conservatory in Jerusalem but in fact trying to feed themselves, just sets the tunes in a concise sonata form, and preserves all their humour and charm with hardly a suspicion of the composer intruding.
MUSIC /The new deal: BBCSO /Knussen — Royal Festival Hall
By ROBERT MAYCOCK
THE GHOST of Charles Ives, still shouting ‘stand up and use your ears like a man’, must have stalked the corridors when the opening programme of the BBC Symphony Orchestra's season was under construction.
Varese as well as Ives, and an Elliott Carter premiere — not much feminine sensibility there, though it all made for a classic Oliver Knussen pile-up of Americana, topped out with a violin concerto by Marc Neikrug that Pinchas Zukerman had brought to London for the first time.
Then again, it was relatively approachable Carter.
This particular novelty was the third short orchestral piece to appear in the last few years, written, like the second, at Knussen's prompting, and it rounded off a performance of all three as a suite, titled Three Occasions for Orchestra.
This suite now runs as a broadly balanced progression from fast to slow to fast again, or from the brilliant, epigrammatic and many-layered — A Celebration of Some 100 x 150 Notes — to the increasingly linear.
In fact the second piece, Remembrance, maintains its ritualistic continuity more through the long-held lines in the background than in the sombre broken utterances of the solo trombone.
But the BBC-commissioned Anniversary keeps up an exhilarating flow of counterpoint, flung around from one instrument to another, rich in incident and in side issues but, for all the pace, radiating a quiet air of serenity and sureness.
Taken together the pieces offer points of contact with a formidably quick mind that may suggest ways into the longer and more forbidding time-spans of Carter's major works.
To that extent they ought to have wide circulation, except that they depend on the kind of painstaking preparation that Knussen had given them — the music sounded taught and nurtured rather than merely rehearsed.
Varese's Arcana needs equal pains if its enormous forces are to operate with clarity.
Fourteen percussionists here had a stage of their own, stretching around half of the choir seats, and the average decibel count from the brass was well up in proportion.
The concern, though, was always with where the music was going and which of its layers were propelling it, so that the occasional sudden stillnesses became a real opening-up of another dimension in the music's workings and vision, not just a refuelling stop for the orchestra.
Thrills with thought: this astonishing piece is necessarily a rare event, and it would be a shame if so astute a performance went unrevived.
Ives's Three Places in New England also had a philosophical, meditative character, rather than a passionate or temperamental one.
The march tunes heaped up with proper brashness and a wild final acceleration, but the collage until then kept a rare sense of harmonic direction.
Neikrug's concerto was a tenderer flower, not at home in this strong company.
The music was well-made, sometimes boldly scored, and it produced attractive gestures from the start which glisteningly sampled ideas above a deep held bass.
Without sounding exactly like anything else, however, its sum total was more a collection of echoes than a consistent voice.
By the time the timpani signalled a perky rapprochement of the Chichester Psalms and the Young Person's Guide, having long ago left Berg behind, there was every reason to be grateful for the consistent vigour of the solo writing and to admire Zukerman's unstinted flair in putting it across.
MUSIC /Unholy row: CBSO /Rattle — Birmingham
By JAN SMACZNY
THE MOST appealing moment in Mark-Anthony Turnage's engagingly chatty introduction to Three Screaming Popes, his Feeney commission premiere for the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra at the Birmingham Town Hall, came with a stated desire that his music should be accessible to an audience.
Well, the Popes, in terrifying orchestral sonorities, certainly screamed and the new composition was, indeed, accessible to the audience.
This substantial, 15-minute orchestral movement was inspired by three paintings of Innocent X by Francis Bacon, themselves based on Velasquez.
Taking a lead from the artist, Turnage subjected his original material, some Spanish dances, to techniques of submersion and distortion.
The result is layers away from the original.
Far from being a harmless slice of programme music, Popes is a remarkably positive statement.
If at times the surface gives an eclectic impression, the outline of the whole is marvellously clear.
Sonorities constantly change and occasionally reach a thrilling pitch of tension with the composer forcing his wind and brass towards their natural upper limit.
Perhaps the most genuine tribute to the composer was that, despite the difficulty of the work, the orchestra went about their task with evident relish.
Turnage has produced a work which is attractive, disturbing and memorable: an impressive curtain-raiser to a three-year association with the CBSO from which more works are destined to flow.
The decision to interpose Stravinsky's Suite No 1 for Small Orchestra as a kind of buffer zone between Beethoven's Leonora No 3 and the Turnage was little short of inspired.
The Stravinsky was a welcome up-beat to the new work and it drew a veil over a performance of the overture which apart from a cracking final Presto was emminently forgettable.
Brahms' Fourth Symphony, now something of a hardy annual with Rattle and the CBSO, provided the conclusion.
Scrutinising this familiar object revealed some untidy details in the first movement: the performers have not quite solved the problem of what must be one of the cruellest openings for an orchestra ever devised.
Apart from a notable solo in the Finale, the flute section these days seems to prefer crescendos to decrescendos.
But, carping apart, Rattle's performance of the Brahms remains one of the most bracing and intelligent anywhere.
OPERA /Czech mates: Welsh National Opera — Cardiff New Theatre
By STEPHEN WALSH
WHEN IT was new, Rudolf Noelte's Bartered Bride for Welsh National Opera offered a notably austere view of Smetanesque comedy, with its single, dominating barn set (Jan Schlubach), its complete avoidance of condescension and slapstick and its severely geometrical stage placings.
Seven years on, much of this character survives in Mike Ashman's revival: it remains one of the least pantomimic of Brides (though the circus, with brilliant tightrope dancing by Brenda Larenty, is a startling exception).
But the impression is untidier, less focused and — some will say — more exuberant.
Ashman seems to make more whimsical use of the device of exit up-stage, re-entry stage right (whether the idea is Ashman's or Noelte's, its use in duets where one knows the exiting character has a line to sing almost at once, soon becomes irritating).
Above all, this is a less regimented show than Noelte made it; the chorus work is scrappy, and sometimes looks under-rehearsed, with much School-of-Sadlers-Wells handshaking and glass-waving.
Though one thinks of The Bartered Bride (among other things) as a cataract of marvellous vocal melody, it is rarely well performed in Britain, mainly because of our lack of really deep-chested lyric tenors of the type that can making singing Czechs such enthralling neighbours.
This problem is very much in evidence in Cardiff.
Ryland Davies is a fluent and musically amiable Jenik, but he is plainly not at home in the long and crucial stretches of middle-to-low register that Smetana throws at him; and the same is true of David Owen's otherwise rather stylish Vasek.
In fact, the only male singer in the cast able to convince that his part might have been written for him is Stafford Dean, who gives a beautifully focused and intelligent Kecal, somewhat constrained, though, by the context.
Much nearer to the intense spirit of the original staging is Christine Bunning's Marenka, taking her tone from the opening duet with Jenik, which can so easily project the character as a social and emotional misfit.
Something vulnerable in her manner brings out an element of sadism in the way the long final act teases her endurance; but it also makes the denouement extremely touching, and the part lies well for a voice that has managed Janacek's Capture as well as Verdi's Violetta.
When all is said and done, The Bartered Bride is rarely less than enchanting.
But this revival will enchant still more when Sir Charles Mackerras has tidied up stage-pit ensemble, and refined some aspects of the orchestral sound.
However, lively detail is no substitute for an integrated texture of the sort we have come to expect from the WNO chorus and orchestra.
RECORDS /Marital infidelities
By MISHA DONAT
THE NINETEENTH century could never reconcile itself to Cosi fan tutte, that most consistently inspired of great operas.
Beethoven, whose own opera of marital fidelity was heavily influenced by its music, regarded it as immoral -a reaction at least healthier than that of most commentators, who dismissed its plot as merely frivolous, and unworthy of Mozart.
As for Mozart himself, who had married the sister of the woman he loved, the subject of Cosi must surely have given him food for thought.
The opera's subtitle is ‘The School for Loves’; and during the course of this dangerous experiment in human emotions, in which the two sisters unwittingly find themselves seduced by each other 's lover, all four central protagonists learn something about themselves.
Nor can there be much doubt that the experience is more painful for the men than the duped women.
James Levine's new recording takes the opera very seriously indeed: it is a Cosi without, perhaps, a great deal of fun, but one with considerable insight.
Every single word of recitative is included (with a spasmodic fortepiano accompaniment that takes some getting used to), and all six characters are delineated with exceptional vividness.
In this opera of ensembles there is, however, a price to pay for such fierce individualization: the beauty of Mozart's blended vocal writing is sometimes sacrificed, and there is little sense of joint wonderment as each new turn of events is unfolded.
(Mozart's characteristic sotto voce seems in any case not to be in James Levine's vocabulary.)
The cast is first-rate.
Kiri Te Kanawa's Fiordiligi and Thomas Hampson's Guglielmo give particular pleasure throughout.
Only Ferruccio Furlanetto's consistently aggressive rendering of the cynical bachelor Don Alfonso becomes an irritant.
The recording is generally good, though the orchestra sounds curiously recessed in the concluding pages of the Act I finale.
There are, too, a few ensemble lapses that should have been corrected.
If in Cosi it is the women who are put upon, then in L'Italiana in Algeri it is the eponymous heroine who wears the trousers — or so, at least, it ought to be.
Alas, Agnes Baltsa is hopelessly miscast in DG's new recording of Rossini's frothiest comic opera.
Her lack of authority is helped neither by a recorded balance that places her too far from the microphone throughout, nor by Claudio Abbado's propensity for extremes of tempo.
With this vital flaw, and with Ruggero Raimondi also failing to make much of an impact as the comically menacing Bey, the performance never gets off the ground.
There is more to enjoy in Decca's Barber of Seville — particularly Cecilia Bartoli's fresh and delightful performance as Rosina.
However, William Matteuzzi's Almaviva is so weak that it requires a considerable stretch of the imagination to picture her preferring the young Count to the lecherous old Dr Bartolo; and although the late Giuseppe Patane conducts the score with obvious affection, he has little flare for dramatic pacing.
On an altogether higher level — indeed, among the finest opera recordings to appear in recent months — is John Eliot Gardiner's new version of Rossini's penultimate opera, Le Comte Ory.
It is not difficult to understand why Berlioz was such an admirer of this opulently scored work.
As a comic opera, it is very much sui generis: all the recitatives are furnished with orchestral accompaniment, and the music is both continuous and strongly unified.
The plot is more than faintly ludicrous but the music is Rossini at his most inspired — even when one suspects that he is writing with tongue in cheek.
The Act II trio, in which the labyrinth of disguises reaches a peak of intricacy, is one of his most sensual pieces.
The Philips recording, although made in the studio, is based on stagings at the Lyons Opera last year.
It offers a reminder of what can be achieved without recourse to star names or the Vienna Philharmonic.