

Auctions: Dazzling riches of the Orient
By ROGER BELL
IT IS Asian Week at Sotheby's and Christie's.
They are mixing Islamic art from the Middle East with Indian and South-East Asian.
The sales combine items of charm at fairly accessible prices with some rare treasures aimed at big-time collectors.
Homely Persian pottery of the twelfth to thirteenth century combines animal and bird images with sinuous plant motifs and marks the beginning of lustre wares; they are mostly priced in the £500 to £1,000 range and rate high on charm.
The Iznik pottery from Turkey dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth century explodes with colour on more sophisticated white grounds; Iznik is now highly sought after by Turkish yuppies and prices run from £2,000 or so to £15,000.
Both houses combine elegant early metalwares (twelfth/thirteenth century), bronze vessels with silver inlay — which are expensive — with nineteenth-century imitations, more flashy but in the mid-hundreds.
There are plenty of Indian miniatures, colourful and charming evocations of princely courts, priced in hundreds or low thousands.
Stone figures chipped off the war-torn temples of Cambodia are more expensive; a striking Khmer figure will cost £20,000 or more.
There are also outstanding bits of Indian stone monuments, with gods and goddesses sensuously entwined in spiritual embrace; they start with the Gandhara grey schist carvings of the third/fourth century.
Glasgow: Clocks and scientific instruments, Wednesday 11am.
Market Harborough: Ceramics, glass, toys, silver, musical instruments and artworks, Tuesday 10am.
Prints, watercolours, oil paintings, furniture and architectural effects, Tuesday 1.30pm.
Gildings, Roman Way (0858 410414).
Finds: Old firm friends: John Windsor on a fight to save corporate archives from the bin
By JOHN WINDSOR
COMPANY records — boring-sounding but the ultimate in historical memorabilia -have slipped through the fingers of British private collectors by the skipload.
Only a sophisticated handful of collectors seek company minute books, ledgers and subject files to add historical depth to displayable hardware such as insurance firemarks or automobilia.
It has fallen to salaried professionals in universities, public record offices, the Business Archives Council, corporate bodies themselves — and the ‘vanity press’— to salvage and conserve the tons of old papers explaining the historical context of what tumbled off the production line.
As the heritage boom gathers pace, made-to-measure company and family biographies have become big business.
For $27,000 (£16,800), the San Francisco vanity publisher The Sharper Image offers 225-page hardbound corporate histories in limited editions of 100, for use ‘as a public relations tool’.
The London publisher Henry Melland offers corporate biographies for £5,000-£50,000, and lists among past and present clients BP and British Steel.
A new British company, Living Memories, will produce an illustrated album of company or family biography for a typical price of £500 for a family, £2,000 for a company.
Most sophisticated of all, Terry Gourvish, director of the London School of Economics' business history unit, charges up to £150,000 for a three to four-year company history project employing two full-time researchers.
No vanity here: the result is a warts-and-all publication intended as salutary reading during management training.
Rowntree and Glaxo are at present under his scrutiny.
Such in-depth research is what Sunday-morning collecting should evolve into but seldom does.
One of the few collectors dedicated enough to go for the company context is Peter Card, whose collection of 400 old bicycle lamps is without equal.
As honorary archivist for Lucas, the motor components group, he begged the company to let him be custodian of the earliest archives -including Lucas family albums — when, during company restructuring two years ago, the entire archive went to the British Motor Industry Heritage Trust.
Company archives are not that difficult to find.
They tend to be the first victims of clean-sweep company shake-ups and takeovers.
Expanding City firms hire skips to empty old papers out of basements and attics.
I paid a Hackney second-hand dealer £100 a few years ago for seven black plastic bags of documents dating back to the seventeenth century — the contents of tin trunks removed from the basement of a firm of solicitors.
They include the entire records, with a letters file, charting the heat-and- history of the London-based Egyptian Dredging Company, 1885-1938.
There is also a complete and intimate record of the acrimonious relationship which developed between the Norwich Union Insurance Company and the founding manager of its London office in Edwardian times.
Besides an at times emotional correspondence, the manager's bills for dinners, cigars and ladies' hats, and a vellum wallet full of used cheques are all intact, providing a documentary cameo of the life and times of an Edwardian financial rake.
The thought of such treasures disappearing into private collections brings a sigh to Serena Kelly, secretary-general of the Business Archives Council.
She has never had to compete with private collectors for company archives and hopes she never has to.
As the Council's only full-time worker, she runs a one-woman intelligence operation, making friends with company archivists and hob-nobbing with big liquidators such as the London accountants Cork, Gully and Grant, Thornton, who allow her access to their warehouses of seized goods.
She relies heavily on tip-offs, in turn alerting county and metropolitan records offices about historic company records due for release by liquidators.
Two years ago, she and John Orbell, archivist of Baring Brothers and chairman of the Council's Liquidations and Rescue Support Group, were tipped off by a friendly Extel employee about the news agency's imminent takeover by United Newspapers.
The voluminous Extel archives, giving a unique insight into Victorian journalists' news-gathering methods (and expenses claims) are now in London's Guildhall Library awaiting a researcher.
We accompanied Pamela Scott-Wexo, a director of Living Memories, on a visit to one of her clients, the Royal Star and Garter Home for disabled servicemen at Richmond, Surrey, to see what her research would turn up.
One resident, Jim Goodson, aged 105, who enlisted in the Army in 1902 at the age of 17, remembered being one of the first to be issued with a khaki uniform, an improvement on the red tunics which the Boers picked off so easily.
She will include such memories in the home's 75th anniversary volume.
Collecting: You're never alone with a print: Edward Lucie-Smith reports on why the modern multiple image is making a big impact in the blue-chip art market
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
Many column inches have recently been devoted to the boom in classic modern and contemporary painting.
Very little has been said about the boom in modern prints.
In some ways this boom is even more extraordinary, because it represents not only a new taste but a subtly different attitude towards works of art.
Peter Osborne of the Berkeley Square Gallery in London, which specialises in material of this kind, explained some of the rules of the print market.
‘A print of the right kind is not simply something that is worth money.
It is more like actual currency.
The reason is that while it may be in limited supply, it isn't unique.
When other, identical examples exist, it is easy to establish what the value should be.
It is also much easier to create a market situation which will see to it that the value goes up.’
Not every print, or every print-maker, is suitable for the purpose, however.
The blue-chip market is confined to a very limited number of names.
There are certain artists of the old Ecole de Paris: Matisse, Picasso, Miro, Chagall, Rouault.
There are certain contemporary American artists: Jasper Johns, Frank Stella, Jim Dine, Sam Francis.
There are also two British artists: Henry Moore and David Hockney.
What are the rules of admission to the pantheon?
First, the artist has to be a ‘major name’.
Second, he has to be a prolific print-maker, and the prints themselves, though perhaps individually rare, must collectively be in reasonably good supply.
Third, the prints must form an integral part of the artist's career — that is, our appreciation of his achievement as a whole would be incomplete without some knowledge of his activity in this field.
All of these are fairly obvious.
But there are two other, less obvious laws as well.
Prints, to be valuable, must be good impressions on good quality paper.
Edvard Munch, whom many art historians would describe as one of the greatest print-makers of the century, fails to qualify as ‘blue-chip’, despite occasional high prices at auction, because he often used poor quality paper and the impressions are not always of the best quality.
The final qualification is that a print-maker, to reach the very top of the tree, must be known and appreciated by the Japanese.
The Berkeley Square Gallery, for example, maintains a second outlet in Tokyo, as a vital part of its operations.
Japanese collectors find it easy to appreciate prints, because works on paper are very much part of their own cultural heritage.
They do not make the distinction between an image on canvas or panel and one on paper which seems so obvious — indeed axiomatic — to Europeans.
They are aware of the fact that some of the greatest of their own artists — Hokusai, for instance, and Hiroshige — made print-making a primary creating medium.
Japanese collectors also value the psychological security offered by the multiple image — to like exactly what other collectors like seems to them a good and reassuring thing.
The way the market in prints moves is very much governed by developments in Japanese taste.
‘The first generation of collectors was very conservative,’ said Mr Osborne.
‘They tended to like what was soft-edged and pretty.’
As a result of this, certain big Renoir prints are expensive — over £20,000 for the kind of lithograph which looks like a chalk drawing.
This makes a striking contrast with Manet, whose prints, though rare, are modest in scale and not found in signed, numbered editions.
The Berkeley Square Gallery has an example of his Infanta Margarita (After Velazquez) for only £1,250.
But now a new generation of Japanese collectors is coming into the market and their taste is for much stronger, more colourful things, such as prints by Miro.
Something they have not developed a liking for yet is prints by the German Expressionists and their successors, the artists of the Neue Sachlichkeit such as Beckmann and Grosz.
Occasionally, they take a liking to a European or American artist who is not really an absolutely major name internationally.
An example is the American Carol Summers, who makes superb, coloured woodcuts.
What they appreciate here is the closeness to their own tradition — Hokusai's prints are coloured woodcuts, too — and superb quality.
How much do real blue-chip prints tend to cost?
This is fairly easy to answer, but only with the proviso that a given conjunction of circumstances will set prices spiralling upward again.
A recent major commercial show of Miro's work, for example, took all his prices to a new high.
A big coloured image, such as the aptly named Le Samourai, will now cost £25,000.
Spectacular coloured Chagalls bring even more — up to £45,000.
So do major prints by Sam Francis (who lived and worked for a while in Japan).
The benchmark here is over £50,000.
Matisse and Picasso, who form the backbone of the market in ‘classic modern’ prints, bring sums which depend both on the actual rarity of the image and its attractiveness.
A beautiful odalisque by Matisse, such as Torso with a Jug, typical of the work he did in the 1920s and 1930s, will bring £35,000 or more.
Images from Picasso's eternally popular Vollard Suite, which dates from the early 1930s, bring between £8,000 and £12,000 plus — but these, though easy to like because of their smooth neo-classical style, are not coloured and were published in a fairly big edition.
The established artist who is currently rising most rapidly in price is Hockney.
Images from the mid-1970s — large prints of swimming pools, vases of flowers and interiors (all nice, neutral subjects) were till recently anchored at around £15,000.
In recent months they have begun to tear loose from this platform.
Today, £20,000 might be a good guess for an especially attractive image and Mr Osborne predicts that the price will soon be nearer to £30,000.
Obviously a good choice for collectors who like their blue-chips gilded.
But what about the long-term future?
One problem is that there do not seem to be many potentially blue-chip names in the pipeline, ready to join what is now a severely restricted group.
The Neo-Expressionists mostly seem too dour to qualify — and most do not make prints on a sufficiently regular basis.
One answer seems to be that the market will take another look at Impressionist prints, and those by the Nabis, both of which are beginning to seem undervalued, in comparison with what was produced by their successors.
You can get a fine Bonnard print for £2,500; a Pissarro for less than £7,000.
Signac, who continued his activity as a print-maker into the period after the First World War, uses the graphic medium superbly.
A tip-top specimen costs £10,000.
Even Cezanne's rare prints are starting to look a bit undervalued, in terms of the way in which the market as a whole is performing.
Move over Hockney, Uncle Paul is behind you.
If this is the way things go, there would be a certain art-historical justice in it.