

Reporter jailed
Foreign News Page 10
Nepal avalanche
Foreign News Page 10
Chilean protest
Foreign News Page 10
Peres to Moscow
Foreign News Page 10
Disident freed
By CHAIM BERMANT
PRAGUE (Reuter)— Czechoslovak authorities have released a human rights activist, Miroslav Kusy, who was held on charges of subversion.
Bush to see PM
Foreign News Page 10
Stepping down
Foreign News Page 10
No federal case
By CHAIM BERMANT
WASHINGTON (AP)— President Bush, making light of surgery to remove a cyst from his right middle finger, said it was no ‘federal case’ and promised to show off his scar afterward.
In the hot seat
By CHAIM BERMANT
BOGOTA (Reuter)— Roberto Salazar Manrique, an economist, was named as Colombia's new justice minister, replacing Monica de Greiff who resigned after repeated death threats by drug traffickers.
Mr Salazar is the ninth justice minister since August 1986.
Mining ban
By CHAIM BERMANT
SYDNEY (Reuter)— The government has decided to ban mining in most of the Kakadu wilderness park, where the film Crocodile Dundee was shot.
Harare arrest
By KARL MAIER
HARARE — Plainclothes policemen detained a Zimbabwean labour leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, as part of a crackdown on opponents of President Robert Mugabe's government, writes Karl Maier.
Mr Tsvangirai's detention came a day after his Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions denounced the government's closure of the University of Zimbabwe and accused it of unleashing ‘brutal state force’ against opponents.
Siege ends
By KARL MAIER
SAN SALVADOR (Reuter)— One of two occupations of embassies in San Salvador ended when human rights activists freed 13 hostages they had held for a day at the Costa Rican Embassy and left.
The occupation of the Mexican by leftist guerrillas continued.
Murder claim
By KARL MAIER
BRUSSELS (AP)— An unknown group called ‘Young Palestine, Proud and Free’, in a letter to Belgian newspapers yesterday, said it had killed Joseph Wybran, a leading Belgian Jew.
The claim came as 1,000 people attended a funeral service for Mr Wybran.
LDP pick Kaifu
By KARL MAIER
TOKYO (Reuter)— The Liberal Democratic Party, struggling to win back voters alienated by scandals and a sales tax, yesterday chose the Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, to lead it into the next general election.
Ratification of the appointment is expected on 31 October.
Plan rejected
By CHARLES RICHARDS
JERUSALEM — Likud ministers yesterday blocked a proposal by the Labour coalition partners to accept Egyptian ideas for convening Palestinian-Israeli talks.
The inner cabinet was split along party lines six to six, but tied votes are taken as votes against, writes Charles Richards.
Bitter medicine for Poles
By CHARLES RICHARDS
WARSAW (Reuter)— The Polish Finance Minister, Leszek Balcerowicz, offered Poles a harsh dose of economic austerity yesterday, but said no relief from soaring prices and food queues could be expected for at least a year.
He said the Solidarity-led government had been given a chance to implement a ‘total change’ from Poland's communist system to a free-market economy.
‘But this chance was given to us in extremely bad conditions.’
Poland must cut spending, free prices, tighten tax discipline, cut state subsidies and wage indexation and limit pay increases.
Mr Balcerowicz said his policies would bring unemployment to between 10 and 20 per cent.
East Berlin keeps Westerners out
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
‘NO DAY-VISAS TODAY!’
Phalanxes of East German border guards barred the way to Westerners trying to use the crossing-points in the Berlin Wall as East Germany's Communist leaders began celebrating their 40-year rule over an increasingly restive population.
Protests by hundreds of Dutch, Scandinavian, West German and British people fell on deaf ears as they were turned away.
Only business travellers and returning East Germans were allowed through.
At Friedrichstrasse station, where many Westerners arrive on the Stadtbahn, the city railway, long queues formed.
‘I fixed up months ago to meet my parents in East Berlin today and took some holiday for it,’ fumed one man.
Many West Berlin pensioners, who had set off to visit relatives and friends in the East, looked scared.
That generation knows only too well what political tension can mean.
There were Poles returning home after selling rucksacks full of sausages, butter, Polish vodka and cigarettes on West Berlin's black market.
‘This can't go on much longer,’ the Poles hopefully assured the Germans.
The flight of East Germans from their country continued yesterday, despite restrictions on travel to Czechoslovakia and other neighbouring countries.
No sooner had a special train, carrying 633 people who had taken refuge at the West German embassy in Warsaw, arrived in Hanover yesterday than at least 200 more refugees turned up on the embassy doorstep.
Another 1,800 emigres came out across the Austro-Hungarian border in the 48 hours ending yesterday morning.
The West German embassy in Prague, where thousands of people had taken refuge, is now surrounded by Czechoslovak police, who check the identities of all comers and have sent away numerous would-be refugees.
Film of the riots in Dresden on Wednesday have reached the West, with evidence that they were more violent than first thought.
A West Berlin radio station said a young man was killed — it was not known how — and that another lost both legs when hit by a train.
He been with people who had lain on the tracks to try to stop the special trains bringing out 7,600 refugees from Prague and climb on board.
About 10,000 people were believed to have been involved in the clashes, in which police, army units and factory militias armed with water-cannon and truncheons clashed with crowds hurling cobblestones and shouting ‘We want to get out.’
Many people are believed to have been seriously injured.
Several police vehicles were burned or wrecked, windows were smashed and public buildings were damaged.
More demonstrations and clashes, although less violent, followed on Thursday night, while in Magdeburg, police broke up a silent march of some 500 people through the city following a prayer meeting in the cathedral.
Church sources said four people were injured and 100 to 200 were taken away by the police.
East Germany's workers' militias, which have 400,000 members, are standing by all over the country to help to clamp down in case of trouble.
Police and security-service patrols have been stepped up.
The mobilisation of the militias has been accompanied by letters in the press, supposedly from members, calling for tough action against ‘subversive provocation’ and vowing to ‘stop these counter-revolutionary actions for once and for all -with weapons if need be’.
The militias, or ‘combat groups of the working-class’, are armed units set up within factories, agricultural co-operatives, big organisations or institutions.
They are supposed to crush politicial uprisings, act as a kind of home guard in times of war and to guard buildings.
East Germans find consensus only in boredom: Edward Steen, in East Berlin for the 40th anniversary celebrations, reflects on how illusions have been shattered and triumphal propaganda now has a hollow ring
From EDWARD STEEN in East Berlin
LIKE BEAUTY, tawdriness is in the eye of the beholder, and on their country's 40th birthday East Germans tend to see it through the cruelly unblinking eyes of thoroughly Westernised consumers.
‘My relatives used to come over and say: ‘There's nothing in the shops’, and I thought it was ridiculous, because there was plenty,’ a 47-year-old lathe operator from Dresden told me yesterday.
He was on a train taking him home from a visit to his sister in Vienna.
‘When I was allowed to go West again after 20 years, two years ago, I couldn't believe how it had been transformed.
I came back and saw it was true: there is nothing in the shops.’
The postwar generation, unschooled in the brutality of hardships of war and reconstruction, compares its lot with that of West Germans, with double their standard of living, rather than with their neighbours to the East, to whom the mountains of sausages and pigs' trotters in butchers' shops would seem like a dream come true.
Forty years on, there is, at best, a consensus of boredom with the virulent attacks against allegedly renascent fascism, and the endlessly invoked Achievements.
Yesterday, Achievements marched up and down the grey columns of the party paper Neues Deutschland with more than usual determination.
The solid education system, full if unexciting shops, the fact that East Germany is socialism's only economic miracle, ranking among the world's top 10 industrial countries — it all bores people unspeakably, as much as those triumphal lists of foreign dignitaries attending today's ceremonies, and the constant reminder that 135 countries recognise the 1945 Soviet occupation zone as a second German state.
But so do many of the opposition groups here, entertaining a touching if economically illiterate faith in a third way which would involve neither reunification nor a return to capitalism.
But the haemorrhage of people since travel was eased in the past few years, and the mass exodus of the past weeks suggest they are in a minority.
The German Democratic Republic arose as a retaliation to the Western Allies' decision to create a German Federal Republic in the Western occupation zone in May 1949.
The GDR line is that Britain and the US were responsible for this ‘collaboration with monopoly capital…without any democratic authorisation’.
The chance of ‘uniform anti-fascist and democratic development’ in a unified country had been thrown away.
East Germany's slender claim to legitimacy rests above all on the fraudulent implication that it is the good non-Nazi, never-Nazi Germany, any Nazi-supporters having joined the four million renegades whose Westward migration almost drained East Germany dry before the Wall went up on 13 August 1961.
The GDR's acceptance as a real country has been the function of the Cold War, a piece of make-believe reflecting tacit agreement by both blocs that the German Question is best put on hold.
West Germany's willingness in the early Seventies in effect to bribe East Berlin — by about DM4bn (£1.32bn) a year — to treat its citizens more decently has cemented the division.
This has given the East Germans the best standard of living in East Europe.
But freer travel to the West, which is one of the benefits Bonn extracted, also increased disgruntlement with things at home.
An important factor in the crisis is the awakening realisation among West Germans that they have been tricked into pretending this peculiar arrangement of subsidising their compatriots' oppressors was normal.
The once-numerous Western apologists for the GDR have fallen silent, or stridently demand reforms.
Pope urges freedom for Church in Ukraine
From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
THE VATICAN is to step up pressure on Mikhail Gorbachev with a demand by the Pope for the legalisation of the Ukranian Catholic Church, church sources said yesterday.
The church, which had been in communion with Rome since 1596, was forcibly merged with the Russian Orthodox church by Stalin in 1948.
Pope John Paul's outspoken words on behalf of a church which he deems to have been ‘driven into the catacombs’ reflect a worried assessment by the Secretariat of State, the Vatican's Foreign Office, that Mr Gorbachev's authority may come under increasing threat and that the Church should therefore exploit Soviet liberalisation for all it is worth.
According to these sources, the Pope and the Secretariat of State intend to push for a firm public commitment to legalisation by Mr Gorbachev when he visits Italy and the Vatican at the end of November.
They say the decision to step up overt pressure came quickly after the Vatican learned from Italian Foreign Ministry officials that Mr Gorbachev's visit was being curtailed to less than three full days.
On Thursday, the Pope spoke forcibly to an audience of Ukrainian Catholic bishops, recalling that the native branch of their church had been ‘driven into the catacombs, suffering the martyrdom of her bishops and priests, deportations, arrests and the closures of churches and monasteries’.
‘The cries of these Catholics reach Rome with ever-increasing urgency,’ he said.
‘The campaign of hostility and accusations against this church and her priests does not help reforms, but hinders them.
Without the legalisation of the Ukranian community, the process of democratisation will never be complete.’
The Pope spoke these words, which allow the Soviet leader a suitable period for reflection, before travelling to Asia yesterday on a 10-day visit.
The trip begins at a Eucharistic Congress in Seoul intended to put the seal on the Catholic Church's extraordinary progress in Korea, where the number of believers has grown from a post-war 200,000 to more than 2.5 million, and is increasing by 10 per cent each year.
Then there is a potentially controversial stop in the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, which has a majority Catholic population.
The Vatican has never officially recognised Indonesia's annexation of the territory, but it is privately conceded that the Papal visit constitutes de facto recognition of the status quo.
Greek coalition resigns after launching clean-up
From PETER THOMPSON in Athens
GREECE'S three-month-old government will resign today, opening the way for fresh elections, probably on 5 November.
When the right-wing New Democracy party and the Communist-dominated coalition of the left agreed after inconclusive elections in June to support a temporary administration headed by the conservative backbencher, Tzannis Tzannetakis, its mission was strictly defined: to clean up the scandals that unseated Andreas Papandreou and his socialist (Pasok) government; and ‘to restore the prestige and normal functioning of democratic institutions’.
After the summer's inquiries, MPs decided to commit Mr Papandreou and a handful of ex-colleagues for trial on charges of ordering telephone tapping and accepting bribes.
This momentous decision — it is the first time a former Greek prime minister has been indicted by parliament — was complemented by measures the left coalition in particular regards as vital to prevent abuse of power by single-party governments in future.
The Tzannetakis administration left state broadcasting free to report objectively.
It reformed the judicial system, buttressing its independence, and introduced parliamentary scrutiny of important public sector contracts and appointments.
It also completed the long task of national reconciliation, burying by example the myth which dates from the 1946-49 Civil War, that right and left can never co-operate.
Mr Tzannetakis, who has won public affection for his unassuming style, said this week that no single-party government could have achieved these things — the broader consensus was what was needed.
However, there are few signs, after this constructive interlude, that Greek politics will avoid reverting to their familiar rancour and polarisation.
Mr Papandreou's Pasok, embittered and demoralised, remains unable to evolve from unreconstructed popularism and anti-right rhetoric.
New Democracy, led by Constantine Mitsotakis, has shown that its undertaking to rid the bureaucracy of party domination means merely replacing Pasok stalwarts in key state posts with its own loyal time-servers.
The left coalition appears more committed to moderation and compromise, yet it is unlikely to be rewarded with the electorate's gratitude.
Its senior partner, the Communist Party, has not carried all its followers with it this summer, and last month had to purge the entire leadership of its youth movement (KNE).
Shocked by the formation of the left coalition last year, the KNE was downright hostile to its supporting a government in alliance with the right.
The big question now is whether Mr Mitsotakis will win an overall majority next month.
In June he fell just short, with 44 per cent of the vote and 145 seats out of 300.
Some observers argue that the assassination last month of Mr Mitsotakis' son-in-law, Paul Bakoyannis MP, and the dignity and courage shown by Mr Mitsotakis then, may tip the balance in New Democracy's favour.
Mr Papandreou will do everything he can to thwart New Democracy.
He has wooed back respected figures who had quit Pasok, and enticed one former conservative minister, Yannis Boutos, to join him.
His proposal of limited electoral co-operation with the left, while not encouraged, has not been completely rebuffed.
There may be bad blood between the two party leaderships but, given a hung parliament next month, they will need each other.
Reformists take hold of Prague congress
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
HUNGARY'S ruling Socialist Workers Party took a big step yesterday towards the complete abandonment of Communism when its president, Rezso Nyers, sketched out the contours of a new socialist movement capable of contesting next year's free elections, the first in Eastern Europe for 40 years.
‘The historic role of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party has come to an end,’ Mr Nyers said, in a speech opening the party's congress.
‘We now need a new party, one that is the heir and not a mere continuation of the present one.
I believe the new party cannot be a communist party.’
He added: ‘Communism is not on the agenda today as a social formation.’
Mr Nyers was speaking shortly after a long procedural wrangle on the method of electing the new leadership.
This debate, as well as a straw poll taken in the morning, confirmed that the reformers, though short of an absolute majority, now have the upper hand.
With 464 delegates out of the total of 1,276, they are by far the largest bloc.
The numbers are important, because the new party's leadership will be elected from lists submitted by the various factions on an all-or-nothing principle.
If the reformists emerge as the largest group, they will sweep the board.
In the first vote of the day, they ensured that Central Committee members and regional party secretaries not elected as delegates were allowed to attend the congress only as observers.
The confidence displayed by reformers such as Mr Nyers and Imre Pozsgay, who introduced the new party's programme, was in sharp contrast to the air of resignation in the conservative rows.
Karoly Grosz, the outgoing general secretary, cut a lonely figure as he bowed out, dropping hints that in future he would be taking a back seat in politics.
Mr Grosz was the only senior politician yesterday with the courage to stand up for Communism in front of a hostile audience.
As a parting shot, he even attacked reformists for ‘resorting to Stalinist tactics’ and admitted to having ‘differences of philosophy and outlook with Comrade Poszgay’.
But Mr Poszgay's radical programme looked safe last night.
His proposal that a new socialist party should rise from the ashes of the present one was hardly disputed.
The programme's emphasis on a mixed economy also met little resistance.
Democracy is, of course, a tedious process, and the first concrete results of the congress are not likely to emerge before tomorrow.
Having discarded Communism, the delegates will have the difficult job of deciding what to erect in its place.
Less than seven per cent of the delegates are manual workers, and even if the word ‘worker’ is dropped from the title, the Thatcherite economics will be hard to reconcile with the remaining word ‘socialist’.
Readers lose their faith in Soviet press
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
GLASNOST, it would seem, has lost its charm — or more accurately perhaps, the Soviet people have realised that man cannot live by words alone.
After two years of explosive circulation growth, Soviet newspapers are being deserted by their subscribers in droves.
The bulk of sales of dailies and periodicals here is not at the news stands, but via annual subscriptions which normally have to be renewed by 1 October.
But the threatened drop in readership for 1990 is now so great that the the authorities have extended the date by a month.
In many cases, this form of guaranteed sales is running at barely half that of 1989, when the boom was such that the government was forced to drop limits on subscriptions, which it claimed were forced upon it by lack of newsprint.
By mid-September, according to figures released yesterday, subscriptions to Izvestia, the government daily, which now sells close to 11 million copies, were only 61 per cent of the level 12 months before.
For Trud, the union paper which claims the largest daily sale of close to 20 million, the figure is 54 per cent.
Both liberal and conservative publications have been hit.
The most dismal performance is by Pravda, the official party paper, of whose regular readers only 36 per cent had renewed their subscriptions.
But even Ogonyok, considered the most chic and sought-after of the progressive press, is running at only 50 per cent of 1989 levels.
Perhaps, as officials contend, faces will be saved by a last-minute rush to meet the new deadline.
More probably, however, even the final figures will show large declines — the most telling possible proof of how the exhilaration of being able to read almost anything has been replaced by disillusion at being able to buy almost nothing.
Vyacheslav Antonov, a senior official of the central press agency, Soyuzpechat, claimed yesterday that readers were merely becoming more discerning, after having snapped up everything on offer in the initial heady flush of press freedom.
If anything, the papers are growing yet more adventurous, and they are certainly not expensive, at between three and five kopecks (pence) a copy.
More probably, the mass desertion is another sign of how the people have lost faith in perestroika and its unfulfilled promises.
TRAINS moved vital supplies into Soviet Armenia yesterday, ending a blockade of more than a month by workers in neighbouring Azerbaijan, Reuter reports.
Tass news agency said hundreds of wagons rolled in to the southern Soviet republic bordering Turkey, three days after the Soviet parliament authorised the army to take over the railways.
Tass said the trains passed between Armenia and Azerbaijan, where workers have blockaded railways to press the Armenians to drop claims to the disputed territory of Nagorny-Karabakh.
The Week in Review: Foreign News
By FIONA LENEY
IT HAS been a week of mixed fortunes for the some of the world's more repressive regimes.
The exodus of East Germans continued: 18,000 streamed into West Germany before their country took belated action to plug the last hole in its borders by requiring visas for all future trips to Czechoslovakia.
East Germany's leader, Erich Honecker, did his best to pretend he had cured the malaise by expelling ‘anti-social elements, who have a bad attitude to work and also to normal living conditions’.
His purge has been West Germany's much-needed transfusion, as its 26,500 new citizens bring with them precious skills.
Although East Germany managed to staunch the flow on the eve of its 40th birthday, observers said it was still in danger of bleeding slowly to death, or of suffering convulsions brought on by repression on its streets.
Police beat back would-be emigrants as they tried to join sealed trains carrying their countrymen to the West, or sought refuge in the US embassy in East Berlin.
China's elderly leaders had salt liberally rubbed into their wounds by the Nobel Foundation, which awarded the Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama.
The Peace Committee cited not only his religious work but his ‘struggle for the liberation of Tibet’.
The parallels between the methods used to suppress unrest in Lhasa and those used to put down the student-led demonstrations in Peking made the award a double indictment of China's human-rights record.
The Chinese lashed out at the Nobel Prize Committee for meddling in China's affairs and ‘hurting the Chinese people's feelings’.
For Panama's General Noriega, the week could have ended with far more than hurt feelings, after junior officers mounted a coup against him.
But troops loyal to the general foiled the attempt and he emerged with his customary grin and triumphal air-punching.
The rebels had managed to seize the military headquarters and briefly take ‘Pineapple Face’ hostage.
But they refused to hand him over to the US for trial and the coup crumbled when American troops stationed in Panama retaliated by ignoring their pleas for help against loyal troops.
In the recriminations that followed the botched coup, pro- and anti-Noriega factions attacked the White House.
The first accused Washington of backing the failed coup; the second, complaining of the Bush ‘wimp factor’, said the United States had not done enough.
Denials of CIA involvement rang hollow in Washington, where the extent of the President's obsession with ousting General Noriega is common knowledge.
Tension between the Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan over administration of the bitterly-disputed region of Nagorny Karabakh threatened to erupt into full-scale confrontation.
The Azeris continued to block rail links with Armenia.
The Soviet parliament approved special measures allowing the military to take over the railways to get supplies through, but the army held off, apparently reluctant to trigger fresh protests.
Soviet newspapers said it was impossible even for convoys with a military escort to enter Nagorny Karabakh and compared the situation with Afghanistan.
President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines stood by her decision to forbid the return of Ferdinand Marcos's body for burial, saying his corpse still had a ‘malignant power’ which could be used by his followers to seize power.
The Marcos camp then applied to the Philippine Supreme Court to reverse the ban.
President Aquino said she would abide by the court's decision.
Show business has traditionally intruded on American news programmes, but it went a little far last week in the trial of the fallen televangelist, Jim Bakker.
Bakker was convicted of swindling followers of his Praise the Lord ministry out of more than $150m (£90m), some of which he used as hush money for his mistress, Jessica Hahn.
After the verdict his wife sang, in chorus with her supporters in the courtroom: ‘On Christ the solid rock I stand/ All other ground is sinking sand’.
Plans are reportedly afoot for a new soap called ‘Ministry’.
Even worse, Dan Rather, the CBS news anchorman once considered America's most trusted person, failed to answer accusations that he had aired fake battle footage and false news accounts of the Afghan war.
The charges were backed up by the BBC's Foreign News Editor, John Simpson, who said the film ‘had no feeling of reality’.
Seems you can't trust anyone nowadays.
Moscow and Kabul avoid UN flare-up
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York and AHMED RASHID in Lahore
THE SOVIET UNION and Pakistan remain bitterly divided as to how the conflict in Afghanistan should be resolved, despite having agreed on the wording for a United Nations resolution in the hope of avoiding a public row at the General Assembly, diplomats said yesterday.
Far from suggesting that the two sides were moving towards a new spirit of co-operation, the diplomats said they were a long way from calling for a ceasefire.
The resolution, drafted by the Islamic Conference group of countries, calls for ‘a comprehensive political solution’ and a ‘cessation of hostilities’but contains no initiatives of substance, diplomats said.
At Moscow's insistance the resolution includes a call for an end to the fighting between the mujahedin and the Kabul government, but the appeal for a ceasefire is made in the context of a broad political settlement being reached, the diplomats stressed.
The resolution will be adopted by acclamation.
In spite of a spate of speculative press reports, Soviet-Pakistan co-operation at the United Nations does not change Pakistan's unconditional support for the mujahedin and Soviet support for the Kabul regime.
Although the resolution appeals to the UN Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, to ‘encourage and facilitate’ a comprehensive political settlement on the basis of the Geneva Accords (which his Special Representative, Diego Cordovez, negotiated to cover the withdrawal of the Soviet army in January), he has so far hesitated to begin a new round of peace talks between the warring Afghan parties.
None the less, the consensus in the General Assembly will give Mr Perez de Cuellar scope to carry on behind-the-scenes negotiations with all sides in the conflict, to agree to a UN peace plan.
Western and Pakistani diplomatic sources said the UN secretariat hoped to bring together the six countries directly involved in the conflict — the US, the Soviet Union, China, Pakistan, Iran and Saudi Arabia — to accept the broad terms for a dialogue among the rival Afghan groups.
The main stumbling block to this was the US, which is committed to the overthrow of the Kabul regime by the mujahedin.
Last week, Mr Perez de Cuellar called for a ‘structured’ Afghan delegation representing all the Afghan factions to meet and organise an intra-Afghan dialogue.
He hopes to encourage President Najibullah to allow prominent Afghans in Kabul who do not belong to the ruling People's Democratic Party (PDPA) to represent the regime in this delegation.
But there has been no sign from Kabul that President Najibullah is at all in favour of the proposal.
India's royals get a taste for democracy: Once-mighty Maharajahs are still making their influence felt in an election battle for a pivotal seat, Tony Allen-Mills writes from Bharatpur
From TONY ALLEN-MILLS in Bharatpur
WHEN the Indian princes were at the height of their outrageous fortune, the Maharajah of Bharatpur had 24 Rolls-Royces in his garage.
He kept tiger and cheetah cubs as house pets and was famous for slaughtering ducks.
Fortune duly gave way to forfeit; the cars were sold, the duck marsh was turned into a bird sanctuary and the only tigers left in Bharatpur are stuffed.
Yet almost 30 years after Indira Gandhi stripped the princes of their titles, the ex-Maharajah of Bharatpur continues to exert a regal influence over the affairs of his former state.
As India's leading political parties shift into gear for the forthcoming general election campaign, no fewer than three of the ex-Maharajah's once-royal relatives are jostling for the right to contest the Bharatpur seat.
The scramble for aristocratic advancement in this mixed constituency of prosperous urban merchants, ambitious Jat farmers and the inevitable hordes of illiterate villagers reflects a striking fact of political life in the royal Indian state of Rajasthan.
For all their cruel, corrupt and reckless vices, the Maharajahs were worshipped as gods by tens of thousands of their subjects.
They may have lost their feudal rights and their privy purses, but in many of these formerly-gilded princedoms there remains a powerful bond between ex-rulers and ex-ruled.
Several former Maharajahs or their relatives have entered Parliament as elected MPs.
In princely strongholds such as Jaipur, Udaipur, Jodhpur and Bharatpur, politicians of both ruling and opposition parties have been busily courting aristocratic support this year.
‘The influence of the Maharajahs is probably not as great as they would like to think,’ observed a veteran republican in Bharatpur.
‘But it is certainly important enough not to be ignored.’
In Bharatpur, the competition between Rajiv Gandhi's ruling Congress (I) party and the assorted forces of the anti-Congress opposition is so finely poised, and the pool of royal admirers so deep, that three prominent relatives of Maharajah Brijendra Singh have slipped into a democratic version of an old autocratic vice: the royal family feud.
The sitting Bharatpur MP, K. Natwar Singh, is the grandson of the brother of a former Maharajah's wife.
Although he is a senior and successful Congress (I) figure, and is Minister of State for External Affairs, Mr Singh is being challenged for the ruling party's nomination by the present Maharajah's son, Vishwendra Singh.
An energetic and ambitious figure who was recently elected chairman of the local council, Vishwendra Singh has threatened to run independently if he is not selected.
Adding fuel to the fire is Deepa Kaur, the daughter of Rajah Man Singh, the Maharajah's late brother.
Behind Miss Kaur's prospective candidacy for the opposition Janata Dal party lies a family tragedy.
Her father was an eccentric, outspoken critic of the government, who was killed by police in 1985.
Enraged when supporters of a visiting Congress (I) chief minister tore down one of his family's red and yellow standards, the Rajah rammed the visitor's helicopter with his Jeep.
Police were sent to arrest him on a charge of attempted murder, but in the ensuing melee the Rajah was shot dead.
The death of the Rajah tainted the family's relationship with Natwar Singh and the Congress (I) party, and helped propel Miss Kaur into the opposition ranks.
Politicians on both sides in Bharatpur agree that if she is chosen as the Janata Dal candidate, she is certain to benefit from a sympathy vote, particularly in the nearby town of Deeg, where the Rajah died close to the extravagant summer palace formerly used by the family during monsoon months.
For the ordinary civilian politicians of Bharatpur, these complex family questions are tending to obscure what is looming as a tense election battle in a pivotal seat that both sides badly need to win.
The anti-Congress opposition won Bharatpur in 1967, lost it in 1971, won it again in 1977 and lost it again in 1980.
The seat is one of several in Rajasthan which the Janata Dal cannot afford to lose if the combined opposition forces are to oust Mr Gandhi from power.
Hoti Lal Parishar, the veteran chairman of the local Congress (I) committee, admits to some bemusement at the complications caused by Vishwendra Singh's challenge to the sitting MP.
‘There is no reason why Mr Natwar Singh should leave, but we have some internal difficulties,’ he confessed.
‘Some leaders are urging Vishwendra Singh to claim the ticket.’
He added somewhat forlornly: ‘The Maharajahs are always arguing over very little things.’
Mr Parishar is robustly confident that Congress (I) will regain the seat in any event.
That view is inevitably contested by Ram Kishen, 73, a socialist who won Bharatpur for the opposition in 1977, and who is a contender along with Miss Kaur for selection as candidate this year.
Mr Kishen prudently praised his royal rival, but he felt her appeal would be limited to Deeg and other rural areas where admiration for the ex-ruling family remains strong.
His own support, he asserted, was wider.
He agreed that without a friendly settlement of the candidate question and a unified opposition campaign, the Janata Dal could not hope to win.
Whoever ends up fighting the election, Mr Kishen suggested, royal parentage will not matter as much to Bharatpur voters as the government's abysmal record on rural development, inflation and corruption and its failure to fulfil promises made during the 1984 campaign.
Burmese hijackers free all hostages
From DENISE YOUNG of Reuters
U-TAPAO, Thailand — Hostages held by two students who hijacked a Burmese plane to Thailand were allowed to leave the plane one-by-one early this morning after an eight-hour drama, a Thai military official said.
The 50 passengers and crew were being let off the plane by the hijackers, who were armed with hand grenades, at intervals of seven minutes, the official added.
The first, wearing a traditional Burmese longyi, or sarong, and carrying an umbrella and a briefcase, was thoroughly searched by Thai security forces when he came down the plane steps.
Thai Deputy Prime Minister, Thienchai Sirisamphan, who held three rounds of negotiations with the hijackers, told reporters all the passengers were Burmese.
The domestic Burmese flight was hijacked shortly after taking off from Mergui in southern Burma, bound for Rangoon.
They had threatened to blow up the plane unless their demands for the release of political prisoners were met, but the deadline of 6pm passed without incident.
They demanded that the military government in Burma free all political prisoners, order troops back to barracks and lift an overnight curfew across the country.
Rangoon radio said the airliner was 20 minutes into its flight when it was taken over by what it called ‘terrorists disguised as passengers’.
Thousands of Burmese students were rounded up, hundreds were killed and others fled after the military took power last September to crush a national uprising for democracy.
Foreign travel is restricted by the government, which has pursued an isolationist course for a generation.
Bonn may sell two submarines to Israelis
From CAROL BERGER in Cairo
WEST GERMAN companies, despite the country's long-term ban on selling weapons to the Middle East, are considering the sale of two advanced submarines to Israel, using an American firm as a go-between in the transaction.
Egyptian officials, who scrupulously monitor parity with Israel on weapons procurement programmes financed by Washington, are making enquiries in Bonn to determine whether the proposed sale will go ahead.
Contract discussions have been under way since early this year, according to West German sources.
But no one associated with the pending $500m (£312m) sale would say whether the West German government has yet indicated its final approval.
The sale of the submarines to Israel would be technically in violation of strict West German export laws which prohibit military sales to zones of conflict.
On paper, however, the vessels would be on the order of the United States, enabling Israel to receive American financing and circumventing West German export restrictions.
An Egyptian military spokesman said the government had received no official notification of the reported negotiations on the sale, but is interested in obtaining further confirmation.
Egypt is the only Arab country to have signed a peace agreement with Israel.
Since the signing of the 1979 peace treaty, the US has sought to keep the military assistance component of its large foreign aid programme to Egypt and Israel on roughly equal terms.
Informed sources say that a sub-contract between an American company and the West Germans was signed in the US in mid-September.
Under the terms of the agreement, a consortium of the West German firms Howaldstwerke-Deutscheswerft (HDW) and Thyssen Nordsewerke is to supply two diesel-powered submarines to the US.
The sources said they understood the contract holder will be the US-based Ingalls Shipbuilding, a subsidiary of the defence conglomerate Litton Industries.
Ingalls has produced no submarines for more than 20 years.
A spokesman for the consortium lead firm, HDW in Kiel, confirmed that the contract for the two 1,550-tonne diesel-powered submarines had been signed.
Hans Saeger, the HDW submarine sales manager, expressed caution about the deal, saying that approval from the West German government was still being sought.
All German military exports must be approved by the Federal Security Council.
‘In such a phase, where final decisions have not been taken, nobody can say anything is for sure,’ Mr Saeger said.
Robert Knapp, a spokesman for Litton Industries in the US, said: ‘We are not providing the submarines.
We will have a very minor role in that programme.
Ingalls will provide some contract support, but we will not be involved in the programme management, the engineering, material procurement or production.’
On the West German law prohibiting military sales to zones of conflict, he said: ‘If such a law exists, it had no influence at all on our contractual relationship.
Our work with Israel is based purely on business considerations.
The submarine work is actually part of a much larger contract that we have with Israel to build three Corvettes for them, worth $300m (£187m), at the Ingalls yards in Mississippi.
That sale is being made through the US government's foreign military sales programme.
I believe that means the US government has a role in its funding and in the contractual arrangements for the sale.’
The West German vessel is considered the world's most sophisticated conventionally powered submarine, both in combat efficiency and ‘sustainability’ or battery storage capacity.
This enables underwater operation for long periods of time.
It is also well-suited for navigation in shallow seas.
The Dolphin-class submarine is considered a versatile platform for espionage activities, including violation of territorial lines, sensor laying, monitoring of underwater communications, interruption of communication signals and photography.
One Western military source said Israel's plans to acquire the submarines would ‘give impetus’ to Egyptian efforts to upgrade its anti-submarine capability.
Egypt's ageing fleet of 12 submarines is mostly composed of Chinese and Soviet-made Romeo-class vessels.
Egypt has requested financing for expensive refurbishment and modernisation from the United States, which provides some $1.6bn in military aid annually.
The US firm Tacoma Boat is in line to update two of the Egyptian navy's submarines with American components and financing.
The navy has also expressed its intention to purchase two derelict British-made Oberon submarines from the Immingham-based firm of Seaforth.
The two submarines were acquired by Seaforth through a Royal Navy disposal sale.
The 1960s vintage subs would require substantial refitting.
Two Swiss Red Cross workers kidnapped in Sidon
From CAROL BERGER in Cairo
A Muslim militiaman searches the boot of a car in Sidon yesterday after gunmen in the city kidnapped two Swiss Red Cross workers.
The abduction brings to 19 the number of Westerners missing and believed kidnapped in Lebanon 
Red Cross officials seized in Lebanon
From ROBERT FISK in Beirut
ALLEGATIONS that the Swiss government failed to pay kidnappers for the release of an abducted Red Cross official in Sidon last year may lie behind the seizure yesterday of two more Swiss delegates of the International Red Cross.
The two men, Emmanuel Christen and Elio Erriquez, were kidnapped by two masked gunmen only 300 yards from the Ein Helweh Palestinian camp, where the Red Cross runs an artificial limb centre.
Other Red Cross workers saw Mr Christen standing with his hands in the air, holding in one of them an artificial limb, before the gunmen took him away.
But the latest abductions may also be a deliberate attempt to embarrass the Palestine Liberation Organisation which controls most of the Palestinian areas of Sidon.
Abu Nidal's Palestinian extremist group, which maintains a close association with the Shia Muslim Hizbollah holding most of the Western hostages in Lebanon, is the most likely culprit.
A presumed member of Hizbollah, Ali Mohamed Hariri, is in prison in Switzerland for the murder of a Frenchman on board an Air Afrique airliner during a hijack attempt which ended in Geneva in July 1987 — and Hariri's release is said here to have been part of the price which the Swiss government secretly agreed to pay for the release of Peter Winkler, the Red Cross official who was freed in Sidon 10 months ago.
Several Red Cross officials believed that the Swiss government had foolishly offered to trade Hariri for Mr Winkler and had then reneged on its promise.
The return of the kidnapping plague to Lebanon — albeit to Sidon, an area which lies outside the control of the Syrian army — has grave implications.
After Mr Winkler was released last December, the 31 Swiss Red Cross delegates were withdrawn from the country.
Unless the two men kidnapped yesterday are speedily released, it will be difficult for Michel Dufour, the chief ICRC delegate in Lebanon, to avoid taking the same decision once again.
The abductions have served to emphasise not only the anarchical state of Sidon itself, which has been the scene of five recent inter-Palestinian assassinations, but the vast Palestinian guerrilla presence in the city.
Up to 10,000 armed Palestinians live in Sidon and the surrounding hills, and the PLO is bound to be accused by its enemies of involvement in the kidnappings at the very moment when President Mubarak of Egypt is trying to involve PLO supporters in peace talks with Israel.
Only a day earlier, another pro-Palestinian group calling itself the ‘soldiers of justice’-believed to be from Abu Nidal's organisation — had claimed responsibility in Beirut for the murder of the Belgian Jewish leader, Joseph Wybron.
Bush tripped up by Panama plot
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
A MUDDLED response and ambivalent attitudes in the Bush administration contributed to the failure of Tuesday's Panamanian coup, US officials now concede.
Despite official denials, it appears the US did agree to play a limited, and deniable, role in the rebellion.
US officials place most of the blame for the debacle on half-cock rebel tactics, and a lack of adequate advance consultation with Washington.
But the White House Chief of Staff, John Sununu, has started an inquiry into the administration's performance in one of its first efforts in foreign policy crisis management.
The administration's enemies, both on the Democratic left and the Republican right, were still circling yesterday hoping to draw political blood.
In a speech to the Senate on Thursday night, Senator Jesse Helms compared the US performance to that of ‘the keystone cops’.
President Bush defended his administration's cautious response, saying he had seen no facts since Tuesday which ‘would have made me make a different decision’.
But the official version of events has already changed several times.
Three days after the coup, the provisional picture which has emerged from carefully phrased official clarifications, and unofficial leaks, is that the Bush administration did not initiate the rebellion but knew about it at least two days in advance and had promised, or at least hinted at, limited support.
It appears the US policy was to assist the coup if it appeared likely to succeed; but to back away as soon as it seemed doomed to fail.
According to The Wall Street Journal, Washington first heard about the coup plans from the wife of the rebel leader, Major Moises Giroldi, nearly three weeks ago.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, insisted yesterday that Mrs Giroldi first contacted US officials on Sunday night.
But Mr Fitzwater did confirm that US officials had spoken directly to her husband, something previously denied.
US officials say privately that Washington promised the rebels that American troops would block two key roads leading to the headquarters of the Panamanian Defence Forces (PDF).
The Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, said yesterday that no formal pledge was given to the rebels but US troops were moved into place on both roads on Tuesday morning, ready to intervene if Washington decided that they should.
Military experts suggested yesterday that the US was hoping its troops would be attacked by the pro-Noriega forces, allowing Washington to claim that it was attacked first and forced to intervene.
In the event, the ‘loyal’ battallions took both the rebels and the US troops by surprise by using other roads, and possibly short-hop airlifts, to attack the rebels at army headquarters.
The coup leaders belatedly asked for additional US help.
Washington had still to respond when the coup petered out.
One theory is that the US was at a loss to know how to deal with the rebels becuase it had, indeed, been plotting a Panamanian coup, but not this coup.
Larry Birns, director of the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, quoting US government sources, said ‘the United States was conspiring with a different and more senior group of conspirators’.
He said that Colonel Guillermo Wong, arrested by General Noriega after the rebellion failed, was part of the US plot, but not part of Tuesday's abortive coup.
This version of events is denied by the White House.
Another subject on which intense confusion remains is whether or not the US was ever offered a chance to apprehend General Noriega (wanted in Florida on drugs charges).
Senator Jesse Helms, the arch-conservative North Carolinian Republican, says he was told by the CIA, as well as sources within Panama, that the rebels did offer to surrender General Noriega to the US.
White House officials insist this is a misunderstanding; US interest in the coup evaporated rapidly when the rebels made it clear that they would not hand over Noriega.
Officials admit that the administration response was muddled but blame poor intelligence-gathering in Panama.
‘This is our first blood-letting, if you will, our first real-time crisis operation,’ said an official.
Noriega threatens to fight ‘enemies within'
From CHRIS MCGREAL in Panama City
PANAMA'S military government yesterday stepped up its verbal assault against enemies at home and abroad after putting down a coup led by some of the country's most senior officers.
General Manuel Noriega's Justice and Interior Minister, Olmedo Mirando, said in an interview that he was going to ‘get rid of our enemies within the administration’.
He went on: ‘They are a fifth column, and we cannot permit that.
We are going to change the law to allow us to get rid of people.
I do not want to say that we are going to get rid of everyone, only those who are our enemies.
People cannot be protected by the law when they are conspiring against the government.’
Mr Mirando said that a government council had already overturned a law protecting diplomatic service personnel from dismissal.
On Thursday night more than 30 paramilitary thugs and soldiers ransacked the opposition coalition headquarters, where Guillermo Endara, the winner of May's annulled presidential election, was in the 16th day of a hunger strike.
Troops fired teargas and shots as they smashed their way in, beat reporters with rubber hoses and steel bars, confiscated camera equipment and stripped journalists of hundreds of dollars at gunpoint.
Yesterday Mr Endara, who had apparently been allowed to escape, took refuge in the Papal Nuncio's home.
‘This hunger-striking buffoon sneaks out to eat so he can be well fed when he takes over the presidency, but he is screwed,’ General Noriega said of his opponent.
The military leader saved some of his most scathing remarks for the White House, which he said faced another ‘Bay of Pigs’.
The 12,000 American troops in Panama remained on the highest state of alert and largely confined to their bases.
The crisis, ironically enough, coincided with the US military's ‘Hispanic Awareness Month’.
Panamanian public opinion has shifted from disbelief to bitterness at the failure of the US to back the abortive coup.
Businessmen who support General Noriega have offered a $250,000 (£156,000) reward for the assassination of six of the general's enemies, according to a letter published yesterday in a pro-government newspaper, AP reports.
The threats, presented as a letter from unnamed businessmen to a columnist of the Critica daily, could not immediately be confirmed.
Angola ceasefire ‘ready to sign’
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
SOME GENTLE arm-twisting from President Bush appeared yesterday to have persuaded the Angolan rebel leader, Jonas Savimbi, to accept a resumption of a ceasefire in the Angolan civil war, and to re-open the peace process with the Soviet-backed government in Luanda.
Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, said a ceasefire accord between the Angolan government and Mr Savimbi was ready to be signed.
‘The ceasefire text is ready,’ Mr Mobutu told a news conference.
‘It remains just to sign it.
When I return to my country I will start a discussion between the two parties.’
Mr Mobutu said on Thursday he believed he could produce an agreement this month, after Mr Savimbi had had a week of talks with US officials, including 30 minutes with President Bush, and agreed to accept Mr Mobutu as mediator between his Unita guerrilla organisation and the Luanda government.
In two sessions, one with Mr Mobutu on Wednesday, and another with Mr Savimbi on Thursday, Mr Bush apparently persuaded both leaders to drop earlier disagreements and resume the negotiations to end Angola's 14-year civil war.
In making his diplomatic push, Mr Bush agreed to continue US support for Unita, which has been receiving a covert aid programme of between $40-$50m (£25-£30m) a year.
He also apparently succeeded in persuading Mr Mobutu to resume delivery of these military supplies to Unita through Zaire.
Mr Mobutu had cut the supply route after a dispute with Mr Savimbi.
The Angolan guerrillas refused to attend an 18 September meeting in Zaire to discuss the peace process, which started with a ceasefire last June.
But that ceasefire fell apart after Mr Savimbi learned that Mr Mobutu and seven other African leaders felt the Unita leader should go into ‘temporary and voluntary’ exile and integrate his Unita movement into Angola's single party Marxist-Leninist system.
Unita has been proposing a ceasefire followed by an interim coalition government and winner-take-all free elections.
The US supports Mr Savimbi's position.
A White House statement noted the United States' 'longstanding support for a ceasefire and face-to-face negotiations, and, ultimately free and fair elections'.
Mr Savimbi says he has no intention of going into exile, or of integrating his forces.
‘Why are we going to surrender?
What is this reason?’ he asked.
‘When we are strong why should we say we are going into exile, running away?
I am leaving behind my people who have fought a 14-year resistance; that would not be accepted.
That would not be reasonable.’
Mr Savimbi said yesterday that he would meet Mr Mobutu ‘very soon’, but set no specific date.
Menace in the air at capital's drug trial
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
AT one o'clock in the morning a petrol bomb shattered the window in Kathy Sellers' front room, shooting flames across the floor and up the curtains.
Ms Sellers was not at home.
She was under police custody waiting to continue her testimony against the man alleged to be Washington's most powerful drug lord, Rayful Edmond III.
Mr Edmond and 10 others are accused of running an extended ‘crew’ of drug dealers who controlled up to 40 per cent of the city's cocaine trade.
Security has been tight at the court, but there has been one threat against a juror, a bomb threat against the judge and now the firebombing directed at a key witness.
Mr Edmond has the dubious honour of being tried by the District of Columbia's first anonymous jury.
The courtroom itself was specially constructed with an inch-thick wall of bullet-proof glass to separate the principals in the case from reporters and spectators.
Last week Judge Charles Richey attempted to bar the public from the proceedings as a further security measure, but he was overruled by a higher court.
The Edmond family is reported to have been running crime rings, in a small way, for generations.
But since Rayful's father started him off in the business with a packet of cocaine from New York, prosecutors allege that Mr Edmond has built up a vast business concern, generating sales of up to $2m (£1.25m) a week.
Police have linked the crew to 30 murders; Mr Edmond is charged with three.
‘It resembled the structure of traditional organised crime, of La Cosa Nostra,’ said the prosecuting attorney Jay Stephens.
But the ‘godfather’ in this case is only 24 years old.
He allegedly became Washington's ‘Mr Big’ by finding a steady supplier in Los Angeles who could provide drugs in almost unlimited quantities.
Yesterday the jury donned headphones to begin listening to four months worth of FBI wiretaps of the Edmond headquarters.
The trial, in which 200 witnesses are due to testify, is expected to last another six weeks.
De Klerk to meet Tutu and Boesak
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
JOHANNESBURG (Reuter)— President FW de Klerk said yesterday that he would meet anti-apartheid churchmen — including Archbishop Desmond Tutu — next Wednesday, the first sign that he will live up to election promises of entering into talks with recognised black leaders.
The president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, Allan Boesak, and Frank Chikane, the secretary-general of the South African Council of Churches, will also attend the Pretoria meeting.
Archbishop Tutu said in a statement that he had asked to see the President in an effort to spell out what the white minority government must do to resolve South Africa's political crisis.
‘Church leaders are convinced that (Mr de Klerk) does not appreciate the far-reaching nature of the steps he must take to get negotiations off the ground,’ the archbishop said.
‘Negotiations which exclude the legitimate leaders of our people, which the government appears to be contemplating, will intensify, not resolve, our country's crisis.’
He described himself and his colleagues as facilitators who would try to help create the climate for negotiations.
In a significant concession to the black union movement, the government yesterday granted permission for International Labour Day — 1 May — to be celebrated as a public holiday.