

In the Garden Update: Prize fruit and veg
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
PRIZES will be awarded for the best carnations and bonsai at the Royal Horticultural Society's show in Greycoat Street, London SW1, to be held this Tuesday (11am-7pm, admission £2.50) and Wednesday (10am-5pm, admission £1.50).
There will also be displays of autumn fruit and vegetables.
In the Garden Update: Growing classes
Weekend Garden Page 43
In the Garden Update: Weekend work
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
SECATEURS are likely to be the tool most in demand now.
The summer's sprawl begins to be oppressive at this stage in the year and trigger fingers are itching to snip back overgrown mallows, clear out the mildewing foliage of golden rod and reduce the overpowering bulk of bullyboy ground cover.
Keep away from jasmine, already thick in flower bud, and clematis, however untidy.
Buddleias, although messy, should not be cut back until spring.
Dead, ragged heads of the climbing hydrangea can be removed, cutting where the stem joins the main branch.
Virginia creeper needs to be clipped back from windows and hauled out of gutters.
Mulching is a pleasant activity for October.
It can be done in spring too, but there are usually more pressing jobs then.
Shrubs such as hydrangea particularly relish rich rations.
It is a good time to plant hardy shrubs too.
Clematis so bristles with brittle green shoots in spring that planting then is an anxiety rather than a pleasure.
Runner beans and French beans have now given up completely and can be cleared off vegetable plots.
Globe artichokes are sprouting new leaves and may need protection from frost in cold areas.
Summer bedding is looking tired and should be removed so that the ground can be cleaned and fed ready for spring bulbs or wallflowers.
In the Garden: Planning to beat a leafy retreat at home: In the first of a series for novice gardeners, Anna Pavord stresses the value of careful forethought
By ANNA PAVORD
PLANTS should come a long way down the list of priorities for the novice gardener.
There are many things to think about before even the first tentative daffodil bulb is sunk into the ground.
The first and most important question to mull over as you gaze at your patch is: What is this garden for?
If you start writing down some of the responses to that question, you will find you have along the way acquired a ragbag of elements that will have an important bearing on the design.
If there are small children in the equation, there will need to be a flat, soft area where they can fall off swings and climbing frames.
If you like hanging out washing rather than drying it in the bowels of an expensive machine, you will need to tuck away a line and make a dry path to get to and from it.
Some novice gardeners may not want to do much actual gardening at all, but conversely, do not want to look out every day over a scene of threadbare grass and rotting fence.
Their ideal garden will look good and demand little attention.
If you are a dedicated sun-worshipper, you need to mark out the part of the garden where the sun lingers longest.
It may not be the part nearest the house, though this is where sitting out areas always tend to be made.
You may, even as a novice, care so passionately about plants that all you want is the maximum space to grow them in.
Raised beds built down an unpromising alley could provide extra gardening space.
Privacy is an important consideration.
A first time garden is usually small and certainly the typical one I am imagining for this series is no more than 40ft x 20ft and surrounded on all sides by other houses.
Privacy is a ticklish business where close neighbours are concerned.
To throw up an impenetrable Berlin Wall between you and them could be tactless.
Trellis is a useful compromise and you can always pretend it was forced on you by the speed of growth of your climbing rose.
Aesthetes among the novices will by now be thoroughly irritable and complaining that gardens should have as much to do with the soul as with the necessity or not of a washing line or a barbecue pit.
So they should, and when the list of necessities is securely written down, you can ask the second question: How do I want this garden to feel?
This question produces as varied a response as the first.
Some urban gardeners, as short of space inside as they are out, want their gardens to be extensions of their homes, with a great deal of hard paving, good furniture and lighting.
The garden for them should feel like an extra sitting room, gnat-ridden perhaps, damp occasionally, but an important overflow of living space.
Closet countrysiders may want to pretend their patch is actually a corner of some Sussex meadow and picture it swagged with honeysuckle and waving with ox-eye daisies and scabious.
This is a difficult trick to bring off with suburban trains hurtling by on one side and lorries grinding through their gears on the other.
A leafy retreat is an excellent goal for a small town garden, but it is best made acknowledging the urban setting, using un-wild plants such as bamboo, acanthus, fig, vine, alchemilla, euphorbia, wisteria.
While you are working through this process, take note of the features in the garden that you would like to keep.
On a new estate, there may be nothing.
In an old garden, there may be a fruit tree, or a good bulwark of evergreen laurel or box that, tidied up, could add a dash of venerability to the new garden that will emerge around it.
If you do not know what a tree or shrub is, exercise clemency and give it a year's grace to demonstrate its worth before you turn it over to the axeman.
The mood of the garden will dictate its eventual style.
It may be clipped classical, random cottage, modern high-tech, or some intensely personal vision of Byzantium, that no one has ever imagined before, but which exists in your head and wants to get out.
Do not let anybody, particularly gardening writers, tread on your dreams.
All this thinking and doodling will have done nothing physically to change the view outside the window, but it is a vital part of the gardening process.
Before you can make, you have to know what it is you are making.
In the Garden: Drawing the line at great design: Anna Pavord delves into a book that reveals the gardens architects have imagined could accompany their creations
By ANNA PAVORD
THE drawings of the Royal Institute of British Architects form one of the less well-known collections in London.
Architectural historians have already raided it to good effect, notably Mark Girouard for his book on the sixteenth-century architect Robert Smythson and Jill Lever, the curator of the collection, for the book she wrote with Margaret Richardson, The Art of the Architect.
Jane Brown is the latest to emerge triumphant from the RIBA library in Portman Square with The Art and Architecture of English Gardens (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, £40).
She looks at the collection with a view to its bearing on garden history.
Her book is not a comprehensive history of English garden design, but a much chancier, though equally delightful narrative depending for its emphasis on what happened to find its way into the collection.
These quirks of fate, combined with Jane Brown's own enthusiasms (she is the author of a fine book on the Lutyens-Jekyll partnership) have resulted in a narrative in which the gardens of the Arts and Crafts movement, a relatively short period between 1890-1914, get twice the space of the gardens of either the eighteenth or the nineteenth century.
This is fine by me.
The talented crew of Voysey, Newton, Baillie Scott, who created the beautifully put together houses of that period, evidently also had the gift of persuasively selling their ideas.
Who could have resisted Charles Voysey's design for Oakhurst, Ropes Lane, Fernhurst in Sussex?
A pool of blue scillas lies to the left of an entrance through yew hedges.
The house is softened by sprawls of climbing roses.
Hollyhocks and wallflowers tower over the gaily filled flower border.
His client, Mrs Chester, sensibly did not resist and the house was built in 1901.
Oliver Hill's plan (1913) for the paving of the water garden at Moor Close, Binfield, Berkshire, shows staggering attention to detail.
Red tile set on edge was to be used for the centrepiece, Portland stone for the surround, brown pebble paving for an infill, blue and white pebbles to make a star design, white marble for the path through the pergola.
The plan, beautifully drawn and lettered, as are all the plans of this period, is particularly poignant.
No architect gardeners came this way again.
The story told in Jane Brown's book does not end with the Arts and Crafts movement, however.
It continues with the relatively little known work of the Modern Movement, curtailed by the war, through the idealistic beginnings of the Span housing estates in the mid-Fifties, to Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe's plan, now being executed, for the Moody Botanic Gardens at Galveston, Texas.
Sixteen drawings for this massive project form the book's final chapter ‘Towards the 21st Century’.
After this chronological march through the archives, Jane Brown devotes the second part of her weighty book to the delightfully rich seam of garden buildings and ornament designed over the last 400 years.
Here is Sir Jeffry Wyatville's design for a Swiss Cottage to be built at the Duke of Bedford's rural retreat, Endsleigh, Devon.
The ‘bijou rustic pavilion’ as he describes it, still survives and has recently been restored by the Landmark Trust.
Here too is Lutyens's design for a fowl house, a wooden building perched on staddle stones with lantern and a thatched roof, a residence to please the most demanding chicken.
Architectural drawings may seem dry fodder to provide the stuff of an exciting book.
Jane Brown's gift is to vault the divide that has unfortunately grown up between architects and the rest of us and bring their drawings alive in the most agreeable and informative way.
One does not always agree with her.
She commends Barry for ‘his ability to build well and to last’, but Barry's work at Kingston Lacey in Dorset and elsewhere was outrageously shoddy.
She credits the Crystal Palace built by Joseph Paxton for the Great Exhibition in 1851 as the inspiration for later conservatories and ‘the whole future of growing plants indoors’.
The revolution in glasshouses had surely started rather earlier than that with the radical design built in 1820 by W&D Bailey of Holborn for Lady Rolle at Bicton in Devon.
But these are quibbles, and in no way detract from Jane Brown's achievement.
This is a fascinating book.