

Court Circular
By ANNA PAVORD
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 6 October: Brigadier RW Morris (Representative Honorary Colonel of the Royal Australian Army Ordnance Corps) and Mrs Morris had the honour of being received by The Queen.
The Duke of Edinburgh was represented by the Countess Mountbatten of Burma at the Memorial Service for Marjorie, Countess of Brecknock, which was held in the Guards Chapel, today.
The Duke of Edinburgh was represented by Mr Peter Coni at the Memorial Service for Mr Thomas Keller which was held in St Peter's Church, Zurich, this afternoon.
6 October: The Duke of York, Trustee, this evening attended the 10th Anniversary Dinner of the Friends of Lakefield College School at the Cavalry and Guards Club, Piccadilly, London W1.
6 October: The Prince Edward, Chairman of The Duke of Edinburgh's Award Special Projects Group, this evening attended receptions in Edinburgh at the New Club and at the Dominion Cinema.
His Royal Highness was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for the City of Edinburgh (Mrs Eleanor McLaughlin, the Right Hon the Lord Provost) and was attended by Major William McLean.
6 October: The Princess Royal today visited Avon, and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Avon (Sir John Wills Bt).
Her Royal Highness, Patron, The Home Farm Trust, visited the Home Farm Trust's Registered Office, Merchants House North, Wapping Road, Bristol.
The Princess, President of the Missions to Seamen, then visited the Avonmouth International Seafarers' Centre, Gloucester Road, Avonmouth.
In the afternoon Her Royal Highness, Patron of The Butler Trust, visited HM Prison Leyhill, Wotton under Edge.
Afterwards The Princess, President of the Save the Children Fund, attended a reception with employees of Halifax Property Services, and opened their Headquarters building at Great Weston Business Park, Yate, Bristol.
This evening The Princess Royal, President of the Save the Children Fund, attended a reception at Chavenage House, Tetbury, in celebration of the Fund's 70th Anniversary, and was received on arrival by Colonel David Lowsley-Williams (Deputy Lieutenant of Gloucestershire).
Mrs Richard Carew Pole was in attendance.
The Princess Royal, President, Federation Equestre Internationale, was represented by Mr Rene Ziegler (Director, Federation Equestre Internationale) at the Memorial Service for Mr Thomas Keller (President of the International Rowing Federation and GAISF Honorary President) which was held in St Peter's Church, Zurich, this afternoon.
KENSINGTON PALACE 6 October: The Prince of Wales, President, Business in the Community, held a meeting with members of Business in the Community which was followed by a luncheon at the Palace of Holyroodhouse.
His Royal Highness, attended by Mr Guy Salter, travelled in the Royal Train.
6 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon this afternoon visited Up Hatherley, Cheltenham, and was received on arrival at Staverton Airport by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Gloucestershire (Colonel Martin Gibbs).
Her Royal Highness was present at a Service at the Church of St Philip and St James during the Parish Preaching Mission.
The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Mrs Jane Stevens.
6 October: The Duchess of Gloucester, Colonel-in-Chief, The Royal Army Educational Corps, this evening attended the Officers' Annual Dinner at Eltham Palace, London SE9.
Mrs Howard Page and Major Nicholas Barne were in attendance.
Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, was represented by Major Nicholas Barne at the Memorial Service for Marjorie, Countess of Brecknock, which was held in the Guards Chapel today.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent were represented by Captain the Honourable Christopher Knollys at the Memorial Service for Marjorie, Countess of Brecknock which was held in the Guards Chapel, today.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess Royal, Patron, The British Nutrition Foundation, today visits the Foundation's Conference for Teachers of Nutrition at Exeter Court Hotel, Kenford, Exeter, Devon; as President, The Save the Children Fund, visits the Save the Children Fund Shop, 17 Paris Street, Exeter, Devon; and, as President, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, attends and presents the Annual Tribute Award at the Odeon, Leicester Square, London W1.
Princess Margaret, Patron of the Halle Concerts Society, tomorrow attends a performance by the Halle Orchestra at Henbury Hall, Macclesfield.
The Duke of Gloucester, President, British Consultants Bureau, tomorrow accompanies a mission to Portugal.
Faith and Reason: We know only that God is a mystery: In the fourth article in our series on the mutability of God, Herbert McCabe OP argues that neither change nor stasis are applicable to God's ‘human’ suffering
By HERBERT MCCABE OP
THE MUDDLES all come from thinking you could have a better idea of God or a worse one or any idea of God at all.
In Jewish, Christian and Islamic tradition the word ‘God’ is used for God not because its meaning is thought to correspond to the nature of God, but simply as a convenient label for the ultimate, altogether incomprehensible mystery because of which things exist instead of there not being anything at all.
This is not, of course, the only or the first or the commonest use of the word; we have borrowed it from people who believe in gods.
In our tradition we think it appropriate, and indeed urgent, to ask the vertiginous question about Creation: ‘Why is there anything instead of nothing?’
If it is sensible to ask this question it has an answer — even though we have not the faintest idea what that answer is — we simply label it ‘God’.
What are called ‘proofs for the existence of God’ are not attempts to show that there must be a divine kind of thing (we have no concept of a divine kind of thing), they just seek to show that if and when all other questions were answered we would still be left with this mystery: and this is what we shall call ‘God’.
We know of innumerable kinds of things that could not possibly be the answer to our question; we know, then, what God is not, but nothing at all of what God is.
We know some things about what God does, for once we recognise that there is this mystery we recognise that all that is is God's doing — though we have no understanding of what it is for God to ‘do’.
Faith, moreover, means that we are sure that God speaks to us.
In hearing that word we recognise yet more astounding things that God does — like summoning us to share in the mystery of his own life.
Yet more astonishingly we learn that the word of God is made flesh and is one of us and that God himself is tortured to death and that through our suffering and death we can share in God's suffering and thereby, in some utterly incomprehensible way, in his life.
It is this sharing in the suffering of God that is so convincingly and magnificently expressed in Margaret Spufford's recent book, Celebration.
It is, however, central to the Christian tradition that the suffering of God is the human suffering of the cross.
It is historical and of our world.
The suffering of God is not incomprehensible — except in the weaker sense that all human life is incomprehensible by contrast, say, with crystals or tides.
The suffering of God is not eternal and infinite; it is human and limited and the same kind of suffering as that of Auschwitz or of cerebral meningitis.
We can at least begin to understand the human life and affection and anger and doubts and suffering and death of God in a way that we could not possibly begin to understand what it means for him to be God.
The muddled thinking that makes us claim at least some vague idea of what God is leads us disastrously to thinking that if we say God cannot be one kind of thing we must be saying he is the other.
But if we (rightly) say that God has to be unchangeable we do not mean he is static any more than if we say ‘The Equator’ is not the name of a poison we mean that it is safe to eat it.
Neither change nor stasis, in any sense we could possibly understand, can have any application to whatever it is we label ‘God’.
If we were to use the word ‘God’ to mean something subject to change we would have ceased to use it in the Jewish-Christian-Islamic sense to refer to the mystery of Creation.
What we spoke of would be a part of, an inhabitant of, the changing inter-acting universe and not the source of all meaning and being.
Of course there are, and ought to be, a thousand images of God in which we represent him as changing his mind, forgetting, being angry, being him, doing all kinds of creaturely things; our language of worship, of gratitude for existence, has to be full of such metaphors and images; we must take these metaphors seriously, but if we take them literally, if we mistake these images for God, we are idolaters.
The genius of the Council of Chalcedon, in saying that Jesus is one person in both divine and human natures, was that it denied that the incarnation implied anything about the nature of God (the meaning of ‘God’), asserting simply that God, the mystery of Creation, is become a human being — not a divine kind of human being but a human kind of human being.
It is the mystery of Creation, the God of all Jews not some new ‘Christian’ God, the God who is not a god but the mystery at the centre of all being who transcends all beings, He who Is, that hung in torment from the cross and died.
In the mainstream Christian tradition it is the human suffering of God (of God, not some limited, changeable, process-god) that redeems our agonised world.
It is not, however, precisely by suffering as such that this redemption is brought about.
(I am about to re-read Celebration to see whether Dr Spufford ever really suggests any such thing.)
We are saved through the loving obedience of Jesus which is not just a mental state but is expressed and only could be expressed in bodily pain and death.
The world is redeemed because of the sanctity of this man Jesus, because of the love for his Father and for his sisters and brothers which made him totally accept his mission from the Father.
He was sent to be, commanded to be, the first completely human being, the first to be wholly at one with the human race, to be, therefore, wholly at risk from us, to be the victim, the scapegoat on whom we could project our guilt and our fear of being human, of being loved.
His willingness to accept violation and destruction at our hands out of love for us the loving obedience to his Father is the darkness of the aboriginal prayer, the prayer that makes sense of any other prayer, the mystery of hope at the heart of hopelessness that Dr Spufford refers to in the death of Robert Aske.
This is the inarticulate prayer that is answered (we read in Philippians) in the resurrection, the redemption of all human suffering, of all mortality.
The prayer of Jesus from the heart of the suffering world is not something in the mind, it is his accepted bodily agony and it is by being given the grace to accept our material weakness and pain and finally our death in union with him that we too can pray.
That is why the prayer of the Church as such, the Eucharistic meal which expresses and celebrates joyfully the community of the Church and the ultimate unity of humankind is the sacrament of bodily suffering, of the sacrificial death of Christ at our hands.
It is the sign of our redeemed and forgiven sin in being the sacrament of our unity in love.
For it was on the night he was betrayed that he took bread and broke it and said: ‘This is my body for you’.
Obituary: Witold Rowicki
By RICHARD BERNAS
ONE OF the finest conductors of his generation, Witold Rowicki had the good fortune to play a central role in his country's musical reconstruction after the Second World War.
In 1945 the newly formed Communist government appointed him head of music for Polish radio, based in the southern city of Katowice.
There Rowicki created the Polish Radio Symphony Orchestra, building it from scratch and directing it for the next five years.
He then moved on to Warsaw where he undertook an even more arduous task, that of reconstructing the Warsaw Philharmonic and supervising the rebuilding of its concert hall from the musical and acoustic standpoint.
At the inauguration of the hall in 1955, Rowicki's orchestra was officially renamed the National Philharmonic.
With the exception of three years in the mid-Fifties, Rowicki continued as its artistic director and principal conductor until 1977.
For a short period from 1952 to 1954 he was Professor of Conducting at the Warsaw Conservatoire.
From 1965 to 1970 Rowiecki also served as musical director of the Theatr Wielki, Warsaw's huge opera and ballet theatre, and presided over the opening performance of the reconstructed building in 1965, conducting Moniuszko's Straszny Dwor (' The Haunted House', a characteristically Polish mix of folklore and Bellinian melody).
But the exigencies of operatic life did not really appeal to one of his perfectionist standards.
He preferred touring with his orchestra and, increasingly, guest conducting abroad.
In London he appeared with the Philharmonia, RPO and LSO (with whom he recorded all the Dvorak symphonies), and he also worked with the Vienna Philharmonic, Cleveland Orchestra and Orchestre de Paris.
It is as an advocate of twentieth-century music that Rowicki may best be remembered.
Building on the Warsaw Philharmonic's pre-war advocacy of such Polish composers as Szymanowski (of whose Third Symphony and ballet Harnasie he made particularly strong recordings), Rowicki moulded the orchestra into a responsive vehicle for an exceptionally talented native generation: collaborations with Penderecki, Gorecki, Lutoslawski and a dozen other composers were a regular feature of the National Philharmonic's concert season and not just confined to the Warsaw Autumn festival of contemporary music.
Rowicki's early training reflected this.
Although he took his diploma from the Krakow Conservatoire in violin, he studied composition there as well and a number of works, including a symphony (1957) and a concerto for orchestra (1976) to his credit.
Of his study visits to pre-war Vienna, his strongest memories were not of virtuosos but of composers conducting, notably Richard Strauss directing his operas and Anton Webern the symphonies of Mahler.
As with Hermann Scherchen and Hans Rosbaud in Germany, contemporary music was nothing unusual, but rather an integral part of his repertoire.
In rehearsal Rowicki's method was one of a patient but relentless taskmaster.
He never rehearsed the performance, but rather the technique of the music, leaving his emotional response to the inspiration of the concert and expecting a well-prepared orchestra to be entirely responsive to this.
Working with an ensemble he had built in a hall whose construction he had supervised, he could afford to be as relaxed as he wished, and also as demanding.
Rehearsals for important premieres, such as the first Polish performance of Shostakovich's Fourteenth Symphony at an inaugural concert of the Warsaw Autumn, could take many weeks.
I remember a short, rhythmically complex passage patiently unpicked and reconstituted over half an hour.
After what seemed its thirty-fifth repetition, Rowicki put down his baton, looked up and spoke to the ceiling in a low-pitched, conversational tone: ‘Everyone can now play this correctly except Mr X’(the fourth inside desk cellist).
The ceiling obviously had a word with Mr X, who was note perfect the next day.
Appointments
Gazette Page 18
Anniversaries
By RICHARD BERNAS
On this day: the Battle of Lepanto was fought, 1571; The Independent was first published, 1986.
Today is the Feast Day of St Artaldus or Arthaud, St Helan of Cornwall, St Justina of Padua, St Mark, pope, and St Osyth.
On this day: King's College, London, was opened, 1831; Charles Nessler first used a permanent waving machine on a woman's hair, 1905; Britain's tallest building, the Post Office Tower in London, opened, 1965; Britain's first legal commercial radio station, LBC, started transmitting, 1973.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 18
Obituary: Jacques Doniol-Valcroze (CORRECTED)
By DAVID SHIPMAN
Correction (published 9 October 1989) incorporated into this article.
AS A FILM-MAKER, Jacques Doniol-Valcroze was only a minor member of the nouvelle vague but by virtue of being — with Andre Bazin — the founder and editor of Cahiers du Cinema he was one of the driving forces behind the movement.
He had already edited several popular movie magazines, but it was because of Bazin's reputation as a theoretician that this new one, more highbrow, attracted from its first publication in 1951 a group of young, enthusiastic and iconoclastic critics.
By the middle of the decade, they had formulated their auteur theory, which gave a new gloss to film studies.
They claimed that the director was the sole author of his films, and that the more strongly his personality and preoccupations were found in them, the greater he was.
With the exception of Hitchcock, whom they worshipped, they had little time for accepted and acclaimed directors, finding more value in the more commercial movies of, for instance, Howard Hawks and Raoul Walsh.
With a vigour amounting to tactlessness they put dissension and argument into film debate, too long overshadowed by blind acceptance of yesteryear's taste.
It took as long again for their theories to be discredited, despite the fact that almost none of their Hollywood idols would agree that they were the sole auteur of the films they made; while the greatest weakness of their belief was that the most flawed work by one of their preferred film-makers was of more interest than a major piece by one of those they did not rate.
Years later one of Cahiers' most influential critics, Jean-Luc Godard, admitted that none of them had really believed in the theory, but had used it to draw attention to themselves.
Along with Francois Truffaut, Claude Chabrol and other contributors, he became a director himself, and the brilliance of their early work was one of the reasons their views became so firmly enshrined.
Both as critics and film-makers their creed was so consistent as to encourage producers to contact any of their colleagues, and after the international success of such films as A Bout de Souffle, Hiroshima Mon Amour and Les Quatre Cents Coups, Doniol-Valcroze was able to make his feature debut in 1960 with L'Eau a la Bouche.
It was, alas, only too derivative, but given its auteur's antecedents everyone was prepared to give him a second chance.
Like his peers, he had already — since 1955 — been making shorts: unlike the most celebrated of them, he was to prove only moderately talented.
Indeed, only the first of the seven features Doniol-Valcroze made was shown publicly in this country.
He also published a novel, acted in movies and assisted on the screen plays of others; but he did not direct again after 1974, perhaps because a much-anticipated family saga, La Maison des Bories, reveals many of the faults of those film-makers swept away by the nouvelle vague, and none of the movement's freshness.
This last quality was, however, manifest in his second (and best) film, Le Coeur Battant (1961), a witty and enchanting comedy about a couple in a small seaside resort — she (Francoise Brion) waiting for her lover to arrive and he (Jean-Louis Trintignant) gradually falling in love with her but refusing to admit it even to himself.
With the possible exception of Louis Malle, none of that generation of French movie-makers was too happy with more grandiose material: sitting through some of Doniol-Valcroze's later films, one longed more and more for the simplicity of that one.