

Council inquiry
By DAVID SHIPMAN
(First Edition) Two senior council officers were suspended on full pay pending an inquiry into a chain of consultancy companies they set up on public health, waste management, food hygiene and urban renewal.
Frank Reynolds, 57, head of Birmingham City Council's health department and his deputy, Keith Hunter, face disciplinary proceedings.
Benefit cash
By DAVID SHIPMAN
Spending on cash benefits for long-term sick and disabled people now totals £7.3bn, a 90 per cent increase in real terms since 1978-79, Nicholas Scott, Minister for the Disabled, said.
Heart first
By DAVID SHIPMAN
A 43-year-old man underwent the first heart transplant operation at the London Hospital, Whitechapel.
The operation was performed by a surgical team led by Mr Alan Wood.
MP to retire
Home News Page 2
Man dies in blast
By DAVID SHIPMAN
An investigation is under way into an gas explosion at a block of flats in Dagenham, east London, in which a man died.
Police said that although the explosion was not thought to have been an accident no one was being sought.
Party conference
By DAVID SHIPMAN
Plans to prevent acid house parties in the South-east were drawn up at a meeting of senior police officers and council leaders.
Policemen from Kent, Sussex, and London met representatives from every council in Kent in Sevenoaks.
Short measures
By DAVID SHIPMAN
Only one out of 208 pints served in 104 pubs, clubs and restaurants in Birmingham came up to a full measure, trading standards officers disclosed.
Investigators said 170 complaints were made resulting in 39 prosecutions.
Met Office move
By DAVID SHIPMAN
The Meteorological Office, at Bracknell, Berkshire, is to become an executive agency in April 1990 under the Government's Next Steps Initiative, Michael Neubert, Minister for Defence Procurement, said.
Hostage pledge
By DAVID SHIPMAN
John Major, the Foreign Secretary, promised to keep the Lebanon hostages ‘high on the public agenda’ after attending a memorial service for the mother of the missing British journalist John McCarthy.
Mr Major and a number of diplomats joined the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Robert Runcie, and Mr McCarthy's family and friends at the service for Sheila McCarthy, 66, who died in July.
Warning on health food
By DAVID SHIPMAN
A food supplement sold in health food stores could cause kidney damage, the Department of Health warned.
Tests on products containing germanium showed there was a risk.
The products were supposed to speed up blood-flow to make people feel more alert.
The department said: ‘We have no evidence to show that germanium has any nutritional value or is beneficial.’
Accused ‘told to use M50’
By DAVID SHIPMAN
The father of the man accused of the M50 murder told a jury yesterday he advised his son to use the motorway on the day that pregnant housewife Marie Wilks vanished.
Edward Browning, a night club bouncer, called at his father's home shortly before setting off for Scotland.
He says he travelled north by going across the Severn Bridge on to the M4.
Shrewsbury Crown Court heard that the two men discussed no other topics and Browning, 36, left.
The trial continues on Monday.
Ambulance service inquiry into deaths
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
THE LONDON Ambulance service, hardest hit by the national overtime ban, is to investigate two deaths last week which may have been caused by staff shortages.
Leaders of ambulance crews argue that their industrial action, in protest at a 6.5 per cent pay offer, has exposed the lack of personnel which may have been responsible for the deaths.
The fatalities were in the London area and involved collapses.
Both involved a delay of about an hour, and in the second case an officer was forced to go in a staff car to attend the patient.
A London Ambulance Service spokesman said: ‘We are aware of the two cases where people died and they are being investigated to discover what happened.’
Stuart Barber, the National Union of Public Employees' ambulance official for London, said: ‘The work-to-rule has exposed the chronic staffing problems in the London Ambulance Service where there are over 160 vacancies.’
Ambulance crews have been warned by their unions to keep a dossier of all delays because of the risk of litigation and possible disciplinary action.
Meanwhile, representatives of management have agreed to meet officials of Acas, the conciliation service, next week — possibly on Tuesday.
Managers will be responding to points made to Acas officials yesterday at a briefing session involving union officers.
A Department of Health spokesman said, however, there was little immediate hope that the dispute, now in its third week, would be resolved.
At the Conservative Party conference in Blackpool next week, ministers will face a persistent, vociferous and potentially embarrassing lobby by ambulance union representatives.
Roger Poole, and other leaders of the overtime ban, have vowed to do whatever they can to force a face-to-face confrontation with Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, who has refused to countenance a meeting.
‘We shall go to the conference anyway and if necessary catch him in his pyjamas in his hotel room,’ Mr Poole said.
Emergency services could face additional problems over the next few days -the first weekend that ambulance officers have been involved in the action.
Nuns end their hen house occupation
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
Six nuns from the Our Lady of the Passion monastery at Daventry end their hen house occupation to prevent the slaughter of 5,000 hens thought to be infected with salmonella.
The nuns say there is insufficient evidence that the chickens carry the virus.
Ministers prepare to attack ‘myth’ of new Labour image
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
A TWO-PRONGED counter-offensive is to be launched next week against Labour at the Conservative Party conference by Cabinet ministers, with a series of announcements and an attempt to explode the ‘myth’ of Labour's new image.
Ministers will also be seeking to lift sagging Tory morale, by offering assurances on a range of issues, which promise to make this one of the most difficult annual conferences the party leadership has faced since Margaret Thatcher came to office.
While the Labour conference was taking place the Prime Minister had a trial run with the televising of Parliament.
Commons sources confirmed that on Thursday Mrs Thatcher stood at the despatch box with a television monitor nearby to see how she appeared on television in the chamber.
Her advisers are expected to groom her in adapting her Commons performances at Prime Minister's question time to television coverage.
The same day ministerial aides met to co-ordinate the attack on Labour.
One source said: ‘Our blood is up.
We are angry at the way Labour is being presented and we are going to go for them.’
Underlining government irritation with the success of Labour's presentation, some aides privately are complaining, for the first time in many years, about Labour bias in the Press.
Chris Patten, Secretary of State for the Environment, will lead the Government's fight-back, by announcing a compromise over the poll tax to allay Conservative grassroots concern about the effects of the ‘safety net’ under which Tory areas subsidise Labour-dominated inner cities.
Mr Patten will also outline the forthcoming ‘green Bill’, underlining the Government's commitment to environmental protection in the wake of his decision to reject a proposal for a new town at Foxley Wood, Hampshire.
Norman Fowler, Secretary of State for Employment, is planning to couple announcements about further trade union legislation in the next session of Parliament with an attack on Labour's plans for restoring rights to trade unions, including the right to carry out a form of secondary, ‘sympathy' action.
Party leaders aim to lift sagging morale by attacking Labour's successful conference week as a public relations exercise masterminded by Peter Mandelson, the party's director of campaigns and communications.
Ministers will insist that, despite the image management, the party remains dominated by the left.
Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, will open the attack on Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader today with a warning that the party could revert to its left-wing image, if it were elected.
Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, will offer reassurances on the changes to the National Health Service, with a strong defence of the policies for allowing hospitals to opt out, establishing an internal market and giving GPs practice budgets.
Michael Heseltine, the former Secretary of State for Defence, is the voters' favourite to succeed Mrs Thatcher, according to an opinion poll published in The Daily Telegraph today.
Mrs Thatcher will deliver a major speech on the environment to the United Nations General Assembly, when she visits New York next month.
It will be her first speech to the assembly for four years.
Engineering firms to quash levy collection
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
ENGINEERING employers are mounting a tactical offensive to cripple the union selective strike campaign aimed at winning an industry-wide hours cut for two million workers.
The strategy, outlined in an internal document from the Engineering Employers Federation, centres on quashing workplace collection of a voluntary levy to fund the strikes.
The disclosure comes as Rolls-Royce, one of four blue-chip companies selected for strike ballots at key sites in two weeks, said there would be lay-offs and redundancies among its 37,000 workforce if action goes ahead.
Nearly 5,000 Rolls-Royce workers at Glasgow and Coventry are among 24,000 who will vote on whether to strike, so spearheading the campaign to cut the working week from 39 hours to 35.
Other companies in the front line are British Aerospace, Smiths Industries and NEI.
The leaked federation document, from Ian Hughes, its director in Yorkshire and Humberside, shows the employers' strategy as agreed by the federation management board three weeks ago.
In a letter to chief executives, he reports there was a unanimous view that the success of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions' campaign, and its ability to sustain industrial action ‘will depend significantly on the success of the levy’.
Therefore ‘all federated companies have a duty to see that the collection of the fund is made as difficult as possible for the CSEU’.
The voluntary levy has raised £2m so far and unions have pledged a further £7m to enable payouts of at least £100 a week to be made to those called out on strike.
Last night, Roger Lyons, assistant general secretary of the white-collar union MSF, accused the federation of ‘sending out secret missives to chief executives instructing them to sabotage a democratically-determined voluntary levy’.
He added: ‘The letter suggests the employers have got a spy network in place, indicating they are in a state of war with their own workers.
This displays an attitude that the employers are not interested in a constructive settlement.’
Rolls-Royce wrote personally to all its employees yesterday claiming that either a strike or a cut to a 35-hour week would be ‘disastrous’ for the company.
Treasury rejects appeal for more CTC funds
By NGAIO CREQUER and HELEN HAGUE
THE TREASURY is refusing to fund a further phase of the city technology colleges.
Plans for the creation of 20 CTCs by 1990 were announced by Kenneth Baker, the then Secretary of State for Education and Science, at the Conservative Party conference in October 1986.
They were to be a new form of secondary school —‘beacons of excellence’— funded mainly by industry, and would concentrate on science and technology.
But the Government has been severely embarrassed by the burgeoning cost of the programme.
Mr Baker had said that industrial sponsors would pay ‘all or a substantial part’ of the capital costs.
The lack of sponsors has meant the taxpayer has had to foot more of the bill.
The Department of Education and Science said yesterday that the Government had spent £19.7m on CTCs and there was a further planned expenditure over the next three years of £106.2m.
So far industry had contributed £44m.
Sir Cyril Taylor, the Government's adviser on CTCs, who had earlier been successful in persuading Mr Baker to commit more government funds to the 20 schools, had been hoping to get more money for a new round of schools.
But sources have confirmed that this has been ruled out by the Treasury in the current round of public expenditure talks.
But yesterday, Susan Fey, of the CTC Trust, said, ‘We were only ever given a target of 20.
We have never been to Treasury to ask for funds for more than 20.
Of course there have been discussions between the Trust and civil servants but nothing has gone to PESC (the expenditure talks).’
Although Sir Cyril had spoken in January 1988 about ‘hundreds’ of CTCs, these would be funded by local education authorities.
Jack Straw, Labour's shadow education secretary said yesterday at the Labour Party conference that the news to abandon further CTCs marked ‘the death of an expensive corrupt fiasco, which has already cost the taxpayer millions’.
‘But so rotten has the policy proved that not even a ‘taxpayer bail-out’ could save it.
Indeed even Britain's blue chip businesses boycotted the scheme despite being put under intense personal and political pressure,’ he added.
Mr Straw said this involved ‘veiled threats if they did not cough up and clear promises of honours if they did’.
He added: ‘What is so appalling is that millions of pounds which should have been invested in children's education has been squandered in pursuit of electoral advantage.’
He will renew calls on the public accounts committee to conduct a full investigation into ‘this disgraceful waste of the funds so vital to the education of our children’.
He is also writing to John McGregor, the Education Secretary, urging him not only to abandon the idea of additional CTCs but to hand over those in the pipeline to local authorities.
Prisoner in lice case wins again
By NGAIO CREQUER and HELEN HAGUE
A CONVICTED mass murderer has, for the second time, bloodied the nose, metaphorically speaking, of Malcolm Rifkind, the Secretary of State for Scotland, by successfully pursuing a claim for damages.
Thomas Campbell was yesterday awarded £4,000 damages by the Edinburgh Court of Session, following a three-day hearing into a claim that he was beaten and stamped upon in his cell by prison officers.
Campbell, serving a minimum of 20 years for six murders during the so-called Glasgow ice cream war, last month accepted £250 damages after discovering his hospital bed in Petershead Prison, north-east Scotland, was infested with lice.
In pursuit of the action Campbell had caught about 80 of the creatures on a piece of sticky tape and then forwarded them to a zoologist.
Yesterday, the Court ruled that Campbell, 36, sustained injuries as a result of the unlawful actions of prison officers.
He suffered a ruptured bowel.
His earlier successful damages claim arose when he was in the prison's hospital wing convalescing after abdominal surgery at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary as a result of the beating.
Law-abiding island hit by crime of the century
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
IN THE closing years of the twentieth century, the wind-swept island of Foula, 20 miles west of the main Shetland group, has reported its first recorded case of vandalism.
This remote crofting community, where sheep outnumber people by 30 to one, has had a law-abiding past.
No one can remember precisely when the last crime was committed, but it could have been in the early 1900s.
One Shetland policeman said yesterday: ‘It has not been a regular occurrence by any means.
It could be 80 years.
But our records don't go back far enough for that.
The previous crime was supposed to have been an assault.’
The latest addition to Foula's sparse crime statistics was the sort of incident that nobody would pay much regard to elsewhere.
A broken-down Land Rover parked by the roadside had its windows broken and its instrument panel smashed.
Constables Stephen Mardon, from Scalloway, and Alex Forbes, from Lerwick, flew from the main island to investigate, hitching a lift aboard an eight-seater plane on charter to British Telecom.
It was their first visit to Foula, and they seem to have been well received.
‘People were very friendly and we were invited in for a number of cups of tea during our stay,’ PC Mardon said.
Their day of inquiries led to a charge being laid against a resident of the island.
Along with the island's hydro-electric scheme — bringing power to some houses for the first time — and the harbour improvements, the incident will probably go down in Shetland annals as another stage in Foula's modernisation.
Right to buy for the old to be extended
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
ELDERLY council tenants living in easily-accessible housing will gain the right to buy for the first time, under a government amendment to be tabled in the House of Lords on Monday.
If the change to the Local Government and Housing Bill goes through, it will remove the power of local authorities to refuse to sell such homes to right-to-buy applicants.
This right has been used by councils to prevent 6,169 old people buying their council homes since January 1987 when the rule came into force as a result of a government defeat in the Lords.
Under the previous legislation the Secretary of State had the discretion to turn down applications but exercised it only 519 times in the space of five years.
Age Concern said: ‘If local authorities’ precious stock of properties suitable for elderly people begins to be sold off, the consequences for the majority of elderly tenants in ordinary housing could be very serious indeed.’
Research centre plans rejected
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT'S advisers on scientific research have rejected proposals for a £50m national clinical research centre, which medical experts say is needed urgently.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils acknowledged the need for a boost to clinical research, but rejected the Medical Research Council's proposals for a new centre linking basic laboratory research to clinical research in a hospital setting and postgraduate education.
The board outlined its views in a letter to the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
Britain's clinical research is widely acknowledged to be in very bad shape.
The existing centre at Northwick Park in north-west London, has not developed its research in collaboration with hospital work, as once hoped, and is to be phased out.
Rejecting the idea of a new national centre will hamper efforts to put laboratory work to practical effect and will mean that medical postgraduates do not develop the appropriate training in new biological techniques, according to an MRC source.
The board favours a more ‘cost-effective’ approach that involves strengthening several existing regional centres and enhancing clinical research at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith, west London.
The reduced proposals that the MRC is now being forced to put together will mean that some areas of research must be dropped.
They will render impossible the broad, multi-disciplinary approach to research and teaching that the MRC wanted.
‘There is a unity about the whole thing which needs to be practised in a single centre,’ the MRC source said.
‘But the political reality is that we will have to reshape the whole proposal.’
Man ‘used cucumber to rob building societies of 9,205 pounds’
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
A ROBBER tricked building society cashiers into handing over thousands of pounds by pretending a cucumber was a gun, an Old Bailey court was told yesterday.
Ernest Coveley, 36, escaped with £9,205 from building societies in London during a two-month period.
His total haul from the robberies was £12,418.
Staff were hoodwinked into thinking the cucumber, wrapped in a black bin-liner, was a sawn-off shotgun, Michael Warren, for the prosecution, said.
Armed flying squad officers ambushed Mr Coveley, who was still carrying the wrapped cucumber, at his home in Bethnal Green, east London, on 4 July.
He admitted eight robberies between May and July and asked for two others and six attempted robberies to be taken into consideration.
He also admitted using the cucumber and an iron bar to frighten staff.
But he denied possessing the vegetable and the iron bar as imitation firearms.
Mr Justice Jowitt adjourned sentence for social inquiry and psychiatric reports.
Yugoslav fear ‘no surprise’, peer tells trial
By STEPHEN WARD
LORD ALDINGTON told the High Court yesterday he was not surprised that tens of thousands of Yugoslavs, many of whom had fought on the German side, feared repatriation at the end of the war.
The former Conservative minister and company chairman was being cross-examined at the end of the first week of his libel action against historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy and property developer Nigel Watts, who circulated a pamphlet in 1987 saying the peer was responsible for repatriating 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs to be massacred by the communists in 1945.
Richard Rampton QC, for Count Tolstoy, cross-examining Lord Aldington, said: ‘These people were in mortal fear of being returned to their homes.’
Lord Aldington replied: ‘That's what you tell me.
I'm not surprised they were.’
Mr Rampton suggested if Lord Aldington had not known what would happen to the Yugoslavs, he was the only person in his corps who did not.
Mr Rampton read out a military report which said that parts of Austria under the Tito forces, to whom the Yugoslavs were to be repatriated, were being ruled by terror.
Lord Aldington said: ‘If you're suggesting I knew they were behaving badly, then I did.
But I didn't think it would extend to massacring.’
‘Did you know that those Yugoslavians who came into your hands had very good reasons to fear for terror?’
Mr Rampton asked.
‘I was told they had contributed to the terror almost as much as the terror was used against them,’ Lord Aldington said.
‘Those working with the Germans were no less guilty of the most horrible brutality than the Titoists.’
Mr Rampton asked: ‘Suppose you had somebody in your hands who had behaved badly…is it in those circumstances right to hand him back to somebody who would treat him with equal brutality?’
‘It's right to hand him back to the government of the country to which he belongs in the expectation that he will be properly treated and if he has committed a war crime he would be tried accordingly,’ Lord Aldington replied.
‘It most certainly is my view that what was done with these people was a political decision, a decision of high command.’
Mr Rampton asked Lord Aldington why he had ordered on 17 May 1945 that the Yugoslavs not be told where they were going, and whether they had been falsely told they were going to Italy.
Lord Aldington insisted they had not been lied to, but they would not have got into the trucks if they had known they were going to Yugoslavia.
In evidence earlier this week Lord Aldington, 75, formerly Brigadier Toby Lowe, who was chief of staff to General Sir Charles Keightley, commander of the British Army's V Corps in Allied occupied Austria, said he had not known until 1979 what had happened happened to the Yugoslavs when they were handed over to the forces of Marshall Tito.
The case continues on Monday.
Heavyweights in battle for British vegetable honours
By RICHARD NORTH
THERE WERE pumpkins the size of bean bags and groups of onions which would have made fair roofs for Byzantine churches.
And carrots which looked like impacted wisdom teeth crossed with a fantasy of Edgar Allan Poe's.
One carrot resembled a tower in Gaudi's cathedral in Barcelona.
This was the giant vegetable competition run by the British National Pumpkin Society, itself an offshoot of the World Pumpkin Confederation, based in the United States.
On Monday, the results of 22 national competitions will be phoned to New York to find the heaviest pumpkin in the world.
Bernard Lavery is the doyen of the home-grown British giant vegetable world, and he organised yesterday's event at Alton Towers, the Midlands pleasure park which attracts two and a half million visitors a year.
Not many of them were in evidence yesterday, when the first proper snap of autumn was in the air.
There were plenty of pumpkins at about the British record weight of 444lbs, or about a third the weight of a hatchback car, into which not one of them could have fitted.
Mr Lavery, however, weighed his champion in at 710lbs, 39lbs over the world record.
‘I fed mine this year with Algoflash, which is a seaweed-based formulation -organic — from France,’ Mr Lavery said.
He farms half an acre of a friend's land in Mid-Glamorgan.
Last year, he fed his giants on lager from the firm whose products reach where other beers can't.
‘But I find that Algoflash reaches places even the lager couldn't’
The tricks to giantism sound very simple.
Mr Lavery, who had entered giant celery, onion, radish (about the size of a young elephant's tusk) and leek (about the size of a young palm tree) and cabbages, explained how the latter's immense size was achieved.
‘I noticed a freak red cabbage with side-shoots coming from the leaves, and crossed it with a freak green cabbage.
The result is a giant cabbage with four heads.’
Opinion is sharply divided on the edibility of the results.
One woman who grows some big vegetables, but is normally more interested in quality, said that on no account would she touch one of the big pumpkins.
‘They've been forced, haven't they?
They must be stuffed with nitrogen and God knows what.’
Others swore they tasted fine, if only you could find an army of friends to devour them with.
Mr Lavery said his would be delicious, and that you can't over-fertilise a pumpkin, or it wilts.
‘They just collapse,’ he said, leaning against his winning pumpkin, which looked like something run up for a stage set.
It showed no sign of collapsing.
Geoff Kirby, of the National Society of Allotment and Leisure Gardeners, who is based near Coventry, gave a cautious welcome to the giantists.
‘It's a bit of fun, and if it appeals to the young people, that's a good thing.
We've noticed a fall in the demand for allotments.’
Brian Davies, also from near Coventry, had entered some immense pumpkins and marrows, but seemed mournful.
‘I normally enter village shows.
Today, I've put in a runner bean — it must be all of twenty inches long — but I don't grow them specially.
If I see one that looks like it's growing good, I might give it some extra feed and talk to it a bit.’
But otherwise, he swears by the old tradition of a load of farmyard muck.
He sounded as though he disapproved of exotic plant feeds and the new variety of vegetative showmanship.
Unfortunately, there were no giant bean stalks on show yesterday.
But then Alton Towers prides itself on not being a theme park.
It leaves all that fairy-tale nonsense to Disney.
Clarke denies that ‘firm’ drug budgets will restrict doctors
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
HEALTH AUTHORITIES will be expected to adhere to the ‘firm’ budgets they are to be given for patients' drugs, Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, said yesterday.
But the budgets will not be cash limits and GPs will remain free to prescribe all the drugs their patients need, he insisted.
Mr Clarke, however, would not say whether — as seems likely — the legislation putting the Government's plans into effect will ‘require’ regional health authorities and family practitioner committees to keep to their drug budgets.
‘We are still drafting, and exactly what goes into the legislation has not been settled,’ he said.
The British Medical Association has said that if the legislation does require authorities to keep to drug budgets, the association will see that as a cash limit and cry ‘foul’ after accepting assurances from Mr Clarke last week that budgets would not operate as cash limits.
Mr Clarke, speaking in Southport at the annual conference of the Society of Family Practitioner Committees, insisted that what was planned would not be a cash limit for drugs.
‘What we will expect the regions to do is adhere to the firm budgets by doing their job properly,’ he said.
That would involve monitoring the ‘indicative’ budgets which are to be given to GPs to ensure that there is no wasteful or excessive prescribing.
‘But we cannot give them cash limits because we have no idea how bad the weather is going to be in the winter or what particular type of ‘flu might be coming along.
‘We have no idea what wonder drug Boots or Wellcome might suddenly produce during the year, and we cannot stop and should not stop doctors prescribing all the drugs that their particular patients’ need.’
That was why, he said, the NHS White Paper did not use the words ‘cash limits’.
When it was being drawn up ‘we agreed we couldn't have a cash limit and we never said there would be a cash limit’.
It was his critics, Mr Clarke said, who had confused themselves by saying there would be one.
He wished that the BMA would now stop ‘quibbling’ and accept the assurance that it had accepted last week that patients will get all the drugs they need, he added.
David Mellor, Minister for Health, yesterday told representatives from major voluntary groups that the chronically sick and disabled stood to gain more than any others from the proposed health service reforms.
‘The fears that I have heard expressed about the possible negative impact on these groups are totally groundless,’ he said.
It was of prime importance that ‘money follows the patient’, ending the present haphazard funding of patients across district boundaries.
‘What that means is that NHS hospitals will be resourced according to the number of patients they treat.
The establishment of a clear link between work done and resources obtained is absolutely crucial to the future of the NHS…
‘This will particularly help those chronically ill patients who have to travel out of their home districts to specialist treatment centres.’
The minister also said that there would be no financial or budgetary disadvantage whatsoever to any GP who had to treat a large number of chronically ill patients.
Mr Mellor dismissed the suggestion that self-governing hospitals would focus on acute specialities, to the detriment of the chronically ill.
‘District health authorities will be under a duty to ensure that demands for both acute and community health care are adequately met, and their performance in discharging this vital function will be monitored.’
Karpov discovers fear is the key to winning ways
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
IN THE Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals at Sadler's Wells, the former world champion, Anatoly Karpov, has taken a 2-1 lead after his opponent, Artur Yusupov, resigned the adjourned third game of their match yesterday.
In the other semi-final, Jan Timman leads Jonathan Speelman, also by 2-1.
The last two games show that Yusupov still has to overcome his fear of Karpov.
From two very good, perhaps even winning, positions, he has scored only half a point.
In the third game, he outplayed Karpov in the late middlegame and early ending, and then made a fatal blunder after almost six hours' play.
The scene as the game was adjourned on Thursday night told the whole story: Yusupov, head buried in hands, glumly contemplated the ruins of his previously wonderful position; Karpov stood impassively behind his own chair, surveying the battleground with quiet authority.
But it is Jan Timman who has gained the attention of the Dutch.
The Netherlands' chess tradition dates back to 1935 when Dr Euwe won the world championship.
Since then, chess has been followed with the fanatical devotion usually associated with the major physical sports.
The only problem is that the Dutch have not really been very good at the game since Dr Euwe retired.
Now, with Jan Timman as their first genuine world title contender for 50 years, Dutch chess journalists almost outnumber the English at Sadler's Wells.
Last Tuesday, when the start of this match coincided with the end of a major international event (won by Garry Kasparov) in The Netherlands, one national paper devoted most of a page to chess coverage.
Their investigative chess journalism is also evidently of high calibre.
Herman Eetgerink, writing in Algemeen Dagblad, has revealed an interest in the match in very high places.
He reports a supposed telephone conversation between Margaret Thatcher and the Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, with Mrs Thatcher doing all the talking and demanding that Mr Lubbers help with her problems.
‘…that damned Kinnock and his vile socialists in Brighton…behind in the polls…we need a champion, Ruud, get my drift?…your Timman takes a dive, or else!’
At the start of the Pilkington Glass Semi-finals, Mrs Thatcher did send a welcoming letter to the grandmasters: ‘I wish all the players every success but I must send my particular good wishes to Jon Speelman.’
Only with this Dutch report has the extent of her potential support become apparent.
UK on brink of revolution in telephone technology
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
Computer technology built on to telephone exchanges will allow subscribers to have the same number wherever they are in the country, automatically reject unwanted calls and bar calls to ‘chat-lines’ or other unwanted services.
It will enable the telephone to take messages, storing them at the exchange for ‘reading back’ when required.
Eventually, in conjunction with television, it could allow the telephone to be used for ‘tele-shopping’, or for selecting a film from huge databases which could be the electronic video stores of the future.
The key to the telephone revolution is a development which can link telephone exchanges to computers running a widely-used software system called UNIX.
A British company called GPT, which makes many of the digital telephone exchanges used by BT, Mercury and others, has devised a way of upgrading its System X exchanges to link to UNIX machines so that anyone can write the software to run on them.
It is this extra software which will enhance the intelligence of the telephone networks and allow them to provide special services rather than simple telephony.
The more intelligent networks will be able to recognise codes, keyed in at the telephone and will store much more data than is possible today.
How quickly the services will be on offer depends on BT, Mercury and the operators of mobile radio networks.
But GPT believes that demand will be so high that the services will be well established by the middle of the next decade.
Fears for the future of rare game bird
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
CONSERVATIONISTS are concerned about the decline in the Scottish population of capercaillie, a bird of the old pine woods and the largest member of the grouse family.
The capercaillie, one of Britain's most spectacular game birds, is prized by European trophy hunters.
But as it has retreated towards its heartland in the Tay, Dee and Spey valleys, most sporting estates have imposed a voluntary moratorium on shooting.
Roy Dennis, North of Scotland officer for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, said there could be as few as 2,000 left in the highlands, an 80 per cent decline in the past 15 years.
‘I wouldn't say it was the last ditch for the capercaillie.
But it is concerning.’
Poor breeding in wet, cold springs; clear-felling of Scots pine forests; the proliferation of dense sitka spruce plantations; and over-shooting have all been suggested as contributing to the capercaillie's retreat.
Robert Moss, the leading British expert on capercaillie, believes that habitat destruction and modern forestry practices played an important role.
‘The future of the capercaillie will depend on how good a habitat we provide for them in our new forests,’ he said.
The bird's retreat has led the Forestry Commission to modify three of its forests to make them more welcoming to capercaillie.
This has involved thinning trees, opening up glades around mature Scots pines and planting juniper and blackberries.
The experiment was prompted by a survey of the commission's forests in northern Scotland.
Assisted by the RSPB, the commission circulated questionnaires among its rangers in Highland and Grampian regions.
The results showed that capercaillie had vanished from 12 of the 56 forests which had held them for 20 years, and numbers had declined in nearly all the other forests.
The commission has sponsored the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (ITE) at Banchory, near Aberdeen, to examine how modern forests can be made capercaillie-friendly.
Capercaillie in Scotland have already come back from near extinction once.
They died out in the eighteenth century as a result of deforestation and hunting.
The species was successfully re-established in Perthshire with birds from Sweden in the 1830s.
By the turn of this century they were plentiful in Scotland, eventually becoming so numerous that commercial foresters regarded them as vermin because of their liking for pine buds and needles (a trait which, according to gourmets, makes them taste strongly of turpentine).
Their last population peak was 1974.
Since then there has been a long decline.
Popularity of police to be tested by survey
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
POLICE forces throughout the country are taking part in a survey to discover how effective, efficient and popular the police are.
Police constables, station sergeants, inspectors and some higher ranks are all being asked to take part in the review, while the public in selected towns are to be asked questions about the police and whether the people's needs are being met.
The results of the survey, which will include a national poll, will be known to senior police officers in the next few weeks, but will not be made public until early in the new year.
Peter Wright, chief constable of South Yorkshire, and outgoing president of the association, revealed details of the survey on the final day of its conference in Preston, Lancashire.
Mr Wright, whose own force faced criticism after the Hillsborough disaster, said there was a need for police forces to discover whether or not their perception of their work matched that of the public's need.
The Metropolitan Police are co-ordinating the survey and six other forces, Avon and Somerset, Devon and Cornwall, Northumbria, North Wales, Sussex and South Yorkshire, are looking at specific police roles.
John Dellow, deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, has been elected the new president of the Association of Chief Police Officers.
The Labour Party Conference: Neil Kinnock takes time away from the platform limelight
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
Neil Kinnock takes time away from the platform limelight yesterday, disappearing backstage before the Labour conference ended with the party in a buoyant mood 
The Labour Party Conference: Gay rights group wins support over age of consent
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
THE LABOUR leadership suffered an embarrassing rebuff when lesbian and gay rights activists won a conference endorsement of their demand for cutting the age of homosexual consent from 21 to 16.
Fearing it would lose general election votes, party leaders avoided any reference to a common age of consent in the policy review and replaced a commitment to ‘full equality’ for gays with ‘greater equality’.
But the Labour Campaign for Lesbian and Gay Rights argued in a debate on Thursday that back-tracking was costing gay support ‘in droves’.
Roy Hattersley, deputy party leader, was blamed for the change in policy which has been approved at three previous conferences.
To cheers, it was announced yesterday morning that a composite motion reaffirming full equality and 16 years as the age of homosexual consent had been carried by 3,702,000 votes to 2,317,000.
Unions supporting the motion included the transport workers, shop workers and public employees.
Peter Purton, an executive member of the lesbian and gay rights campaign, said now the idea of a common age of consent had been supported for a fourth time, he hope that the leadership would finally accept the commitment and ensure it went into the manifesto.
‘We hope the leadership will have learnt their lesson this time.
‘It is only if you pretend and try to sweep it under the carpet that you get a bigoted response,’ Mr Purton added after the vote.
The Labour Party Conference: Trade unions face cut in power over making of policy
By STEPHEN GOODWIN and JUDY JONES
THE LABOUR PARTY took the first step yesterday towards diminishing the power of the trade unions in its policy-making procedures.
In the Brighton conference's closing session, delegates called on the party's national executive to bring forward proposals next year to give a bigger say to local party members, women, ethnic minorities, councillors and MEPs.
Larry Whitty, the party's general secretary, admitted Labour's current procedures were ‘unsatisfactory, unfair, archaic and need changing’.
The NEC believed that there had to be changes and had already begun wide-ranging consultations.
But though the intention will be to curb the power of union leaders wielding hundreds of thousands of block votes, Mr Whitty emphasised that Labour would remain a trade union-based party.
A composite motion demanding the straightforward abolition of the block vote was defeated on a show of hands.
He said there was ‘inexorable pressure’ for Labour to change its methods of representation.
They were out of line with the procedures of most socialist parties in Europe and the growing democracy within the trade union movement.
‘It is time for the party as a whole to take a step back and look at the way in which its democracy is being carried out,’ he told the conference.
Millions of trade unionists could not simply be represented by the casting of a block vote once a year.
Demands for the NEC to draw up proposals for widening the party franchise were led by John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB.
He argued that Labour policy-making, though democratic in concept, was defective in practice.
He urged the party to move towards a ‘one member, one vote’ system of decision-making.
‘Whenever I am asked about the block vote by GMB members, they find the explanation baffling.
They cannot accept that I should cast votes on their behalf without first asking each of them what they think.
I agree with them.
‘That is no way to make policy in a party of government.
The trade unions should retain influence, but surrender control.’
In a modern party, the national executive committee should launch the policy-making procedure, and the conference should have the final say.
He called the existing policy-making system as one ‘designed for the 1920s which is wilting under the television lights of the 1980s’.
He said they should not try to camouflage the block vote —‘we should not try to paint a smile on the face of the monster’.
Keith Gordon, of Conwy, attacked those within the party who were ‘clinging to masonic unionism’.
In the 50 seats that Labour needed to capture at the next election, people would continue to view the party with suspicion ‘until we display democracy in our organisation’.
However, some delegates feared ordinary members would have even less influence on policy formation if the conference voting system was altered.
Graham Till, of Derby North, saw the GMB move as a ‘silken noose’ that would tighten around the party's neck.
This week's conference had been superfluous since Sunday's vote to prevent amendments to the policy review documents, he said.
All that was left was a media exercise staged by Peter Mandelson, the party's director of communications.
In future, Labour conferences would be ‘good television’ but little else.
‘Maybe the party will be able to get some money out of it and we will be able to prostitute ourselves a little bit more.
Socialism is not something you can tinker with, not something you can stop.’
The Labour Party Conference: Block voting reform may be linked to membership drive: Possible block vote reforms all leave trade unions with a powerful voice.
Colin Hughes looks at the options
By COLIN HUGHES
ALL OF the options being considered for block vote reform leave the trade unions with either a majority or a veto.
But the proposal most likely to win the leadership's backing is the one which carries the potential for most substantially diminishing trade union power.
At present the unions wield 89 per cent of the conference vote in blocks, with the constituency parties taking 10 per cent, and the small socialist society affiliates less than 1 per cent .
The favoured alternative is to base the share of vote on the value of membership fees by which unions and constituency parties respectively affiliate.
The main attraction of that method is that it can be loaded in favour of constituencies, to give them a heavy incentive to recruit more members.
The leadership is determined that reform of the block vote should be inextricably tied to the party's mass membership drive, and to the extension of one member, one vote democracy.
That approach can be devised in numerous ways to produce different results.
The most radical is to give one vote to each constituency party for its first 500 members, and an additional vote for every 250 extra members.
Trade unions would have one vote for every 3,000 affiliated members.
On existing membership figures that would give constituency parties 26 per cent of the vote, and the unions 74 per cent.
But if individual membership doubled — in line with Labour's 1991 campaign target — the proportions would shift dramatically: union voting strength would then be reduced to 55 per cent, with constituency parties having a 45 per cent share.
There are two other main options.
The party could create an electoral college, simply giving the trade unions and constituencies set proportions.
The national executive's consultation paper suggests a trade union/constituency party split of 70/30.
One variation on that would be to increase the constituency share according to the national increase in membership — so constituencies would have 30 per cent of the vote on a membership of 300,000 (as now) but would get an extra 1 per cent of the vote for every 30,000 increase in national membership.
Then if membership doubled, the balance would move to 60/40 in the unions' favour.
That could be further varied by including MPs as a section of the electoral college.
The final option is splitting the party into two houses — the unions with half the vote on one side and constituency parties on the other.
Any proposal would have to achieve a majority in both houses.
Although that would reduce the union block vote more drastically than other options, it would also give both sides a veto.
The national executive's consultation paper further warns that it would leave the party looking divided every time the two houses failed to agree.
The executive's consultation paper — written by Larry Whitty, party general secretary — also advocates redesigning policy-making machinery along the lines of European socialist parties.
The ‘rolling programme’ approach would mean creating an enlarged and more representative executive, fed by policy commissions of up to 100 members.
They would take policy reports to conference in one year, have party consultation and debate during the year, with voting and amendments in the subsequent year.
The Labour Party Conference: Buoyancy hides fear of failure
By JOHN PIENAAR
IF THIS WEEK'S striking display of Labour unity was more show than substance, there was no sign of it among the party's ‘other ranks’ as they dispersed in buoyant mood from Brighton.
All around the conference centre, the message was the same from all but the largely isolated activists of the hard-left: differences on the detail of Neil Kinnock's policy review took second place to its status as Labour's only route-map to political power.
Dread of failure, as much as positive enthusiasm for Labour's change of direction, was a driving motivation for offering the most appealing face possible at the next election.
Constituency Labour Party and trade union delegates seized eagerly on the common feeling that the Conservatives economic and political trials, and the disarray of the centre parties, were at last combining to open a window of opportunity.
Thursday's hike in interest rates had served only to heighten that conviction.
Ron Waugh, a 38-year-old glassworker and delegate from St Helens North CLP was resigned to a ‘period of healing’ on the hard-left.
‘People here don't know that the policy review is already outdated.
We need to do more work at grass-roots level — possibly, we have been a bit lazy in that respect.’
But that view was the exception.
Eileen Dunning, 33, from Glasgow Central CLP laid heavy emphasis on the common yearning to haul Labour back from the wilderness.
‘There has been so much despair among the lot of us that seeing the party back in government again seemed so remote.
Despite my criticisms of the way the policy was carried out — there was not enough consultation -it gives us a real basis to work on.
‘The left will always have their heroes.
But there is almost something sad about it — we are talking about people who have become politically impotent.’
That urgency, she added, was even greater in the party's Scottish heartland, where Labour knows that anything but a convincing election challenge could allow the Scottish National Party rapidly to mobilise a bandwagon of anti-Conservative protest.
A knot of delegates from the transport workers union were determined to press next year for nuclear unilateralism and union immunities wider than those envisaged in the policy review.
Michael Tappin, 42, a politics lecturer at Keele University and delegate from the local CLP, believed 80 per cent of the party were in accord with the review.
The political shift at the top was now widely reflected, he said.
Edward Boden, 50, who is a transport worker and secretary of Newcastle under Lyme CLP, celebrated the return of the ‘old Labour Party’.
He said: ‘The ideas have been fed from the top down, but from the bottom up they have been accepted.
‘The mood of this conference has been that there is a light at the end of the 10-year tunnel — we are a party again.’
The Labour Party Conference: Labour ‘needs help’
By JOHN PIENAAR
Labour would not win the next general election on its own and should accept electoral reform, David Owen, SDP leader, told a Plymouth meeting.
The Labour Party Conference: Conference quotes
By JOHN PIENAAR
‘We used to have to promise to do things to get elected, and now we have to promise not to.’
— David Blunkett, in the Red Review.
‘Current conference procedures are unsatisfactory, unfair, archaic and need changing.’
— Larry Whitty, the party's general secretary.
‘This conference must sound the death knell of the block vote.
The trade unions should retain influence, but we must surrender control.’
— John Edmonds, GMB.
‘We want to put behind us these tawdry, shabby years of the 1980s’ materialism, the salmonella, listeria society of Thatcher.’
— Dennis Skinner.
The Labour Party Conference: Delegates' final day decisions
By JOHN PIENAAR
The conference yesterday: Condemned privatisation of security at Ministry of Defence establishments.
Instructed the NEC to prepare a blueprint for widening the party franchise and streamlining annual conference procedures, reporting back to next year's conference.
Rejected appeals to commit the next Labour government to introducing a Bill of Rights.
Supported reducing the age of consent for homosexual acts to 16.
Pressure on services forecast in ‘ageing UK’
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
WESTERN nations will have older and dwindling populations as they enter the next century, and their fluctuating birth rates will also pose problems, a conference on future trends heard yesterday.
But the populations of poorer countries will continue to rise rapidly.
The growing number of elderly will put strains on pensions, social security and health services in developed countries, Geoffrey Hobbs, a senior planner with ICI, told the ‘Exploring the Future’ conference in London.
Ever-changing bulges and deficits in different age groups — such as the shortage of school-leavers which Britain is about to experience — will present problems and opportunities for businesses, Mr Hobbs said.
One of the most important factors for governments and forecasters will be how much money young and middle-aged people save for their old age while they are earning.
Almost all developed countries, including Britain, have a fertility rate of less than 2.1 children per woman — the level needed to sustain the population, Mr Hobbs told the conference, organised by the Royal Institute of International Affairs and the Strategic Planning Society.
In Britain the median age will rise from 36 years now to 41 in 2020.
West Germany and Japan will be older, the United States slightly younger.
The ‘young’ elderly of the future — active, many of them relatively affluent and in their sixties — will become an important and powerful group of consumers, Mr Hobbs said.
The old elderly — frail, and mainly widows — will also provide growing business opportunities in converting houses to meet their needs and health care.
Fluctuating birth rates will present their own challenges.
The US will probably benefit from a doubling of middle-aged people aged 45 to 54 over the next 20 years because of the baby boom of the late 1950s.
Meanwhile, the number of young adults in West Germany will decline dramatically.
The number of teenagers there is expected to fall by 45 per cent between 1980 and 2000.
The influx of young refugees from East Germany will help to offset this.
In the developing nations, populations will continue to rise, according to United Nations forecasts.
But this growth rate should begin to decline around the turn of the century.
At its peak it will add 90 million people to the world each year, roughly equivalent to the population of Mexico.
Growth rates in the countries of sub-Saharan Africa will be the slowest to fall off, and by 2020 Nigeria is likely to become the world's fourth most populous country with 350 million people.
On present trends, Mexico City's population will expand to 26 million by the end of the century, retaining its place as the world's biggest mega-city.
Its people will equal the entire population of Canada.
Comic's funeral
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
Graham Chapman, the comedian who died on Wednesday, will be cremated next Friday at Vinters Park Crematorium, near Maidstone, Kent.
Chemical leak at school
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
Nine pupils and two teachers were treated in hospital after being overcome by noxious fumes in a classroom at Lancaster Boys' School, Leicester.
Environmental health officers are investigating.
Five policemen were taken to hospital after a lorry overturned while carrying canisters of the chemical phenylacetonitrile near Scotswood Bridge, Newcastle upon Tyne.
Terrorists ‘cannot be Catholics’
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
IRA terrorists could not also be members of the Catholic Church, the Bishop of Down and Connor, Dr Cahal Daly, told mourners at a Northern Ireland funeral yesterday.
He said: ‘Membership of the IRA and voluntary participation…with its so-called ‘military operations’ is most gravely sinful'.
This was not an opinion, simply the Catholic moral teaching, he said at the funeral of Henry Babbington, shot dead on Wednesday by IRA men who mistook him for a loyalist terrorist.
Aspiring astronauts set to take space test
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
SIXTEEN aspiring astronauts will next week undergo a series of trials to test their endurance in space.
Their ability to withstand high G-forces, extreme disorientation and lack of oxygen will be key factors in deciding who is to travel to the Soviet space station Mir.
The would-be astronauts will be spun in a giant centrifuge to simulate the experience of rocket lift-off and re-entry, and sealed inside altitude chambers to experience the lack of oxygen at 16,500 feet.
But perhaps most severe of all are tests for susceptibility to motion sickness: they will be blindfolded, and have to move their heads and upper parts of the body back and forth or up and down; and they will be pushed back and forward on a track every five seconds for 20 minutes.
The 14 men and two women will begin this next phase of tests on Monday at the Royal Air Force Institute of Aviation Medicine at Farnborough.
Group Captain Glaister, a professor of aviation medicine who is involved in the testing, said at Farnborough yesterday: ‘We will inquire upon the symptoms of increasing sickness, so that they can stop before they actually have to use a paper bag.’
The most severe tests have already been carried out on a man and a woman, unconnected with the project, last week.
The £16m British Juno mission to send an astronaut to Mir is fast reaching the point where the final candidate and a backup will be chosen and sent to Moscow's Star City for 18 months of training with Soviet cosmonauts.
Hopes that a woman would make it to the last hurdle are receding as the Soviets have made it clear they would like the two candidates to be of the same sex.
The rigours of testing do not end next week as eight people, chosen by the Soviets and the British, will be taken to a Soviet hospital for further tests, the nature of which is as yet unclear.
According to Air Vice Marshall Peter Howard, who is in charge of selecting the astronaut, the Soviets can choose four ‘finalists’ but the British then decide on the two people who will leave for Moscow at the beginning of December.
‘We the British have undisputed and unchallenged choice of the final two.
Then they have five days to sell the dog, make arrangements for the wife and kids and set off for Moscow's Star City,’ he said.
The Soviets, however, seem happy for families to stay at Star City for the whole 18 months.
It is not yet known, however, who will end up paying for the Juno project, currently being supported by the London-based Moscow Narodny Bank.
ITV and Scottish Television have a contract for TV coverage, but the project needs to attract at least £15m in sponsorship and advertising of various kinds.
Details of the science experiments which the astronaut will carry out may be revealed in the next week or two, Professor Heinz Wolff, of Brunel University, said.
Sixteen experiments have recently been presented to Soviet scientists in Moscow, he said.
The Soviets are particularly interested in growing protein crystals which could help to develop drugs to tackle diseases including Aids.
Computer hacking may be outlawed
By MARY FAGAN
THE LAW COMMISSION's report on computer hacking is to be published on Tuesday, two months earlier than planned and in time to allow ministers to put proposals for legislation into the Queen's Speech, should they so wish, writes Mary Fagan.
Experts are divided over whether the commission will urge specific new legislation making hacking a crime, or opt for changes in existing laws to cope with certain types of computer crime.
For example, some lawyers say the law of deception must be adjusted to include deception of machines rather than just people.
This could lead to prosecution of people who illicitly use passwords and codes to get access to forbidden parts of a system.
There may also be a need for changes to criminal damage laws to cover viruses and logic bombs which can corrupt and destroy computer data.
At the moment, under English law, data is not property, and damage or theft has to relate to the medium on which it is stored.
But the main area of controversy is whether simply obtaining unauthorised access to a computer should be a crime.
Emma Nicholson, Conservative MP for Devon West and Torridge, has lobbied that it should be, and for prison sentences of up to 10 years for culprits.
The Confederation of British Industry also wants hacking outlawed, but the Data Protection Registrar is adamant that hacking per se should not be a crime.
The Week in Review: Home News
By DAVID LISTER
NEIL KINNOCK, in his speech to the Labour Party conference, dealt with waste disposal methods in Sweden and the increase in the rodent population in Thatcher's Britain.
As not a single local party had discussed either of these issues, not a single delegate took umbrage and Mr Kinnock received a Tory-style standing ovation.
The Labour leader said that in her supposed splendid isolation from Europe, Margaret Thatcher showed she was from the Greta Garbo school of diplomacy.
Nigel Lawson enrolled in the Clark Gable ‘Frankly, I don't give a damn’ school when he fell foul of his own party over a rise in interest rates just before the Tory conference.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, a graduate of the John Wayne memorial diplomatic academy, spoke out against the emergence in Britain of a ‘Pharisee’ society of self-interest and intolerance.
He said: ‘The successful are always tempted to regard their success as a sort of blessing or reward for righteousness.
This can lead to judgements being made about the unsuccessful, the unemployed, the poor and the unintelligent, which are both uncharitable and untrue.’
Placing himself in an illustrious line of critics he pointed out that the Pharisees did not escape the sharp edge of Jesus's tongue for their ‘self righteousness’ and ‘judgemental’attitudes.
Most parents eschew diplomacy completely when dealing with their children, and opt for the Jimmy Cagney approach.
New research showed that as many as two-thirds of babies are smacked before the age of one, 83 per cent of mothers of four-year-olds believe in smacking, and 18 per cent of children were still being smacked by their 11th birthday.
Christopher Brown, director of the NSPCC, said: ‘How can you listen to children if you are hung up on smacking them?’
Which assumes that the latter is an alternative to the former, rather than a consequence.
The Second World War intruded into the week's events.
A group of MPs protested that it was ‘totally unacceptable’ for the Second World War to be omitted from the national curriculum for 7 to 14-year-olds.
They concluded: ‘We regard the omission as totally unacceptable; without logic; educationally insupportable; and offensive to all those who fought in or suffered from the Nazis.’
Walter Kent, the 72-year-old American composer of the wartime song White Cliffs of Dover, came to Britain for his first glimpse of the aforesaid cliffs.
He saw many seagulls but not a single bluebird, and could not be persuaded to approach the edge to have his picture taken.
After the opening of his much acclaimed film of Henry V, Kenneth Branagh said he was worried that his high media profile could lead to a ‘Branagh backlash’, and that people might get ‘bored rigid’ reading about him.
Doomed valley yields store of historic treasure
By DAVID KEYS, Archaeology Correspondent
ARCHAEOLOGISTS in Devon are recording the 5,000-year history of a valley which is about to be flooded to form one of Britain's largest reservoirs.
Investigations in the area — part of the valley of the river Wolf, north-west of Dartmoor — have revealed evidence of human activity dating from neolithic times.
But the most important aspect of the project has been the excavation of domestic buildings built between the fifteenth and nineteenth centuries.
For the first time, archaeologists have been able to study in detail the techniques used by post-medieval builders to construct the typical ‘cob’ houses for which the West Country is famous.
Building in cob — mud, straw and cow dung — is no longer practised.
The tradition, which goes back at least 2,500 years, continued until the early part of this century.
Although cob walls contain no stone, apart from the footings, they are remarkably resilient.
Tens of thousands of traditional mud-built cob buildings are still in use throughout Devon and Cornwall.
In the early nineteenth century, the area — whose most celebrated son was the Rev Sabine Baring-Gould, composer of the hymn ‘Onward Christian Soldiers’— supported at least 100 people.
It had its own brickworks, cloth mill and farms, and was largely self-sufficient.
However, by the 1970s the population had dwindled to less than 20, and the last inhabitant moved out three years ago, after the land was bought by South West Water.
Over the past two years, archaeologists have excavated the remains of a medieval village — including its corn and cloth mills — as well as four farm sites, and three buildings constructed of cob.
The last house in the valley — West Wortha — will be demolished within the next four weeks, but archaeological work will continue even as the water level starts to rise.
The excavation — directed by Peter Stead of Exeter Museum — has been funded jointly by English Heritage and South West Water to the tune of £250,000.
Items so far recovered include prehistoric flint instruments, medieval pottery, a seventeenth-century water wheel, eighteenth-century clay ovens for scalding Devonshire cream, and nineteenth-century cider presses and apple crushers.
A permanent exhibition on the history of the valley is to be established near the dam in the early 1990s.
The flooding process, which begins next week, is expected to be complete by 1991.
A £16.1m dam will hold back a 2.6-mile-long artificial lake to be known as the Roadford Reservoir.
The dam itself — 45 miles west of Exeter and completed two months ago — is 430 metres across and 40 metres high.
SNP sets tone for election campaign
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
THE SCOTTISH National Party yesterday signalled its strategy for the 1990 regional council elections and the next general election by accusing Labour of swallowing ‘Thatcher values’.
Launching its autumn campaign in Edinburgh, the party revealed that the twin themes of independence in Europe and ‘fighting for Scotland better than Labour ever can or will’ would form its ‘springboard to victory’.
The SNP's national executive comittee meets this weekend to discuss election policy.
Nationalists claim growing popularity for their flagship policy of independence in Europe.
But the SNP is only too aware that most of its dormant support lies within Labour's Scottish ranks and that its electoral fortunes are constrained by Labour's dominance north of the Border.
In the latest Scottish opinion polls the SNP was trailing behind the Conservatives and Labour.
But Labour's lead over the SNP was 30 percentage points, a far cry from the four-point gap which separated them in January, in the wake of the nationalist victory at the Govan by-election.
The SNP is also launching a recruitment drive but its attacks on Labour seem likely to cause most controversy.
Michael Russell, the party's vice-convener for publicity, accused Labour of selling out on all the promises it made to Scottish voters at the last election.
Labour had ‘actively collaborated’ in trying to impose the poll tax.
The party had even colluded with the Tories to attempt to thwart SNP assaults on ‘Thatcher's right to ruin Scotland’.
He added: ‘Labour may have thrown in the towel, but the SNP will continue to lead the fight to defeat the poll tax and to rid our nation of the nuclear menace.’
Court will hear Press appeal over ‘Spycatcher’
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
THE EUROPEAN Commission of Human Rights gave its permission yesterday for three newspapers to pursue a claim that the UK broke freedom of expression guarantees during the Spycatcher affair.
The Guardian, The Observer and The Sunday Times are seeking a ruling that temporary injunctions handed down by a 3-2 House of Lords majority in 1987, banning publication of details from the memoirs of an ex-MI5 officer, Peter Wright, were unnecessary prior restraints on free speech that breached Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Andrew Neil, editor of The Sunday Times, welcomed the commission's decision and said his newspaper would certainly pursue the case to the bitter end.
The ruling in Strasbourg yesterday that the complaints are admissible clears the way for a future hearing before the European Court of Human Rights in up to two years' time.
In the meantime, the commission will consider the merits of the case with a view to bringing about a private, ‘friendly’ settlement with the Government.
Failing that, the case will be referred to the court by the commission, or by the Government, or be decided by a committee of ministers.
‘We hope the Government will agree to an amicable settlement but it will mean a big climbdown for them because we're not going to give way on the principle,’ Mr Neil said.
‘Our understanding is that if it does go to court, the hearing will be next year.’
Peter Preston, editor of The Guardian, said his newspaper's main aim was to get the European court to rule that it was wrong for the Government to use injunctions to prevent publication of such material, on the questions of principle and cost.
As soon as an injunction was sought, newspapers faced large legal bills, he said.
The Guardian and The Observer published details of the contents of the book in April 1986 and The Sunday Times published the first of a series of extracts in July 1987.
The Government was represented at a hearing before the commission on Thursday by the Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew QC.
It argues that the injunctions were necessary in the public interest to prevent the concept of the security service's confidentiality being destroyed pending full argument at trial.
The affair provoked a deep division of views when the case reached the Law Lords in July 1987.
Lord Templeman said that sweeping aside the public interest factor without any trial would have ‘established a ‘charter for traitors’ to publish on the most massive scale in England whatever they had managed to publish abroad'.
But in a dissenting judgement, Lord Bridge described the injunctions as a massive encroachment on freedom of speech.
They were finally lifted in a second House of Lords ruling in October last year.
Call for ivory trade ban tops conference agenda
By NICK CATER
THE FATE of the elephant will be decided by delegates at a conference on endangered species next week.
Eugene Lapointe, head of the world's wildlife trade monitoring body, hopes to find a compromise between those African nations calling for a total ban on ivory trading and those arguing for trade to be controlled.
The 103 nations which are parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) meet in Lausanne, Switzerland, from Monday.
Tanzania's proposal, which is backed by Kenya, Somalia and The Gambia, has divided delegates.
Southern African countries, including Zimbabwe, Botswana and South Africa, will fight any ban, and, if it achieves the required two-thirds majority, have declared they will register a CITES ‘reservation’ to allow elephant tusk sales to continue.
Mr Lapointe is cautious.
‘I want the emotion taken out of this debate.
It may be impossible to stop the trade in ivory, so a compromise must be found,’ he said.
At present, trade in African ivory worth millions of dollars is allowed by CITES, under a system of quotas, with tusk markings and shipment papers designed to catch out sales of poached tusks.
The quota system, which critics claim permits poached ivory to enter legal trade, was set up as African elephant numbers fell from an estimated 1.3 million in 1979 to about 600,000 today.
The dispute arises because poaching and habitat destruction has vastly reduced elephant herds in central and eastern Africa, but wildlife management further south has meant rising populations, which are regularly culled to raise foreign exchange.
Conservationists condemn as near-bribery the fact that the CITES' ivory trade monitoring unit is financed by a $140,000 (£86,950) levy on the trade.
Mr Lapointe says CITES needs at least $4m (£2.4m) to enlarge the role of the Convention and to bring in more money to support its policing work.
‘One suggestion is to develop our expertise in species management and to support countries establishing systems for the sustainable exploitation of wildlife.’
The Convention could examine key traded species, carry out the necessary scientific studies and create management plans which would ensure the protection of the species while allowing a profitable legal trade.
Mr Lapointe hopes to begin in Bolivia, where poaching threatens the caiman crocodile.
Neither the Bolivian government, nor its people benefit from the trade.
‘Yet with the right kind of controls, and the development of proper management for the species, the caiman could be conserved and still create income for local people and foreign exchange for the government.’
Encouraging more trade is an anathema to the pure protectionists, dismissed by some observers as ‘bunny huggers’.
They and other green groups will be among 350 observers at the biggest CITES meeting yet held.
Family left Sellafield house after dogs died
By NICK CATER
THE DEATH of two pet dogs from cancer was one of the factors which convinced a family they had to leave their home near the Sellafield nuclear processing plant in Cumbria, a High Court judge was told yesterday.
Christine Merlin also told Mr Justice Gatehouse that the fertility of her breeding geese diminished and goslings hatched with abnormalities such as‘heads on the wrong way round and wings in peculiar positions’.
Mrs Merlin and her husband Christopher say radioactive contamination was behind their decision to sell the house, Mountain Ash, Ravenglass, six miles from Sellafield, which fetched only £35,000 — little more than it cost 11 years earlier.
The couple are suing British Nuclear Fuels for about £150,000 compensation.
BNFL is contesting the case, claiming the levels of radioactivity were harmless and that the decision to sell was purely financial.
Mrs Merlin, now of Grass Gars Farm, Broughton in Furness, Cumbria, said she became concerned about the safety of the house before her husband who was ‘completely besotted’ by Mountain Ash.
She told him of her unhappiness, but she knew that, because of his love of the house, it would be difficult to convince him to move.
Their financial situation would not have been enough to drive them away.
A schoolmasterly exposition of the law: Andrew Brown sat in on a High Court trial — and was transported back to the strangely mingled fears and absurdities of a prep-school
By ANDREW BROWN
THE LAW COURTS in the Strand pronounce a terrible judgment on the visitor as soon as he enters: school, they say, really was a preparation for life.
Why, this is Dotheboys Hall, nor are we out of it.
The architecture is that of a thousand prep-schools; just as at a boarding school, authority seems at the same time ludicrous, arbitrary, and deadly serious.
The eccentricities of the judges have the same stupefying unfunniness — however witty — as those of a schoolteacher.
The courtrooms themselves are much smaller than one would imagine, from the size of the issues dealt with in them, while the great hall of the courts, which would, in a palace, be impressive, has red benches all around its edges, on which hurried sandwich lunches are consumed, the wrappers stuffed into ashtrays afterwards.
The majesty of the law does not derive from pomp, but from fear.
In libel trials the threat is of bankruptcy, rather than prison: the action brought by Lord Aldington against Nigel Watts and Count Nikolai Tolstoy is expected to last around three months, and could ruin at least one side.
Private Eye will probably close if it loses its appeal against the award of £600,000 to Sonia Sutcliffe, which was also heard last week.
Knowing all this, the surprise is the lack of drama as these trials progress.
A libel trial is in large parts intensely soporific, if you are not on the receiving end.
The wood panelling echoes slightly; Lord Aldington's counsel, Charles Gray QC, has a voice like a bumble-bee: a moment's inattention and his even, well-modulated and comforting tones seem to embark on an erratic, heavy flight around the room.
‘Have you violated, grossly or otherwise, the laws of war and of humanity?’ he asks his client.
‘Certainly not,’ Lord Aldington replies.
The careful, thorough examination continues: each charge in the pamphlet complained of is brought out and evenly dismissed.
‘Do you have the blood of 70,000 men, women and children on your hands?’—‘Certainly not.’
The hot-air hand-drier was almost certainly invented by lawyers: instead of the quick, rough efficiency of a towel, you must stand there miming the washing of hands over and over again until the soap has been extracted from every last crevice.
This is very much the way in which the law approaches the extraction of the truth, and it is different both from the vivid imprecision of ordinary life and the intimacy of a police interrogation.
Above all, the questions to be decided in a libel case stand at a curious tangent to the stories that lead up to them.
Tom Bowden fell over in his bathroom, drunk, in 1975 and crushed his throat and died, Mr Gray told the court.
He left a widow and three children.
The insurance company did not pay out because he had failed to mention when renewing his policy that he had been seriously ill.
The nature of the illness is disputed: the company thought it was alcoholism; the widow believes not.
A partner in her firm of solicitors knew Lord Aldington, who was then the chairman of Sun Alliance Insurance, which handled the case; and asked him to look at it.
He decided that the company was justified and that the nature of the disease was irrelevant.
Mrs Bowden's brother is Nigel Watts, who in 1984 took up the campaign against the insurance company, which had lain dormant since 1978.
After repeated telephone calls to Lord Aldington at home — as many as 28 in one weekend — had failed to change his mind, Mr Watts learnt of Count Tolstoy's theories.
Count Tolstoy provided much of the information for the pamphlet at issue, of which Mr Watts circulated 10,000 copies.
Among the recipients were the teachers and pupils of Winchester College, of which Lord Aldington was Warden.
The general allegations in it had been made before: Harry Phibbs had a moment of fame for calling the late Earl of Stockton ‘a war criminal’ on the strength of Count Tolstoy's theories, but he got away with it.
This time, the lights went up on the slipper-fight.
Lord Aldington sued first Mr Watts, and then Count Tolstoy.
He has told the court that he has spent the best part of the last two and a half years preparing for this joust.
There are several unusual things about this libel trial.
Most of the recent causes celebres in the libel courts have involved journalists on one side or another.
Frequently they have involved celebrities, who are thought, because they have fame and money, to have commensurately vulnerable reputations.
Lord Aldington does not fit this pattern at all.
He has been enormously successful, but in a quiet world.
One of the youngest brigadiers in the British Army; deputy chairman of the Conservative Party; chairman of a major insurance company; Warden of Winchester College — these are all solid achievements, but it is safe to guess that until this trial started most people had never heard of him.
When he gives evidence, sitting for the most part on two cushions, he leans forwards attentively like a headmaster, and with something of the same terrifying effect.
What a curious and deep shaft into English society is opened by the reflection that when reputations and perhaps a million pounds in costs alone are at stake, we revert to the patterns of upper-class education.