

Critical Review of the Week: Theatre
By ANDREW BROWN
Jean Poiret, the author of La Cage Aux Folles, came to the West End this week with Paris Match.
Sian Phillips, Stephen Moore and Lesley Ash did their best, but to little avail.
‘They awarded me a seat behind a pillar for this French farce, but foolishly I moved to a place where I had a full view of the stage.
I say foolishly because (it) grows worse the more you see of it…
Miss Phillips's performance is really a series of inappropriate costumes by Pierre Balmain and the actress wafts around in a lilac voile morning trouser suit, a black cocktail number, dresses up to resemble a wasp and dresses down in a riot of patchwork heliotrope, orange, purple, blue and green.
It is as if her costumes were the reasons for her being there.
Perhaps they were.’
Nicholas De Jongh, The Guardian.
‘In the course of a long and misspent career, I have probably seen less amusing comedies than this but, if so, I cannot at present call any of them to mind.’
Charles Osborne, Daily Telegraph.
‘Those of my colleagues and fellow theatregoers who constantly compare British theatre unfavourably with the depth, vitality and style of of the European stage should cop a load of this.’
Martin Hoyle, FT.
Critical Review of the Week: Film
By ANDREW BROWN
Could the Kenneth Branagh backlash be beginning?
Critical response to the actor-director's hugely-hyped Henry V was distinctly mixed.
‘Saddest disappointment is Branagh himself (who) proves a curiously anodyne screen presence.
Blond-mopped and doughty-featured, he resembles — Nature's fault not his, but one magnified on screen — a schoolboy who has eaten too many buns during the tuck-box break.
Shorn of Oliver's physical charisma and reserves of sullen, glowing mystery, Branagh tries to compensate with a pugnacious modernism.
But all one feels is a talented adjunct desperately grabbing at officer status.’
Nigel Andrews, Financial Times.
‘In terms of performance the film is praiseworthy, with a consistent, naturalistic, undeclamatory style that still respects the poetry…
Kenneth Branagh's own performance — correct, passionless, all intelligence -will be entirely a matter of taste.’
David Robinson, The Times.
‘This Henry V is an achievement of some character and resource, warts and all.
It deserves anybody's attention.’
Derek Malcolm, The Guardian.
‘Henry V offers (Branagh), better than any other play in the repertoire, what might be called a yuppie dynamic, a mythology of success and self-definition rather than of struggle…
It is fair to say that the real chemistry is not between actor and part, but between the idea of the star as entrepreneur and the idea of the king as a self-made man.’
Adam Mars-Jones, The Independent.
The best thing about Wired was Michael Chiklis's touching and convincing performance in the central role of John Belushi.
Otherwise, there seemed little to commend it.
‘The filmic device of a discarnate Belushi reviewing his life allows the dead performer (and Hollywood collectively) a right of reply; unfortunately it also makes the film ludicrous.’
Hugo Davenport, Daily Telegraph.
‘Better than it might be.
Michael Chiklis is an astounding Belushi lookalike, and an act-alike to match…
The movie's only enemy — but a major one — is its dialogue, oscillating between the pompous and the purple.’
Nigel Andrews, Financial Times.
‘Wired purports to be about America not just Belushi, but this is trite stuff about decadence in Tinseltown; what it has to say about the nation is nugatory.’
Sheila Johnston, The Independent.
The week's oddity was Ariel, a Finnish road movie directed by Aki Kaurismaki.
‘The week's pleasant surprise…
Dark, comic and determinedly un-moralistic, Ariel is a minor-key delight.’
Nigel Andrews, Financial Times.
‘The film is pretty short, but makes everything count and, while proving extremely entertaining, never lets go of its main point, which is to illuminate, with some sympathy, the underbelly of Scandinavian and particularly Finnish life.’
Derek Malcolm, The Guardian.
EVENTS /Conkering heroes take on the world
By SIOBHAN DOLAN and OWEN SLOT
The conker fraternity prepares for the highlight of its sporting year on Sunday with the World Championships at Ashton; it includes entries from the USA and Greece.
Nurturing the conkers to peak fitness rests with the Ashton Conker Club who ensure the nuts are not overly toughened or injected with illegal substances.
A World Championship conker must be exactly a week old, any less and it is too soft and if it lies any longer, the inside shrivels up.
Thousands are graded for size, shape and consistency and then strung on leather bootlaces.
All that remains for the entrants is to polish the conkers, Dennis Lillee style.
Tips for budding conker conquerors (like those above) include aiming for the the top (the weakest part) of your opponent's conker with the periphery of your own.
The swing is also crucial.
One enthusiast has constructed a gallows-like contraption in order to perfect his technique.
Overswing and you could snag (entangle with the string of your opponent's conker)— three snags and you're disqualified.
A good eye is essential as illustrated by the Mexican who practised for only 10 minutes before becoming King Conker, and the first overseas winner, in 1976.
This year the British contingent looks set to retain the title (won by a Devon man, Will Cox last year) unless the late Russian entry (a red hot favourite with some observers) proves a dark horse with his chestnut.
BOURNEMOUTH Golden Oldies Hockey Festival International event for the over 35s with teams from Fiji, New Zealand, Canada and West Germany bullying off for supremacy in the week long tournament.
To 14 Oct.
Bournemouth Sports Club, Chapel Gate, Hurn, Dorset (details 0684-293175).
Sat, Civic reception, Sun play begins at 2pm.
BRISTOL Amnesty International Film Week ‘89 A week of screenings, debate and discussion to raise awareness of the the organisation's work.
Includes Death Penalty Debate (Sat 7) to follow screening of much acclaimed The Thin Blue Line.
Watershed Media Centre, Bristol (0272-276444).
To 14 Oct.
BUXTON 4th International Kite Fly For Peace Up, up and away as kite flyers world wide unite in their quest for peace.
Participants are invited to bring kites or make one in the on-site kite workshop.
Buxton Girls Lower School, Peveril Rd (details 0298-814543).
Sun, 1.30-5pm.
Free admission.
GATESHEAD Family Sculpture Day 1989 Mammoth effort to build circus in just one day with old wood and pieces of string.
Professional sculptors on hand to help advise.
Wear old clothes and bring a hammer.
The Grove, Saltwell Park, Gateshead (details on 091-477 3478).
Sun, 11am-5pm.
Dagarti African music and dance with evocative displays of the history and landscapes of the Commonwealth.
Commonwealth Institute, Kensington High St, London W8 6NQ (01-603 4535).
Sun, 2.30pm.
London To Brighton Road Running Race The chimes of Big Ben mark the start of this race which follows A23 to Horley, then B2036 to Pycombe where it rejoins A23 to Brighton.
Big Ben Clock Tower, Palace Of Westminster, London SW1 (details 01-247 0371).
Sun, 7am; free for spectators.
SOUTH TYNEDALE Railway Diesel Day Chance to get all steamed up at unique collection of classic British industrial engines including ‘Tiny Tim’ and ‘The Wickham Trolley’.
Opportunity to view non-operational equipment under restoration.
South Tynedale Railway, Alston Station (details 0452 304546).
Sun.
FRIDAY LEEDS Film Festival Two weeks of varied film with a horror weekend (14/15 Oct), a George Romero retrospective with a screening of his new film Monkey Shines, various seminars, and two exhibitions, The Man Who Shot Garbo and 30 Years of Cuban Cinema.
To 28 Oct.
Box office and details (0532-462453).
Chess Commentary
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
After a nervous start to the Pilkington Glass World Championship Semi-finals, the Timman-Speelman match exploded into violence in Thursday's third round.
The diagram shows the position after White's 42nd move.
With two rooks and a bishop for the queen, Speelman has a nominal material advantage, but there are still threats to his king.