

Business and City Summary
By ANTHONY PAYNE
Today: September producer prices (UK).
French finance minister to propose European Community savings tax in Paris.
EC finance ministers meet in Luxembourg to consider VAT harmonisation and investment income taxation.
Tuesday: EC internal market ministers meet in Luxembourg.
Wednesday: Nobel prize for economics to be announced in Stockholm.
Confederation of British Industry monthly meeting to consider the economy and European monetary union.
Nicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, speaks in Washington on the consequences of low US savings rate.
Thursday: Liffe allowed to sell its contracts in the United States from today.
Friday: UK retail price index (September).
US producer prices (September).
Commodities: AFBD problem: to be or not to be
By MICHAEL PREST
KEITH GAUNT is no Pericles.
But when the citizens of the Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers cast their stones into the pot last week and elected the managing director of Amalgamated Metal Trading on to their council with the biggest number of votes, they elevated the nearest that divided body has seen to a populist.
The AFBD is divided for two reasons.
First, despite a brave attempt to encourage candidates to stand at last week's annual general meeting, the council remains grossly under-represented.
Neither the very big and important financial futures business, which accounts for about 155 of the AFBD's 400 members, nor the equally important oil market, is represented by the nine elected council members.
By sharp and crucial contrast, the metals trade, which accounts for a fraction of the AFBD's membership and income, is directly represented by at least three members — the triumphant Mr Gaunt, Phillip Robinson from Metallgesellschaft, and Francis Holford from Rudolf Wolff.
The AFBD has not been treated with the seriousness it deserves by bodies as powerful as the London International Financial Futures Exchange.
Moreover, the association suffers from a very Periclean problem: you cannot force people to vote in a self-regulatory organisation.
Allowing for 120 proxy votes and some 50 people at the AGM, less than half the AFBD membership bothered to register their opinion.
So the rules were changed last week to permit co-option of individual members.
One consequence of this weakness of self-regulation is the other reason for division within the AFBD.
A relatively small group of members, characterised as the Commodity Traders Group, has ensured that relations with the United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission occupy more public airtime than the leaders of the AFBD would like.
Mr Gaunt has been the most vocal of this band, and his election was his reward.
The warning to the AFBD is direct: ‘I don't see myself being tied to an AFBD board position on the CFTC issue.
I'm not looking to work at the CFTC issue within the AFBD.
I'm going to talk as Keith Gaunt, who has a mandate.’
In this political sense, Mr Gaunt is a populist.
The mandate, it seems, extends to discussing directly with Andrea Corcoran, the engaging lawyer whose unfortunate task it has been to negotiate on the CFTC's behalf, a solution to the intricate questions of extra-territoriality and segregation of clients' funds on the London Metal Exchange.
This threat Ms Corcoran can survive.
But can the AFBD survive?
The lofty official view is that the agitators in favour of an entirely fresh deal — or preferably none at all— with the CFTC command little support among the membership and distract the association from grappling with real issues such as Globex, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's putative electronic trading system.
For his part, Mr Gaunt claims that 38 of the 50 members who have signed the exemption order saving them from the full rigour of the CFTC's rules say they do not like the agreement.
Most, however, will probably tolerate it.
In any case, rescinding the deal will be very hard and was virtually ruled out at the annual meeting by Christopher Sharples, the AFBD's chairman.
Still, in this sense, there are divisions.
The unfair element is that the AFBD has been obliged to extricate itself from a CFTC hole largely dug by the Securities and Investments Board and imperfectly filled in by the Department of Trade and Industry.
There is a sovereignty issue, and the question of adapting rules to an odd but bona fide market such as the LME cannot be swept aside.
However, the vexed CFTC issue is resolved — and the AFBD last week was the lucky recipient of yet another draft solution from the commission — the traumas of the past six months have posed again the question of the association's independence.
Phillip Thorpe, the AFBD's chief executive, felt obliged to circulate to his staff a denial of reports that a merger with The Securities Association was in the offing.
But co-operation over matters such as a futures rulebook and joint compliance have indicated the economies of scale possible in combining with the TSA's 1,000 members.
Faced with the possibility of their contributions to the AFBD doubling to £8m a year, members may find a merger less undignified after all.
It would be ironic indeed if the AFBD's new populist hastened the downfall of his Athens.
International Capital Markets: Banks lose money in Eurobond battle
By DAVID FRANKS
OLD HABITS are dying hard in the Eurobond market where two months have now elapsed since leading banks implemented a radical change in the way they organise the selling of new issues to investors.
The habit into which the banks had slipped, and which their fresh approach to the business was designed to cure, was quite simple: losing money.
The largest fixed-rate offering ever witnessed in the Eurobond market, a $1.5bn five-year deal announced on Friday for Italy, which used the new money-making formula, provides disturbing evidence however that excessive competition, born of over-capacity, could yet ruin the latest attempts at restoring profitability to the market.
The new system for arranging Eurobond issues is derived from the way new issues have been done in the US for many years.
Bonds are underwritten and sold to investors by a small group of banks in return for a fee from the issuer.
The banks agree not to sell bonds below the issue price until the arranger of the issue is satisfied that the bulk of the deal has been sold, after which, members of the group are free to sell at whatever prices they wish.
This contrasts with the traditional Eurobond new issue system: banks in the underwriting group can sell below the issue price from the outset.
This they frequently do, eating into, and more often devouring, the commissions they receive from the issuer.
At the root of the problems with the old system was cut-throat competition.
Not, however, the old story of too many banks chasing too little commission income; compared to most markets, conventional Eurobond commissions are very generous.
No, the problem was banks were giving away their commissions to investors as inducements to buy expensively-priced bonds, the result of new issues arranged by banks desperate to maintain market share.
The US-style new issue system has much lower commissions than its Eurobond counterpart.
But under the US system, banks stand a much greater chance of actually retaining them.
On a five-year conventional Eurobond, fees might be 1.25 per cent of the total issue amount, yet banks would be lucky to see one eighth per cent(and that on a good deal) once discounts had been allowed to buyers of the bonds.
On a similar US-style deal, commissions might be only 0.325 per cent but most of that should end up with the banks.
Which brings us to the blockbusting Italy issue arranged by Morgan Stanley, the US investment bank which put together the first US-style issue in Europe with an offering for New Zealand in August.
Bankers had expected that the fees for the Italy deal would be the standard 0.325 per cent.
According to reliable sources, however, Italy is paying only 0.25 per cent to its underwriters.
Bankers close to the deal say that Morgan Stanley was forced reluctantly to accept a lower commission structure because Italy was being offered this by other banks competing for the business.
The fear now is that banks will start to compete by driving commission rates lower and lower until they are prepared to arrange issues at break-even or worse.
And this would vindicate those who believe that the market's ills are not going to be solved by tinkering with new issue processes, but rather by a drastic cutback in the overheads — ie, sacking people — being carried by the industry.
Major UK slowdown forecast
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
THE BRITISH economy is on the brink of a ‘major slowdown’ in the fourth quarter as the Government's high interest rate policy produces a dramatic downturn in business confidence, the latest Dun and Bradstreet survey of UK business says.
The survey was conducted before base rates rose to 15 per cent, and Dun and Bradstreet suggest that its findings might have been even bleaker had the poll been taken after the move.
The poll discloses a decline in selling prices for the second successive quarter, indicating that inflation is expected to fall.
But, at the same time, the steepest decline in Dun and Bradstreet's ‘optimism index’ since quarterly surveys began in the fourth quarter of 1987 points to a sharp slowdown in economic activity.
Keith Williams, managing director of Dun and Bradstreet UK, said: ‘High interest rates and the present value of the pound look like escalating the slowdown in the economy.’
The survey, of 1,000 chief executives in large and medium-sized companies, points to significant declines in optimism over sales, new orders and profits.
And companies expecting to shed workers have matched those likely to continue hiring, which suggests no growth in employment in the final quarter.
Employment opportunities in manufacturing, in particular, are likely to decline.
Moreover, business failures are expected to continue rising, especially among small firms.
Other highlights of the survey suggest that the construction industry is stagnating and that there has been a steep fall in new orders, declining sales and lower selling prices.
And manufacturers report a big drop in new orders.
For the first time since they began the surveys, Dun and Bradstreet report a negative outlook for the profits of retailers, which indicates a gloomy outlook for consumer spending in the run-up to Christmas.
Unlike previous polls, the latest survey shows the service sector joining the downward trend with significant declines in optimism for profits and employment.
On a brighter note, the survey indicates that the North-South divide is continuing to narrow.
Optimism remains relatively higher in the North than in the southern part of the country.
The survey's findings underline the concern of several City economists that the economy was already slowing down rapidly as base rates were lifted.
The Government is also understood to be divided over whether the increase in base rates will provoke a recession.
However, the Treasury which in the past several weeks has been preparing economic forecasts for inclusion in the November autumn statement seems almost certain to revise down its estimates for economic growth next year.
It is understood that the Bank of England backed higher rates to protect the pound but was less convinced that they needed to be raised to cool down the economy any further.
Treasury officials emphasised that Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor, has never promised a ‘soft landing’ in which inflation abates but growth continues moderately.
However, some in the Treasury are understood to have been recommending a base rate increase for some weeks on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence that the economy had cooled.
Although it is by no means the universal view, some City analysts believe the increase in rates makes a short-lived recession inevitable next year.
And they believe that what makes the current situation precarious is the continuing uncertainty over the outlook for sterling.
September trade figures, due on 24 October, are thought critical for sterling's fortunes.
Economists believe a sizeable narrowing from the £2bn current account shortfall for August would shore up sterling and ensure that interest rates rise no higher.
BAe-Thomson may bid for Ferranti
By JEREMY WARNER
A JOINT takeover proposal from British Aerospace and Thomson-CSF of France is one of a number of bid options which the board of Ferranti International, the troubled electronics group, will consider this week, writes Jeremy Warner.
Company sources said yesterday that British Aerospace and Thomson, who are believed to be negotiating a joint proposal, had not yet put anything to Ferranti which counted as a firm offer.
‘It is only one of a number of options which include proposals from British, US and Continental companies,’ the source said.
GEC, Ferranti's main British rival in radar, is also keen to mount a takeover bid but would encounter fierce Ministry of Defence opposition on the grounds that it would damage competition in electronics procurement.
The Ferranti source said: ‘Lord Weinstock (GEC's managing director) would like to be in the position where he was able to say to the Ministry of Defence, ‘Look, I am the only person who can rescue Ferranti from collapse.’
But the fact of the matter is he is not.
There are lots of people who want to take us over.’
One option believed to be under consideration by GEC would be to form its own partnership with British Aerospace, but MoD sources say this would be unlikely to overcome its fundamental objections to GEC's involvement.
Unions said yesterday that there would be a threat to thousands of jobs if either GEC or Thomson were allowed to gain a foothold at Ferranti because of the overlap in radar interests.
Roger Lyon, assistant general secretary of the Manufacturing Science and Finance union, said he would demand that Ferranti should discuss all takeover plans with the workforce first.
Mr Lyon is due to meet Ferranti's chairman, Sir Derek Alun-Jones, after tomorrow's reconvened annual meeting.
Mr Lyon believes he will be able to discover Thomson's plans because of an agreement giving his union the right to discuss any relevant employment or investment matter with senior managers.
Former adviser leads attempted TCS buyout
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
AN INDEPENDENT consultant who advised the Government on privatising The Crown Suppliers, the procurement agency, is now leading a buyout team bidding for the bulk of the business.
Bob Ethrington, a director of Coopers & Lybrand Associates, is heading a group of TCS managers and staff planning to bid for the core business, the product supply and services division.
There is no suggestion of any impropriety by Mr Ethrington.
However, his membership of the team could prove an embarrassment to the Government, which is subsidising his bid attempt.
Mr Ethrington has provisional financial backing from the trade union bank Unity Trust to make a bid via an employee share ownership plan.
He previously conducted two studies on behalf of the Government into TCS.
The first, more than two years ago, considered the feasibility of privatisation and followed reports from the Treasury and the Central Purchasing Unit which came out against wholesale privatisation.
The second was a report on restructuring the business in the run-up to privatisation.
This was completed in September 1988.
Eight months later, in May 1989, Mr Ethrington joined the management buyout team, which had been formed a year earlier.
Coopers & Lybrand worked on the first study in conjunction with Samuel Montagu, the merchant bank which is handling the sale on behalf of the Government.
Mr Ethrington denied there was any potential conflict of interest.
‘There is absolutely no question of (our receiving) favoured status in the sale process,’ he said.
‘This has been done in a very formal and proper way.’
On the question of whether as adviser he had been privy to confidential information, he said: ‘Any (management) buyout is party to information other buyers won't have.’
The Department of the Environment commented: ‘We see no conflict of interest.
Mr Ethrington had no association with the management buyout team when he was advising the Government.
Neither he nor anyone else in Coopers & Lybrand is now advising the Government on matters relating to the privatisation of TCS.’
Mr Ethrington's partners in the buyout team are Jim Cousins, the TCS finance director, and John Cross, procurement director.
Christopher Chope, the environment minister, disclosed in May that the Government was prepared to contribute to the professional advice costs of management buyout teams to a maximum of £132,000.
NI changes take effect
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
MORE than 19 million employees will pay £3 a week less in national insurance contributions and more than two million pensioners will be able to work without reducing their state pension entitlement following changes which came into force this month.
Reforms of national insurance and the abolition of the pensioners' earnings rule will effect most of the working population, claims the Treasury in this month's Economic Progress Report.
The measures, designed to boost the supply side of the economy, were announced in this year's Budget.
Increases in earnings just above the old NIC ‘steps’(£75 and £115) will no longer be wiped out by higher contributions.
The rate at the lower earnings limit of £43 a week is reduced from 5 to 2 per cent.
Earnings between £43 and £325 a week — the upper earnings limit — will now attract the uniform 9 per cent.
The Treasury estimates that abolition of the pensioners' earnings rule could cost £565m by 1991, to be met out of reserves.
But extra tax revenue from working pensioners could claw back £130m.
French set to reject Deloitte merger
By SIMON PINCOMBE
THE PROPOSED international merger between Deloitte Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross is likely to be holed below the waterline this week when the French arm of Deloitte pulls out of the agreement.
The French firm is expected to follow the example of Deloitte UK by joining forces with Coopers & Lybrand instead.
But unlike Deloitte UK, which declined to join the proposed Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu (DRT), the French practice has already signed up.
Sources within Coopers say that a change of mind will be announced this week.
The move will come as a shattering blow to the US-backed DRT initiative.
It will leave it so far with merger agreements in just the US and Japan.
Coopers, on the other hand, now has merger agreements with Deloitte UK, Deloitte Dijker van Dien of the Netherlands and now France.
With DRT still holding two of the most important countries, the complete disintegration of Deloitte Haskins & Sells International is now assured.
A fierce battle is now on for the constituent firms across Europe, the Pacific basin and Canada.
Sources within Coopers suggest that Deloitte in Australia will shortly announce it is to side with Coopers, and the firm is confident that the Canadians will follow suit.
The position in Canada is critical.
Both Coopers and Touche are neck and neck in the market place with the Canadian firm, Deloitte Samson, just a fraction behind.
If the Deloitte firm joins with Coopers, Touche Ross, as a representitive of DRT, will be at a huge disadvantage and the gloabl aspiriations of DRT will be utterly wrecked.
If that happens, the logic behind the Deloitte strategy will have disappeared and some in the profession are predicting that Deloitte US may have to admit defeat and reconsider its position.
Of all the proposed mega-mergers this year, the only success has been that of Ernst & Young, which merged all its significant practices expect for Canada.
Radio sounds like music to City ears: Changes afoot in the world of radio have made the City sit up.
Deregulation could make it an exciting prospect, as Mary Fagan reports
By MARY FAGAN
AFTER years of playing the cinderella of the media world, the potential of radio is at last gaining recognition.
Shares in the quoted radio stocks in 1988 outperformed the market by 100 per cent, and since March 1987, the sector's market value has soared from £33m to over £400m.
All the signs are that radio is an exciting prospect — the forthcoming deregulation of the industry with associated changes in costs, and an expected boom in advertising revenues, is finally making the City take notice.
The potential for an advertising bonanza has come under the spotlight with the advent of ‘splitting frequencies’ such as that undertaken by London's LBC last week.
Splitting frequencies — transmitting different programmes on FM and AM — could effectively double listening hours and provides two highly targeted audiences for advertising in a catchment area.
In LBC's case, for example, the LBC Crown FM is going for the upmarket listener, while the medium wave service, London Talkback Radio, is pitching for the tabloid market and the dedicated followers of phone-ins.
Capital Radio, the other UK giant of the independents, has already split its frequencies, and before long all nine quoted independent stations are expected do so, albeit not always around the clock.
To date, radio has trailed badly in the UK advertising stakes, taking just 2 per cent of total expenditure.
But the trend is changing.
Stockbroker Hoare Govett believes that radio could increase its share by 5 per cent by 1995.
But advertising is itself extremely volatile and profits could take a dive as easily as they could soar.
At Barclays de Zoete Wedd, whose report on the sector is due out this week, analyst Jane Anscombe points out that there are currently some worries on the advertising revenue front, and that some television people have seen a bit of pressure.
In spite of that, she believes: ‘These times seem a good opportunity for long-term investors to get hold of stock.’
The Broadcasting Bill, due next month, is expected to spark a radical reshaping of radio in the UK, broadly along the lines envisaged in the Government's 1987 Green Paper ‘Radio: Choices and Opportunities’.
Today, the radio industry is dominated by two regulatory authorities, the BBC and the Independent Broadcasting Authority.
Unlike the BBC radio stations, which are funded by the television licence fee, the independents depend almost entirely for their revenues on advertising, which they can broadcast for nine minutes in an hour.
They rely for their existence on franchises awarded by the IBA, and pay a primary rental fee each year in return for the use of the IBA transmitters.
The Government's thirst for more competition, less regulation and more consumer choice is expected to result in three new national commercial radio networks (two of which will push the BBC out of some of its existing frequencies) as well as a plethora of local and ‘community’ stations.
Unlike the national services, which are likely to go out to competitive tender, these local and community services are expected to be awarded on the basis of their planned services and financial viability.
The result could be many hundreds of independents in the UK by the end of the next decade.
In about a year's time, the IBA will be no longer, and the regulation of radio passes to the Radio Authority.
From then, licencees will be responsible for their own transmitters, either owning or leasing them.
But the cost structure of the industry is also set to change.
The main costs to the independent stations have been the IBA primary rental for transmission facilities, secondary rental as a tax on net profits, and copyright.
In future, the primary rental will be abolished, and the new costs of maintaining their own transmission systems plus paying for the licence are expected to be considerably less expensive.
But because currently larger stations effectively subsidise the transmission costs of smaller ones, the big stations will benefit most.
More widespread benefits are likely from the passing away of secondary rental, which will finally disappear with the advent of the Radio Authority.
Less than glamorous, perhaps, but with lighter regulation and the prospect of consolidation on a regional level, the independent radio business is no longer the ugly duckling of the media world.
Economic Outlook: Sweet and sour conference specials
By SARAH HOGG
Ask yourself which politician you would rather be this fortnight, Chris Patten or Nigel Lawson, and the answer is easy: John Smith.
Labour's party conference was, for its shadow Chancellor, wonderfully enhanced by the sufferings of the real one.
Being Labour's money man is never easy, even when the party is still in opposition and you are as persuasive as Mr Smith.
But for once, the regular Labour conference task of reminding the party the public purse is not bottomless was put in the shade by the two looming Tory conference tasks of presenting the poll tax — and 15 per cent base rates.
The first of these is basically more difficult; but Mr Patten has the advantage of novelty, the sheen of possible succession to Mrs Thatcher, a way with green words and blue audiences.
He is wresting more money out of the Treasury to dilute the poll tax.
But it is far from clear yet how much.
As for the hoped-for recasting of the ‘community charge’, nothing short of transferring education to central government — which is simply not going to happen before the next election — can reduce it to a politically painless level.
Well, Mr Patten will do his best to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, and the audience will know it was not his idea.
Nor, of course, was it Mr Lawson's.
After a year in which the Treasury's forecasting failures (notably that very large trade deficit) have been rather obvious, it is only fair to recall that it did presciently point out just about every awkward little detail of the poll tax, from its automatic upward impact on inflation to the folly of providing local authorities with a golden opportunity to raise more tax while blaming the Government.
Mr Lawson did, however, play his part in taking the Prime Minister to that peak of economic success from which the poll tax plan was launched.
It was born in that self-confident time when other changes she had doggedly forced past party muttering had been rewarded by a step-change in productivity and relatively low inflation.
Would she — could she — have driven the idea of the community charge through in today's less confident political and economic circumstances?
Plenty to explain Circumstances which, of course, will fall to Mr Lawson to explain this week.
A decision is always easier to defend than vacillation, so — provided he is spared a second — the Chancellor can at least be glad that the base rate hike happened last week.
Having blamed it on the Bundesbank, he can go on to talk about other things — such as sex and tax, perhaps.
Britain's savers and pensioners are just beginning to wake up to the possibilities of independent taxation of husbands and wives.
One unremarked consequence for both sexes, for example, is that since wives' allowances can henceforth be set against investment income, there will be more non-taxpayers among bank and building society depositors — and the composite rate of tax on their yield will then be reduced for everybody.
Mr Lawson can dress all this up macroeconomically as a timely ‘budget for savings’.
For a current account deficit on the balance of payments reflects a shortage of national savings, in relation to investment.
He has hitherto fought shy (apart from a few marginal incentives) of trying to increase total savings through the tax system.
But he is a sufficiently good opportunist to put a strategic gloss on something he is going to do anyway.
A Tory conference probably has more than its due share of savers.
It will still contain plenty of business and mortgage borrowers to kick up a stink about base rates.
At the moment, the economic evidence is sufficiently ambiguous to support the view that higher rates were needed domestically, not just to steady the pound.
But a conflict between objectives — as we saw early in 1988 — may re-emerge the moment it is clear the economy is really slowing.
Then the trade deficit will make it hard to lower interest rates without undermining sterling, while at the same time reinforcing industry's demands for cheaper money to help it compete.
Reaction to the latest rise makes it clear that everyone is watching out for another eruption of internal discord on the exchange rate between Sir Alan Walters in Downing Street, and Mr Lawson in the Treasury.
Ripe time Assuming Mr Lawson has achieved a respectable fall in inflation, the time then really would be ‘ripe’ for full membership of the European Monetary System, since this would tend to drive interest rates down while holding up the pound.
Out of the question?
Well, perhaps only the new Foreign Secretary could sell it to Mrs Thatcher, and he will have his own notions of ripe time.
But some quite surprising right-wing converts to the idea seem to be popping out of the woodwork, attracted by Mr Lawson's mistitled idea of ‘competing currencies’.
What this really means is a fixed exchange rate system without capital controls.
In such a system, big companies could choose which currency to do business in, especially if national taxes are reformed to encourage choice.
Then high-inflation EC members would have to get their act together, or lose reserves and revenue.
Hey presto, economic convergence and monetary union -without a European central bank.
All this actually amounts to, however, is the existing EMS (once so resisted by those converts), after capital controls are finally gone, as long planned for next year.
For it is coming to be understood that their departure will force the pace towards total fixity of exchange rates in the EMS.
But that means not so much competing currencies as one Euro-currency with various national names.
This would inevitably require European central bankers to work closely together, while the structure of the system would eventually have to be formalised.
Well, what's in a name?
If different people see the process differently, never mind.
If competing ideas all point in the same direction, the politicians follow.
It will not be long before every party conference is treated to its spokesman's version of European monetary union, along with motherhood, apple pie — and, no doubt, local government finance.
GM buffs up its British credentials: Michael Harrison on Jaguar's preferred ally in its fight to stay independent
By MICHAEL HARRISON
THE attentions of General Motors, the world's largest car manufacturer, can be hard to resist — something Jaguar may very soon discover as GM and its US rival, Ford, slug it out for the hand of the embattled luxury car maker.
In 80 years, GM has grown into the most powerful industrial conglomerate in the United States, and one of the biggest multi-national companies in the world.
Its size is simply awesome.
Last year GM's turnover was $123.6bn (£77bn)— comfortably more than the gross domestic product of a good few developing countries.
It employs 766,000 people and last year sold 8.1 million cars and trucks — three times more than the entire British market consumed.
It is nearly 10 times the size of the UK's biggest industrial conglomerate, British Aerospace including its Rover car subsidiary, and dwarfs even the mighty Japanese motor manufacturers Toyota and Nissan.
The founding of GM in September 1908 was, however, a little publicised event.
In its first year of operation it made 25,000 cars and trucks.
Today its tentacles spread from motor manufacture to aerospace, defence, computing and railways.
It has more than 200 plants in 30 states and 122 cities in the US, and manufacturing or distribution operations in 33 other countries worldwide.
For a good part of the 1980s, GM languished in the doldrums — burdened by a a top-heavy bureaucracy, losing market share to Japanese and domestic rivals, and saddled with a reputation as the biggest but highest-cost and least efficient US car maker.
In 1986 its profits plunged from $4bn to $2.9bn — largely as a result of a $1.3bn restructuring programme.
Critics of its lumbering style of management — notably the flamboyant and dissident board member H. Ross Perot — were having a field day.
In a memorable phrase Mr Perot suggested that what GM needed was ‘the capitalist equivalent of Mao's cultural revolution’.
The man who has achieved that — and has record profits of $4.8bn in 1988 to prove it — is the GM chairman Roger Smith, hardly a charismatic revolutionary, but rather the quintessential GM company man down to his sober suits and clean-cut features.
The resurrection has not been without pain, however.
Since 1986 GM has slimmed its workforce by 111,000 and ‘indefinitely idled’ a number of its US plants — GM's euphemsism for closure.
But it has paid dividends.
On Friday, GM announced that its share of the US car and truck market for the 1989 model year ended September 30 was 35.2 per cent— up from 34.7 per cent in 1988 — and that it has outsold Ford by 1.7 million vehicles and Chrysler, the third biggest American car maker, by 3.4 million vehicles.
No company is an island, however.
Not even one the size of GM, which has enthusiastically joined in the scramble to forge alliances and co-operative deals with other motor manufacturers worldwide.
Last week, it announced an unprecedented pact with its rival Chrysler to manufacture jointly transmissions and other drive-line components for each other 's van and car ranges.
But the process of collaboration had started earlier.
In February 1984, GM and Toyota formed a joint venture to produce a new small car, the Chevrolet Nova.
Eight months later, GM completed a merger with the computer services company Electronic Data Systems in a bid to improve computer services throughout the GM empire.
In the same year GM launched the Saturn passenger car division.
In 1985 GM expanded into aerospace technology with the $5bn acquisition of Hughes Aircraft — a diversification which has been copied by Daimler-Benz in its takoever of MBB and, in reverse, by BAe with its purchase of the Rover car group.
GM, in common with other Western car manufacturers, perversely views the Japanese automotive industry as both the great collaborator and the great threat in equal measure.
This schizophrenic attitude is amply illustrated.
On the one hand, GM has joined forces with Toyota in car production and with the Japanese van manufacturer Isuzu, to which it sold a 40 per cent stake in its Bedford van plant in the UK and with which it is now investing £70m to produce a new four-wheel drive vehicle for the European market.
On the other it has made no bones of the need for concerted action on the part of European car makers — of which it counts itself one — and European governments to counter the threat of growing Japanese car imports into the Continental market.
At the Geneva motor show earlier this year, the president of GM Europe, Robert Eaton, articulated this most clearly when he warned it was vital to make ‘substantial progress’ towards improving productivity and presenting a united political front against Japanese import penetration.
Failure to do so, he warned, would mean surrendering 25 per cent of the European car market to Japanese companies by the mid-1990s.
The cause for GM's concern is plain when one realises that its West European operations have emerged as the biggest profit earners in the entire group, accounting for some 37.3 per cent of net income in the last two years but for only 14.6 per cent of group turnover.
Not least among its star performers has been the British arm, Vauxhall, which last year achieved record net profits of £152m and record car sales.
As well as being profitable and actually paying a dividend back to Detroit for the first time in years, Vauxhall is an important part of the GM empire for political reasons.
GM has sold off its UK truck operations and reduced its holding in the Bedford van plant.
It was badly scarred by the ill-fated attempt to acquire Leyland Vehicles and Land Rover, and only in recent times has it begun to reverse its image in Britain as little more than a screwdriver assembler of cars.
At one stage, Whitehall officials seriously considered stripping Vauxhall of its classification as a UK car company, so high was the imported content of ‘British-built’ Vauxhalls.
Since then local sourcing of components has improved markedly, as has the proportion of Vauxhall-Opel's UK sales which derive from its UK car plants as opposed to those on the Continent.
In 1986 GM acquired a controlling interest in the British sports car maker Lotus, and also employs thousands in its UK car parts division, AC Delco.
If it is to succeed in partnering Jaguar, then it is important for GM to be seen as a ‘good citizen’ of the UK.
The difficulty remains that, in this respect at least, Ford still has the superior credentials.
Third Market: Unit to add new interest
By NEIL THAPAR
UNIT GROUP, which obtained the distinction of being the first company to float on the Third Market, is about to make an important diversification into the engineering sector.
The company, which is one of the leading manufacturers of timber pallets in the UK, is thought to be planning the acquisition of a components manufacturer for about £700,000.
The target is believed to be a privately-owned Surrey business which is a supplier of most aluminimum products to the aerospace and defence sectors.
Although there appears to be little synergy between Unit's existing business and engineering, the group believes it can introduce better management systems in the target company.
Unit has already built up valuable experience in engineering by setting up its own production line for the pallets business with in-house expertise.
It aims to capitalise on that experience by creating a second plank for the group in the engineering field.
It is likely that Unit will want to acquire more engineering interests to tie in with the Surrey business.
Unit is expected to finance the deal with a combination of cash and shares, which last week closed 1p lower at 145p, valuing the company at about £8m.
Meanwhile, demand for Unit's pallets continues to be strong, although it remains to be seen what impact the slowdown in the economy will have on its prospects.
However, BWD Rensburg, the broker, is looking for pre-tax profits of about £1.2m in the year ending 31 March against £1.04m reported for last year.
Although earnings slipped from 8.1p to 17.6p last year due to a much higher tax charge, they are expected to improve to about 20.3p a share in the current year.
Next year could also see Unit's graduation from the third tier to the main market.
The company has a large number of Business Expansion Scheme investors who backed the company before it was on the Third Market.
It does not want to move up until the tax rules for BES investments have been fulfilled in January.
Square Mile: Stock Exchange hurries ahead on clearing house
By JOHN MOORE
BY THE end of this month the International Stock Exchange will have a clearer idea of the problems ahead of it in its establishment of a clearing house for the settlement of share deals.
Sir Geoffrey Littler, a former senior Treasury official and a director of NatWest Investment Bank, together witha group of eight City worthies, will have reported back to another committee established by the Exchange giving an interim assessment of the issues involved.
Last week, Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the Exchange, announced the appointment of Sir Geoffrey Littler as head of the Clearing House Formation Committee, which is charged with developing the proposals for the new settlement system.
The Exchange intends that the new clearing house will be jointly owned.
The Exchange will hold around 40 per cent of the shares in the new body with 20 or more groups — such as banks, registrars, securities houses and large financial institutions as well as some listed companies — holding the remainder.
As yet nothing is concrete and, following Sir Geoffrey's study, that initial concept may well change.
The terms of reference of Sir Geoffrey's committee indicate that the Exchange is determined that all aspects of the creation of a clearing house are fully explored.
A priority for the committee will be to establish the categories of organisation to which participation in the ownership of the clearing house would be extended, and the requirements that such an arrangement would be expected to fulfil.
The committee will also be considering whether there should be representation for groups not involved in ownership.
Mr Hugh Smith is committed to the principle of allowing users of the stock market more participation in the provision of services.
In its original thinking for the clearing house scheme, announced last July, the Exchange intended that a management agreement will exist between the clearing house and itself for the use of the Exchange's existing and projected settlement services.
An eventual transfer of the settlement services to the new clearing house was not ruled out.
Sir Geoffrey and his committee will be attempting to define the relationship between the clearing house and the Exchange and the financial arrangements for the provision of services.
His committee will be considering the regulatory requirements of the Financial Services Act for the new Exchange.
Under the act, the new clearing house will have to achieve ‘recognised’ status and adhere to the existing regulatory regime in the City.
More generally, Sir Geoffrey has been charged with proposing arrangements which will ensure that the business direction of the clearing house will be consistent with the maintenance and promotion of an effective central securities market in the UK.
What has given impetus to the establishment of the clearing house is the Exchange's fear that its centralised securities market is in danger of fragmenting.
The provision of efficient services and the involvement of users of the stock market is seen as a vital way in which to hold the market together.
Sir Geoffrey is also required to examine the basis on which share deals which are carried on outside the Exchange can be handled by the new clearing house.
His committee starts work next week.
The Exchange hoped originally that the new clearing house would be in operation by March next year.
At the moment, no date for its formation has been set but Sir Geoffrey has been asked to make specific recommendations ‘as soon as possible’.
Threat to insurers AS THE £1.1bn takeover bid by Australian Mutual Provident, Australia's largest life insurer, gets underway for the Pearl Group, a new survey suggests that perhaps the Australians should have made a bid for a building society.
The survey, prepared by the giant reinsurance group Swiss Re, shows that building societies pose a growing threat to insurance companies.
In it, 1,500 individuals were asked: ‘If you were to buy life assurance, which of the following methods, if any, would you choose — from a salesman in your own home, from a broker in his office, by post (either from a newspaper advertisement or from a mailshot), from a bank, or from a building society.’
The responses indicated that 28 per cent would prefer to buy through a building society; 27 per cent said they would buy from a salesman in their own home.
Only 2 per cent would choose to buy a policy through the post, while 26 per cent opted for the broker route.
Those who would prefer to use a bank amounted to 22 per cent.
The fascinating feature of the survey is the marked change of sentiment towards methods of buying life cover in the last year.
A year ago 37 per cent of individuals indicated that would prefer to buy through a salesman, while 20 per cent preferred building societies.
Banks appear to be growing in popularity: a year ago only 17 per cent would have bought life cover through a bank.
According to Swiss Re, the banks and building societies continue to be very strong in the 15-24 age group.
The findings indicate why groups such as the Pearl are finding it heavy going in their core business activity.
The Pearl has a 6,500-strong sales force which collects insurance premiums and arranges policies by the simple expedient of house-to-house calls.
The Australian group bidding for Pearl argues that the UK market's proportion of individual life and pension business attributable to this method of business has fallen from 25 per cent to 7 per cent.
The Pearl has been making strenuous efforts to change its business direction, but the Australians clearly see the possibilities offered by the British group's large distribution network to market its own products.
View from Paris: Postal reform not easy to deliver
By SARAH LAMBERT
THE FRENCH government is standing firm against a wave of strikes by tax collectors, Peugeot workers, nurses and transport workers that threaten to paralyse certain sectors of the economy.
The strong tactics have paid off in the case of the prison officers, who went back to work last week, but there is increasing concern on how to deal with the tax collectors.
The unrest stems from their demand for higher salaries and better working conditions and has brought the day-to-day operations at the ministry of finance to a virtual standstill.
In the south of France hundreds of house sales have been held up because there is no one available to process the tax-related paperwork involved.
Given this background, the minister of posts, telecommunications and space, Paul Quiles, was treading on eggshells when he met the unions this week for the second in a series of talks concerning the reform of the country's post office, the PTT.
France, Denmark and Luxembourg are the only European countries not to have deregulated their post and telecommunications industry.
As a result the country is losing market share and is ill-prepared to fight the European competition come 1992 and the single European market.
The EC ministers have been told that if they cannot agree voluntarily on measures to ensure the harmonisation of the telecommunications industy some time early next year the European Commission will force them to do so.
The hurdle of post office reform has brought down French ministers of state before now, notably Pierre Lelong, who held the posts and telecommunications portfolio in Jacques Chirac's government but was forced to resign after a long and bitter strike in 1974.
Notwithstanding, Mr Quiles commissioned a report into strategies for reform and its controversial recommendations, made public at the beginning of last month, immediately drew the wrath of the unions.
The report recommends splitting the PTT in two with separate managements, one responsible for the post, the other for telecommunications.
The 450,000 employees, 300,000 of whom work in the postal service, are unhappy.
In the 1970s the government of Valery Giscard D'Estaing made a huge investment in the French telecommunications industry, giving it one of the most modern infrastructures in the world.
The rates it charges for its services are, however, set by the ministry of finance.
While 85 per cent of telephone users are reportedly satisfied with the service they receive, commercial clients are not.
The use of telex machines increased 7 per cent in the year 1987-88 and the demand for fax machines will outstrip that this year.
Many large companies doing business with the US and Asia can save as much as 20 per cent on their communications costs by routing traffic through London.
With the developments in fibre optics and the explosion in the use of services such as transcontinental video conferences, the competition can only get stiffer.
The post is, meanwhile, losing out to electronic ‘mail’ systems and a lengthy postal strike last year served only to hammer another nail in the coffin.
Delivery services such as DHL have captured 65 per cent of the post office's traditional market.
The post office has a monopoly only on the delivery of letters and parcels weighing less than a kilogram — a decling trade and one that now represents only 40 per cent of total earnings although attempts to stop the drift by creating, for example, specialised services for direct marketing have been very successful.
The post office's financial viability rests on its investment product, the good old post office savings book.
But, while it attracts 14 per cent of all personal savings, it barely ranks as a force in France's wider investment market.
However, the development of specially-tailored funds and financial products to compete with those offered by banks is beginning to get under way and there is a potentially lucrative link-up with the big assurance companies based on the post office's huge client base.
None of this is of any comfort to the unions, who are very strongly represented within the PTT and have been united in their rejection of the proposed reforms.
They fear that having separated post and telecommunications, France Telecom will receive the lion's share of the budget and may ultimately be privatised altogether.
The most vociferously opposed union maintains that all the problems could be solved were the government to remove the PTT from the financial tutelage of the finance ministry and give it an independent budget.
Since this would require a constitutional change it is not likely to recruit many supporters, but the unions have some powerful government supporters on their side.
They oppose the proposed changes for political reasons, believing that they form part of the task the prime minister, Michel Rocard, has set himself to reform public sector industry — reforms that many to the left of Mr Rocard believe to be inherently unsocialist.
The astute Mr Quiles has made a promising start.
The initial talks with the unions dealt with grievances such as working conditions and pay, sweetened with the promise of Fr100m to fund immediate improvements — to help provide cheaper accommodation for Paris workers, for example.
However, the unions have made it clear that they refuse even to discuss the proposed reforms and are not afraid to call their men out on strike.
Mr Rocard is frightened that, without reform, the PTT risks the same fate as France's now moribund iron and steel industry.
Mr Quiles is probably more concerned to hold on to his job.
An expert at crisis management: Mr Morton's penchant for rows is one of his hallmarks: Jeremy Warner looks at the man entrusted with the spadework of the tunnel project
By JEREMY WARNER
‘ALASTAIR MORTON is terrific at crisis management, but he is no good when it comes to running a settled organisation,’ says one of those who has been left, somewhat bruised, along the wayside of Mr Morton's whirlwind career.
If this is a correct analysis Mr Morton must have found his metier at Eurotunnel, where he is one of two chairmen.
Yet questions are now being asked about whether his combative and aggressive style is really appropriate for Eurotunnel's latest debacle.
Mr Morton was headhunted by Eurotunnel from a minor financial services group, Guinness Peat, in Febuary 1987 specifically to deal with another such crisis.
Then the group's efforts to raise £750m from the Equity Three share placing looked like foundering.
Without the new share capital, the banks wouldn't put up the £5bn syndicated loan which was to provide the bulk of the tunnel's finance.
Most observers agree that Mr Morton did a spectacular job in reversing the project's fortunes.
With new advisers, he managed to change investment sentiment.
A series of presentational coups followed his appointment.
He renegotiated the agreement over tunnel usage by the railways and succeeded in presenting it as a breakthrough.
And he made a number of management changes which reinforced the impression that Eurotunnel had become a company capable of acting in the best interests of bankers and shareholders and standing up to the demands of the Anglo-French contracting consortium.
Yet, despite numerous rows with the contractors, he has failed so far to tinker with the construction contract to any meaningful degree.
It is this contract, which Mr Morton inherited when he joined Eurotunnel, that lies at the heart of present difficulties.
Mr Morton needs to bring the contractors down from their revised cost forecast of £7.5bn.
He also needs to cap the new price so that it is prevented from rising further over the remaining four years of construction if he is to convince bankers that they should continue to support Eurotunnel.
It should be a situation perfectly suited to Mr Morton's Rottweiler style of management.
Some bankers, however, are beginning to have doubts about the way he bulldozes through his business aims.
One admits to getting a little fed up with Mr Morton's tendency to gloss over Eurotunnel's problems, insisting that almost whatever happens it will all come right in the end.
Mr Morton has always had a powerful ally in the shape of the Bank of England.
Both David Walker, now at the Securities and Investments Board, and Kit McMahon, now chairman of Midland Bank, are friends.
In 1982 they called on Mr Morton to help rescue Guinness Peat, which was close to collapse.
Despite some well publicised rows with Lord Kissin, the group's founder, and a high turnover of senior executives, he succeeded in turning the company round.
Mr Morton's penchant for rows is one of his hallmarks.
His most notable was with the merchant banker Sir Philip Shelbourne.
Mr Morton was running the British National Oil Corporation when Mrs Thatcher took power in 1979.
She brought in Sir Philip to oversee the dismantling of BNOC and the privatisation of its successor Britoil.
Within a week of his arrival Mr Morton, always an interventionist in his economics, was gone.
Mr Morton was born in South Africa, the son of a Scottish oil executive who had married into a local Afrikaner family.
He has worked for South African companies and first came to this country on a De Beers scholarship to Oxford.
But his views are strongly against the regime of his birthplace.
In his business style he bears many of the characteristics of an immigrant -including an overbearing, sometimes ruthless, desire to succeed.
The immigrant in him also makes him a bad delegater, say former colleagues.
He acquired his interventionist leaning at Harold Wilson's Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, where he was recognised as an up-and-coming young manager by Lord Kearton, the charismatic chairman of Courtaulds.
Mr Morton has long been rumoured as a possible successor to Sir Bob Reid at British Rail.
But, even if he wanted the job, his politics would probably rule him out.
He is strongly SDP, or at least was until its virtual demise.
Mr Morton, who has made many speeches on the need for an integrated and planned transport policy, would in any case be unlikely to relish the job of breaking up the rail network.
Ward arrested in US over Guinness affair
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
THE US Department of Justice has agreed to back the Serious Fraud Office's efforts to have Washington lawyer Thomas Ward extradited to Britain to face charges in connection with the Guinness affair.
Mr Ward was arrested by the FBI in Washington on Thursday and charged with Theft Act offences relating to the £5.2m he secretly received from Guinness through an obscure offshore nominee company in May 1986.
Mr Ward, a senior partner of the Washington law firm of Ward, Lazarus, Grow & Cihlar, is the eighth person to face criminal proceedings in relation to the Guinness affair.
The Washington attorney was a close friend and adviser to Guinness's former chairman, Ernest Saunders, and has been a major target of the SFO's investigation of the corporate scandal.
He is alleged to have been a key figure in virtually all aspects of the Guinness affair.
Mr Ward refused to comment on his arrest when contacted at his Maryland home yesterday.
‘We do not comment on anything.
How's the weather there in London?
It's glorious here’, he said.
Many of the crimes with which others caught up in the Guinness affair are charged are not covered by the extradition treaty with the US.
As a consequence it is possible to extradite Mr Ward on only one of the offences allegedly committed by him — the alleged theft of the £5.2m.
Theft is covered by the treaty but other offences which crop up in the Guinness case, such as common law conspiracy to rig the market and breaches of the Companies Act, do not.
Mr Ward has claimed that the £5.2m was a legitimate payment for ‘valuable services’ to Guinness during the Distillers takeover.
However, the British civil courts have ruled that the payment was unlawful and that the money was at all times the property of Guinness.
Mr Ward has consistently refused to be interviewed by the British authorities investigating the Guinness affair.
It is thought certain that Mr Ward will fight extradition proceedings, which as a result could take up to two years to bring to a conclusion.
The extradition will add a further complication to the Guinness criminal trial.
Mr Saunders has already been charged with the theft of the £5.2m, raising the possibility that this part of his trial may have to be delayed until Mr Ward is extradited.
Eagle acts to stop 227,000 pounds cheque
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
DAVID JAMES, the recently-appointed chairman of Eagle Trust which is under investigation by the Serious Fraud Squad and the West Midlands Police, has made attempts to freeze payments totalling £227,000 authorised by the previous chairman Malcolm Stockdale to John Carway, a Dublin-based financier with a record of drugs and fraud offences.
Mr Stockdale, who resigned as chairman of Eagle Trust two weeks ago, paid Mr Carway to locate assets purportedly owned by Eagle.
Mr Stockdale had taken control of Eagle Trust in the wake of the resignation and subsequent departure from the country of John Ferriday, and had discovered that £13.7m of funds could not be accounted for.
These included a shareholding in Laforza Automobiles, the US car manufacturer in which Eagle had invested $17.9m (£11m).
It was Mr Carway who discovered that the holding in Laforza's parent company, the Jersey-registered AIUK, was only under option to Eagle, not directly owned by it.
In 1985 Mr Carway was given two suspended sentences, one in the UK for possession of cannabis, and another in Ireland for cheque fraud.
‘There is nobody I do business with that does not know of my convictions,’ Mr Carway told The Independent.
‘It's part of my life that is passed and there is no point in hiding it.’
Mr Stockdale, however, said he did not know of Mr Carway's record, despite having a long business relationship with him.
It was Mr Carway who introduced Mr Stockdale to Iroquois Brands, the US-listed company Mr Stockdale used to buy into Eagle ealier this year.
Mr Stockdale authorised the £227,000 payment as part of a package just before he resigned.
This included £329,000 to Iroquois, covering fees over the four-and-a-half months that he chaired Eagle, £33,000 to Iroquois' lawyer and two blank cheques for £250,000 presented to Richard Smith and Clive Whiley, who had just been sacked as directors of Eagle.
The payments to the former directors were later stopped.
WPP settles for 7m dollars in Lord Geller action
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
WPP IS to be paid $7m (£4.3m) in an out-of-court settlement of its long-running legal battle against former executives of its Lord Geller subsidiary who left to form a rival agency with backing from Young & Rubicam, the US advertising giant.
In an agreement reached last Friday, Lord Einstein O'Neill & Partners, the new agency, will pay WPP $7m in cash, settling all claims and counter-claims.
‘The settlement does not suggest admission of wrongdoing by any of the parties and is intended to avoid the expense and distraction that would accompany continued litigation,’ the four said a joint statement last night.
However, the outcome will be interpreted as a considerable victory for WPP in its attempt to stop the movement of staff and advertising clients from its subsidiary to the rival shop.
The legal battle began shortly after WPP acquired J. Walter Thompson, the Madison Square agency, for $544m in July 1987.
The takeover sparked off the defection of key executives from Lord Geller, a J W T subsidiary.
At the time, Lord Geller was handling a number of important accounts, including a $130m advertising contract from IBM.
The dispute was seen as an important test case in the advertising industry over the issue of staff and client defections.
The former executives have also dropped counter-claims against WPP involving bonus and retirement benefits and another $5m in ‘golden parachute’ payments.
The settlement will not affect WPP profits.