

BOOK REVIEW /Fish, chips and zeal: ‘Against the Tide: Diaries 1973-76’— Tony Benn: Hutchinson, 20 pounds
By RUTH DUDLEY EDWARDS
‘MY OFFICIALS looked sick…but somehow I have seen a shaft of light; I know clearly why I am there.
I am there to look after our people, and what good people they are.’
Thus Tony Benn, in June 1975 and three months into his tenure as Secretary of State for Industry, summed up what this volume is all about — his vain attempt to persuade government and Civil Service to implement Labour Party policy and bring about an irreversible shift of power and wealth to the working class.
And how he tried — speeding from study group to policy committee, from National Executive Committee to Cabinet, from office to platform, spraying out speeches, press releases and lengthy papers reminding his colleagues of what had been said in their manifesto.
At every turn he met bewilderment, cynicism or hostility he found difficult to understand.
Night in, night out he sat at home in his basement office dictating his account of the day, and seeking to record and explain for posterity what was going wrong.
Like other officials, his Permanent Secretary, Sir Anthony Part, is unhelpful — because ‘the Civil Service is defending the class interests of owners and professional people’.
Working-class ministerial colleagues see socialism as ‘people like them getting to the top, not actually changing the top, just getting there’.
Michael Foot is ‘an elitist parliamentarian’, Barbara Castle is ‘politically greedy’, Denis Healey ‘wobbles about according to which way the wind is blowing’.
And above all there is Harold Wilson, ‘piggy-eyed’, deceitful and contemptible.
(Benn is as vicious about the appearance of only one other person — the ‘stubby, dull, ageing’ Princess Margaret.)
Never does it occur to him that there might be good reason to dispute his proposals.
In some ways this is a heart-rending book, for there is no doubting Benn's single-minded commitment to his adopted class.
He is horrified by the contemptuous way in which fat Establishment cats speak of workers and it is particularly unfortunate that his enthusiastic support for co-operatives should have foundered because he backed dodgy horses.
Where he becomes ridiculous is in his desperate ambition to be part of the working class, striking a rather pathetic figure as he sits in his ministerial office with his trade union banner behind his head.
Eagerly he announces that he joined in ‘a marvellous Christmas drink with the canteen staff at the Department’.
Along with his intensely loyal family he struggles hard to achieve downward mobility.
In his prejudiced but occasionally interesting Labour and the Benn Factor (Macdonald £12.95), Michael Cocks recalls Benn on the train after a party conference wandering up and down the carriage saying: ‘Has anybody seen a pair of National Health Service glasses?’
Cocks also describes how Denis Healey, in excellent form after winning the deputy leadership in 1981, spotted his beaten opponent in a fish and chip cafe and roared through the window: ‘Joined the plebs then?’
Benn would not have seen the joke.
The comic dimension of a line like ‘Caroline and I went to Lockets for the husbands’ and wives' left-wing dinner' will have passed him by; he is as earnest as he is sanctimonious.
With his loyal advisers Francis Cripps and Frances Morrell by his side, he beavers away with unremitting zeal even when his beloved industrial policy is snatched away and he is banished to the Department of Energy.
But despite enthusiasm and hard work, disappointment and disillusion are the main reward.
Ms Morrell attempts damage limitation by telling her boss to keep his mouth shut and not rock the boat, but on he goes collecting more enemies and being let down by erstwhile friends.
And all of this is inevitable, for Utopians are ill at ease at the sharp end of politics.
Benn is too much a product of his comfortable and intensely high-minded background to be able to understand why the common man (let alone the common politician) has more vulgar aspirations than plain living and high thinking.
Yet whatever Benn's shortcomings, he deserves high praise for the service he has performed for recent political history.
His diaries may be partisan but they are honest, thoughtful and unsanitised.
They make up an archive of incalculable value.
Historians should be carrying him shoulder-high.
It's not who you know: Tom Arnold on the new gap between the Establishment and the Tory party
By TOM ARNOLD
THAT familiar phenomenon, the mid-term protest vote, should not be allowed to obscure an equally dramatic long-term change.
The Establishment has lost its heartland in the Conservative Party.
The emergence of a competitive society of equals was once only a dream.
Within this party, however, there has been a real move in that direction.
A short time ago, it would have been difficult to imagine that the Conservative Party in Parliament would be in open revolt against bishops of the Church of England.
A common feeling among Tory MPs is that on matters such as the resurrection of Christ, on which the Bishops should be certain, they are full of doubt; but on matters such as the precise level of the public sector borrowing requirement, they are vociferous in their certainty.
Few would have predicted that a radical, reforming Lord Chancellor would begin an assault on the restrictive practices of barristers.
In the old days the subtle relationships which constituted the Establishment at work would have prevented any such developments taking place.
Henry Fairlie wrote: ‘The exercise of power in Britain (more specifically, in England) cannot be understood unless it is recognised that it is exercised socially.’
Fairlie, who is widely credited with inventing the phrase ‘the Establishment’ during the Burgess and Maclean revelations in September 1955, alleged that the two diplomats had been protected by such an Establishment.
In today's Conservative Party, ‘knowing all the right people’ does not ensure that doors will be opened.
Quite the reverse.
It may be a hindrance, for the new method of recruitment to the Conservative Central Office approved list of parliamentary candidates places no emphasis on social connections, and tries to assess a candidate's practical and political potential.
Individuals are now more important than institutions.
The Conservative parliamentary selection board meets three or four times a year.
Over a two-day period on each occasion, nearly 50 applicants are assessed for their suitability as future candidates and MPs.
At the 28th such board meeting, in February 1989, the age of those present ranged from 26 to 49, with an average age of 37.
They included lawyers, bankers, chartered surveyors, company directors, a market researcher, an engineer, a journalist, a charity appeals officer, a student, an actor and four computer managers.
There were eight women (not enough in my opinion; we are going to recruit more).
Half of the applicants passed, including five of the women.
What, then, does the board seek to examine?
Broadly speaking, the assessors, divided into MPs, industrialists, and senior party volunteers do not mark a score card; their task is to build up a profile of the applicants' intellectual and practical potential.
In other words, are they leaders?
Could they weld a Conservative Association together, lead it into an election campaign, and, if successful, represent the constituency in the House of Commons?
Are they well-rounded individuals who can cope with the stresses and strains of public life, domestic pressures, and constant travelling?
The Conservative Party is not looking for experts, but it is looking for men and women who have a good working knowledge of contemporary politics and a proven track record of experience in the party, and who above all know their own minds.
We might, for instance, ask them: ‘The local education authority, which is Conservative-controlled, wants to close a popular primary school in a run-down urban area in your constituency because of falling rolls; there is high unemployment.
Parents, teachers, and local clergy are campaigning to have the decision reversed.
They say the nearest alternative school is too far away and has a poor reputation.
Would you defend the decision?’
Those who do well are the men and women who can articulate a sense of their own values, and who convey conviction.
Since May 1980, nearly 1,250 applicants have been to the board.
Few of them, in Henry Fairlie's phrase, have ‘known all the right people’.
Many have been councillors, schooled in the hard practicalities of the town hall.
Their understanding of political power is formal and explicit, not mysterious and implicit.
They prefer conscious, open decisions to veiled influence.
The power of the Establishment came not from the fact that a few dozen people imposed their will on the rest of us, but from the fact that for a long time we felt it right that the opinions of such people should have respectful attention paid to them.
They thought they knew better, and they were, in turn, thought to know better.
As far as the Conservative Party is concerned, the current method of recruitment to the candidate list has released a great deal of pent-up energy and ability.
Thatcherites, and the Prime Minister herself, believe in a meritocracy of talent — and that talent is changing the face of the Conservative Party.
Creating money to buy trouble with
By WILLIAM REES-MOGG
NIGEL LAWSON'S fatal mistake was to abandon targeted monetarism in his Mansion House speech in the autumn of 1985.
A standard monetarist prediction of that decision would have been that it would produce two years of boom, followed by growing inflation and balance of payments deficit.
That is exactly what has happened.
Tim Congdon, at any rate, forecast it correctly.
The monetarism which Nigel Lawson abandoned was not perfect.
I am not myself an advocate of the Friedmanite arithmetical standard for money, but of the older and stronger rule of gold convertibility, the gold standard.
Yet a chancellor transgresses Professor Friedman's rule at his peril.
The money supply, measured by a broad definition, should only be allowed to increase at a stable and gradual rate, in line with the growth of the economy's productive capacity.
That is the rate of monetary growth which is compatible with avoiding inflation.
That rule was accepted by the Conservative Party in opposition before 1979, and Nigel Lawson, as a junior Treasury Minister, helped to develop the targeting of M3, the money supply measure, which was the backbone of the counter-inflationary policy of Mrs Thatcher's first administration.
There is no doubt about his commitment, or the Prime Minister's, to that policy.
It was painful, but it was successful.
Inflation was brought down to below 5 per cent, the balance of payments remained healthy and productivity improved rapidly.
That was the Thatcherite miracle of the early 1980s.
The price was that much redundant labour was squeezed out of industry, and unemployment rose to above three million.
Since the 1985 Mansion House speech broad money has ceased to be targeted.
However, it has continued to be reported, though M3 has been dropped.
M4, the best measure we have, has risen at an annual rate of around 18 per cent, and even this year it has continued to rise at that rate.
Unbelievably, M4 was allowed to rise at a rate of 17.7 per cent in the most recent six-month period.
Over a four-year period, 18 per cent compound approximately doubles, and Britain's broad money supply has approximately doubled since that fatal Mansion House speech.
This increase in the money supply has been disproportionate to that in any other West European or North American country.
During these four years twice as much sterling has been brought into existence.
What has this monetary expansion financed?
In the first place it financed a boom, helping to win the last election.
Around a fifth of the increase was taken up in greater activity, which resulted in a sharp fall in unemployment.
Something like a third of the increase has been taken up in higher prices, with the prices of some capital goods, such as houses, actually doubling.
Third, it financed a massive increase in British imports, and a critical deterioration in the British balance of payments.
Just less than half the money created went down that drain.
We created the money to buy trouble.
This is precisely what the Conservatives were elected to avoid.
The repudiation of the monetarist doctrines which were the heart of Thatcherite economics is the cause of 15 per cent base rates, and Labour's surge in the polls.
The Chancellor has not responded to the crisis with a monetarist policy, but with a severe interest rate policy, which has halted the housing market and depressed some consumer demands.
Yet he has allowed the excess creation of credit to continue, and has not used the obvious policy of overfunding to mop up the excess money supply.
The result has been that sterling has become very expensive to borrow, but there is still far too much of it, and the supply is still increasing too fast.
The Labour Party's solution is to advocate credit controls.
That does address itself to a real evil, the grossly excessive creation of credit, but not in the best way.
Credit controls have been tried in the past in Britain, and proved arbitrary and ineffective.
The other and lesser mistake has been the Government's failure to agree on a policy towards the European Monetary System.
Nigel Lawson rightly wanted to join the exchange rate mechanism two years ago — as did Sir Geoffrey Howe.
The Prime Minister rejected that, and refused to participate in the creation of a European Central Bank.
The result has been a shambles.
We are now plainly operating on a Deutschmark standard, and the rise in British base rate to 15 per cent was dictated by the rise in German rates.
We are therefore behaving as though we were fixed in the European Monetary System.
Yet, as the Financial Times observes, we are getting ‘none of the advantages’.
I share some of the Prime Minister's suspicion of a European Central Bank.
Europe has a perfectly good central bank already — the Bundesbank.
The Germans are more to be trusted with maintaining the value of European money than would be a Central Bank with votes for inflationary countries like Greece, Britain or Italy.
Until the Bank of England has the independence of the Bundesbank, it will remain an ineffective protection against inflation.
I do not therefore mind leaving these matters in the safe hands of the Germans, just as many nations before 1914 were content to leave them in the safe hands of the British.
But if we are to be fixed to the Deutschmark, that should be an agreed and acknowledged policy.
It is absurd to disagree about whether we should be fixed to the Deutschmark or not, while behaving as if we were.
There is now no easy way out of the economic problems which face Britain.
Even with the best economic policy it will take two years from this point to go through the unavoidable stages of deflation and recession to reach the start of recovery.
The past two years have only seen the start of the process, and in terms of M4 the process has not been started at all.
With current policies the Conservatives will not win the next election; even with better policies they might not win it.
The first step must be to restore coherence and confidence to the central direction of economic policy.
That would require three decisions: the restoration of targeting of M4, the use of government funding to control the quantity of money, and immediate British entry to the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS.
The shibboleth of the DM3 standard should not stand in the way of entry at a realistic level, which would probably be at around DM2.80 to the pound.
During the period of entry, interest rates may have to be kept at the present emergency level, but it is an emergency level, a punishment for past sins of credit creation and lax management.
It is not an acceptable long-term rate, because of the damage it does to industry and homeowners.
There is no need for Nigel Lawson to resign, although he and the Prime Minister share responsibility for a disastrous lapse from Thatcherite principles.
He is still the best equipped Chancellor on the Conservative front bench; she is still the best Thatcherite Prime Minister we have.
But they must announce a new and solid policy.
They are both tough and principled politicians.
That makes them effective when the policies are right; but to run a stable economy one needs not only strong character but the right ideas.
What we have, we hold: The decision not to build in Foxley Wood leaves vital questions of planning policy unanswered.
Paul Barker offers a cure for the South-east's Nimby tendencies
By PAUL BARKER
It is the blueing, not the greening, of the countryside.
The decision last week by Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, to reject the scheme for a small new town among the gravel pits and conifers of north-east Hampshire is pure politics.
The Conservative Party is trying to get its green credentials in order, as witness Mr Patten's emollient interview with Brian Walden on ITV yesterday.
For anxious Conservative MPs in the Home Counties, the Foxley Wood decision is a signal that the Government is listening to them.
It is, however, not just a little local difficulty.
It is an important signal that short-term politics matter more than the longer-run question of how to house the next generation.
The priority has been to buy off the ex-brigadiers of Hampshire.
In one of his last acts as environment secretary, Nicholas Ridley scrapped a similar scheme in Oxfordshire, at Stone Bassett.
The local MP happened to be Michael Heseltine, who knows a thing or two about campaigning.
But just where are the proliferating households of south-east England supposed to go?
On Sunday Mr Patten was vague about this.
A responsible green policy would not defend every blade of grass.
People are as important as buttercups.
The trick is to keep as many buttercups as you can while giving people a pleasant place to live in.
At the moment, the cheery assumption is that wasteland can be found somewhere within existing cities for housing to be built on.
The snag is, as London Docklands developers have found, these are not always the houses that people want.
There is a paternalistic assumption lurking here, which reminds me of that which led to the disastrous council housing estates of the Sixties and early Seventies.
Those estates were not where We would like to live: but they were all right for Them.
Similarly, We would like to have a bit of grass around the house and a nice view.
But, for Them, an in-fill town house will be just fine.
If they can find one at a price they can afford…
Tightly packed urban living is, indeed, fine — if that is what you want.
As a rule, those who can afford it seem increasingly to temper the urban living of the weekday with a touch of rural life at the weekend.
But those people who — unlike Chris Patten or Nicholas Ridley — can only afford one house would like a flavour of the country on their own doorstep.
It is no use wringing hands and regretting this preference.
It is a long English tradition, which is not going to change.
Every Englishwoman and her husband wants a garden.
The only sensible question is how to meet this demand in a way that does not wreck the countryside.
Foxley Wood and Stone Bassett — neither of which, incidentally, was in the Green Belt — were a reasonable stab at answering this.
They were private developers' schemes, yet the Town and Country Planning Association — which tends the flame of Ebenezer Howard's garden city ideals — endorsed them.
The point is that, unless you have such focuses for new building, you are left with only two alternatives: to force all new building back on to those urban wastelands; or else to let new housing grow, like fat around a middle-aged belly, on the outskirts of existing villages and country towns.
In practice, as Chris Patten seems to acknowledge, it means the latter option.
Without new towns of some sort, we shall not protect the countryside; we shall ruin it.
Inevitably, we are talking about the South-east, which is where the development pressure is.
That is where the jobs are.
It is the South-east that needs new settlements, if we are not to end up with a town-and-country muesli of interest to no one.
I would like to think that the Foxley Wood and Stone Bassett decisions might mark a positive turning point.
Until now, under this Government, everything has been left to the hazards of private development and the initiative of county councils.
But the not-in-my-backyard arguments are hard to resist at local level.
Three private new town schemes have now been rejected.
This is the catch in Chris Patten's weekend declaration of trust in local authorities.
The only one that is going ahead is in the Fens, north of Cambridge, at Westmere.
Here there is a great deal of open space, no longer necessary for agriculture, and Cambridgeshire County Council was in favour.
I doubt if any more private-enterprise new towns will now be proposed.
One of these days a new co-ordinating authority will have to be created to resolve the Nimby tendencies of the South-east.
Until then, only the Government — which means the Department of the Environment — can fill this role.
Chris Patten — the cuddly man succeeding the spiky man — has begun ominously.
Alongside his Foxley Wood decision he published new planning guidance which tilted the general balance against giving permission for house-building.
Another dose of blue for the countryside.
What we have, we hold.
Conservatism at its best is about letting people — within broad bounds — do what they want and live how they want.
(This is why, in the media, it has always been Tory governments that have created new radio or television channels, whether Radio Clyde, Granada Television, London Jazz Radio, or Channel Four.)
I only hope that, once he has calmed the panic among his Home Counties political colleagues, Chris Patten has more of a strategy up his sleeve.
If London is not to implode and if people are not to be paternalistically forced to live the way they do not want to live, new towns will have to be publicly designated.
It is the only way to give both people and the countryside a breathing space.
There will be about two million more people in England in the year 2001 than in 1986.
London and the South-east will have to absorb 900,000 extra households over the same span of years.
These are the Environment Secretary's own figures.
If you let your eye rove over the map, it is pretty obvious that one of the new towns should be near the Channel Tunnel and another near the new Stansted Airport.
The pressures will build up there inexorably.
That will help the north-east and south-east conduits of growth outwards from London.
To the north-west, there is of course Milton Keynes.
Huge tracts of this city of 137,000 are not yet built.
Chris Patten could reasonably say to house-builders: Go to MK.
But how, after the Foxley Wood decision, is the pressure going to be eased to London's south-west, along and around the M4 and M3 motorways?
Fuelled by defence spending, this is the electronics boom area.
Unemployment is nil.
Should the only answer be to tack more and more suburbs on to the edge of Reading and more ‘executive housing’ on to the fringes of Berkshire or Hampshire villages?
Is our imagination at such a low ebb?
I have many reservations about Prince Charles's scheme at Dorchester.
It is too far-flung, anyway, to help much with this specific problem.
But at least he is having a go.
He could not do it if he were not the landlord, although in general you cannot, in the late twentieth century, expect high-minded landlords to do your planning for you.
Nor on present evidence can you leave it to the internecine politics of the county councils around London, with occasional injections of national politics.
Planning got a bad name through trying to do too much.
It is worth looking closely at Milton Keynes to see that planning need not, any more, mean trying to design every dot and comma of people's lives.
Where planning is not purely negative (which it has to be sometimes), it should set out to enable people to live decent lives.
Right now, we seem to be ready to cripple lives and curb them — creating houses we shall regret and preferring town cramming to town planning.
The collapse of London — like the report of the death of Mark Twain — is much exaggerated.
Many of its difficulties will not be solved either by John Prescott's ideas for greater rail and bus use, or by Cecil Parkinson's new and wider motorways.
The only answer is to spread the people and the jobs thinner — so that fewer travellers, bringing their cars and their litter -journey into it or through it.
This is not an argument that should only concern South-easterners.
Love it or hate it, the South-east does contain 30 per cent of the population of the United Kingdom.
It is the engine that drives the economy.
It is in everyone's interest, North, South, East and West, that London is not throttled and that those who live in the South-east — on modest means — can have a decent life.
If the regions revive, the revival will be powered from the South-east.
If the South-east sinks, they will go down the plug with it.
Unroll that map of England, Mr Patten.
A green and pleasant London goes hand-in-hand with a green and pleasant England.
London is not the way it is through sheer inertia and accident.
In its day it built the world's first by-pass and dug the world's first underground railway.
It invented the suburb — the most successful invention in the history of human habitation.
It is time to match again that degree of ingenuity.
This will not be done just by saying No to things.
It means deciding where, when and why to say Yes.
Leading Article: Gorbachev's German Question
By PAUL BARKER
MIKHAIL Gorbachev presents himself as the saviour of socialism.
These days, however, when he visits some outpost of that crumbling creed, he must look like its undertaker.
In Havana in April, Fidel Castro politely told him to mind his own business.
A month later his arrival in Peking gave moral succour to the ‘counter-revolutionaries’ of Tiananmen Square.
Now it has happened again.
His obligatory attendance of the 40th birthday party of East Germany has helped to leave that self-advertised ‘pillar of European stability’ and ‘trustiest of friends of the Soviet Union’looking more unstable than at any time since the Red Army moved in to suppress the uprising of 17 June 1953.
This time the stakes are higher than ever: the very future of Moscow's most important military ally.
However dramatic the events of these days in East Berlin, Dresden and Leipzig — not to mention sundry West German embassies in the Eastern bloc — East Germany will not disappear tomorrow.
But with stunning clarity they demonstrate again how the great reformer has unleashed forces which he and his country no longer control, and which now are playing on the German Question itself, the issue which lies at the very heart of today's European order.
Nato may fret over the soul of West Germany.
But such worries are nothing compared to the dilemma facing the Kremlin as the waves of perestroika lap at one of the last fortresses of communist orthodoxy.
To permit things to proceed as they are is to invite further mass emigration, further disorder, and deeper isolation of East Germany among its increasingly notional ‘fraternal socialist allies’.
Yet the advent of out-and-out reformers in East Berlin would represent an even greater threat for Moscow.
Unlike Poland or Hungary, East Germany has no nationalism upon which to fall back, as the dogmas of nearly half a century evaporate.
Ideology is the only rationale for the existence of the ‘first workers’ state on German soil'.
Remove Marxism — as the Hungarians have done this weekend — and the pressures to pull down the artificial barriers with the other freer, richer, and more appealing Germany, would become irresistible.
What price the pact then?
This weekend Mr Gorbachev has walked the finest diplomatic tightrope.
Unmistakably, though, he has come down on the side of the demonstrators and against Erich Honecker, the East German leader.
‘When you fall behind, you are punished by life,’ was the remark to his host, relayed to the world by Gennady Gerasimov, the Soviet spokesman.
Beyond such verbal subversion there is little Mr Gorbachev can do.
The only way of squaring the circle to Moscow's satisfaction would be to send in troops.
But the interventionist Brezhnev doctrine, in any case not conceived as an instrument of liberalisation, has been abandoned.
East Germany's future, as Mr Gorbachev never tires of reminding us, can be settled only by East Germany itself.
He may have concluded that Mr Honecker is a lost cause, but sooner or later (and probably sooner) he will leave the stage.
If the regime is to be saved, his successor will have no choice but to make changes.
The Kremlin's only option now is to pull every available string to find a miracle-worker, a man capable both of reform and of limiting the consequences of reform.
Mr Gorbachev's future, as well as that of East Germany, ride upon the outcome.
Leading Article: The freedom to party
By PAUL BARKER
WE HAVE been here before.
The delights of all-night dancing parties with weird lights on the walls were discovered by white bohemian crowds in California in the Sixties, when they were called acid tests, and had a quasi-religious significance.
It is difficult to deal sensibly with the craze unless we remember that it is the latest in a series of recognisably similar phenomena, which the law has had difficulty in regulating: the early ‘happenings’, influenced by LSD; the ‘blues parties’, which were the last to hit the headlines; the continuing ‘northern soul’ craze, and no doubt others which even the participants have long since forgotten.
The fashionable dress varies, as do the fashionable drugs, but there are always at least two problems for society to deal with: the fact that these events are associated with the consumption of illegal and often dangerous drugs; and the noise they make.
Some acid house parties can be heard miles away across the countryside: the inhabitants of normally quiet villages deserve protection.
So, too, do those people in towns who have the misfortune to live near the wrong warehouse.
Douglas Hurd's announcement on Friday that he will try to tighten up the law relating to the licensing of these parties should certainly address itself to that aspect of the problem.
If noise pollution is made a more clearly identifiable criminal offence, this will prove one of the rare occasions on which hard cases have generated a much-needed law.
As a general principle, hasty legislation does more harm than good.
None the less, there are some aspects to the present acid house craze which distinguish it from its predecessors and which need attention.
The first is the amounts of money to be made in the business.
While the fashion lasts, these are considerable: figures of £200,000 to £300,000 in profit for one well-organised party are being bandied about, and do not seem to be greatly exaggerated.
Such sums could prove attractive to all sorts of unsavoury characters, including those who might have money to launder.
With bad luck, the phenomenon could even develop into the sort of cash-cow that speakeasies became for organised crime in the United States under Prohibition.
The emergence of bellicose private security forces enforcing order at these parties is an allied worry.
The second cause for concern is the sheer length of time for which the parties seem to continue.
Perhaps this is a reflection of the increasing health of the young and affluent, who are prepared to try to dance for 24 hours; be that as it may, it multiplies the offence to outsiders.
But none of these problems is unique to acid house: the Notting Hill Carnival continues for three days, attracts vast crowds, involves large-scale drug consumption, and is stupefyingly noisy.
So is the annual CND pop festival at Glastonbury.
Yet these, by a process of negotiation and experience, have been regulated and brought within the compass of what is socially acceptable without the passage of unnecessary laws such as the ‘anti-hippy’ sections of the Public Order Act.
Regulation should not attempt to suppress the phenomenon altogether, but ensure, with appropriate penalties for failure, that acid house parties — and whatever succeeds them — cause minimal disturbance to the non-dancing majority, and that they do not become occasions of profit for professional criminals.
A higher degree of espionage
By MILES KINGTON
‘FIFTY million freshmen can't be wrong,’ thought Boris.
It was the first day of the new university year.
Most second-year students had not returned yet; they were still struggling back from cycling holidays in Iran.
Most of the third-year students had been back for a month already, desperately trying to catch up with their second-year work.
But all the first-year students had arrived together on the first day of term and sought out the one fixed event in the university calendar, the Freshmen's Fayre.
Boris had got back two months early to organise it.
But then, he was a sixth- or seventh-year student.
Nobody was quite sure how many degrees he had started and not finished, not even Boris, but he had been at the place so long he could remember when they used to spell it Freshmen's Fair.
It was Ronnie, one of the junior lecturers.
Boris could remember him coming.
Only the older dons predated Boris.
‘I don't need to join any of your lonely hearts clubs,’ said Ronnie.
‘A young lecturer is meant to be able to get friends without paying for them.’
‘They're not dating agencies,’ said Boris, shocked.
‘They're ways of recycling first-year money directly into third-year pockets — from students who don't know how to spend it to those who really need it.
Anyway, I've got to go in and snoop around a bit.
I'm worried about the English Literature Society's threat to burn Dame Iris Murdoch in effigy.’
‘What's wrong with that?’
‘Nothing.
I'm just afraid they might forget.’
As he wandered round, Boris saw all the old stalwarts.
The Tobacco Society ('Unable to hand roll ciggies?
We'll teach you in complete confidence'), the Jazz Society ('There will be a small written examination before we let you know if you can join') and the French Society ('Amusez-vous bien et attrapez cirrhose du foie avec la Frenchsoc! ').
There were the bank recruitment stands ('If you give us all your money, we will let you queue in our bank when we're open, and outside when we're not! ') and the MI5 stall ('Ever thought about Intelligence?
You could do worse…').
The MI5 stall?
Boris couldn't believe his eyes.
MI5 had never asked for permission to have a stall.
He had never granted it.
It must be some kind of joke.
‘How are things going, lads?’ he said casually, wandering over to the stand.
‘Anyone joined yet?’
‘We don't answer questions like that, Boris.’
‘Well, how about this one?
How do you happen to have a stall when the organisers didn't give you permission?’
‘Oh, we rented this space from the Poetry Society.
We persuaded them we needed it more than they did.’
‘All right, here's another.
Who the bloody hell are you?’
‘Exactly who we say we are,’ said the man, looking surprised.
‘MI5 has decided to recruit openly in future.
Hadn't you read?
All this old-style word-in-your-ear, casual approach stuff wasn't getting anywhere, so we're going out in the market place to get the right people.’
‘And recruiting first-year students?’
‘Planting the seed, Boris, planting the seed.
Care to join yourself?’
‘Oh, we know all about you,’ said the man.
‘We know how much money from the Freshmen's Fayre has found its way into your bank account over the years.
We know who's been organising acid house parties for the past year.
We know who's been supplying the drugs to them.
We even know about you and Ronnie's wife.
Intelligence is our business, don't forget.’
‘What are you going to do about it?’ said Boris faintly.
‘We like the way you organise things,’ said the man pleasantly.
‘Shame to see such talent wasted.
Why not join us?’
‘You'd be in trouble, I'm sorry to say.’
‘This is blackmail.’
Letter: The Dalai Lama's Nobel Prize
From Lord ENNALS
Sir: The announcement of the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama is not only wonderful news for Tibetans throughout the world and for those who admire this selfless leader of the Tibetan people.
It will also be widely welcomed by all who believe in self-determination for these proud people, who have suffered Chinese oppression for nearly 40 years.
From my visit to Lhasa last year, I am very much aware of the implications for the Tibetan people of Chinese colonialism and its policy of apartheid.
As your article (6 October) says, the award challenges Peking to honour what it says is its willingness to open a dialogue with the Dalai Lama.
Their condemnation of the award is not a good omen.
The award is also a challenge to Her Majesty's Government.
For how long can Mrs Thatcher continue to recognise China's present position, in spite of martial law in Lhasa and a series of brutal attacks on peaceful demonstrations by Chinese troops, in that HMG recognises the Chinese occupation of Tibet?
When the Dalai Lama came to Britain in April 1988, he was snubbed by the Government.
On the Prime Minister's orders, no minister or civil servant was allowed to meet him.
That sort of response is no longer acceptable.
The Dalai Lama should be congratulated on the great honour which is to be bestowed on him, and the Prime Minister or the Foreign Secretary should make it clear that he will be warmly welcomed when next he is able to visit London.
This week's Conservative Party Conference in Blackpool would be a very appropriate time for such a statement by Mrs Thatcher.
I know there are many Conservative MPs who would welcome this.
Letter: Repression of Sudanese unions
From Mr KEN GILL and others
Sir: We write to express our deep concern and profound fears over the continued detention of scores of prominent trade union leaders and activists in the Sudan and the banning of all union activity.
Recently 55 more trade unionists have been arrested, yet those who were detained immediately after the 30 June coup have been neither interrogated, charged nor given an explanation of the reason why they are being held.
Those held are imprisoned throughout the Sudan including in the main prison in Khartoum North, ‘Kober’.
There is little reason to doubt that they are being incarcerated because of their trade union membership.
Immediately after it came to power, the junta led by General Omar Hassan el Beshir dissolved all trade unions, closed their headquarters and confiscated their property.
Since then it has started to dismiss work leaders and trade union activists.
The suppression of trade union and democratic rights by the military authorities is reflected in their attempt to impose a new trade union law in the absence of leaders, thus violating international conventions and agreements, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to which Sudan is a signatory.
Now the Union of Sudanese Trade Unions has issued an international call for support.
We appeal, therefore, to public opinion, and trade unionists in particular, to denounce these repressive measures, condemn the violations of democratic and trade union rights by the authorities and demand the immediate release of all detainees and a halt to mass dismissals and arrest without trial.
Letter: Lawson's blunt instrument
From Mr DAVID F. HEATHFIELD
Sir: The Chancellor's policy of fighting inflation with exceptionally high real interest rates is at variance with the government's economic philosophy in two significant ways.
First, interest rates are not to be left to market forces and free competition.
Unlike other prices (and wages), interest rates are to be politically determined.
Second, whereas the government's social policy extols the virtues of targeting benefits and subsidies to where they will do most good, there is no parallel targeting to ensure that interest rate policy will bear only on those aspects of the economy which increase inflationary pressure.
The need for state interference in this market springs from the fact that it is no longer the state but the commercial banks which generate the bulk of our money supply.
They do so by creating credit.
The sovereign's power to debase the currency has passed to the commercial banks and so has the seigniorage which once accrued to the state.
Profit-seeking banks in competition with each other are, quite reasonably, keen to issue as much interest-bearing credit as possible.
They cannot be expected to consider the inflationary consequences of their commercial activities.
Unlike the sovereign, who simply minted more coin, the banks have first to persuade us to take up the credit they wish to create.
In other words, they have to persuade someone to borrow from them before they can ‘issue’ new money.
By imposing a very high cost of borrowing, the Chancellor hopes to reduce our willingness to accept any more bank credit and thereby limit credit creation by the banks.
This is a very blunt instrument.
The only kind of credit which is inflationary is that which is newly created by the commercial banks (and similar deposit-taking institutions).
Existing credit and other (non-bank) credit is not only non-inflationary, but beneficial.
By imposing a high cost on all credit, the Chancellor is failing to target newly-created bank credit and the costs of this failure are enormous.
The increasing number of mortgage repossessions, the increasing interest costs to the UK manufacturing sector, the distortion of the foreign exchange market, the wage demands induced as workers seek to maintain their living standards and the large, gratuitous redistribution of income from debtors to creditors result in painful and often irreversible dislocations.
Letter: Libel damages
From Sir KENNETH DOVER
Sir: The suggestion of Mr Varcoe-Cocks (letter, 5 October) that if I win damages for libel and give them to charity I ‘cannot be said to have been compensated in any way’ is extraordinary.
I find it hard to think of any more splendid compensation than conferment of the power to transfer a very large sum of money from a newspaper which I dislike and despise to an organisation or institution which I love and admire.
Letter: Libel damages
From Mr ANDREW BLUNDY
Sir: Mr Stephen Campbell (letters, 5 October) asks if he is alone in thinking that personal injury awards should be increased in relation to libel awards rather than the other way round.
The answer is that, while he is not alone, he has misunderstood the purpose of civil awards of damages.
The purpose of the civil law is to compensate; it is the function of the criminal law to punish.
The most likely explanation for the recent record levels of libel awards is that juries have confused these two functions, and part of the blame must lie with judges for having failed adequately to explain to juries the purpose of their damages award.
Perhaps it is too much to hope that the Court of Appeal (in their forthcoming judgment in the Sutcliffe case) will give definitive guidance on what should be included in the judge's summing up in a libel trial.
Letter: Invitation list
From Professor BHIKU PAREKH
Sir: In his report on the seminar on the Rushdie affair organised jointly by the Commission for Racial Equality and the Policy Studies Institute (3 October), John Torode says that the proceedings were dominated by ‘pragmatist liberals’— those who believe in restricting freedom of speech in order to protect the religious sensibilities of fundamentalists.
But there was no such domination.
Two of the five papers presented at the seminar disapproved of such censorship.
The participants represented a wide variety of views and tended on the whole to disapprove of state-imposed censorship.
Mr Torode says he was told that those supporting the Government's views on blasphemy were excluded.
He was misinformed.
Although he was unable to accept, John Patten, Minister of State at the Home Office, was invited to open the seminar.
Two senior research officers at the Home Office were also invited, and one of them made an excellent contribution.
Mr Torode's sources are also wrong in saying Fay Weldon and her allies were not invited because they held racist attitudes.
In a seminar limited to 40 participants, not everyone's favourites can be included; however, Harold Pinter, whom Mr Torode surprisingly regards as Ms Weldon's ally, was invited, not only to participate but also to chair a session.
Angela Carter too was invited.
Stuart Weir, who has courageously stood by Rushdie, was there, and so were such men and women of impeccable liberal credentials as James Cornford, Sara Maitland and Ben Whitaker.
The CRE organised a series of three seminars in order to bring together people of very different points of view and evolve a broad consensus on some of the large issues raised by the Rushdie affair.
The results so far have been encouraging.
They have shown that the gap between the different communities is smaller than Mr Torode would have us believe, and it is bridgeable.
Letter: A-road architecture
From Councillor SALLY POWELL
Sir: While agreeing with much of what Jonathan Glancey say in his article on ‘A-road’ architecture (4 October), I think he misses the point when he says that no one cares about it.
The impressions given by Mr Glancey is that these buildings somehow just appear from nowhere, with no one even noticing; he says that they are ‘anonymous’, even ‘invisible’.
In reality, of course, they are the result of a long chain of conscious decision making.
They are the product of a specific brief by land owners or developers, detailed ‘design’ by architects within that brief and approval by the local authority.
It is no accident that these three processes combine to produce buildings that reflect the values of those involved.
The combination of commercial patronage, large-scale corporate architectural firms and those local authorities which hold materialistic values produces the kind of architecture described in Mr Glancey's article.
Local people (who do notice and do care) are virtually powerless to intervene against such a combination.
Hammersmith Road is a good illustration of this process at work.
There was colossal opposition to these developments at the planning stage, but local people's views were generally ignored by the Tory administration of the day, who basically held the same values as the developers and permitted the schemes.
If the worst examples of A-road architecture are produced by a combination of developer, architect and local authority all holding the same materialistic values, the reverse is also true.
While any one of these groups can individually try to alter the design of a building, each can only achieve a little on their own.
When all three, however, start from a different point — caring about the environment and the quality of life -buildings such as Ralph Erskine's design for Ake Larson and Enator become feasible.
Mr Glancey is inaccurate when he says that the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham rejected an ‘inspired scheme’ by Terry Farrell for the reconstruction of Hammersmith Broadway.
Quite the reverse.
The Labour administration approved the scheme wholeheartedly in 1986, and used it at a public inquiry to try to oppose the imposition of more A-road architecture on the site approved by the previous Tory administration.
The Secretary of State, however, ‘knew best’ and overruled his inspector who had supported the borough's view.
A-road architecture does not glide in silently overnight and park itself along our urban highways.
It results from and reflects power, patronage and politics in our society — and it is detested by those who must live for decades in its shadow.
Letter: Margaret Regina
From Mrs S. L. ALLCOCK
Sir: Following the report on the ‘regal’ gates to be erected at the end of Downing street ('Psychiatrists explore hidden meaning of Thatchergate plan', 4 October), your readers may be interested in a recent instance when Mrs Thatcher was equated with the Queen.
Two weeks ago in Yugoslavia, we stayed overnight in a private house offering bed and breakfast accommodation.
Owing to the extremely high inflation there, prices are often quoted in Deutschmarks.
My husband did not have enough marks to pay the bill, so he offered to pay the equivalent amount in Sterling.
The landlady looked suspiciously at the notes he proffered and asked if they were Belgian currency.
When he insisted that they were pounds, she looked more closely and then exclaimed: ‘Of course they're British — they've got a picture of Mrs Thatcher on them!’
Letter: Social balance
From The Rev JIM WELLINGTON
Sir: Canon Oestreicher (letter, 5 October) would appear to have allowed political prejudice to cloud impartial judgement.
Dr Runcie, he writes, ‘is calling for a social market economy’, the implication being that such a marriage between free market principles for wealth creation and collective provision for social needs does not exist in this country.
How can this implication be justified when the last decade has witnessed a real growth in public spending, particularly on health and society security, coupled with an increase in overall taxation?
Judged on the facts, rather than the political rhetoric of both left and right, the present Government deserves neither the undying praise of the supporters of laissez-faire nor the unremitting invective of collectivists.
Letter: Fees and taxes
From Professor MALCOLM GRANT
Sir: Terry Coleman reports (5 October) the speech by Andrew Neil at a Fabian fringe meeting, in which he described the BBC licence fee as a poll tax and suggested that it was indistinguishable from the community charge.
A similar comparison was made by the Minister (Michael Howard MP) when defending the poll tax in the House on 18 April 1988.
It is entirely fallacious.
There are two fundamental differences between the two.
First, the licence fee is voluntary: nobody is forced to buy the BBC's product.
Payment of the community charge is compulsory, which is why it is more accurately characterised as a tax than a charge.
Second, for those who do choose to have a BBC licence, the fee is payable per household (like the existing system of domestic rating), not per head (or ‘poll’) of the adult population.
The only common feature is that the level of each is fixed, and bears no relationship to the means of the payer.
Letter: Electoral reform
From Mr KIERAN SEALE
Sir: Roy Hattersley says that he is against electoral reform as it would stop the Labour Party winning an overall majority.
Besides, he says, the Democrats and the Greens only support it because of self interest.
I wonder if there is some contradiction here.