

Khmer Rouge: Hidden strengths and forced marches
By TERRY MCCARTHY
THE STRENGTH of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla army is, according to its commander-in-chief, Son Sen, ‘a military secret’.
Western intelligence estimates range between 20,000 and 35,000 armed men.
The Vietnamese say 17,000.
There are 68,000 refugees in Khmer Rouge-controlled camps inside Thailand, according to the United Nations border relief operation.
But aid officials estimate that there are between 50,000 and 100,000 refugees living in military camps hidden along the border and to which international organisations have no access.
Many of these refugees are used as porters to bring supplies into Cambodia for the Khmer Rouge troops.
The military command structure of the Khmer Rouge is tight at the top and loose at the bottom.
Besides Son Sen, the two most senior commanders are Pol Pot and Ta Mok.
Under them are battlefield commanders, most of whom operate under code names such as Korn, Siab, Chan, Sok.
Khmer Rouge divisions and regiments have no set size, and their strength depends largely on the proficiency of the commander.
Each commander has general orders, but is allowed considerable independence in day-to-day decisions.
Their operations are monitored by three small mobile commands which move around inside Cambodia, keeping radio contact with each other and with the base camps along the Thai border.
In the field, the guerrillas rely mainly on AK47 automatic rifles, B40 and B41 rocket-propelled grenade launchers, hand grenades and 82mm mortars, which can all be carried easily by men moving on foot through the jungle.
In the military camps along the Thai border, the Khmer Rouge also has some heavy artillery, including 130mm guns which have a range of up to 15 miles and some armoured vehicles, rumoured to include a number of tanks.
Most recently, it has acquired HN-5A infra-red guided anti-aircraft missiles, which are Chinese copies of the Soviet SAM 7 missiles and described by one military analyst as a cheap version of the Stingers used by the resistance in Afghanistan.
These missiles have so far not been used because the Phnom Penh airforce has not yet deployed its Soviet helicopters and recently acquired MIG 21 jets in combat.
Inside Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge strongholds are mostly in the western and southern provinces, and to a lesser extent, in the north.
The guerrillas operate from the Phnom Malai mountains in Battambang, the Cardamom mountain chain that runs through Pursat, Kompong Speu and Koh Kong, and the Elephant mountains in Kampot.
Recently there have been reports of a concentration of Khmer Rouge forces in Kompong Speu, where the mountains come within 30 miles of Phnom Penh.
The Khmer Rouge also comes down from the north through Preah Vihear to Kompong Thom, Kratie and Kompong Cham.
Pol Pot's shadowy cabinet
By TERRY MCCARTHY
ONE OF the key strengths of the Khmer Rouge is the continuity of leadership.
Today, it is fighting the same war, with the same leaders, as 20 years ago.
When Hun Sen, himself a former Khmer Rouge commander who fled to Vietnam, gives his list of eight Khmer Rouge leaders whom he absolutely refuses to include in any political deal, it is the same people who studied together in Paris in the 1950s, fought in the jungles from 1967, captured Phnom Penh in 1975, led the government of Democratic Kampuchea from 1975, and fled to Thailand in 1979 after the Vietnamese invasion.
Pol Pot was born in 1928 and educated in Phnom Penh before going to Paris to study electronics.
He returned to Cambodia in 1953, joined the Kampuchean Communist Party, and quickly worked his way to the top.
When Phnom Penh fell to the Khmer Rouge in 1975 he was head of the party, and known as ‘Brother Number One’.
He was ultimately responsible for the emptying of the city, the forced labour in the countryside, the persecution of anyone judged to have been tainted by foreign influences, and the bloody purges of Khmer Rouge cadres suspected of being ‘Vietnamese traitors’.
Today he lives in the Eastern Thai town of Trat and, although officially retired, is still regarded as the overall leader of the Khmer Rouge.
All major decisions, either on the international diplomatic front or on military strategy inside Cambodia, are referred to him.
Ieng Sary, 59, studied with Pol Pot in Paris, and returned to Cambodia in 1957.
He became deputy prime minister and minister for foreign affairs after 1975, and was known as ‘Brother Number Two’.
He is thought to be Pol Pot's effective deputy.
Son Sen, 59, has a degree in philosophy from the Sorbonne.
In the fight for Phnom Penh, he was chief of staff of the Khmer Rouge forces, and was made defence minister in the 1975 government.
Today he is commander in chief of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla army.
Khieu Samphan, 58, has a doctorate in economics from the University of Paris, and after returning to Cambodia set up a left-wing newspaper and served in Sihanouk's parliament before fleeing to join the Khmer Rouge in the bush in 1967.
He was head of the state presidium under Pol Pot, and after the Vietnamese invasion became the official head of the Khmer Rouge.
He leads Khmer Rouge delegations at international conferences, and has been promoted as the moderate face of the Khmer Rouge.
Ieng Thairith is married to Ieng Sary, and has a degree in English Literature.
She was minister for social action in the Pol Pot era and is regarded as one of the main theoreticians of the party.
Her sister, Khieu Ponnary, is married to Pol Pot, and was influential in the 1975 government, but is now understood to be confined to hospital because of mental illness.
Ta Mok, 62, does not belong to the Paris-educated clique.
One of the most brutal of the Khmer Rouge commanders, he is known as the ‘Butcher of Kampuchea’ for the killings he ordered in the south-west from 1975 to 1978.
He is now one of the most senior battlefield commanders.
Nuon Chia was educated in Thailand, and is regarded as the main ideologue of the Khmer Rouge.
In 1960 he was more senior in the Communist Party than Pol Pot, and in 1976 briefly replaced him as prime minister.
Ke Pauk was in charge of the central zone of Cambodia under Pol Pot, and carried out the purges of Khmer Rouge cadres in the Eastern zone in 1977 and 1978 which forced many to flee to Vietnam, including Hun Sen and Heng Samrin, currently Prime Minister and President of the Phnom Penh government.
He is still in charge of military operations in the same zone, centred on Kompong Thom province.
Thiounn Prasith, not on Hun Sen's list, is the Khmer Rouge's top diplomat.
Grandson of a former palace minister in Cambodia under the French, Thiounn Prasith studied with Ieng Sary in Paris and was adviser on foreign policy from 1975-78.
He is now ambassador to the United Nations in New York for the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea.
Khmer Rouge: A feared and secret army of ‘patriots’
By BY TERRY McCARTHY
THE Khmer Rouge values secrecy.
On the international front, its diplomats are tight-lipped and difficult to approach.
Its military camps along the Thai border are closed to aid organisations and journalists.
Inside Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge usually appears at night, without warning.
Khmer Rouge guerrillas move around the countryside in small groups of five to 10.
Their black pyjama uniform of the Seventies has been exchanged for grey-green jackets and trousers, but they still wear the krama, the chequered cotton scarves common to all Cambodian peasants.
They enter villages, round everyone up, and criticise those who support the Phomn Penh government for being ‘lackies’ of the Vietnamese.
The Khmer Rouge propaganda also highlights the growing corruption among official party leaders and businessmen in the towns, the lack of economic improvement in the villages.
In the western provinces they have been distributing leaflets, many carrying the warning: Pros tvoeu chi, neari tvoeu pouch —‘We will make the men into fertiliser, and keep the women for reproduction’— to deter collaboration with the government.
Sometimes they take people away from the village for re-education, or for recruitment into their army.
They rarely meet opposition from the village militia, who have no training and not enough ammunition to put up a fight even if they wanted to.
In many villages, Khmer Rouge informers warn them if government troops are in the area.
The guerrillas are well disciplined, and intent on winning villagers over to their cause.
Despite their spartan, isolated lifestyle, there are no stories of women being raped or wanton violence against civilians.
When they need food, they will often pay for it in gold or hard currency, although villagers rarely admit this to the local authorities, preferring to say that their rice was stolen.
In rural areas, the Khmer Rouge is not universally despised, as the government in Phnom Penh maintains.
Unlike townspeople and those ‘polluted’ by foreign influences, the peasants were not targeted for persecution under the Pol Pot regime.
For many, the worst memories of that era are of food shortages because of the disruption to the agricultural system.
It is among the merchants and civil servants that fear of the Khmer Rouge is highest.
One night in July, a large number of Khmer Rouge entered the town of Muong, on Route 5 between Pursat and Battambang.
According to a shopkeeper, they went through the market forcing merchants at gunpoint to hand over money and gold.
‘As patriots, we think we have some Cambodians to support us,’ said Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan in an interview in Paris in August.
The extent of active support for the Khmer Rouge in the countryside is impossible to judge, but interviews with peasants in the provinces of Battambang, Pursat, Takeo and Kampot, in the west and south of Cambodia, indicate widespread passive support allowing the guerrillas to move around and gather food.
A district army commander in a small outpost 10 miles west of Kampot town admitted last month that the mines his troops had planted at the foot of the mountains were designed only partly to defend their position.
‘They are also to stop the people having relations with the Khmer Rouge in the mountains,’ he said.
When they fight, the Khmer Rouge show their real mettle.
the Vietnamese soldiers were terrified of them.
The Khmer Rouge had no mercy for any Vietnamese they took prisoner, and many Vietnamese soldiers preferred to kill themselves rather than be captured.
‘I thought I would use a grenade’, said Vu Van Hau, a 22-year-old Vietnamese soldier who served for three years in Kompong Cham and Kompong Thom provinces, before returning to his native Ho Chi Minh City as part of the September withdrawal.
Hau knew what the Khmer Rouge could do.
In July he was one of 80 troops attacked by about 400 Khmer Rouge in Kompong Thom.
The Vietnamese withdrew, but not before Hau saw two of his friends shot.
‘In the afternoon we returned to collect the bodies.
Two had their limbs cut off, including one of my friends.
The Khmer Rouge had used hammers to smash their skulls.’
It is not just their passionate hatred of the Vietnamese that has kept the Khmer Rouge together in the malarial jungles for 10 years.
Many of the soldiers have families held hostage in the refugee camps along the Thai border, but so do the two other, much less effective, resistance factions.
The loyalty and discipline of the Khmer Rouge troops springs from something much deeper — the pride of the warrior in being able to survive in the forest, fighting against foreign enemies.
The harsh discipline imposed on them enhances their morale.
‘I was proud of myself as a soldier,’ said Loy Im, a 32-year-old former Khmer Rouge commander who had deserted to rejoin his family after 17 years in the jungle.
He commanded 90 men from a jungle camp close to Route 10, from Battambang to Pailin.
‘We slept in hammocks attached to trees, but there were not enough mosquito nets to go round.
We also had anti-malaria pills, but not enough.
If people got seriously ill, we had to carry them back (to Thai border camps) in hammocks.’
The Khmer Rouge paid him no wages, but sometimes the porters carrying rice and ammunition supplies from the Thai border would also bring cigarettes and rice wine.
Food was always short, and they were forced to eat roots and fruits from the forest, and kill deer and birds.
Once a month his commander, Nam, would visit and update his orders.
Otherwise, he was totally responsible for his men, and for planning ambushes on Vietnamese or Phnom Penh forces along the road.
Although a deserter, his estimation of the Khmer Rouge was still high: ‘The Khmer Rouge can survive in the jungle for ever’.
Preparing to return to power: The Khmer Rouge, whose atrocities of the mid-Seventies have become notorious, is increasingly likely to form part of any new government in Cambodia.
On this page Terry McCarthy looks at the organisation's roots, aims, strength, support and supposedly revised methods
By TERRY MCCARTHY
THE Khmer Rouge.
Visions of skulls in the rice fields of Cambodia, torture, starvation, death.
The Western view of the Khmer Rouge has been encapsulated in the title of David Puttnam's film The Killing Fields.
Few would argue with the proposition that it should never be allowed to return to power.
But the blank horror over Khmer Rouge atrocities between 1975 and 1978 has created a blind spot about its strength in Cambodia, and the growing likelihood that it will return to power, either on its own or with the other Cambodian opposition factions.
The Kampuchean Communist Party, first called the Khmer Rouge by Prince Sihanouk, has existed under the same leadership since the 1950s, has deep roots in Cambodia, and is not about to disappear.
It is ‘a sociological phenomenon of Cambodia’ says Vandy Kaon, a dissident intellectual in Phnom Penh.
It is a product of a dark, brutal side of Cambodian society that lives in fear of racial extinction at the hands of the neighbouring Vietnamese and Thais.
Its dream of recreating the glories of the Khmer empire that 1,000 years ago stretched from northern Malaysia to southern Vietnam may be an illusion.
But it is a powerful illusion, and attracts support from some of the best brains Cambodia has produced.
In public, the Khmer Rouge leaders have a quiet dignity.
But it is the dignity of the funeral parlour, tempered by the knowledge that they have killed many people for their dream.
They have pursued this dream so fiercely that they cannot afford to admit any self-doubt.
‘The Khmer Rouge wants to protect Cambodia, but no one has harmed Cambodia as it has done,’ says an aid worker.
What makes the Khmer Rouge so strong is its vision for Cambodia, which is pure, radically nationalistic and free of the corruption, petty power struggles and personal jealousies that bedevil the other two resistance factions and the Hun Sen government in Phnom Penh.
Lon Nol, the country's leader in the early Seventies, sold out to the Americans, said the Khmer Rouge.
Hun Sen sold out to the Vietnamese, and is now selling out to Thai businessmen as well, it says.
Only the Khmer Rouge will fight to preserve Cambodia for Cambodians.
It is actively supported by a small part of the population, and tacitly tolerated by many more, out of either fear or a simple desire not to be involved in a political battle.
The Khmer Rouge has infiltrated the towns, and is said to have secret sympathisers at very high levels in the Phnom Penh government.
Time is on its side.
It no longer has the Vietnamese army to worry about, and can now operate in large parts of the countryside with little interference from Phnom Penh government troops.
Since the Vietnamese withdrawal, the two non-communist resistance factions -the Khmer Peoples National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the Sihanoukists -have mounted a big offensive with an even bigger publicity campaign to boost their credibility.
The Khmer Rouge has done nothing, because it has no need to prove anything.
Its arms supplies from China are assured.
Speculation that its soldiers would attack the town of Pailin on the Thai border has died down, as it became clear that to hold Pailin would be more of a liability than an asset.
It would tie down a lot of troops and would also give Phnom Penh the opportunity to raise international alarm at the spectre of the return of the Khmer Rouge.
Vietnam has not ruled out the possibility of its army returning to Cambodia if requested by Phnom Penh.
The Khmer Rouge does not want to rock the boat, having waited patiently for more than a decade for the Vietnamese to leave.
The Paris conference was a success for the Khmer Rouge.
There was no international recognition of the Hun Sen government, no agreement on the cessation of foreign military aid, and Prince Sihanouk did not do a deal with Hun Sen cutting out the Khmer Rouge.
‘Prince Sihanouk knows well that the problem is not the Hun Sen government, but the Khmer Rouge.
This is why he does not cut them off,’ said an aide to the Prince in Bangkok last week.
Of the three Cambodian resistance factions, the Khmer Rouge is by far the best organised.
In Paris, its diplomats proved to be the most methodical, hardest working and best co-ordinated of all the Cambodians.
The Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), made up of the Khmer Rouge, the Sihanoukists and the KPNLF, is recognised by the United Nations.
It has nine permanent diplomatic missions abroad.
Eight of the missions have Khmer Rouge ambassadors, effectively giving the Khmer Rouge its own foreign ministry.
All the CGDK declarations, including Prince Sihanouk's recent five-point peace plan, are written by the Khmer Rouge, and simply presented to Sihanouk and the KPNLF leader, Son Sann, to sign.
Along the Thai border, the Khmer Rouge leaders can function with impunity, courtesy of the Thai Army which has supported them as its most effective weapon against Vietnam, Thailand's largest security concern.
Inside Cambodia, Khmer Rouge guerrillas do not appear to be planning any big offensives against the towns.
Their strategy seems to be widespread but low-level guerrilla warfare to discredit and destabilise the Phnom Penh government.
At the same same they are using propaganda and terror to boost their position in the countryside.
The calculation is that increased pressure on Hun Sen will force him back to the negotiating table, ready to make the dreaded concession: the inclusion of the Khmer Rouge in a political settlement.
The main supporters of the Khmer Rouge are the Chinese, who kept advisers in Phnom Penh throughout the Pol Pot era, and now supply the guerrillas with arms and money.
The Chinese want to put pressure on Vietnam, and Peking has made clear that it will continue sending arms until the Vietnamese-installed government of Hun Sen agrees to some form of power-sharing that includes the Khmer Rouge.
The Khmer Rouge says it has changed, and now supports a free market economy and a multi-party system.
Given the conviction of Khmer Rouge members that they are the only people who can save Cambodia, few observers believe their commitment to multi-partyism would last for long.
But if they return as part of negotiated settlement, they will at least be constrained by a large international presence of peace-keepers and aid organisations, which was not the case in 1975.
The Khmer Rouge is aware of the tightrope it has to tread, both with the West and with Vietnam.
Its goals are long-term.
‘We need international support, particularly from Western countries.
Therefore we cannot return to the politics of 1975 to 1978,’ said the Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan, in Paris.
‘We need a liberal economy and a liberal democracy.
This is the basis for national unity.
Why is this indispensable?
Because Vietnam is still there at our door, ready to return at any occasion.’