

Treaty ban will not stop America from making nerve gas
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
THE United States will continue to make new nerve gas weapons after the conclusion of a global treaty banning them takes effect, according to a hitherto secret administration policy review.
The move takes the glitter off President Bush's call at the United Nation's last month for immediate steps to ‘halt and reverse’ the worldwide threat of chemical weapons, and indicates that Mr Bush's commitment to a poison gas ban is not so ‘extraordinarily strong’as he and his advisors have declared.
The secret decision to continue producing the new generation of so-called ‘binary’ nerve gas weapons would also seem to preclude a Bush-inspired bilateral agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union to start reducing their arsenals of chemical weapons before the new global treaty is concluded.
After the President's UN speech on 25 September, the chief Soviet arms control adviser, Viktor Karpov, made it clear that Moscow would not join in making such reductions unless the US first ended its production of the new ‘binary’ weapons.
The new US position would also require redrafting the new global treaty banning production and stockpiling of chemical weapons being negotiated by 40 nations in Geneva.
At present, the treaty would require that production acitivities be halted immediately and the chemical plants rendered ‘inoperable’ within three months.
The United States is about to seek changes to allow continued production, according to officials quoted in the Washington Post.
Critics of the decision by the Bush administration said yesterday that continuing US production was destabilising because it encouraged countries capable of producing chemical weapons to begin developing new production lines immediately.
This would put them among the countries allowed to continue production after the new treaty comes into force.
‘Once these countries have actually made substantial investments in a chemical arsenal, what guarantees do we have that they will eventually be willing to throw it away?’ asked Elisa Harris, a chemical weapons at the Brookings Institution.
The secret decision to continue production was teken by the President after several options had been presented to him by the Pentagon and the State Department.
Pentagon hardliners, who have opposed a chemical weapons ban on the grounds that it could not be verified adequately, suggested the idea of seeking continued production of the new ‘binary’ weapons during the 10 years it would take to eliminate all arsenals.
The new binaries are claimed by their advocates to be safer than the older ‘unitary’ weapons because they use two chemical components that only become lethal when combined during the firing of the weapon.
The French have also favoured a continued production clause so that they would be able to develop new binaries during the 10-year period.
Mr Bush accepted the Pentagon proposal even though he told the United Nations that he believed ‘we can achieve the level of verification that gives us confidence to go forward with this ban’.
Also at the United Nations, the President called on the Soviet Union to reduce its stocks immediately to 20 per cent of the current US arsenal, which is unofficial estimated to be 30,000 tons.
The Russians have said they have 50,000 tons.
But such a bilateral arrangement is now in jeopardy.
because of the Soviet condition that the US cease production of its binary weapons.
Administration officials argue that Mr Bush's speech at the United Nations was in fact a turning point in the US efforts to ban the prodictoion of chemical weapons because it created an atmosphere in which the Geneva negotiations are likley to be accelerated.
Other countries were looking to the United States to take a firm leadership role, said one official.
Professor Matthew Meselson, a chemical weapons expert at Harvard, said the administration ‘wants to have its cake and eat it, too.
It's backward thinking to put the global ban at risk…simply to save a rather controversial binary programme’.
Bus bomb kills seven in Colombia
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
A policeman in Bogota surveys the body bags of some of the seven people who died when an explosion destroyed a bus.
Police do not believe it was the work of Colombian drug lords Photograph (omitted):
Street life kills Brazil's children: Richard House in Sao Paulo finds runaways suffering brutality at the hands of criminals, death squads and the police
From RICHARD HOUSE
FOURTEEN-year-old Manoel Jorge Santos had no idea of the perils awaiting him in Sao Paulo when he fled from a broken home and brawling stepfather, trudging 50 miles to the city's cathedral square in search of a new life.
‘You've got to be careful: they cause lots of trouble,’ said Manoel, glancing nervously at the groups of patrolling military police and the slate-grey truck used to cart away vagrant minors who spend their days here sniffing glue, bathing in fountains, picking pockets and sleeping rough.
Street children like Manoel now fear more than temporary incarceration at Febem, the Dickensian state orphanage that has long been a synonym for alienation and violence.
They fear torture, sexual brutality and death at the hands of organised death squads allegedly paid by tradesmen to ‘clean up’ the streets.
In Rio de Janeiro, dead street children have been found trussed in barbed wire, with their eyes gouged out, and even decapitated with a chainsaw.
One small corpse found recently in a fashionable district bore the warning: ‘I kill all those who don't go to school.’
Three years ago a Sao Paulo solicitor was applauded as he kicked a young would-be pickpocket to death.
He was never charged.
‘The violence against street children is now far more barbarous than anything inflicted on political prisoners during the worst phase of the military dictatorship,’ said Benedicto Rodrigues dos Santos, of the National Street Children's Movement, a welfare organisation that has documented the violent deaths of 1,397 street children since 1984.
‘The children are caught by police, imprisoned with common criminals, tortured and made to sign confessions.
The girls also suffer sexual exploitation by police.
Often they're made to pay for their release and so must steal to get this money,’ said Mr Santos.
The data compiled by the Childrens' Movement and IBASE, an independent institute, show a street child dies from stabbing, strangulation, beating or gunshots every two days in Brazil and claims that 82 children have been murdered by death squads this year.
Mr Santos blames ‘paramilitary groups and violent military policemen working for sectors of the business community interested in increasing profits by cleaning up the streets.’
But he admits it is almost impossible to prove their involvement.
He says evidence is systematically suppressed by the authorities.
Offending policemen frequently receive no more than a dishonourable discharge, and may resume killing in plain clothes, Mr Santos said, while some adolescents — who under Brazilian law are not criminally responsible -are also employed to kill other children.
These charges have mobilised the government: the Justice Minister has ordered an investigation by regional security officials, and Congress plans an inquiry.
Police officers insist that most of the killings are drug-related, especially in Rio, where minors are employed as delivery boys and armed lookouts by traffickers.
But last weekend two adolescent courting couples were murdered in Novo Fribourgo because they witnessed the killing by military police of a youth considered to be tarnishing the town's image.
For thousands of children who spend their days locked up in the shanty towns while their parents work, the streets offer freedom and escape from domestic violence as well as a springboard to prostitution or petty crime.
A decade of economic stagnation has forced families to turn schoolchildren into breadwinners.
Of Brazil's 58 million children and adolescents, almost a fifth work full-time as delivery boys, rural workers, shoe-shiners or gatherers of waste paper.
Marta Silva Campos, municipal welfare secretary for Sao Paulo's left-wing city administration, calculates that there are almost two million children living in such poverty that the streets offer an alternative.
‘People are paranoid — they just want to keep the problem under control so they don't get robbed by juvenile delinquents,’ she said.
Funabem, the federal child welfare agency, calculates there are seven million street children across Brazil.
Ms Campos is highly critical of the Sao Paulo state government's high-profile child care policies, which claim to have saved at least 100,000 children.
‘The first problem is to stop adults being afraid of children.
By educating children that a large part of society would like to see behind bars, we are breaking down important taboos,’ said Alda Marco Antonio, state welfare secretary.
But despite the return to democracy, she admits humanitarian attitudes are unchanged:: ‘This is an outdated, prejudiced and repressive society.’
FBI advertises for Russian spies
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York
THE FBI HAS taken out advertisements in a Russian-language newspaper in New York in an effort to entice spies and counterintelligence agents living among Soviet emigres in the United States to defect.
The advertisements appeared in Novoye Russkoye at the weekend, causing a buzz of excitement in the Soviet expatriate enclave of Brighton Beach, also known as Little Odessa.
Some 150,000 Jews, Armenians and ethnic Germans have come to the US since 1975, and 80,000 more are expected over the next year.
Many Russian exiles have long suspected that spies had been planted in their midst by the KGB, and for some the advertisements confirmed their darkest fears.
The FBI — which handles counterintelligence matters — is trying to turn the influx of Soviet emigres to its advantage, however, and, according to The New York Times, the agency hopes to reap a potential intelligence bonanza once double agents have been weeded out.
The agency's unorthodox approach and a solemn promise that ‘replies will be kept in the strictest confidence’ caused some mirth among exiles.
The ad says that ‘many emigres have found themselves in a position to assist the FBI in its counterintelligence mission’.
‘Some of you are emigres who, for one reason or another, have direct knowledge of KGB methods or operations in the USSR or abroad, but particularly in the United States.
Potential defectors are asked to call Manhattan (212) 553-2700 and ask for the counterintelligence section at extension 3037.’
Defectors have found difficulty making contact with FBI agents, although the agency is listed in the telephone book.
Apparently many emigres are unaware that phone books, almost impossible to acquire in the Soviet Union, are freely available in the US.
Novelist leads as presidential race begins in Peru
From SIMON STRONG in Lima
MARIO VARGAS LLOSA, the novelist, was comfortably ahead in the opinion polls as the deadline for the registration of candidates in the Peruvian presidential elections passed yesterday.
Mr Vargas has achieved his lead despite the offence caused to some of the crustier elements of his right-wing allies, the Popular Alliance and the Popular Christian Party by a television advertisement that presented a monkey dressed as a state bureaucrat.
‘And they say they care about those below’, said the commentary, as the monkey urinated against a wall.
Doubts about Mr Vargas' taste were also raised by the sight of near-naked women dancing to celebrate his second anniversary in politics.
Mr Vargas, whose group is called the Liberty Movement, needs to win more than half of the votes next 8 April to secure the presidency.
He would introduce sweeping, neo-liberal reforms, including an extensive privatisation programme, within a framework of ideas promoted by a Peruvian economist, Hernando de Soto, whose work has been hailed by President Bush as a blue-print for the developing world.
If he fails to gain an outright majority the Marxist former mayor of Lima, Alfonso Barrantes, might win the second round.
Mr Barrantes, 61, bowed out of the 1985 presidential elections after coming second in the first ballot.
He launched his campaign on Saturday with a promise to protect the public sector and to jail those caught stealing from the state.
Superficially, little has changed.
Left and right struggle over familiar territory and all sides — including the ruling Apra candidate, Luis Alva,-vow to root out corruption.
But the figure lurking behind all three is Mr de Soto.
And against all three are the guerrilla groups, the Shining Path and the smaller Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement.
Mr de Soto's think-tank, the Institute of Liberty and Democracy, has highlighted how massive urban emigration has undermined a government system that revolves around private and state monopolies.
He claims it has forced migrants to live outside formal society.
His plans to grant land titles to shanty-town dwellers were effectively launched into the Apra-dominated Congress by the ‘reformist’ left.
His comprehensive law to cut bureaucratic red tape was similarly backed.
Both initiatives have the active support of President Garcia.
Mr de Soto's early association with Mr Vargas' alliance, the Democratic Front, has cooled because of the economist's suspicion that the novelist is being compromised by his allies.
Among these are powerful businessmen with little interest in a genuinely free market.
The municipal and new regional elections on 12 November will be the Front's first test.
The elections will be boycotted by Shining Path, who have already stepped up assassinations, caused several candidates to resign and raised fears that, in many parts of Peru, democratic elections will simply be a pipe dream.
Somalia is disintegrating into anarchy: Richard Dowden last week became the first outsider to visit the parts of Somalia controlled by anti-government guerrillas.
He describes a country ravaged by tribal warfare and seemingly doomed to become the African continent's next tragedy
By RICHARD DOWDEN
THERE are only 19 people left in Zeila — mostly old men sheltering from the glaring sun in the wreckage of this ancient port.
They and starving cats are the only living things surviving among the shattered buildings and corrugated iron shacks.
The only building unscathed is the green and white tomb of Ibrahim Ahmed Ben Omar, who died 750 years ago.
The British-built hospital (1939) stands empty, doors ripped off and windows smashed.
A pile of grimy bed-linen lies in what was once a ward.
Embedded in the sand outside is a broken microscope.
The Zeila Fishing Community Training Centre, built by a United Nations fund, has been looted, every removable part of its generator has gone and its floors are littered with excrement and papers from upturned cupboards.
The half-finished Save the Children Fund clinic is abandoned.
Nearby, two rusting medieval cannons lie half-buried in the sand.
Their modern equivalents, two 120mm mortars, stand nearby, pointing out to sea.
Their crews are prostrate in the shade, trying to escape the excruciating, oven heat.
This small town fell to the guerrillas of the Somali National Movement after fierce fighting in May this year.
By June, the whole of northern Somalia was in their hands, with the exception of Hargeisa, the regional capital, and four garrison towns.
In the south, rebels from another group are pressing the government of President Siad Barre, who now has little authority beyond the capital.
The rebel movements are almost exclusively tribal — as is the rump of government.
Fighting has been accompanied by massacres of civilians from the ‘wrong’ tribe.
A recent US State Department report on human rights in Somalia said that, at a conservative estimate, 5,000 unarmed Issaqs had been murdered by the Somali armed forces between May 1988 and March this year.
Hundreds of thousands of Somalis have fled from their homes, some to refugee camps in Ethiopia, others to revert to their ancestral nomadic existence in Somalia's empty semi-deserts.
The Somali government has armed refugees from Ethiopia to help fight the rebels; deserters from the army are also roaming the desert.
Somalia is disintegrating into anarchy.
Last week SNM guerrillas took me into Somalia from Djibouti, a crossing made on foot by night, dodging police and army patrols.
The Djibouti government wants to avoid involvement in its neighbour's civil war, but most Djiboutians support their Issaq Somali cousins.
Although there are between 30,000 and 50,000 Somalis squatting in the tiny littoral state of Djibouti, its government does not grant them refugee status and deports any Somalis -guerrillas or refugees — it catches crossing the border.
According to many local people, the police hold refugees without food or water for a few days, then turn them loose in the desert near the Somali or Ethiopian borders -too far for them to walk back.
As I recrossed into Djibouti, villagers sympathetic to the SNM, or just wanting money, hid me from the patrols.
In one village, suddenly raided by the army at 2am, villagers made me lie on the ground and threw a blanket over me, telling the soldiers I was an old woman, too sick to move.
The SNM is a ragged band of fighters with little political ideology beyond the expulsion of President Barre's forces from northern Somalia and the overthrow of his 20-year-old government.
It is almost entirely made up of Issaq people, the clan of northern, formerly British, Somalia.
The movement seems to have substantial sums of money, but I saw no sign of material support.
All the weapons and uniforms appeared to have been captured.
It lives off the local people, eating the camels of roaming nomads, who appeared to offer them willingly.
When I asked Ali Ahmed Yonis, the local guerrilla commander, how many fighters the SNM had, he replied simply: ‘I don't know.
All Issaqs are SNM fighters.’
The Issaqs have cause to hate the Mogadishu government.
In Djibouti I met 13 of them, once the leading professionals of Hargeisa; doctors, teachers, businessmen and civil servants.
Ten years ago they formed themselves into the Hargeisa Group to lobby the government for a better deal for the north.
For that they were detained and tortured for four months in 1981.
After a brief show trial they were put in solitary confinement in appalling conditions until March this year.
Some still bear the marks of their torture, but they appeared remarkably calm and unembittered by their suffering.
The civil war in the north began in earnest in May last year, when hundreds of SNM fighters poured across the Ethiopian border and attacked Hargeisa and Buroa.
They nearly captured Hargeisa, and the government forces reacted by rounding up all influential Issaqs in the town and executing them.
The SNM withdrew and is now laying siege to Hargeisa and four other garrisons in the region.
Commander Ali said SNM ambushes had prevented supplies reaching them and he was confident that Boroma would soon fall.
It is bitterly ironic that Somalia, the only nation in Africa with one ethnic group, one culture, one language and one religion should be the most deeply divided of the continent's 52 fractious countries.
The landscape seems to belong to some bare planet closer to the sun than earth, and the passions of its people match that glaring heat.
Somalis have a just reputation as fierce, uncompromising fighters.
When the Princess Royal visited the region on behalf of the Save the Children Fund last year, the local people danced for her.
One of the dances consisted of a mimed battle between two men.
It ended with one man symbolically castrating the other and dancing before the Princess waving his ‘prize’.
But the viciousness of Somalia's civil war is far outweighed by the suffering of its refugees.
Almost 350,000 fled to Ethiopia in May last year when the fighting flared.
They were mostly from Hargeisa, townspeople with a reasonable standard of living.
Many of those who arrived in Ethiopia were healthy, and with money and possessions.
Due to the incompetence of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Ethiopia, their condition rapidly deteriorated.
They were not properly cared for, and by May this year there was widespread malnutrition in the camps — despite the fact that the UNHCR provided for an assumed 600,000 refugees, almost double the true number.
The distribution of food, water and shelter was chaotic.
Some refugees managed to obtain extra ration cards, and at the Harshin and Hartishek camps food repeatedly ran out before everyone had received their ration.
There were several riots, and local Ethiopian troops opened fire more than once to quell the angry refugees.
The Save the Children Fund, which was working in the camps, made a report which exposed the scandal of the Ethiopian camps.
In June, after heated talks with the UNHCR, conditions began to improve.
The aid agencies working there decided not to publicise the report, which has since been backed up by an internal report by Robert Ash, a senior UNHCR official.
However inadequate its facilities, Ethiopia remains the only neighbour which accepts Somali refugees.
The UNHCR is too weak to press the governments of Kenya or Djibouti into accepting and caring for them.
Last week the BBC reported that Kenyan police at Liboi, on the border with Somalia, were forcibly returning refugees from Somalia who arrived three weeks ago.
Two had already died of starvation and young children were reported to be very weak from lack of food.
Those who resisted repatriation were arrested and jailed.
But Somalia's refugees may have suffered a less appalling fate than the hundreds of thousands of Ethiopian refugees in Somalia, who have existed in desolate camps for nearly 10 years.
These camps have been attacked by both government forces and the SNM, with at least 241 refugees killed.
The UNHCR has been forced to abandon them, and no one knows what has become of their inhabitants.
Dumped in waterless barren regions near the Somali Ethiopian border, they could not survive long without the food and water supplies brought in by lorry.
They may become another African horror story, reported long after anyone is able to do anything about it.
Siad Barre will celebrate — if that is the right word — 20 years in power on 21 October.
The old man's power, built on a mixture of skilful manipulation and ruthless repression, has waned.
Some say he is now no more than mayor of Mogadishu, retaining only the loyalty of his own Marehan clan and other Darode tribes.
The Ogadeni tribe, once the backbone of his army, has deserted him: its members have formed the Somali Patriotic Movement.
Even the Hawieh, the majority in the capital and usually politically docile, have begun their own movement, the Somali Union Congress.
The United States, formerly President Barre's close ally, has abandoned him.
Having secured a regional detente with the Soviet Union, the Americans no longer need the base facility at Berbera on the coast of the Gulf of Aden.
Only the Italians, the former colonisers of southern Somalia, are continuing to give aid to Mogadishu.
But the question is no longer whether President Barre will survive.
The question is: what will replace him?
The Somali nation has broken down into its tribes and there is little trust between them.
The removal of the Barre regime may be the end of a tyranny; it could also be the begining of a tribal war the horrors of which we have so far only glimpsed.
One day last week we stopped in a deserted village and the guerrillas led me to where lunch was being prepared.
Lunch was a camel.
Its hindquarters squatted comfortably on the ground but the rest of it, from its fifth vertebra, was missing.
The lopped neck and head lay a few feet away, and starving cats licked the blood-soaked earth.
In between men with machetes hacked and chopped in a welter of gore.
It is my abiding image of Somalia.
Sick system
By RICHARD DOWDEN
First Edition (AP)— The World Health Organisation said Bulgaria's ethnic Turks have not received equal access to or equal use of the public health system
Aquino annoyed
By RICHARD DOWDEN
First Edition MANILA (Reuter)— President Aquino, admitting that the death of Ferdinand Marcos had sparked a wave of sympathy for the late dictator, urged Filipinos to stop weeping for the man who had ‘laughed all the way to the bank.’
Pope appeal
By RICHARD DOWDEN
First Edition JAKARTA (Reuter)— Pope John Paul, who makes a controversial visit to the disputed territory of East Timor this week, told Indonesia's government that human rights and self-determination must be respected.
He paid tribute to the way the country had forged national unity.
But in a speech to President Suharto and ministers he added: ‘At times nations are tempted to disregard fundamental human rights in a misguided search for political unity based on military or economic power alone.
But such unity can easily be dissolved.’
Briton held
By RICHARD DOWDEN
David Ormerod, a geology lecturer at the Open University, has been held in Oradea, Romania, for the past three days, after being picked up at the main crossing point into Hungary.
Dr Ormerod, who was on a working holiday in the Carpathians, is to be tried on charges of attempting to smuggle a Romanian citizen out of the country.
Sign of hope
By RICHARD DOWDEN
BEIRUT (AP)— The American University of Beirut, once the most celebrated centre of higher education in the Middle East, reopened after a six-month closure caused by fighting between Syrian and Christian forces.
Car bomb case
By RICHARD DOWDEN
MADRID (Reuter)— Two Basque separatists went on trial charged with a car bomb attack which killed 21 Barcelona shoppers in June 1987.
The prosecution has requested 950-year jail sentences each for Josefa Mercedes Ernaga and Domingo Troitino.
Killer Angela
Foreign News Page 12
Dollar hunt
By RICHARD DOWDEN
BELGRADE (Reuter)— The Yugoslav Prime Minister, Ante Markovic, leaving behind an economic crisis with inflation running at almost 1,200 per cent, flew to the US to ask for $1bn to back up his reform programme.
Hijackers' trial
By RICHARD DOWDEN
BANGKOK (AP)— Two Burmese students who hijacked a plane to demand democracy in their military-ruled country will be tried in Thailand but not sent back home.
30-year itch
By RICHARD DOWDEN
SINGAPORE (Reuter)— The Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, confirmed in an interview with the BBC that he would step down and hand over power to his deputy, Goh Chok Tong, by the end of next year.
Mr Lee, 66, leader of the ruling People's Action Party, has held the office since 1959 when Singapore became a self-governing state.
Japan to pay
By RICHARD DOWDEN
NICOSIA (Reuter)— The Japanese firm, Mitsui, has undertaken to pay Iran almost $1bn (£625m) in compensation for ending its role in a joint petrochemical complex, Iran's Irna news agency said.
Bomb charge
By RICHARD DOWDEN
STOCKHOLM (Reuter)— A prosecutor formally charged four men of Palestinian origin with a series of terrorist bombings against various US and Israeli offices in Copenhagen and Stockholm between 1985 and 1986.
But he denied newspaper reports that the men had been involved in last December's bombing of a Pan Am jet which exploded above the Scottish village of Lockerbie with the loss of 270 lives.
More elections
By RICHARD DOWDEN
ATHENS (AP)— Greeks faced the prospect of new general elections next month after party leaders failed to form a government.
The former Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, rebuffed in his attempt to convince leftist forces to join his socialist camp in a coalition government, returned an exploratory three-day mandate to President Christos Sartzetakis.
Galileo launch challenged
By MARK CHAMPION
WASHINGTON — Countdown to liftoff has begun for the space shuttle Atlantis and the Jupiter-bound spacecraft it is carrying.
But a Washington court could stop the launch today, if it agrees with anti-nuclear activists that the space probe's plutonium generators are unsafe, writes Mark Champion.
In the first-ever legal challenge to a space launch, a coalition of anti-nuclear groups charge that Galileo's generators could rain radioactive waste all over eastern Florida if the shuttle were to explode during takeoff.
Italy pulls out of Nato ship plan
By MARK CHAMPION
THE HAGUE (AFP)— Following the lead of Britain and France, Italy will pull out of Nato's $13bn (£8bn) project to build a frigate for the 1990s, according to the Dutch Defence Secretary.
Jan van Houwelingen said Italy would not participate in the Nato plan to build a new anti-aircraft frigate for the fleets of eight allied powers.
He told the Dutch parliament that those countries still wanting to participate would meet shortly to decide whether to pursue the programme.
Kohl pleads for reform for the sake of European stability
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
CHANCELLOR Kohl yesterday appealed again to East Germany's unbending leaders to introduce reforms as anxiety grew here that the situation in East Germany could hurtle out of control.
‘Internal peace and stability cannot be guaranteed by force and by denying the people a voice,’ he said.
As he spoke, details continued to pour in of demonstrations and police brutality matched only by the harshly-suppressed 1953 uprising.
Caught unprepared by East Germany's explosion of discontent, West Germans fear that the regime's stubbornness could provoke a revolt and bring chaos to the country, threatening the stability of Europe and pose immense problems — including the question of German reunification — which they and their neighbours are not ready to face.
‘We don't want to stabilise the existing regime but we don't want a destabilisation which could lead to incalculable risks,’ said a close aide of the Chancellor.
Chancellor Kohl has promised generous aid to support reforms in East Germany.
This should be taken as a message both to the Western allies and the Soviet Union that West Germany's first concern is the gradual, well-disciplined reform of East German society, not the country's destruction and its absorption into West Germany.
Nor does the Chancellor demand free elections for East Germans immediately, his aides say, but would first like to see them be given greater personal freedom and basic human rights.
The West Germans have found themselves sharing virtually identical interests with East Germany's own superpower, the Soviet Union.
Chancellor Kohl has been in contact with President Gorbachev since the refugee exodus began in August.
Although the details have not been disclosed, the Soviet Union played a key role in convincing the East Germans to let refugees holed up in West German embassies leave for the West.
The Chancellor has evidently made it clear to Moscow that West Germany respects East Germany's existence as a separate state, that it does not want to alter the present military set-up of Nato and the Warsaw Pact, and that although it aims to overcome the division of Europe, this does not also apply to the political division of Germany — at least for the foreseeable future.
The Soviet Union, for its part, let it be known that if serious trouble did break out in East Germany Soviet troops would not move in, as they did to quell the 1953 revolt — so long as the West did not interfere either.
Bonn is now hoping that Mr Gorbachev's publicly cautious, but presumably privately firm pressure on the East German leaders to reform will produce results and doing their best to reinforce it.
WARSAW — About 100 East Germans have been arriving daily at the West German embassy In Warsaw, hoping to join the 1,436 who have gained passage to the West via Poland since 30 September, AFP reports.
A total of 110,184 refugees arrived in West Germany between January and September, according to the West German Ministry for Inter-German Relations.
Honecker sees parallel with unrest in Peking
From EDWARD STEEN in West Berlin
THE East German leader, Erich Honecker, yesterday compared unrest in his country to China's pro-democracy uprising earlier this year, and said that any attempt to undermine communism in East Germany would be doomed to failure.
The official ADN news agency said that Mr Honecker told the visiting Chinese Deputy Prime Minister, Yao Yilin: ‘Any attempt by imperialism to destabilise socialist construction, and slander its achievements, is now and in the future nothing more than Don Quixote's futile charge against the steadily turning sails of a windmill.’
‘The two agreed there was evidence of a particularly aggressive anti-socialist action by imperialist class opponents with the aim of reversing socialist development,’ ADN added.
‘In this respect there is a fundamental lesson to be learnt from the counter-revolutionary unrest in Peking and the present campaign against the GDR and other socialist states.’
East Germany, together with Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, condoned the Peking government's actions in June, when hundreds of people were killed in the crushing of the pro-democracy movement.
The party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, splashed yesterday on a story headlined: ‘The Development Of The German Democratic Republic Will Be The Work Of The Whole People In Future, Too.’
Apart from a page 9 reference to hooligans in Neues Deutschland, only the youth paper, Junge Welt, referred to the unprecedented protests over the weekend, which saw tens of thousands of young East Germans on the streets, and an estimated 1,000 still in jail in East Berlin alone.
Junge Welt printed a photograph of some demonstrators.
The most high-level discontent appeared in an extraordinary open letter to the same paper, the organ of the Free German Youth (SDJ).
The president of the Writer's Association, Hermann Kant, a central committee member, said the exodus of almost 50,000 refugees could not be blamed on the ‘wicked class enemy’ in West Germany: ‘A defeat is a defeat even if it comes on the eve of a glorious celebration.’
He attacked the smug ‘self glorification’ of the official press, the ‘pervasive bossiness’of the system, and said that social understanding was imperative ‘through criticism and self-criticism — openly, not bleating, but by being hard and patient.’
After protests by the Western Allies about the infringement of the Four Powers agreement, West Berliners were moving again through the Friedrichstrasse crossing yesterday.
But only a trickle of tourists passed through Checkpoint Charlie.
The more determined Australian backpackers turned up again repeatedly all through the day.
Too late to find an E German Gorbachev
From EDWARD STEEN
WEST BERLIN — East Berlin yesterday began jamming the cheeky private radio station 100,6 broadcasting from the Western half of the city.
A more eloquent statement of unrealism would be hard to devise, writes Edward Steen.
The would-be island, now with hermetically sealed borders and excluding all but a few tourists, is full of noises.
They are faithfully relayed by West German television to the 16.5 million population, and range from the shouts of ‘freedom’ and the sound of Stasi truncheons hitting skulls to the even more ominous noises from abroad.
Bonn can plainly not afford the political price of continuing to shore up the German Democratic Republic with billions of Deutsche Marks unless in return for genuine reform.
Back in Moscow after the grinding 40th anniversary celebrations in East Berlin, President Gorbachev made plain on Soviet television that Erich Honecker's Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) could sink or learn to swim.
Last week the Soviet embassy in East Berlin even signalled it would not intervene if unrest became uncontrollable.
The long search for an East German Gorbachev is looking more and more irrelevant.
It is probably now too late, but the subject continues to provoke speculation.
Hans Modrow, Party leader in Dresden, is supposed to be a reformist, but there is no evidence for this.
Another, more exotic, suggestion is Markus Wolf, the retired spy chief, if only because he sounds rather human and writes books.
The pundits dip haphazardly into the lucky dip.
What about Gunter Schabowski, First Secretary of The East Berlin Party, who always seems to be in Moscow?
Egon Krenz, 48, a hard-drinking hard-liner and nominally number two, responsible for youths, is now written off, having no friends in the Soviet Union or anywhere else.
But no one knows, and perhaps there is nothing to know.
President Gorbachev claimed on Soviet television to have found many supporters of perestroika in SED.
That could be true.
The disgruntlement among its two million members is almost palpable.
The 22-man Politburo jealously guards power.
It is entirely dominated by old comrades of 77-year-old Erich Honecker from the days when, after 1945, he built his powerbase.
All in Mr Honecker's image, tough and second rate, they are not inclined to give up the hunting lodges and chauffeurs they feel are their due.
With luck, an ‘easeful death’ will intervene before that day comes.
Eight of them are over 70.
To speculate about possible good communists in the GDR is also to ignore the central fact about the country, which is that it is not one.
Increasingly referred to by its citizens as ‘the Zone’, as it had been when it was merely the Soviet occupation zone, it has achieved no genuine separate identity or legitimacy.
On the economic front, the near-heroic attempt to make a centralised economy work has produced, with Bonn's support, a real success story.
But it is sliding ever backwards in relation to the West.
Reform will bring chaos a la russe, according to the leading West German expert on the GDR economy, Doris Cornelsen: ‘But without reforms disaster looms anyway.
The GDR's choice is between dealing with chaos quickly and overcoming it or putting it off.
Then it will be worse.’
But even improbably swift, prudent action, does not solve the problem of the GDR's lack of any other reason for existence except a Socialism few now want.
Reform is not just a sensible course which could, with some pain, lead to a better life for everyone, as in Hungary.
Reform would in effect mean the end of the state.
Mr Gorbachev pleased his grinning hosts in East Berlin when he politely remarked that whatever affected the future of the GDR would be decided in Berlin.
In truth, Berlin is perhaps the least important player in the game.
Soviet workers win a qualified right to strike
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
IN A HISTORIC legislative debut, the new Soviet parliament last night gave final and overwhelming approval to a comprehensive law on labour disputes, admitting the right of workers to strike but outlawing stoppages in various key sectors of the national economy.
The measure is not only the first full-scale law passed by the Supreme Soviet in its new incarnation as a professional legislature.
It is also an unprecedented legal recognition here of a problem the very existence of which was for many decades denied by a Communist state claiming to be founded upon the interests of the working class.
The big moment came shortly before 7pm after more than two days of debate in the full parliament and much scrutiny and no few amendments in committee.
When the result — 373 votes for, 12 against — flashed up on the black and green computer screens at either end of the chamber, the assembled deputies gave themselves a short, self-congratulatory round of applause.
The law itself will take over from the emergency anti-strike provisions voted through amid no little confusion six days ago.
It effectively bans strikes in transport, including rail, air and underground services, in the fuel, energy and defence industries, and in other sectors where a halt in production could have ‘serious and dangerous consequences’.
Strikes for political motives are also forbidden.
Even where they are allowed, strikes will still not be easy.
They are conceived of as a last resort when all else fails, including a mandatory three-day cooling-off period and a further five days while a ‘conciliation commission’ will attempt to produce agreement between the parties.
Even then, a strike can go ahead only with the backing, secured in open or secret ballot, of a majority of the work force.
Picketing and other intimidation will be illegal, and men involved in a stoppage will not be paid for its duration.
However, in an important concession, the legislation permits disputes to be handled not only by official trades unions and works councils but by ‘any other organ’ so empowered by the work collective.
This amounts to de facto recognition of the unofficial strike committees which emerged as a real power during last summer's disruption in the Siberian and Ukrainian coalfields.
Meanwhile, in the current strike which really matters, Azerbaijan's month-long unofficial rail blockade of Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh, the situation remains confused.
According to the Tass news agency, 37 trains got through over the weekend, partly as a result of ‘serious measures’ by the authorities.
That last phrase would seem to indicate employment of the military to ensure safe and regular transit over Azerbaijan, through which 85 per cent of the rail freight reaching Armenia must pass.
But at a rally in Baku on Sunday, the Azerbaijani Popular Front, prime mover in the blockade, indicated it was continuing its campaign, which is aimed at forcing Armenia to drop its demand for reunification with Nagorny Karabakh.
Estonia gets ready for a three-letter miracle: Rupert Cornwell traces the Baltic republic's rapid move to remarkable degree of economic and political autonomy
By RUPERT CORNWELL
REIN OTSASON, at least, has no doubts.
‘By 1 January, we will be ready,’ says Estonia's Deputy Prime Minister in his office in the elegant pink government building, atop the hill dominating the spires and steep-sloping rooftops of the old Hanseatic heart of Estonia's capital.
If anyone may speak with confidence, it is Mr Otsason.
He more than anyone is the inventor of IME.
In Estonian, the acronym stands for Ise-Majandav Eesti: ‘an economically independent Estonia’.
Only 18 months ago, it was little more than a dream, the brainchild of himself and a few radical economists, blending Mr Gorbachev's plans for economic decentralisation with crystallising Estonian nationalism.
Today, almost incredibly, it stands less than three months from take-off.
This May, IME became a law of the Estonian parliament.
Far more astounding, the plan for the republic to switch to full economic self-management on 1 January 1990 was approved by the full Supreme Soviet in Moscow on 27 July.
Thus, perhaps without realising the implications, the Soviet parliament gave the go-ahead for the most revolutionary experiment here since Lenin's New Economic Policy of the 1920s: for a massive delegation of powers from the centre, permitting a single republic to create its own market-oriented economy, with its own budget, and to redraw economic rules which basically Stalin's.
And not just any republic.
Nowhere can economic autonomy be separated from political autonomy, and least of all in the Soviet Baltic states, where separatism stalks every debate.
This devolution will take place amid bitter conflict over local electoral and citizenship laws, and an explosive argument over the very legality of the incorporation of Estonia into the Soviet Union in 1940.
Last week, the Estonian Parliament compromised on both fronts — but only at the price of jeopardising the alliance between nationalists and the republic's Communist Party which has hitherto allowed Estonia so nimbly to sidestep a decisive confrontation with Moscow.
It is against this background, and that of desperate economic crisis in the entire Soviet Union, that IME is supposed to proceed.
In fact, the present mess, whatever its practical implications for the myriad administrative changes required to implement the Estonian experiment, merely increases the impetus for reform.
For the separatists, IME offers escape from the system — political as well as economic — which has imprisoned their nation for half a century.
Those of more moderate cut, such as Mr Otsason and the official party leadership, maintain that the Estonian model is the Soviet Union's only hope of salvation.
‘Our programme is the only one that can get the country as a whole out of its crisis,’ he argues.
‘It will make everyone concerned to spend less and earn more.
Right now, in order to improve our standard of living, we have to ask Moscow for more.
In future we'll be asking for less.’
But it will be a long time before that system is fully installed.
No fewer than 20 legislative acts will be required, says Mr Otsason.
Those providing for a separate republican budget, a revamped tax system, and autonomy for companies registered in Estonia, have been drawn up.
Others though are not, and will be even more controversial.
Their subjects range from property and land (in contrast to the country-wide bill about to be discussed in the Moscow Supreme Soviet, Estonia will explicitly recognise private ownership) to migration and — most delicate of all — currency and finance.
The blueprint approved in May foresees an Estonian central bank controlling a local banking system, the local money supply and credit market.
It would be empowered to conduct its own relations with foreign central banks.
Most crucially, it would have the right to issue an Estonian currency, probably named after the kron which served during the 20 years of independence between the wars.
‘We do not want economic war with Russia,’ Mr Otsason stresses.
Yet there could be no more symbolic act of defiance than a currency with a separate exchange rate against the rouble.
A finance bill looks unlikely before next summer and even then, a re-appearance of the kron seems improbable.
But before that there are other hurdles: how to reach agreement with a jealous central bureaucracy over control of ‘union’ factories on Estonian soil, vital to the central plan.
What about defence industry plants?
Other issues touch sensitive local nerves.
The laws on migration and land could easily upset the 30 per cent Russian component of the population.
Quietly, Estonia is also exploring the possibility of trading directly with other republics.
IME happens to be the Estonian word for ‘miracle’— exactly what is required, you could be forgiven for feeling, if today's designs are to become reality.
Hungarian party heads off split
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
HUNGARIAN reformers narrowly averted a fatal split last night just two days after the birth of their new Socialist Party when they elected a compromise leadership.
Imre Pozsgay's Reform Alliance managed to secure 14 seats on the new presidium, while Reszo Nyers, the moderate president re-elected last night by an 80 per cent majority, won the 11 remaining seats on the party's top body.
The compromise list was put together after long hours of high drama when Mr Pozsgay, a minister of state and the leading reformer, and two of his close allies threatened to walk out.
Mr Pozsgay, Mr Nemeth and Gyula Horn, the Foreign Minister, had been dissatisfied with Mr Nyers' compromising stance, and his support for party cells in workplaces.
Nevertheless, the three would-be breakaways said after the vote that they were ‘satisfied’ with the composition of the new leadership, despite the big sacrifices they had to make.
Two leaders of the Reform Circle movement, Csaba Tabajdi and Ferenc Gazso, are missing from the new line-up, while the People's Democracy Platform, the reformists' left-wing allies, seemed to have got more than their share of the leading places.
Another source of future friction lies in the failure of the congress to elevate Mr Pozsgay above other presidium members, some of whom had never been elected to a top party position.
Mr Pozsgay will have his chance of greater glory in the presidential elections scheduled for next month, but his ambitious young colleague, Mr Nemeth, will have no such consolation.
His high profile in recent months and obvious bid for the party presidency have amounted to nothing.
The new party's founding documents condemned ‘policy mistakes’ in Hungary's recent history, and outlined ‘remedies’for the future.
The main ‘mistakes’ were: the Communist Party's forcible suppression of opposition in 1948 to establish a political dictatorship in Hungary; the Stalinist era's ‘unrealistic pace of military preparation, ill-conceived industrialisation and the forced collectivisation’; Stalinist ‘harassment of millions of people, the mass violation of rights and intimidation’; the violent Soviet suppression of the 1956 Hungarian revolt, which is now now officially defined as a popular uprising; and the party's inability from the mid-1970s to continue the decentralisation of economic reforms launched in 1968.
The proposed ‘remedies’ included: a multi-party political system; a government answerable to an elected parliament, not to one political party; use of referenda as a form of direct democracy; autonomous local governments; the creation of the office of state president; an independent judiciary; an end to censorship; a supreme auditing office to inspect state finances; constitutional guarantees to defend the rights of ethnic and religious minorities; and a welfare state, founded on a market-based economy.
The big question now is whether Communist MPs, most of whom come from the old school, will apply for membership of the new party.
If they do not, the party could lose its majority in parliament, precipitating a government crisis.
MPs will start debating these issues on the 17 of this month, two weeks before members of the old party have to make up their minds about whether they want to join the new ship.
Latvians seek independence
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
RIGA (AP)— Members of the Latvian nationalist movement, the People's Front, have raised their demand from achieving local autonomy to outright independence from the Soviet Union.
Delegates at the second annual congress of the movement voted overwhelmingly early yesterday to approve a programme designed to build an independent economy and social structure in Latvia before the republic secedes at an unspecified date.
Only one of the 1,074 delegates voted against the proposal.
As the congress came to a close, Janis Aboltins, vice-chairman of the Latvian state planning commission, said the call for independence could create problems in negotiating more econonic freedom from the Kremlin.
‘There is a direct link between the political situation and economic negotiations,’ he said.
‘The more radical the slogans, the more difficult it is for us the day after in the corridors of power in Moscow.’
Around the World
By BRUCE PALLING
Law and order in Uganda IT IS more than a decade since Kampala was one of the world's danger capitals, when Uganda was under the sway of Idi Amin, the murderous clown now in exile in the Middle East.
Even though the country is now relatively peaceful, British diplomats still enjoy the protection of British Royal Military Police equipped with the latest in machine pistols and bullet-proof vehicles.
The only other posts with such security are Lebanon and El Salvador.
All the more embarrassing, then, that the residence of the High Commissioner, Sir Derek March, was recently burgled and thoroughly looted, despite a British policeman being on duty at the time.
As though this were not enough, a gang of Ugandan footpads then raided the homes of the newly-arrived British police training mission and made off with their video machines — plus their training tapes for the local police on how to prevent burglaries.
Cedric goes home Mystery surrounds the recent recall to New York of Cedric Thornberry, the Northern Ireland-born bon vivant and occasional spokesman for the United Nations in Namibia.
Officially it is for ‘consultations’ but the usual reliable sources say it follows a series of death threats by white bigots who were displeased when he said the South African-controlled Koevoet paramilitary forces were ‘on a turkey shoot’against Swapo guerrillas.
He also offended cost-conscious UN bureaucrats by purchasing a large mansion in Windhoek; a spokesman in New York described it as showing a ‘lack of judgement’.
He still has many supporters, though, among the Western press, who considered him to be one of the few UN bureaucrats with a habit of telling the truth.
Marcos fairy tale A touching story has reached me from the Manila Times of how Ferdinand Marcos had planned to bequeath more than £2.5bn in gold to his beloved people, but fell ill before he could sign the will.
Even more amazing, he is alleged to have told confidants before he died last month that, far from being the spoils of two decades of looting the Treasury, he had found the 400 tons of bullion just after the war in a northern province of the Philippines.
He claimed it was the fabled treaure, buried in 1945, of the Japanese General Tomoyuki Yamashita.
Marcos, it is said, tried to set up a foundation last year to launder -sorry, deposit — the funds to benefit Filipinos, minus a 10 per cent cut for his greedy relatives and 10 per cent for the Vatican.
The Philippines government, still searching for the estimated £6.5bn that the Marcos family squirreled away, is unimpressed with this fairy tale.
Stuff of nightmares No one expects the life of a Peruvian gold prospector to be easy, but I doubt if many would expect to die from the bite of a rabid vampire bat.
This, unfortunately, has been the fate of 14 gold panners in the town of Puerto Maldonado, deep in the Peruvian jungle.
The vampiros, which have wingspans of more than three feet, swoop into their thatch huts late at night and attach themselves to the sleeping miners' heads, necks and feet.
One Peruvian veteran recalled that the worst thing about the vampiros is that, because they are such brilliant surgeons, they can make their incisions without even waking the victim.
The head of Lima's anti-rabies clinic said the bats normally feasted on animals but, in their rabid state, they probably didn't know any better.
He added that attempts were being made to snare them by hanging nets between trees.
Meanwhile, priests are trying to persuade the survivors that the bat attacks were not the work of evil spirits.
VAT row sparks fears for single market by 1992
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
THERE WERE fears last night that the first substantial cracks had opened in the facade of the European Community's ‘Project 1992’ after finance ministers appeared to concede that the deadline for creating a truly seamless marketplace for traders cannot be met.
In an attempt to overcome a two-year-old impasse over European Commission proposals for an alignment of national rates of Value Added Tax (VAT) and Excise rates by 1993, the ministers agreed to abandon key provisions for revising VAT collection arrangements.
These asked for an end to the current system of zero-rating goods bound for export to other EC states in favour of levying VAT on all taxable goods sold, regardless of where in the Community they are to be sold.
Thus, in tax terms at least, the 12 EC states would become one.
The Commission argues that switching from zero-rating to tax-paid exports would provide the only way of scrapping checks on traders at borders without inviting fraud on a massive scale.
It also suggests that this is vital if traders are to be convinced that trading across frontiers is no more strange than doing business with the shopkeeper next door.
Yesterday, however, the ministers endorsed a counter-proposal prepared by senior treasury officials, which asks that the current zero-rating mechanisms are maintained ‘for a limited period’, on the grounds that too little time is left to adapt to a new system.
The governments' main complaint is that for the Commission's plan to work, a special clearing house would have to be set up to reapportion VAT revenue levied in the country of export which would be owing to that of import -where the product would be consumed.
National officials answer the Commission fears of fraud by proposing a system of double-checking on traders, whereby they would be obliged to list every item exported and imported for spot-checking.
The Commission thinks this would would present businessmen with new paperwork perhaps more burdensome than border checks themselves.
France's Finance Minister, Pierre Beregevoy, insisted a step had been taken towards eliminating fiscal frontiers.
When pressed, he almost conceded that something of the original philosophy of the 1992 programme may have been lost.
‘Rather than seeing total disagreement, I would prefer to have a good compromise,’ he said.
‘I would rather make pragmatic progress than theoretical progress.’
Britain's junior Treasury Minister, Peter Lilley, also defended the new tactics.
‘We can't faff around forever,’ he said.
‘The UK was not alone in thinking that the original proposal was too rigid and paid insufficient regard to market forces.’
The EC Commissioner now responsible for tax, France's Christiane Scrivener, shuffled out of the meeting unusually declining to speak to journalists.
Last week, she outraged her Commission colleagues by suggesting that the government's paper, which has unanimous backing, might prove irresistible.
It may not be long before her view is upheld.
Any decision on taxation has to be taken by the member states unanimously and there now seems little hope that the Commission can deflect them from the course they set out upon yesterday.
Perhaps more grave, however, is the fact that still more contentious aspects of the plan are also still unresolved, notably the extent to which governments can be persuaded to approximate their highly divergent rates of VAT Excise duties.
Three countries — Denmark, Ireland and Belgium — meanwhile indicated yesterday that they remain opposed to another key element, which forsees the abolition of all limits on tax-paid goods that can be carried across borders by private travellers.
These governments fear a vast loss of revenue to the low-rate neighbour countries if these limits — so-called ‘travellers’ allowances' — are abandoned.
However, if they are maintained — and car boots still have to be checked for goods that may exceed the allowances in worth — then the whole dream of a frontier-free Community will be lost.
US cancer experts win Nobel prize
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
STOCKHOLM (AP)— The US cancer researchers Michael Bishop and Harold Varmus won the Nobel Prize for medicine yesterday, for helping to explain how malignant tumours begin.
The 50-member Nobel Assembly of the Karolinska Institute, Sweden's largest and oldest medical university, awarded the researchers the prize ‘for their discovery of the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes’.
Oncogenes control normal growth cells and their division.
The researchers showed cancer develops when the function of oncogenes is disturbed and cells grow without control, the Karolinska Institute said.
Dr Bishop, 53, and Dr Varmus, 49, work at the University of California School of Medicine in San Francisco, at the Department of Microbiology and Immunology.
Dr Varmus said he learned of the prize in an early morning call to his home from a radio reporter.
‘I didn't know if it was false alarm or they got my name confused,’ he said.
Dr Varmus said winning the Nobel Prize was not in his mind when he and Dr Bishop published their research.
‘I didn't go to work thinking about the Nobel Prize.
I go to work thinking about the next experiment,’ he said.
‘Obviously, in the last few years when you look back and see that it had an impact in the field, then it becomes a possibility.’
Dr Bishop said he was ‘stunned’ by the news.
At a news conference later yesterday he declined to speculate about a cancer cure.
‘That's an imponderable at the moment,’ he said.
‘Certainly we have a better image of what's wrong with the cancer cell at the moment.’
In France meanwhile, Dominique Stehelin, a director of research for the National Centre for Scientific Research at the Pasteur Institute in Lille, said he should have shared in the prize.
Dr Stehelin said he worked for Dr Bishop and Dr Varmus in their San Francisco laboratory between 1972 and 1975, and was the principal signer of the first article in the scientific magazine Nature, in 1976, that said a cancer virus was causing cancer by means of a gene it had captured from normal cells.
Dr Bishop and Dr Varmus called Dr Stehelin's work ‘crucial’ to their research, but referred questions about the prize to the Nobel committee.
‘We didn't nominate each other,’ Dr Varmus said.
The regulation and growth of cells was much more complicated than originally believed, and so far more than 40 different types of oncogenes have been discovered in experiments using retroviruses, said the assembly citation.
It said viruses or chemical substances, such as those found in tobacco smoke, can disrupt this growth-control mechanism.
Gosta Gahrton, a member of the Nobel Assembly, said the clinical application of the discovery was still being explored, but he predicted that ‘an enormous field will be opened.
We now have the possibility to analyse the cause of cancer in a much more precise way, because we now know that the cause of cancer is within ourselves’.
Professor Gahrton said the research had facilitated the diagnosis of some types of cancer, including leukemia.
Based on the breakthrough, researchers were working to develop new medicines that would specifically target certain kinds of cancer.
France takes a green lead on Antarctica's fate
From SARAH LAMBERT in Paris
THE FUTURE of Antarctica turns on the outcome of an international conference which Michel Rocard, the French Prime Minister, opened yesterday with a speech that set the tone for what will be a fiercely political debate.
In urging delegates to ‘work on a comprehensive regime for protecting the Antarctic which, in my view, should take the form of a ‘nature reserve’, ' Mr Rocard threw his weight firmly behind the environmentalists who believe the commercial exploitation of the mineral reserves of ‘the world's last true wilderness’ must be stopped.
‘It is no longer enough merely to acknowledge the facts…and to hope that science will solve by itself the problems that it is creating.
The time has come for the politicians to face up to their responsibilities,’ Mr Rocard said.
For the delegates to the 15th meeting of parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the main topic of discussion over the next 10 days will be the status of an agreement — the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities — which collapsed in the summer after the French and Australian governments decided, in consultation with each other, to withdraw their support.
Their action effectively scuppered six years of negotiations, since all decisions taken by the 22 signatories to the 1959 Washington Treaty — the framework for the political and environmental protection of Antarctica -must be unanimous.
Ranged against the French, the Australians and their Belgian and Italian supporters are the US, New Zealand, Japan and the UK, which believe that exploitation of Antarctica is inevitable and that to ensure the environment is properly protected, it is vital that commercial activities be legally regulated.
The latter camp took heart yesterday from Mr Rocard's insistence that any decision must be based on a consensus, but realise that they have a tough fight ahead persuading others of the logic of their arguments.
Greenpeace, the World Wildlife Fund, the Cousteau Foundation and other organisations have been very successful in mobilising public opinion in favour of designating Antarctica a ‘World Park’, outlawing commercial exploitation of mineral resources, and limiting scientific research and tourism to better protect the region's flora and fauna.
While their representatives in Paris doubt the conference delegates will discard the Minerals Convention, they are confident that they, for the moment, occupy the moral high ground.
Hole in ozone layer over Antartica getting bigger
By DAVID BARBER
WELLINGTON — The hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica threatens to be bigger than ever this year, according to New Zealand scientists, writes David Barber.
It is already as big as the previous record in 1987, when half the ozone over the Antarctic disappeared between late September and late November.
‘This means a colossal amount of ozone has disappeared in the last few weeks,’ Bill Jeffries, New Zealand's Minister in charge of the Meteorological Service, said yesterday.
Scientists had thought weather patterns would reduce the size of the hole over the next few years.
He said there was already 10 per cent more chlorine — which mainly comes from chlorofluorocarbons chemicals (CFCs) in aerosol sprays and refrigeration equipment and is the main cause of the ozone hole — in the stratosphere than two years ago.
China hits at Hong Kong by blocking repatriation
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
CHINA used a seven-year-old immigration agreement with Hong Kong yesterday to show its annoyance over the colony's support for the Peking democracy movement.
It was a further example of Peking's present heavy-handed approach towards Hong Kong, and stemmed from the colonial government's decision not to return swimmer Yang Yang to China last week, but to allow him to leave for asylum in the United States.
China refused to accept back 71 people who entered Hong Kong illegally and accused the colony of reneging on a 1982 agreement on immigration policy.
Normally the ‘illegals’ are handed back to China on the border almost daily, but Peking now says it will check each case, a move expected to slow repatriation to a trickle and put further pressure on the Territory's detention centres, which are already overflowing with Vietnamese boat people.
More than 12,000 Chinese ‘illegals’ have flooded across Hong Kong's border this year.
Peking had warned that ‘Hong Kong would be held responsible for all consequences of the (Yang Yang) affair’ by allowing the swimmer, a supporter of the student-led democracy movement, to seek asylum in America.
The latest move comes a day after Ke Zaishuo, the senior Peking representative to the Joint Liaison Group — the Anglo-Chinese body overseeing Hong Kong's return to mainland sovereignty in 1997 — blamed Britain for the crisis of confidence in the territory after the Chinese army assault on Tiananmen Square.
Mr Ke said Whitehall had ‘connived’ with a ‘handful’of Hong Kong people who attempted to sabotage and overthrow the Chinese government.
He used the same language as that employed by the Chinese government to explain away the unrest that the democracy movement unleashed in May and June — namely that it was the work of a ‘handful of evil-doers’.
Martin Lee, an outspoken campaigner for democracy in Hong Kong before it is handed over, said: ‘China has declared war on the people of Hong Kong.
This (comment) just goes to show that either the Chinese leadership is totally insensitive to the feelings here or they don't care what happens anymore.’
The Foreign Office dismissed the conspiracy allegation.
‘There is no evidence that Hong Kong is used as a base for activities against the Chinese government,’ a spokesman said.
Hong Kong's main political groups yesterday reached final agreement on the pace of future democratic reforms, raising the prospect of further acrimony between Britain and China.
The agreement, between conservatives, moderates and liberals, calls for 40 per cent of the legislature to be directly elected by 1997, and 60 per cent by 2001.
Peking has so far agreed to only a quarter of legislators being directly elected by 1997, and has condemned supporters of a full democracy.
Six hanged in Sierra Leone for coup plot
From Our Correspondent in Freetown
SIX MEN, including a former vice-president convicted of treason and murder in the 1987 coup attempt in Sierra Leone, have been hanged at Pademba Road prison in Freetown.
The executions began at midnight on Saturday and were completed six and a half hours later.
Instead of being buried at Rokupa cemetery, as is the normal custom with state criminals, the six were buried elsewhere at state expense.
Unlike other occasions, no bodies were displayed.
The state-run Sierra Leone broadcasting service and newspapers confirmed the executions, and reports from Freetown suggested there was widespread shock that President Joseph Momoh had chosen not to exercise his prerogative of mercy.
The coup attempt in March 1987 was foiled when explosives, army uniforms, arms, a rocket launcher and Sierra Leone currency were found in a raid by security officers in a house in Freetown.
Police of the Special Security Division came under fire, and one was killed.
The plotters, led by Gabriel ‘GMT’ Kai Kai, a former police officer, were arrested.
Police also arrested Francis Minnah, then First Vice-President, who was accused of being behind the coup attempt.
Like the others, Mr Minnah was of the Mende tribe, and an associate of the previous president, Dr Siaka Stevens.
His election campaigns were notorious for their cruelty — he often made sure that those who did not vote for him would never vote again — but the depth of his involvement has never been clear.
After a four-and-a-half-month trial and several appeals, four of the 16 accused were released.
The six condemned to death, with another six who were sentenced to life imprisonment, went to the Supreme Court, whose five judges unanimously dismissed their appeals.
Their sentences were confirmed on 29 September.
‘The Committee of the Prerogative of Mercy considered all the sentences and advised the President accordingly,’ the authorities announced.
President Momoh has rarely made such a controversial decision.
That he didso, even after appeals for clemency from abroad, including Britain and France, apparently indicates his concern at the threat posed by the abortive coup, and may presage further measures to demonstrate a firm hand.
The hanged men were Gabriel Mohammed Tennyson, Francis Misheck Minnah, Prince Kai Kai, Joseph John Harding, Daniel Suleiman Kai Kai and Conrad Innis.
The six sentenced to life imprisonment are David Abu Samu, Francis Massaquoi, Amara Alieu Tarawalie, Joseph Abiodun Williams, Hassan Morlai Conteh and Harunda Vandi Jimmy.
Pope meets President Suharto in Indonesia
From Our Correspondent in Freetown
Photograph (omitted): Pope John Paul talks to Indonesia's President Suharto at the Freedom Palace in Jakarta yesterday.
The Pope will visit four other cities during his five-day visit to the country
Fashion takes great leap backwards
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
FORGET WHAT they might think in Paris and Milan: China's fashion commissars have decreed what is and is not stylish.
The boiler suit is back.
The colours to watch: revolutionary red, proletarian blue and grey.
In keeping with its drive to restore socialist purity and combat ‘counter-revolution’, China yesterday unveiled a ‘new socialist look’ for the next spring and summer season.
According to Zhu Bingchen, director of the China Garment Research and Design Centre, ‘four types of garments will be trendy’.
Inspired by their octogenarian leaders' nostalgia, fashion designers are promising a return to the austere clothing of the 1950s, now hailed as the high-water mark of the revolutionary tradition of ‘bitter struggle and hard living’.
Such garments, Mr Zhu insists, will recall this golden age of Chinese socialism when people ‘worked hard and were always in high spirits’.
Eschewing the Western suit and tie and flamboyant clothes from Hong Kong, the new line features the standard Mao suit and what the official New China News Agency describes as ‘Lenin's small V-neck look’.
Central planners uncomfortable with the confusion and uncertainty of the market-place will also be pleased to learn that the consumer will have little say in what he wears: ‘Various shades of red, blue and grey will be in favour,’ the agency announced.
A second line of clothing is less dreary and perhaps slightly more attuned to what people might actually want to wear.
But it too carries a heavy moral message.
Patterned on what athletes will be wearing to the 11th Asian Games in Peking next year, it includes sportswear, jackets and close-fitting suits: ‘The vigorous clothes will help build the atmosphere of the Asian Games and encourage people to get more exercise to promote health,’ the agency predicted.
A third theme will be nature, or as Mr Zhu put it, ‘people's desire for tranquility, harmony and purity’.
Finally, next year's fashions make a token nod in the direction of China's open door policy by including ‘elegant foreign fashions’.
There will be little room, however, for more daring creations from the now reviled capitalist West.
According to Mr Zhu, the foreign inspiration will be limited to ‘subdued and relaxed fashion with lace trim’.
If previous attempts to dictate dress are anything to go by, sartorial discipline may hold in the Politburo, but the decree will have little immediate impact in the street.
The last great campaign to revise social style — the so-called anti-spiritual pollution drive six years ago -petered out after only a few months when even the party leadership acknowledged it had more important things to worry about than enforcing short hair and dreary clothes.
Pretoria gives way over Namibia poll
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York
A BLATANT attempt by South Africa to dictate the terms of next month's elections in Namibia has been reversed after months of tough negotiations with the United Nations.
Both sides have agreed on a new electoral law which guarantees secret balloting and an immediate count.
There is still disagreement on how long the UN military forces (Untag) and other UN monitors should remain in Namibia after the elections.
South Africa has said it expects the UN to reduce its 4,000-strong military presence once the poll is over and a Constituent Assembly has been elected to draft a new constitution.
But the UN is under pressure from church groups and from Swapo and other parties to keep a strong military presence beyond the six-month deadline the Security Council has decreed.
South African forces in Namibia have been cut from the 40,000 there on 1 April, at the beginning of the independence plan, to a token 1,500.
But a report to the Security Council by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, makes clear that the many former members of the defence forces, as well as counter-insurgency units — the notorious Koevoet in particular-though officially demobilised, are still on South Africa's payroll.
Mr Perez de Cuellar described South Africa's attempt to interfere with the elections as ‘highly problematical’, and announced new procedures for the vote, over four days beginning on 7 November.
South Africa's Administrator-General, Louis Pienaar, had proposed that all ballots be cast in numbered envelopes, which could be traced after the elections, and that the count should be conducted in the capital, Windhoek, over as long as five weeks.
He also wanted voters to have the right to cast their ballots anywhere in Namibia, rather than in towns and villages where voters can be recognised, and to keep the tallymen from Namibia's political parties away from the polling stations and from places where votes would be counted.
The procedures were agreed after acrimonious discussion with South Africa's UN Ambassador, Jeremy Shearar, and with Mr Pienaar in Namibia.
There will be numbered envelopes, but standard sealed ballot boxes.
All voters' hands will be dyed with indelible ink, and both the vote and the count will be conducted locally.
WINDHOEK — Namibian campaign violence could end the independence process, Mr Pienaar said yesterday, AFP reports.
Mr Pienaar's spokesman said: ‘The Administrator-General is very disturbed that with the evidence at our disposal we realise that a situation could be building up which could lead to the ultimate defeat of the aims and objectives of Resolution 435.’