

PERFORMANCE ART /The art of performance: Dalya Alberge talks to a newly installed Derek Jarman…
By DALYA ALBERGE
‘THEY'RE the forces of evil.
The enemy.
The scum, the destroyers of British society.
A positive evil,’ fumed Derek Jarman.
The British film director was letting off steam over the tabloid press, citing in harshly-clipped tones the names of the accused.
His is a fury fanned by insensitive press coverage of homosexuality and the Aids epidemic; the director best known for films like Caravaggio has leapt at the opportunity of reacting against ‘licensed queer bashing’.
His plan of attack: an installation for the Glasgow Live Art Festival.
Go to the Third Eye Centre tomorrow, and you'll find bed mattresses bolted to the wall, tarred and feathered, and covered in discarded clothes.
But the most eye-catching feature will be a bed with two naked men.
Last week, Jarman hadn't quite decided whether they were to talk to the audience or simply sleep through the exhibition's four-day run —‘although they'll be allowed to get up for a pee and lunch,’ he added generously.
By piercing hundreds of news-cuttings with barbed-wire, Jarman intends his most wounding attack on the tabloids' attitude to homosexuality.
The cuttings date back to the beginning of the 1980s: ‘If you read these stories day by day, you simply don't realise how many there are.
Brought together, the whole view becomes very black.
I've also included the particularly unpleasant articles — sheer malevolence — written by Jehova's Witnesses.
And I'll incorporate crucifixes — tarred and feathered.
I might even have a go at Muslim fundamentalists and have a copy of the Satanic Verses there.’
But this is not an attempt to be controversial for the sake of it.
Some will no doubt accuse Jarman of shock tactics along Warhol lines, but Jarman has reinforced the view that performance and installation art are at their strongest when addressing social or political issues.
‘I have never thought of anything I undertook as provocative.
My work came out of the social situation within which I found myself…’
Although Jarman is an avid painter (he exhibited at the ICA in 1984), he did not feel that that medium could extend beyond ‘one person's thing’.
In a symbolic embrace of victims of suffering, he is making it a participation installation, inviting the public to bring along their own press cuttings and photos of loved ones to attach to the barbed-wire: ‘That way, it's like the Berlin wall where people leave messages.
We're living behind Clause 28.
And I'm giving a voice to the hundreds of people who don't have a voice.
It's an incredible responsibility, but I was blessed with a chance to do these things.’
It just so happens that Berlin has expressed interest in a loan show.
By substituting tar (like a thick black oil) for paint, he intends to prompt thoughts about tar as both preservative and something more sinister — a symbolic tarring and feathering of Britain's homosexuals.
‘While the Danes have just legalised marriage between gay couples, the British have not progressed beyond the Oscar Wilde trial.
Gays are still segregated.
When, for example, gay films are shown on Channel 4, they're in a different slot.
..’ He smarts at media references to Aids as a ‘gay plague’.
Nowhere is this more plainly spelt out than in the ‘programme notes’ accompanying the show.
‘This is the tip of the iceberg.
Being HIV positive, I notice these things.’
The installation is at the Live Art festival at the Glasgow Third Eye Centre.
Jarman discusses his film-making on Thurs 12 Oct, 6pm; and his painting/installation on Sun 15 Oct, 2pm.
Going Out to Galleries: Dalya Alberge selects some of the artists and installations selected for the National Review of Live Art
By DALYA ALBERGE
BEER tipped on a member of the audience is not everyone's idea of art, let alone a joke.
But it was part of a performance by one of the contenders for the Ninth National Review of Live Art.
Needless to say, that ‘artist’ was not selected by Nikki Milican — the festival's director — who attended hundreds of events up and down the country.
‘I saw some appalling things.
It's extraordinary that you still find performers assaulting the audience, commenting on ‘anarchy and art’.
That's so tired and boring.’
Nineteen artists offer installations and performance art.
These range from purely aesthetic pieces like Kristel Collison's tape-slide essay on light, to strongly political works like Anne Seagrave's videos on Northern Ireland.
And Gary Stevens's performance piece, using toys and animals, is a witty play on ideas of confused identity.
But for unconscious humour, the festival catalogue wins the award.
On an untitled piece by Richard Downes and Thomas Roper, it reads ‘Two performers interact with each other using two heavy concrete curves as a channel for their communication.’
Some football hooligans will be familiar with this one.
Nikki Milican jumps to their defence: ‘It's impossible to talk about performance art and not sound pretentious.
But as audiences will find out, we don't have to make apologies for the art.
The work proves strong enough.’
The National Review of Live Art runs from 11 to 15 October.
A selection of the festival artists appears below.
(For full details of performances, talks, workshops, contact the Third Eye Centre, 346-354 Sauchiehall St Glasgow (041-332 7521).
Lindsay John Wojna!
(War!), an ‘installation dance’ from the West Indian-born visual artist-dancer; and The Bowl, an improvised comic/tragic duet which he promises will be ‘minimal, gentle, humorous, elegant and profoundly touching.’
His work — reported as visually stunning — is influenced by both Japan and East Europe.
Richard Layzell Dancing on the Mountain, a new, humorous performance piece in which this seasoned performance-artist choreographs a range of characters.
His one-man show takes us through states of mind and body.
In the 1970s, he improvised on single props in a room; today, his work is more structured, more theatrical.
Gary Stevens Animal — a new piece inspired by the ‘comic, animal-like persona of Stan Laurel’, says Stevens somewhat enigmatically — will be premiered by a new group of artists and performers.
Images and effigies of animals and people observed with bemused curiosity.
Characters are apparently motiveless, compulsive liars, who shy from eye contact.
It's a strange piece, but a humorous one.
Anne Seagrave Video works by this Brighton College of Art graduate.
Strong political statements commenting on Ireland where she has lived for the past two years.
Richard Downes and Thomas Roper A dialogue-free performance combining movement and sculptural elements.
Two heavy concrete curves are their channel of communication…
‘A continuous exploration of the material and of their relationship to each other.’
It's a ‘sculptural’ piece, in which the performers' bodies become a continuation of the sculptural pieces.
Alison Inkpen Sometimes you can't hear the Screaming — an installation about the waste of human energy, both physical and emotional.
The performance revolves round rows of hissingly-hot pressure cookers, which are brought to the point of pressure; suspended above them are boxes of ice, with nails and bits and pieces, which drop on to the pressure cooker lids as the ice melts.
It's a ‘sound-visual sculpture’.
Sebastiane Installation/performance about the artist's relationship with his father.
An atmospheric piece, revolving round a white shrine to his father, complete with icons and religious objects.
Fast Food Zoo 33⅓ RPM — a piece of ‘physical and visual theatre’— looks at role, definition and relevance of the individual to revolutions — both political and sexual.
Performers are five recent graduates of Bristol University, who felt revolutions were topical in the light of the bicentennial of the French Revolution and events in China.
The performance is dance, rather than scripted theatre, without dialogue apart from the soundtrack.
‘It's more of a movement piece, with art being created with slides and other material,’ says Dean Byfield, one of the performers.
Brian Hand An installation of slide, video, found objects, text and image — all used to ‘explore origins, coincidences and inter-relationships between concepts and phenomena ‘normally’ not felt to be related within Irish history.’
Mark Hudson Out of the strong came forth the sweetness Not so much an installation as a duration piece created with treacle and sugar cubes.
Thematic ingredients are wide-ranging — issues of race, class, dietary control, patriotism and patronage of the arts.
Mineo Aayamuguchi An important video artist, whose work is concerned with aesthetics rather than issues.
The latest work, Phosphor, is an exploration of the relationship ‘between the human eye and its ability to make sense of colour, shape and light.’
Random sounds are produced by banging together various objects and computers.
Daniel Reeves A fusion of performance and installation.
Smothering Dreams, like most of his work, is about the Vietnam War — the myths, the realities.
‘It's a great privilege to have Reeves,’ enthuses Nikki Milican.
‘He's such an important video artist worldwide, known particularly well in the United States where he has won numerous awards.’
Mehdi Moghadassi If past performances are anything to go by, this should be quite a disturbing work.
Believing that an artist has to suffer to make his statement, he puts himself through dangerous sequences like cutting off his breathing.
Can be unnerving.
Kristel Collison A gentle tape-slide work that uses the surfaces of a room's walls to play with light and shadow.
PICTURE CHOICE /A sublimely sensual state of limbo: Choreographer Ashley Page selects Painting by the Surrealist, Miro
By ASHLEY PAGE
Painting, 1927, by Joan Miro, the Spanish painter regarded as the greatest of all Surrealist abstract artists.
He once said that ‘form is never something abstract; it is a always a sign of something.
It is always a man, a bird, or something else’.
Tate Gallery Millbank SW1 (821 1212) Mon-Sat 10am-5.50pm, Sun 2-5.50pm.
Copyright: ADAGP, Paris/DACS, London, 1989 The first thing that I feel when I look at Miro's Painting is a sense of sublime calm.
The beautiful blue groundwash is so sensuously placid and dreamlike (almost aquatic), and the simple but elegant forms and lines animate the scene, producing in me a state of quiet limbo.
I prefer to retain my initial response to this as an abstract work, although I realise that Miro and his fellow Surrealists were strongly opposed to the abstract movement.
He was influenced by the leading French poets of his time: images seem drawn from Apollinaire's play, Les Mamelles de Tiresias, including the large white form dominating the left of the canvas which, according to Miro, is a horse.
Should we just enjoy the things that touch us in a painting or should it spur us on to learn more?
I know that I will continue to get great pleasure from simply looking at this beautiful image.
Going Out to Galleries: OPENINGS /Erotic fantasy comes to the ICA while Pre-Raphaelites gather in the North East…
By ASHLEY PAGE
OPENINGS LONDON AIR GALLERY Dave Mulholland, a Newcastle-born artist who has worked in locations as diverse as New York and Durham, and has organised community mural projects in London and the North-east, has his first solo exhibition at the Air Gallery in Islington, writes Paul Dunn.
He describes his work -which includes oils, watercolours and ink as well as sculptures in plaster and wood — as ‘dramatic and moody’ with a subjective approach to its main themes of people and landscapes.
‘The show will not have a thematic finished look but will show a potential to move in several directions,’ he says.
6 & 8 Roseberry Avenue London EC1.
Tuesday 10 October to Saturday 14.
ALPINE GALLERY An auction of contemporary art: a percentage of proceeds goes to ARK, the environmental organisation.
Also, a show of figurative work by Robert Plisnier, in his first public show.
On view from today; auction takes place, tomorrow 6pm.
Exhibition from Thurs-Sat. 74 South Audley St W1 Full details 629 2280/821 9401.
HEIM GALLERY Masterpieces from Tabley House — an important collection of British art that includes Turner and Lawrence.
The pictures were assembled during the 1900s by Sir John Leicester, a close friend of George IV who went on the Grand Tour but who, unlike many of his contemporaries, remained faithful to living British artists.
He was later made Lord de Tabley, in recognition of his arts patronage.
Tabley House is the 3,000-acre estate near Knutsford, which he inherited in 1770 at the age of eight.
In 1818, he opened a gallery in Mayfair, showing British paintings, watercolours and sculptures; in 1823, he offered ten major oil paintings by Turner to the nation — to start a national gallery of modern British art.
The offer was turned down by the then philistine government (history repeats itself?) and the collection returned to Tabley House.
59 Jermyn St St James's SW1 From 12 Oct, to 21 Nov Mon-Fri 10am-6pm.
INSTITUTE OF CONTEMPORARY ARTS Surrealism and erotic fantasy are recurring themes in a retrospective on Meret Oppenheim, the German-Swiss artist, who for a time was a model and follower of Man Ray.
But the conflict between the grotesque and the melancholy never obscures humour: Surrealist objects like a tea-cup made useless by fur; and a pair of white shoes, presented on a platter with heels bound like the legs of a roast chicken in frilly paper.
The Mall SW1 (930 0495).
From 13 Oct, to 3 Dec.
MICHAELSON & ORIENT At a gallery specialising in ceramics, a show devoted to the distinguished British ceramicist, Henry Pim.
In his most recent work, he has moved away from elaborate vessels and on to rough-textured jigsaw-like pieces — the ceramicist's equivalent of collage.
318 Portobello Rd W10 (969 4119) From 11 Oct, to 4 Nov.
SMITH'S GALLERIES Start saving for the Contemporary Art Society Market, the Cash and Carry Art — the Sainsbury's-sponsored event — which returns at the end of the month to Covent Garden.
It is a chance to select from over 100 artists, and 1,000 paintings, drawings and sculptures at prices from £100 to £1,000.
Purchases can be taken away immmediately.
If the previous five markets are anything to go by, works will be grabbed from the walls and plinths while organisers rush to replace them with other works.
Last year, 767 works were sold to 410 people in four days.
This time, it runs an extra day and there will be more sculpture.
25 Neal St WC2 (Details: 821 5323) From Tuesday 31 Oct, to 4 Nov.
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE LAING ART GALLERY Pre-Raphaelites: Painters and Patrons in the North East.
An exhibition that brings together (for the first time in over a century) the Pre-Raphaelites' paintings, sculpture and decorative arts that decorated the houses of the region's Victorian industrialists and entrepreneurs.
It shows how wealth, created through shipbuilding, iron, lead and armaments manufacture, was redirected towards cultural development.
Among exhibits are Isabella and the Pot of Basil, 1867 — one of William Holman Hunt's most important paintings, illustrating Keats's poem.
Includes a set-piece display recreating the interior of one of the patron's private houses — complete with pictures by Rossetti and Burne-Jones. (091-232 7734) From 14 Oct, to 15 Jan Tues-Fri 10am-5.30pm, Sat 10am-4.30pm, Sun 2.30-5.30pm; £1 (40p concs).
PLYMOUTH MUSEUM & ART GALLERY The last self-portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds -regarded by many as his finest — is among a small group of 17th and 18th-century paintings loaned from the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle.
Reynolds also appears as the central figure in Zoffany's group portrait of all 36 founder members of the Royal Academy, of which he was first President.
Zoffany, George III's favourite artist, is represented by his detailed portrait of King George III, Queen Charlotte and their six eldest children.
Drake Circus (0752-668000) From 14 Oct, to 13 May 1990.
STIRLING SMITH ART GALLERY The Smith Biennial — open show for artists living in Scotland.
This year, new work by 20 artists includes sculptures, paintings, installations, drawings.
No restrictions were made on entries, but positive encouragement was given to artists ‘working in new ways’.
The final selection was made after studio visits.
Artists include Louise and Jane Wilson, who comment on their relationship as twins through a photographic-sculptural work — their identical degree show at Dundee and Newcastle.
Dumbarton Rd (0786-71917) From 13 Oct, 26 Nov.
PICCADILLY CIRCUS It may be wise to keep your eyes on the traffic, but when you've reached the island, look up to the Spectacolor board above the corner of Haymarket and Coventry Street.
You'll see Circus Diver by Tina Keane -one of the latest artists commissioned by Artangel, an organisation which specialises in promoting public art in ‘high visibility territory’.
Tina Keane, an experimental artist whose materials are film and video, explores ideas about female identity and beauty.
Every four minutes daily between 8am and midnight.
To 31 Oct.
VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM The Art of Design: Edward Bawden, an artist who began his career studying calligraphy and went on to master the art of book illustration, printmaking, poster design, advertising.
His technical command of artistic processes never obscured his sense of humour.
Henry Cole Wing Exhibition Rd SW7 (938 8361) To 29 Oct Mon-Thurs, Sat 10am-5pm, Sun 2.30-5pm.
WADDINGTON GALLERIES David Inshaw, the Staffordshire artist, still turns to the landscape as his main source of inspiration.
But the presence of man is always evident, whether in prehistoric mounds or stone circles.
12 Cork St (437 8611) To 28 Oct.
SOUTHAMPTON City Art Gallery 100 Years of Russian Art — transferred from the Barbican and Oxford.
The first major show to examine the development of Russian art over the last century.
Includes works by Chagall, Malevich, Rodchenko and Popova — all lent by private collectors.
(0703-832769) To 12 Nov.
Competition results: Monty Python, Lords and Commons Cricket
By ASHLEY PAGE
Asked to name the title of the first episode of Monty Python's Flying Circus on BBCTV, only three readers correctly answered ‘Whither Canada’; many more correctly completed the Lumberjack Song verse as ‘he puts on women's clothing and hangs around in bars’.
Congratulations, and sets of Just The Words to J Howard, Birmingham; S Bryant, London W13; M Walker, Wirral.
Nearly-right prizes to T Jenks, London W14 and M Flett, Edinburgh.
The answer to our Lords And Commons Cricket Competition is as follows: the three England Captains to have played for the LCC are Lord Harris, Sir Stanley Jackson MP and Lord Tennyson.
Mrs M Brett from Norfolk receives a copy of Ian Orr-Ewing's Celebration Of Lords And Commons Cricket.
COMEDY /Tristan Davies on a free speech benefit with no expletives deleted: The four letter offensive
By TRISTAN DAVIES
Outside the comfy confines of Saturday night television, comedians — from Bernard Manning to Bob Monkhouse — are a pretty vulgar lot.
And the language, like the seating, is worst in fringe comedy clubs.
Where Cannon & Ball have made ‘Rock on, Tommy’ their trademark, and Jim Davidson is known as ‘Nick Nick’, there is a comic on the ‘alternative’circuit known simply as ‘Two Fingers’Soan, and another, Malcolm Hardee, who goes by the catchphrase ‘F**k it’.
Those four little letters could cost Hardee more than the walkouts he has grown used to.
On Sunday night at London's Red Rose Cabaret, run by Ivor Dembina (erstwhile member of Comic Abuse), a benefit going by the name of F**k was held for cabaret performance poet Joolz.
Attilla The Stockbroker, a suitably offensive looking poet-comedian, took to the stage to tell an unusually large Sunday night crowd why they were there.
‘Joolz, myself and New Model Army were playing an anti-fascist gig in Leeds Town Centre.
Joolz was cautioned by the police for swearing at a heckler who swore at her.
I was told that if I swore my performance would be stopped.’
Joolz was fined £100 for contravening the Public Order Act.
Top of the Red Rose bill was Gerry Sadowitz, a comedian who, if he played Leeds Town Centre, could expect, at £100 per F-word, to lose close to quarter of a million in the course of a routine.
Perhaps heeding the catchphrase of his manager, Malcom Hardee, he failed to show.
Those who came included the food-obsessed Jo Brand ('I thought it was a ‘Fork benefit’); Marks Thomas and Miwurdz; Michael Redmond; The Comedy Store Players; and Mark Steel ('I know it's not trendy to say so any more but I just hate the police.
They're just so sarcastic.
Sarcasm must be part of the course at Hendon').
Only Arnold Brown ran slightly against the grain.
‘I don't think it's very intelligent to swear,’ said Brown, squinting in an atmosphere thicker with smoke than obscenity.
‘There's a time and a place for it.
If I was walking down a street and some scaffolding fell on my head I wouldn't say ‘oh dear’.'
He even showed some sympathy for the police.
‘The Left always say police are bastards…until their video is stolen…’
He places an air-phone to his ear ‘Can you send a bastard round please…’
The money raised by the benefit is being put into a defence fund, pending Joolz's appeal against the fine.
‘The money's not important, but the implications are mind-boggling,’ Atilla reminded us, ‘…that if you say anything more offensive than ‘Crystal Palace’in your performance then you are liable to get nicked.’
A selection of the best live comedy around the country in the week ahead
By TRISTAN DAVIES
Archaos The Last Show On Earth as envisaged by this French circus troupe is a mixture of Mad Max, The Great Rock'n'Roll Swindle and Billy Smart.
Fine strong-man/trapeze element, brilliant trick biker, ridiculous clowns, sublime running gags, over-hyped, under-used chainsaws, expensive tickets (£8) but a great night out.
Big Top, Clapham Common, SW4 (498 1528) Tue-Sun 8.30pm (Sat mat 3pm) To 27 Oct.
Flying Pickets Veterans of the alternative circuit, a capella one-and-a-bit hit wonders who have put their signatures to show themes (remember the accompaniment to the floating condoms in Porterhouse Blue?), here with a show of sketch-like songs loosely based on the theme of ‘work’.
Different.
Theatre Royal, Gerry Raffles Square, E15 (534 0310) 8pm To 14 Oct.
Perrier Pick of the Fringe The provocative South African satirist Peter Dirk Uys (9.30pm to 14 Oct) plus the surreal, but this year more accessible cabaret/theatre duo The Front Lawn (11.15 12-14 Oct only) in the last week of the Edinburgh Festival Perrier panel's choice of the fringe.
Donmar Warehouse, Earlham Street, WC2 (240 8230).
Hot Club Not only are the Paris Studio recordings free (for those who are prompt), you have the added novelty of watching comedy on the radio.
This recording for a R4 comedy show has Arthur Smith, Josie Lawrence, Richard Vranch and Ronnie Golden behind the mikes.
Paris Studios, Lower Regent Street, SW1.
Doors 7.15, no admission after 7.25pm.
FRIDAY Alex Langdon is the fourteen-year-old son of satirical scriptwriter John (Punch Newsrevue, and Rory Bremner gag writer) who delivered some of his father's best lines at this year's Edinburgh Festival.
Brave though he is in facing adult audiences, the result is a bit of a cringe.
With Al & George (see Today), and the agreeably laid-back Irish comedian Sean Hughes.
Old White Horse, Brixton Road (487 3440) 9pm.
Chris Luby by day is a customs and excise inspector, by night a Human Aeroplane.
He warms up with the march-past of the Brigade of Guards, before wheeling out his spitfire, moving on to jet fighters and finishing, if he's in a good mood, with dogfights and acrobatics.
Despite his airforce fatigues (he has a pilot's licence) and handlebar moustache (he is a cult on the military base circuit) his feet never leave the ground: but close your eyes and you'd never know it.
A real novelty.
With Jenny Lecoat, Tracy Brothers, The Two Marks, Owen O'Neal and compere Tony Morewood.
Jongleurs, The Cornet, 49 Lavender Gardens, SW11 (780 1151) 9.30pm.
Also Sat.
SATURDAY Nick Hancock Hugely enjoyable blast-off comedian who, like some smirking, behind-the-sheds schoolboy takes a list of his pet hates out of his pocket, lays them out and talks you through them one by one.
His bald routine is tear-inducing, and, in a show devoid of malice, there are few hairy moments.
With Simon Bligh, Ronnie Golden, Lynn Thomas, Mark Westwood, and compere Maria Callous.
Red Rose Club, 129 Seven Sisters Road, N7 (263 7265).
The Panic Brothers Although the patter of the camp, grey-haired one between songs can irritate, his tenor combined with the falsetto of the otherwise silent, red-haired, red-faced one produces a pleasing pastiche of the Everlys.
With Lee Cornes, Alan Davies, Doon and compere Ivor Dembina.
South of Deptford, 51 Woolwich New Road, SE18 (317 8687) 8.30pm.
BLACKPOOL Jim Davidson A truly blue comic for Tory Party conference week.
Anything after his terrible sitcom Home James has got to be an improvement, hasn't it?
Opera House, Suns to 29 Oct 8pm, 0253-27786.
BOURNEMOUTH Russ Abbot Silly wigs, voices and costumes from the man who once rocked the charts with ‘Oh What An Atmosphere’.
Pavilion Today-Sat.
BRIGHTON Mark Steel is a comic who should be returned to at irregular intervals: see him too often (and he is all over London) and you tire of his south London patter, but go back to his schoolroom lesson after a break from the circuit, or see him off his home patch and you'll enjoy an exercise bookful of character face-pulling, energetic storytelling and witty, like-it-is observations.
With Jungr & Parker and compere Pete McCarthy.
The Concorde, off Palace Pier.
Thur 9pm.
LIVERPOOL Chris Lynham His party piece is placing a banger between his cheeks and setting it off.
With Sean Hughes and Auntie.
Trader Jacks, 21 Berry Street.
Thur 9pm.
NORWICH In between screenings of such classic nasties as Teeth of Death, The Belly Film and Die Baby Die, comedians John Erwin and Geoff Green will be expected to gag (comically speaking) and the Norwich Women's Soul Choir to sing.
Malcolm Hardee will be there ‘to ensure the smooth running of this Big Night Out’ say the management, who may not be aware that the presence of Martin ‘Two Fingers Soan’on the bill may lead to an impromptu, and far from smooth reunion of the two's infamous Greatest Show on Legs.
Norwich Arts Centre, Reeve's Yard, St Benedict's St (0603-660352) Sat 8pm.
Special Edition The special edition of the title is a kind of newspaper, entirely filled by a one-man, sound-off column penned by Simon Fanshawe about the media and its presentation of news and current affairs.
Excellent.
The Drill Hall Arts Centre, 16 Chenies Street, WC1 (637 8270) from 14 November.