

Sport in Short: Volleyball
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Tennis
By TRISTAN DAVIES
MONICA SELES, the Yugoslav who has withdrawn from the Midland Bank Championships at Brighton later this month, is to be contacted by tournament organisers hoping for a change of heart.
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Swimming
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Snooker
By TRISTAN DAVIES
JAMES WATTANA, 19, from Thailand, has broken the world table clearance record with a time of 3min 45sec in Brussels.
Sport in Short: Rugby Union
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Hockey
By TRISTAN DAVIES
NATIONWIDE ANGLIA CUP First round:: Camberley v RAOC; Spencer v Blackheath; Staines v Horsham; Eastcote v Lensbury; Hampstead v National West Bank; Gerrards Cross v Old Edwardians; Enfield v Hayes; Aylesbury v High Wycombe; Old Tauntonians v Tulse Hill; City of Portsmouth v Sunbury; Winchester v Wokingham; Goan v Cheam; Fareham v Trojans; Oxted v Tunbridge Wells; Beckenham v Bicester; Mid Surrey v Old Merchant Taylors; Purley v Witney; Oxford Hawks v Tonbridge; Old Kingstonians v Bognor; Midland Bank v Mid Sussex; Marden Russetts v Wellington College; Tilehurst v Crawley; Blueharts v Harleston Magpies; Pelicans v Westcliff; Old Southendians v Ipswich; West Herts v Bedford; Ipswich & Suffolf v Bury St Edmunds; Cambridge Nomads v St Neot's; Colchester v Norwich Grasshoppers; Letchworth v Long Sutton; Chelmsford v RAF; Leighton Buzzard v Wisbech; Appleby Frodingham v Bishop's Stortford; Olton & West Warwick v GEC Coventry; Barford Tigers v South Nottingham; Bloxwich v Belper; Shrewsbury v Northampton Stains; Handsworth Eagles v Pickwick; Gyymfit v Khalsa (Warks); John Player v Derwent; Wombourne v Kidderminster; Lichfield v Worcester Norton; Edgbaston v Leicester Westleigh; Hightown Northern v Liverpool Sefton; Durham University v Harrogate; Tynemouth v Ben Rhydding; Bowden v Mancehster; Timperley v Chorlton; Carlisle v Preston; Ramgharia v Adel; Swalwell v Aderley Edge; Bacchanalians (IOM) v Stockton; Sheffield v Seaton Carew; Formby v Bradford; Sheffield Bankers v Brooklands; Jersey v Bath; Firebrands v Gloucester City or Cheltenham; Westbury v East Devon; Newquay v Marlborough; Exeter Crickets v Plymouth; RN Portsmouth Comm v Bournemouth & West Hants; Bristol v Leominster; Swindon v Yatton.
Sport in Short: Golf
By TRISTAN DAVIES
GREAT BRITAIN and Ireland won the women's world amateur team betterball championship by one stroke in 72-hole event at Sao Fernando, near Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Helen Dobson, the 18-year-old British matchplay and strokeplay champion from Skegness, and Elaine Farquharson, the 21-year-old from Aberdeen had a two-under-par final round of 69 for a six-under total of 278.
Sport in Short: Football
By TRISTAN DAVIES
YOUNG BOYS of Berne have dismissed their Swedish coach, Tord Grip, because of poor results.
Pal Csernai, a Hungarian in charge of Bayern Munich when they won the Bundesliga in 1980 and ‘81, takes over until the end of the season.
Sport in Short: Cycling
By TRISTAN DAVIES
JANIE EICKHOFF won the women's tempo and points races on Sunday to lead the United States to a surprise victory in the three-day World Invitational, at California State University.
PAUL SHERWEN, manager of the Raleigh-Banana professional team, is to attend a disciplinary hearing in Stoke-on-Trent to explain the behaviour of his team.
Sherwen, the former Tour de France rider and British champion, faces a charge of ‘conduct prejudicial to the good order of the sport’ after Raleigh's absence from two domestic races in September — allegedly without permission — when the team competed on the Continent instead.
Sport in Short: Cycle Speedway
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Cricket
By TRISTAN DAVIES
IMRAN KHAN, the Pakistan captain, has called for an overhaul of Pakistan cricket to combat what he describes as widespread ‘nepotism and favouritism’.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE are searching for financial backers for an extension to the new £500,000 William Clarke stand, at Trent Bridge.
Work on the stand has already begun and the club are hoping to extend the plans to include seven executive boxes and a press box.
THE Test and County Cricket Board has announced two changes to the itinerary for New Zealand's tour to Britain next season.
The one-day MCC v New Zealand match will be played on Monday, 7 May, instead of Tuesday, 8 May, and the two matches between Somerset and New Zealand, on 16 and 17 May, have been converted into a three-day match on 16 to 18 May.
Sport in Short: Boxing
By TRISTAN DAVIES
GLENN McCRORY, the 25-year-old British cruiserweight who defends his IBF title against the South African Siza Makhatini in Middlesbrough on 21 October, said yesterday that his long-term target is still to challenge Mike Tyson, who he used to spar with.
‘I fulfilled a childhood dream when I became champion in June, but Tyson is the ultimate dream.’
McCrory said.
Sport in Short: Basketball
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Baseball
Sport Page 37
Allan Lamb and an ox
Sport Page 37
Cricket: Inquest looks for a victim: Derek Hodgson examines the problems facing today's gathering of the Headingley hierarchy
By DEREK HODGSON
NOT for almost five years has it been thought necessary to preview a meeting of the General Committee of the Yorkshire County Cricket Club but today, at 5.30pm at Headingley, the 22 members will gather knowing that once again they wil be under intense scrutiny by the media.
In short, Yorkshire, the club with 31 Championships, are in crisis again.
The first reason for the meeting is that it is 21 years ago since the last title was won.
The second is that Yorkshire finished 1989 four points from the bottom with a one-day record almost as poor; it seems there has been no improvement, nor is one in sight.
That recent moment of glory, the Benson and Hedges Cup win at Lord's in 1987, can now be seen to have been illusory.
Today's meeting, which the club's bete noire, Geoffrey Boycott, is not expected to attend in his capacity as the member for Wakefield, is an inquest into last summer.
There will be no conclusions today because, says chairman Brian Walsh, ‘the committee felt it necessary to find time for a full discussion on cricket outside of the agenda planned for the next scheduled meeting on 26 October.’
The decisions will be voted upon at the later date.
There is much to talk about.
The captain, Phil Carrick, last month put the cat among the pigeons, or his head upon the block (depending upon each Yorkshireman's point of view on his county's cricket, without which no Tyke is properly dressed) by writing a letter, with his players' support, in which he advocated the abandonment of the holy writ, the birth qualification.
Carrick suggested that a maximum of three outside players should be recruited — one an overseas professional — to strengthen the team immediately.
‘No’ thundered the vast majority of every poll conducted by newspapers, radio and television, members and public alike.
Carrick's argument, that of the man who earns his living playing the game, would make sense anywhere but in the Ridings: without the addition of a West Indian fast bowler and the option of adding two more experienced outside players, says Carrick, the chances of his youngish team ever winning trophies and thus making money, are severely limited.
Without incentives, goes the argument, the drift of talented young players towards more successful counties, with open doors, will accelerate.
His supporters, including some in the Yorkshire media, point out the difficulty in attracting sponsorship to an unsuccessful team and a slow decline in the membership figures.
For most of this century Yorkshire have boasted the highest membership outside MCC; Lancashire now lead them by more than 2,000.
So what is to be done?
The first target tonight will be Brian Close, the former Yorkshire and England captain and now chairman of the cricket sub-committee, on which he is supported by such luminaries as Bob Appleyard, Phil Sharpe, Bryan Stott and Bob Platt, all ex-players.
They will have to answer for the team's performances and can expect to be closely questioned on how often they saw those performances.
Close has an insurance business to run, an excuse that will be accepted.
He will find it less easy to defend his involvement with a cricket call-line service last summer, a job that some will say kept him from his Yorkshire priority.
There will be criticism that team discipline off the field is wanting, a complaint that has surfaced with reasonable regularity since before Lord Hawke's time.
The difference is, it will be quickly pointed out, is that Hawke's teams were winners.
There has been some fairly loose and wide-ranging sniping about inept leadership (Carrick) and incompetence (the committee).
Everyone agrees that something will have to be seen to be done before the next annual general meeting in February.
But what can be done?
Recruiting outsiders is a dead duck for the moment; another five years of failure and the time may yet come.
Bringing home the exiles is a possible option (James Whitaker, Bill Athey, Steven Rhodes) but players of this class will not be lured back easily, for the reasons above.
Changing the captain must be a strong possibility, not least because Carrick himself looked a little weary of wearing the crown of thorns.
The dressing room needs a sense of a new direction: Martyn Moxon is the official vice-captain.
He has experience of leadership at all levels, as has his possible successor Ashley Metcalfe.
The other alternative is to promote Neil Hartley, Ray Illingwoth's choice as a future captain five years ago, from the second team.
If Moxon, still young in captaincy terms, were to be given the job there would be a strong argument in favour of a team manager and as Illingworth, perhaps wisely, has rejected one offer to return (from Leicestershire) Yorkshire might look at another native son who has, from all accounts, done an excellent job in his first year of managment at Somerset, Jack Birkenshaw.
Another possible candidate is MCC's highly successful head coach, Don Wilson.
There will also be talk of a return by Boycott, who has always been open in admitting that he would like to be either cricket chairman or team manager.
His weakness is that he has only four or five votes on the committee and his intermittent appearances and lack of involvement in either the Headingley School or the Bradford Academy will count against him, all past prejudices apart.
The key figure tonight will be Dennis Brian Close.
He still has sufficient force, passion and reputation to get his way if he puts his case forcefully enough and yesterday he spent some time in conclave with Carrick, Neil Hartley and coach Doug Padgett.
But even Close cannot answer the crucial question.
A survey by Don Mosey, helped by the Yorkshire Cricket Association, three years ago revealed that there were 1,798 clubs in organised cricket leagues in the county.
Assuming that each club fields only two teams they will represent almost 40,000 players.
So why is it, for almost the first time in 150 years, Yorkshire cannot contribute a single regular member to the England team?
Not just Yorkshire but all England needs to know.
Cricket: Stewart feels the heat
By DEREK HODGSON
MICKY STEWART, the England manager, gave his son, Alec, a gruelling introduction to cricket on the Indian sub-continent when he put the Surrey wicketkeeper-batsmen — along with the rest of the 14-man England squad -through a three-and-a-half hour training session in temperatures of up to 100F at the National Stadium in Delhi yesterday.
‘Just a short sprint leaves you struggling for breath,’ said the younger Stewart, on his first tour with England.
‘Can you imagine what it's like when it's really hot out here?’
England, who have arranged two practice games against local sides later this week, play their first match in the six-team Nehru Trophy against Sri Lanka on Sunday.
Australia, India, Pakistan and the West Indies complete the line-up for the one-day competition.
Baseball: Henderson steals show to leave Toronto in tatters: Richard Weekes reports on a weekend which saw the Oakland Athletics reach baseball's World Series
By RICHARD WEEKES
BEFORE the Oakland Athletics began their American League Championship series against the Toronto Blue Jays it was said that the team had a crucial flaw: when their celebrated home-run hitters were not peppering the upper decks, the A's supposedly found it tough to manufacture runs base by base with base hits, steals and sacrifice flies.
After Rickey Henderson had finished with the Blue Jays on Sunday — in a 4-3 victory — to take the A's through to their second World Series in a row, that analysis looked a trifle dumb.
The Oakland left fielder, a unanimous choice as the series' most valuable player, put on a display of aggressive running between the bases that had Toronto in tatters.
His total of eight stolen bases in the A's 4-1 series victory was a post-season record, he scored eight runs in total and even managed a couple of homers himself in Saturday's 6-5 win in the SkyDome.
In all he was involved in 11 of Oakland's 26 runs over the series.
‘This was the Rickey Henderson Show,’ Dave Parker, the Athletics' pitcher and designated hitter, said.
‘I've been involved in a few of these things but I've never seen anyone bring it up to the level he did — he turned it up a few notches.’
Henderson did get a little help from his friends, in particular a massive 484ft third-inning home run from Jose Canseco on Saturday that came within 13 rows of hitting the roof of the SkyDome but dropped instead into the hands of a surprised Toronto fan.
And there was some nerveless relief pitching from Dennis Eckersley to secure the final out on Sunday after the Blue Jays had briefly rekindled hopes of a miracle by reducing the deficit to 4-3 with two runs in the ninth inning of game five.
Parker, Oakland's starting pitcher, had gone a full eight innings before George Bell finally broke his hit-left streak by depositing the ball over the left-field fence.
Eckersley then took over, conceded another run when Tony Fernandez scored on a sacrifice fly but stayed cool enough to strike out Junior Felix and end the game.
‘We had our chances,’ Bell said.
‘We just couldn't come out with the key hits.
That's the way it is.
If you start thinking about this game it will drive you crazy.’
While the Blue Jays licked their wounds, the Athletics began the celebrations prior to hosting the first two games of the World Series at the Coliseum next weekend.
Last night the Giants, their neighbours from across the San Francisco Bay, sealed the National League championship series against the Chicago Cubs, winning 3-2 to complete a 4-1 victory and take their first pennant for 27 years.
The odds had turned towards the Giants on Sunday after a 6-4 win at Candlestick Park.
Matt Williams seized on some poor Cubs pitching to drive in four of the Giants runs and Will Clark lifting his series batting average to .625 when he reached base on three of his four at-bats.
Yesterday, Clark improved his average with a tie-breaking, two-run single in the eighth inning — and a record 13th hit of the series — to give him a .650 average in the play-offs.
Rallying: Auriol flies off the track in Tuscany
By RICHARD WEEKES
LANCIA'S new 16-valve Integrale had a disastrous debut at the San Remo Rally yesterday.
Didier Auriol, the French driver, drove off the road in Tuscany and wrote off his new car in the fifth special stage, while Massimo Biasion, the Italian world champion, suffered a puncture in the next special stage.
Lancia still ended the first day in the lead, but Alessandro Fiorio's Integrale was one of the old-style standard versions that have dominated the world championship for the past two years.
Before the setbacks, the new Lancias had passed their tests with flying colours.
Auriol and Biasion tore through the first four special stages to take a commanding lead.
But the Frenchman fell victim during the first off-road stage turning his car over several times.
He climbed out leaving the car upended on its roof.
Biasion's puncture cost him two minutes and he ended the day two minutes and six seconds behind Fiorio.
Tennis: Reissen to pursue Evert
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
WITH all the youngsters now invading the tennis world, it was somewhat ironic, perhaps even worrying, that Chris Evert turned out to be the heroine of the 27th Federation Cup, in Tokyo, which ended yesterday with a predictable victory for the United States.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 17, made a late charge into the hearts of the fans by putting the frighteners on Martina Navratilova, to race through the first set 6-0, in just 25 minutes, cracking winners at every opportunity.
But as Navratilova, although looking somewhat shaky, recovered to win the next two sets 6-3, 6-4, to complete the victory over Spain, there was no stealing Evert's thunder.
The 34-year-old American survived the week without dropping a set.
She was again impressive yesterday as she dispatched Conchita Martinez, another 17-year-old, who is ranked 10th in the world, 6-3, 6-2.
It was the sort of match Evert has grown to hate.
It was full of long baseline rallies that sap the concentration and the patience.
Somehow, though, Evert remained razor sharp throughout the 78-minute examination, and for good reason.
‘I came here at the beginning of the week thinking that this was my last tournament for the year, maybe forever,’ Evert said.
‘What better note to end it on than to win in a team situation and when you are playing for your country?
If this is it, I am sure I am going out on the highest note possible.’
Whether Evert has, in fact, bowed out from the sport she has graced for two decades remains to been seen.
Today, she has hot-footed it to Kyushu, on Japan's southern-most tip, to play an exhibition against Navratilova.
It is one of many planned between now and April.
Indeed, should Marty Reissen, the US captain, get his way, Evert could return to his line-up for next year's Federation Cup, which will played in Atlanta, in July.
‘I will be asking all the team to play again and that includes Chris.
She is definitely an asset and she played superbly here, she was terrific,’ he said.
Volleyball: England discontent
By MIKE SPENCER
THE ENGLISH Volleyball Association will this weekend move to quash discontent in England's senior men's squad, concerning the development of a Great Britain team, writes Mike Spencer.
The Sports Council recently awarded £200,000 towards the development of a British men's team, with the aim of qualifying for the Olympics.
Although a shortlist of five candidates for the position of coach has been prepared, Jefferson Williams, coach of the England men's team, said yesterday his squad were ‘annoyed’ at the lack of information from the EVA.
‘If they think they can set up a squad at three months’ notice, they're sadly mistaken.
If they treat the players like second-class citizens, then I'm not sure they'll get the support.
But it's not too late to change things,’ he said.
In the Royal Bank English League, at the weekend, men's champions Malory defeated Reebok Liverpool City in four sets, and they have a match in hand over joint leaders, Polonia and Staffordshire Moorlands, who are both still unbeaten.
Judo: Corner of a foreign mat for Britain
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
THE JAPANESE are taking these world championships seriously.
Yesterday, on the eve of the event, the squad were supposed to share the training hall with the British team, but there was no room for Karen Briggs, Elvis Gordon and the rest.
In addition to the 14 Japanese competitors, there were 17 training partners and coaches for the men and 11 for the women — and most were past Olympic or world champions.
The loss of face suffered in Seoul, where the Japanese men won just one gold medal, is set to be corrected.
The British team looked quite forlorn in comparison by the time the fighters got on the mat, the Japanese conceding them a small corner.
There were no extra training partners.
Heavyweight Gordon had his team manager, Arthur Mapp, to throw around; likewise, Sharon Lee, the Birmingham heavyweight, had the women's team manager, Roy Inman.
The quality in the British corner included Briggs, showing the speed which is one of her greatest assets, as she attempts to regain the world bantamweight title lost two years ago.
Double world light-middleweight champion, Diane Bell, showed no sign of the back injury that had sidelined her for the past month.
Inman, however, was cautious.
‘Now that women's judo is on the main Olympic agenda in Barcelona, the competition has become much tougher,’ he said.
He pointed over to the Japanese side.
‘They are now capable of taking two or three titles, though two years ago, they were not really a threat.’
The pressure is on him because Britain has taken at least one world title in the women's event since the competition began in 1980.
‘I don't think our record will be broken,’ he said.
Ice Hockey: Devils find work for keen hands
By STEVE PINDER
CARDIFF DEVILS opened their Heineken Premier career by winning three points in Scotland.
Ayr Raiders were the first stop and the second period saw Devils take a 4-1 lead.
Tommy Searle and Danny Shea replied for the home team only to see another Cooper, Ian, make it 5-3.
A power-play goal by Searle half-way through the second period made it 5-4 and with so many minutes left on the clock, a decisive result looked certain.
But despite end-to-end play, it was Searle's third goal with 10 minutes still left that tied the game.
The following day at Murrayfield Racers was a different story as Devils out-shot (40 to 24), out-thought and outplayed the Scots.
Steve Moria's hat-trick gave Cardiff a 3-1 lead and despite the first period ending 3-3, the other two were about Racers receiving a harsh lesson in ice hockey as Moria (with three more), John Lawless, and Ian Cooper sealed an 8-3 win.
The weekend's other draw was in the First, between the upstarts and the fallen mighty.
Streatham Redskins travelled to rampant newcomers Humberside Seahawks with Josef Lukac back from injury to join his Czech international brother Vincet on the import line.
After five minutes, Streatham were 2-0 up, after 18, 4-2 down.
The Lukac brothers spearheaded a second-period revival to take their team to 8-6 at the end of the second but Hawks managed to take the final period 3-1 and tie the game 9-9.
Boxing: Lewis' heavyweight thoughts: Nick Halling on the British-born fighter who is boxing clever on his way to a possible title challenge to Mike Tyson
By NICHOLAS HALLING
SOCRATES and Plato may be unlikely corner men for an aspiring heavyweight champion, but Lennox Lewis, the man reluctantly carrying the tag of the next Frank Bruno, is a lover of philosophy, and admits to being ‘one of those deep-thinking kind of guys’.
It really should not come as a surprise to find Lewis, who continues his professional career tonight against Bradford's Steve Garber at Hull City Hall, owning up to such an unexpected hobby.
Since winning the super-heavyweight gold at last year's Olympics, the London-born but Canadian-raised fighter has shown himself to be anything but another pugilistic stereotype.
After Seoul, many of the sport's biggest promoters, including Bob Arum and Don King, vied for his signature.
Expected to take his considerable talents south of the border, Lewis confounded everyone by choosing instead to cross the Atlantic and return to the country of his birth.
‘I wanted to be different,’ he admitted.
‘There's nothing special about being a heavyweight or having an Olympic gold medal in the United States.
There was more of an opportunity for me to stand out over here, particularly as there is no real heavyweight contender on the British scene since Bruno lost to Tyson.’
He also felt a keen sense of returning to his roots.
Lewis grew up in Forest Gate in east London, where he remembers causing problems at school ('I wasn't a hooligan or anything like that, but I was pretty rough') and following West Ham.
Had he stayed in the East End, he may have drifted into delinquency; instead, his mother sent for him when he was 12 to start a new life in Canada.
There was, of course, another motivating factor: that most basic and powerful philosophy of all, the pursuit of wealth.
His manager, Londoner Frank Maloney, offered Lewis a financial package which proved irresistible.
‘Britain's always wanted a heavyweight champion, and I believe Lennox is the only man capable of giving us one,’ Maloney said.
Lewis certainly possesses the physical attributes for the task in hand.
He turned 23 last month, and his 6ft 5in, 16st 11lb frame carries no excess weight.
In his third professional contest two weeks ago, against the veteran Welshman Andy Gerrard, Lewis displayed patience, mobility, a punishing left jab, and the power of his punching.
Gerrard was unhinged in the fourth round by a double-fisted barrage to the head.
Ultimately, however, the biggest barrier to Lewis's goal of becoming Britain's first world heavyweight champion this century may be his own personality.
Although both he and his advisers stress that he has a killer instinct ('I change when I'm in the ring'), Lewis is articulate, intelligent, and good company.
‘He's a super guy, the kind of person you'd like your sister to go out with,’ one of his handlers said.
There cannot be many who would say the same of Tyson.
Rugby Union: Black knights move on the Welsh pawns: Steve Bale predicts more of the same as rugby union's champions, New Zealand, arrive on their tour today
By STEVE BALE
IF THERE had been unity, it would have been simple enough: in purely rugby terms the All Blacks are unbeatable, by Wales at any rate, so only a surge of hwyl, a tide of emotion, could hope to stop them.
But even the presupposition is wrong.
There has been no unity; in fact, the Welsh Rugby Union has set an atrocious example of disunity, and the national side caught the mood.
When Wales lost to Bridgend 10 days ago, home supporters, who would now like nothing better than a Test-match miracle at the Arms Park on 4 November, taunted the beaten team with chants of ‘Easy’.
The 30 New Zealand supermen — they are only human actually, but they have something like divine status in their own land — fly into Heathrow at lunchtime today for a 13-match tour which next month moves on to Ireland.
It is already being said that if Wales keep them below 30 points it will be a moral victory.
This is a devastating commentary on the state of a relationship that was among the greatest — some would argue the greatest — in international rugby.
Remember that it took New Zealand four attempts before they finally beat Wales in Cardiff, in 1963 (they won in Swansea in 1924).
In bygone days the Arms Park had an almost mystical quality for them.
Times have changed dramatically for the worse in Wales, a condition brought on as much as anything by the masochistic fixture-making which has brought about so much contact between the countries since the Welsh were blacked out in the 1987 World Cup semi-final.
Welsh rugby needed last year's tour, with its half-century hammerings, as much as it needs the All Blacks here now.
That Alex Wyllie, the grizzled New Zealand coach, regards this as the All Blacks' most important tour since the Cup is a tribute not to the Welsh but to the necessity of bringing through the next generation of players.
It threatens the worst for John Ryan, Wyllie's Welsh counterpart, for whom 15 short months in charge have been an eternity.
Defeatist it may seem, but it would be dishonest to predict other than that his tribulations will continue.
If he sees a gleam of light, it is in the clubs — some of them anyway — who tackle the tourists before they play Wales.
‘Whatever state we appear to be in, the players will be raising their game,’ Ryan said.
‘I'm sure the All Blacks expect six games against Welsh clubs culminating in an international at the Arms Park to be a hard tour.
In any case, 100 Welsh players having the opportunity to take on the world champions and learn from them will do a lot of good for Welsh rugby.’
Ryan is trying to keep a long-term perspective since his appointment as Welsh coach runs to the end of the next World Cup, in the autumn of 1991.
But all the plans in the world will mean nothing if Wales take another battering.
Everything has conspired towards this gloomy conclusion.
The WRU was riven, by the league issue, even before the divisive South African centenary celebrations — which distracted Ryan, his players and the Welsh public from their main business, trying to do the impossible against the All Blacks.
And then there were the games with Newbridge (won unconvincingly) and Bridgend (lost disastrously).
‘Those weekends gave us more problems than they solved,’ Ryan conceded.
‘But they were a justifiable attempt to redress the balance: the All Blacks have recently had five Test matches, whereas we haven't played together since March.
‘Whether it was the right decision, only history will tell.
If I'd had control over everything I would have had a full Wales tour in the summer and then we wouldn't have needed to have the practice games, but as it is we are giving them the advantage and I wanted to try to do something about that.’
Ryan may console himself with an unlikely piece of New Zealand rugby history.
In 1924, the All Blacks undertook internal matches against Auckland and Manawatu as preparation for a European tour and promptly lost 14-3 to Auckland, who in those days were nothing like the force they are now.
‘This is the weakest team New Zealand has ever had,’ one former All Black, George Tyler, inveighed in the New Zealand Herald.
‘It is weak in the scrums, weak in defence and lacking in pace.
It is doubtful if the material is there for a first-class combination.’
As this sounds vaguely similar to some of the insults being thrown at Ryan's side, all hope is not lost.
Those All Blacks went on to win every one of 30 tour games, including Tests against Ireland, Wales, England and France, and were arguably the finest ever to visit these shores.
Rugby Union: New Zealand newcomers already on the rampage
By NICK CAIN
British Columbia.............. 3 New Zealand.................. 48 AS THE All Blacks touch down at Heathrow today there is nothing but cold comfort for John Ryan, the Welsh coach, with the news of their heavy defeat of British Columbia at the Swangard Stadium here en route to their United Kingdom tour.
The game, played as a centrepiece to celebrate the BC centenary, provided the All Blacks with a useful opportunity to blood many of their new players.
The result was an emphatic seven-try victory over a courageous side who, over the past few months in their own colours and in their other incarnation as the Canadian national team, have overwhelmed Japan and the United States and been pipped by Wales and Ireland (minus their Lions) after surrendering leads late on.
That this win was achieved by an All Black team featuring only six first-choice Test players — Gallagher, Kirwan, Stanley, Deans, McDowell and Gary Whetton — is conclusive evidence of the great strength-in-depth of this touring party.
The New Zealanders continue to strive for new Everests in rugby achievement and their coach, Alex Wyllie, has already thrown down the gauntlet by stating: ‘If we lose a single game we will consider the tour a failure.’
On the evidence available from their thorough training sessions and the way they brushed aside the challenge from a truly competitive outfit here, it is hard to see these All Blacks returning home as ‘failures’.
The All Blacks are searching for perfection on the pitch and the physical strength and skill of their forwards leaves you with the sense that they are not far from attaining that dream.
The British Columbians, despite dogged persistence, could not cope with a pack in which eight men worked as one and where possession once obtained was so powerfully and cunningly retained.
The hallmark of Wyllie's All Blacks is the ability to drive the ball forward repeatedly at close quarters, sucking in the defence before opening up and ruthlessly exploit any gaps.
Against BC the gaps duly materialised and Joe Stanley, Va'Aiga Tuigamala — a pocket-battleship of a wing — Walter Little, Bruce Deans and Zinzan Brooke crossed for tries.
John Gallagher, meanwhile, proved a more than useful stand-in for Grant Fox in the goal-kicking role, missing the sticks just once.
Wyllie's verdict was a typically gruff Kiwi understatement: ‘There was nothing wrong with it.’
He then added ominously: ‘In fact, it was a good score judging by the other teams who passed through here recently.
But we've still got plenty to work on and we won't get into the real tour rhythm until next Saturday.’
Cardiff be warned.
Schools Rugby: Wellington backs hold the key
By NICK CAIN
WELLINGTON COLLEGE seem certain to have another good season, their latest victory being against St Edward's, Oxford, 17-3, writes Our Correspondent.
St Edward's were powerful up front but the Berkshire side's backs held the key, their tries being scored by Dominic Cannon, James Wyke and Matthew Scott, with Richard Butland kicking a conversion and a drop goal.
Their master-in-charge, John Martin, was very impressed with St Paul's, who had previously beaten Wellington 8-4, and St Paul's must have enjoyed their weekend victory against Whitgift, when they won 36-0.
Llandovery College must regard their third consecutive triumph at the Midland Schools invitation tournament, at Walsall RFC, as the high spot of a successful start to the season.
They beat Friary Grange, Lichfield 28-3, Sponne School, Northampton 26-6, and Queen Mary's, Walsall 36-11, before overcoming Old Swinford Hospital School, from Stourbridge, 15-3 in the final.
Their new player, Quentin Butt, was impressive at fly-half.
Last weekend Llandovery added a notable scalp to their belt with an away victory at Muirfield, 15-20.
Among unbeaten schools, Monmouth have been going particularly well, with victories against Wycliffe College, 16-12, Bristol GS, 14-6 and Bromsgrove, 7-4.
They have speedy backs and a strong, mobile back row, in which their No. 8 and captain, Jamie Lewis, is outstanding.
Their latest victory, at the weekend, was a hard-fought away win against Plymouth, 10-12.
Following their defeat of Ampleforth, Mount St Mary's beat a successful Leeds GS side 39-3, suggesting that they are among the strongest school sides in the country.
American Football: Big Bears mugged by Buccaneers
By JON MARGOLIS
THE big boys were expecting an easy day on Sunday.
The undefeated Chicago Bears, who beat the powerful Philadelphia Eagles last week, had to deal only with the paltry Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who had been crushed the week before.
The 3-1 Cleveland Browns, fresh from their hard-fought win over Denver, were facing the even weaker Miami Dolphins.
There must have been something in the Florida air in addition to vitamin C. One of the passes from Vinny Testaverde, the Tampa Bay quarterback, went through the hands of his intended receiver right in front of the goal-line, and into the hands of a team-mate, Mark Carrier, for a touchdown.
Then there was the bad snap from center on an extra-point attempt.
Unable to kick the point, the Bucs ran the ball in.
Chicago showed enough life early in the second half to get within seven points of the Bucs, but ended up scoring only 35 points to Tampa Bay's 42, the most points scored against the Bears since 1981.
In Miami, the best Cleveland could do after the regulation 60 minutes was a 10-10 tie.
They lost in overtime to a field goal by Pete Stoyanovich, Miami's rookie kicker.
Then there was that other division leader in the American Conference, the Buffalo Bills, who figured to have a picnic in Indianapolis.
Instead they had a disaster.
They fumbled away the game, 37-14, to the Colts, and lost quarterback Jim Kelly for perhaps four weeks with a shoulder separation.
The other big losers of the day were the Houston Oilers, who had already lost games they should have won.
But lose to the Patriots?
‘Ayyeh’, as they say in New England.
It would be a bit of an exaggeration to say that little Doug Flutie out-quarterbacked Houston's big Warren Moon.
But Flutie's team did win the game.
Elsewhere, there was some normality.
In a competitive match-up, the Eagles knocked the New York Giants out of the unbeaten ranks, leaving the Los Angeles Rams, who had little trouble with the Atlanta Falcons, with the League's only perfect record.
The Dallas Cowboys, who were beaten by Green Bay, and the Detroit Lions, who lost to the Minnesota Vikings, remain without a win.
The Washington Redskins had more trouble than they should have with the injury-ridden Phoenix Cardinals before winning by two points while San Francisco relied on one of those Joe Montana come-from-behind specials to overcome New Orleans 24-20.
Racing: Sangster calls time at Manton
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
THE SHADOW of the Maktoums looms larger than ever over British racing after confirmation yesterday that Robert Sangster is to sell Manton, his multi-million pound training establishment in Wiltshire.
In an official statement put out yesterday, Sangster said cryptically: ‘It is a sad decision, but it no longer makes any sense keeping the place and having to stay in the local pub when we visit.’
Speaking from their Isle of Man home where they live as tax exiles, Sangster's wife, Susan, firmly denied that the sale of Manton was a result of her husband's reduced stature in the bloodstock world.
‘It is simply that for tax reasons we cannot stay overnight at Manton,’ Mrs Sangster explained.
‘And if we can't fully enjoy the place there's not much point in keeping it.
But Robert is as fully committed to the world of bloodstock as ever.’
Despite what Mrs Sangster says, the jettisoning of the Sangster flagship will be seen as further evidence of her husband falling behind in racing's power game, in which it is no longer enough just to be a run-of-the-mill millionaire.
Furthermore, there will inevitably be speculation that the Maktoum family, who now dominate racing and breeding in this country to an extent that many find unacceptable, will add Manton to their bejewelled chain of racing assets.
Only last week, Sheikh Mohammed added the White Lodge and Beech House Studs in Newmarket, and the dynasty of priceless mares and racehorses established by the Moller family, to the family's prodigious portfolio.
The Sheikh has a string of horses at Manton under the care of the present incumbent, Barry Hills, who leases the facilities from Sangster.
Hills took over at Manton at the end of 1986 after Sangster sacked Michael Dickinson.
The great dream had turned sour when Dickinson, the former champion National Hunt trainer, failed to produce the required results in his first season as Sangster's private trainer at the refurbished establishment.
Sangster is reputed to have spent £8m on the historic stable, which is possibly the most lavishly equipped in Europe.
The asking price now is rumoured to be in the region of £15m.
Last month it was announced that the Maktoums are to purchase a property especially for Major Dick Hern, who trains the Derby winner, Nashwan, for Hamdan Al Maktoum.
Hern's lease of the royal stables at West Ilsley in Berkshire is to cease next year.
It is possible, however, that the Maktoums may snap up Manton for Hern.
Hills's lease at Manton also terminates at the end of next year, and he could return to his original yard in Lambourn which he still owns and where his son John trains.
Sangster intends to continue sending him horses.
Last year Sangster sold his Vernons Pools empire for £90m in order to concentrate on his bloodstock interests.
In the late Seventies and early Eighties he took racehorse ownership and breeding into a new dimension by applying business principles to what was originally a pastime.
Sangster joined forces with the legendary Irish trainer Vincent O'Brien, and they virtually cornered the market in the stock of the great stallion Northern Dancer as well as successfully syndicating stallions such as The Minstrel and Alleged.
To maintain his operation, Sangster needed a regular flow of Classic winners, but this dried up when the Maktoums arrived on the international scene with their limitless spending power.
Sangster has also fared badly through his involvement with Classic Thoroughbreds, a more recent venture.
The horses trained by O'Brien for this public company have not fulfilled expectations and the shares have fallen from an issue price of 30p to 17p.
Ironically, the sale of Manton comes at a time when Sangster's fortunes on the track are looking up.
His filly Silk Slippers became one of the favourites for next year's Oaks after winning at Ascot recently and he also owns a share in The Caretaker, who won Saturday's Cartier Million.
Things cannot all be black, however.
Sangster recently purchased a 10-acre property in the South of France, apparently to concentrate on his golf.
If he is a loser, who needs to be a winner.
Racing: Carroll could aim at Japan
By JOHN KARTER
THE GASH sustained by Carroll House after he proved himself a cut above the rest of Europe in Sunday's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe looked a lot less serious than had been feared when Britain's new equine hero was examined on his return to Newmarket yesterday, writes John Karter.
Michael Jarvis, Carroll House's trainer, went straight from Paris to Ireland for the bloodstock sales, but Jim Hiner, his secretary, said yesterday: ‘The vet has confirmed that the cut is only superficial.’
Carroll House lashed out at well-wishers and photographers who crowded round him as he was led back after winning and struck a rail with his hind leg.
The four-year-old has always been highly strung and Hiner added: ‘He got so worked up that the French vets couldn't examine him.’
Jarvis will not decide on Carroll House's future until he gets back from Ireland later this week.
If the horse recovers well from his Longchamp experience he could head for the Japan Cup, for which he was entered yesterday.
Meanwhile, four weeks after the St Leger was abandoned because of subsidence of the track, the future of Doncaster racecourse is under debate.
Local Tories plan to lobby Colin Moynihan, the Minister for Sport, at this week's Conservative Party conference to allege that the course in being mismanaged by the local Labour council.
Peter Davis, leader of a delegation from the local Conservative Association, said yesterday: ‘We feel the racecourse would benefit by being taken out of local authority hands.’
The delegation are to submit evidence as to why the course should be privatised in the interests of racing.
It was confirmed yesterday that the meeting scheduled for Doncaster on 27 October is to be transferred to Carlisle.
The following day's card has been switched to Newcastle.
Doncaster's final meeting of the year (10 and 11 November) could go to Thirsk.
Celtic Chief will be out of action for a year while he recovers from a leg injury sustained in last season's Champion Hurdle.
The six-year-old is now trained by John McConnochie following the retirement of Mercy Rimell.
Knighton back on course with take-over
By FRANK KANE
WITH ONLY 48 hours to come up with the cash, Michael Knighton's £20m take-over bid for Manchester United is back on course following a High Court ruling that gives him leave to put together a funding package.
After a day of legal drama mixed with financial farce, he was last night ‘working on two or three options’, according to an associate, ‘before deciding which one he's going to run with’.
Friends of Knighton believe he is close to putting together a deal which would see at least some of the shares resold within four months of a take-over.
‘The problem is that Knighton wants to sit in the chairman's seat, at least for a while,’ one confidant said.
Earlier, Mr Justice Judge had ruled in the Manchester High Court that the terms of a temporary injunction be lifted, allowing him to show financial details of the club to his advisers.
The suit had been brought by Martin Edwards, the United chairman and controlling shareholder, who has agreed to sell his 50.6 per cent holding to Knighton for £10m.
The Court adjourned the matter until Thursday, ‘but it is hoped by both parties that by then the current uncertainty and speculation concerning the future of Manchester will have been resolved’.
Under the terms of Knighton's original contract with Edwards, he set midnight tomorrow as the deadline for posting a formal offer to shareholders.
If he does not do so, Edwards will be able to sell his stake to the highest bidder.
Peter Cole, a solicitor acting for Edwards, said after yesterday's hearing: ‘I think the ball is essentially in Knighton's court.’
But the uncertainty over Knighton's ability to raise the cash continued with a bizarre denial from his financial adviser, stockbroking firm Laing & Cruickshank, that they had guaranteed the deal to Edwards.
Following reports in Manchester that the firm had confirmed to Edwards's satisfaction that Knighton had the £10m to buy his stake and a further £10m to make a formal offer for the rest of the shares, Laing & Cruickshank said: ‘It is completely untrue that we have given an assurance to anyone.
The verification process is going on, but we cannot say whether it's going to be completed by any particular time.
That depends on his assets and whether they meet Stock Exchange requirements.’
Yesterday's developments are bound to anger further the rest of the United board, and fans.
In particular Amer Midani, the United director who has a 15 per cent holding and who is believed to be waiting to buy Edwards's stake.
He is backed by another director, Nigel Burrows, and has indicated that he would install Bobby Charlton as chairman if he wins control of the club.
There is also the role of Robert Maxwell, the newspaper publisher whose Daily Mirror has been strongly critical of Knighton.
Maxwell once tried unsuccessfully — to buy United.
The court hearing, which lasted 23 minutes and took place in chambers, was told by Edwards that a report prepared by Knighton's accountants — believed to show confidential details about players' salaries and contracts, as well as other sensitive financial information — had ‘come into the possession of at least one outsider’.
This is believed to be Eddy Shah, the media entrepreneur who has claimed he was offered the Edwards shares for £16m.
Tony Meo and Eddie Sinclair take up centre stage during yesterday's third-round matches in the grand prix snooker event being held at The Hexagon in Reading
By FRANK KANE
Tony Meo and Eddie Sinclair take up centre stage during yesterday's third-round matches in the grand prix snooker event being held at The Hexagon in Reading 
Football: Robson has a case for the defence
By PATRICK BARCLAY
ENGLAND flew to Poland yesterday with reliance placed in a defence that, like Bobby Robson, has shown a talent for confounding the critics.
Robson's team have yet to concede a goal in their five World Cup qualifying matches and one more clean sheet when the whistle blows on the last, in Chorzow tomorrow evening, will put them in the finals.
This has become almost par for the course in English qualifying campaigns under Robson: they were breached only once in reaching the last European Championship finals.
Yet there is persistent critical doubt about a defence which, upon meeting European opponents of the highest class — West Germany, The Netherlands, The Soviet Union — tends to show equal consistency in letting in three goals per match.
In such situations, Peter Shilton's frame cannot cover a whole multitude of sins.
But with England's great goalkeeper still betraying no signs of his 40 years, except a finely honed judgement that causes the target to shrink before advancing strikers, hopes are high that Poland can be shut out and the points secured that will see England safely through to Italy.
The Poles did not look much of a side at all when they lost 3-0 at Wembley in June and, although they have improved since under new management, there is nothing in their results to suggest that they have recovered the standard of the team that put Sir Alf Ramsey's England out of the World Cup in 1973.
Then, England lost 2-0 in Chorzow, Bobby Moore inadvertently scoring one goal and letting Wlodimierz Lubanski through for the other.
But the Poles had an outstanding side then — not only featuring Lubanski but Deyna, Lato, Gadocha, Gorgon and the goalkeeper, Jan Tomaszewski, who was to defy a barrage of attack in London.
They went on to finish third in the finals in West Germany.
Now, their main hopes rest on the striker Dariusz Dziekanowski, a deep disappointment to his countrymen when Poland lost to Gary Lineker's hat-trick in Monterey in 1986 but lately revived by a transfer to Celtic, for whom he vainly scored four goals in that extraordinary roller-coaster of a European tie against Partizan Belgrade at Parkhead 13 days ago.
Dziekanowski did not play at Wembley last summer — he was suspended after walking out on his then club Legia Warsaw — but clearly he is in the mood to test the English defenders whom Bobby Robson has been casting as his unsung heroes.
The new Polish manager, Andrzej Strejau, has said he noted faults in Terry Butcher's game during the goalless draw in Sweden last month.
But England feel that the pace of Des Walker, the great gain of last season's unbeaten sequence, should close any gaps.
Again, however, a lot may depend on the covering play of the full-backs, Gary Stevens and Stuart Pearce, upon which England's flat back-four system places great responsibility.
Robson insists that he will not play for a draw.
Such an approach, he says, is against the instincts of English players.
They feel they are creative enough to win, even without the injured John Barnes, whose place on the left flank will go to Chris Waddle with David Rocastle coming in on the right and Steve McMahon and Bryan Robson taking the middle.
Waddle has made an excellent start to his new career in France, where he is the major single investment in Marseille's campaign for domestic and European success.
He has lost half a stone since his move from Tottenham, partly, he thinks, because French players do not have the English habit of sinking a few post-match lagers.
‘He looks fitter, sleeker, and better,’ Robson said, ‘and we just hope he can score a goal for us from the wing.
He's certainly looking sharp enough to do that.’
Football: Knocks for Roxburgh
From DON LINDSAY in Paris
TROUBLE, according to the proverb, comes in threes.
Certainly Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, must believe so after arriving here for Wednesday's crucial World Cup qualifying match against France carrying a trio of injured players.
Roxburgh revealed the doubtful candidates for the game as the midfielders Gordon Strachan and Jim Bett, and Brian McClair, who fills an auxiliary role for his country.
Strachan took what the coach described as ‘a whack on the thigh’ in Leeds United's win over West Ham on Saturday.
Bett has problems with a painful toe, and McClair strained a hamstring during a training session on Sunday.
There is particular concern over the knocks to the midfield pair.
‘We did not bring them here to sit in the stand,’ Roxburgh said, although he would not commit himself as to whether either was considered a starter against the French.
‘That is still open for discussion,’ he added.
‘At this stage we will have to wait and see what state they are in before we make a decision.’
Scotland require just one point against Michel Platini's men to qualify for next summer's finals in Italy.
‘We are more than capable of getting a draw.
I think France could be badly affected if we open the scoring.’
The man most likely to cause problems for the French is Maurice Johnston, the striker who joined Rangers from Nantes during the summer.
Johnston is the only member of Roxburgh's squad to have played at the Parc des Princes, the venue for the match.
‘I think he's very important because of that fact, and also as he knows the French set-up and the way they play.
In this situation, they'll be worried about him,’ Roxburgh said.
Johnston is confident of making an impact on the game and felt the size of the crowd would also be a vital factor with 10,000 Scots fans expected to attend.
‘It will be more like a home game for us than France as they have only sold about 20,000 tickets,’ he said.
‘The last time I played there, for Nantes, there was very little atmosphere, and on Wednesday the Scots fans will be right behind us.
I am firmly convinced we will be celebrating on the way home to Glasgow.’
A special security fence will be built well away from Parc des Princes stadium to prevent any Scottish fans planning to turn up without tickets from reaching the stadium.
Football: Wales to face Van Basten
By PHIL SHAW
WALES'S World Cup qualifying tie against The Netherlands tomorrow, deprived of three main attractions by the suspension of Ian Rush and Mark Hughes and injury to Ruud Gullit, recovered some of its box-office potential yesterday with the news that Marco van Basten had been added to the Dutch squad.
Van Basten, the Milan striker whose goals were largely responsible for his country's victory in the European Championship finals last year, has recovered from a knee operation on 1 September and played on Sunday in his club's defeat at Cremona.
‘I thought I did well,’ the European Footballer of the Year said yesterday.
‘I felt good, though perhaps I'm not at my best yet.’
A win at Wrexham would take Thys Libregts's side to the top of Group Four and virtually guarantee their place in the World Cup finals in Italy next summer.
Terry Yorath, the Wales manager, is delaying his selection until he has checked on the fitness of Barry Horne, the Southampton midfielder, who has had a knee injury.
He confirmed that Derby's Dean Saunders will lead the attack.
Yorath said yesterday: ‘We know we won't be going to Italy.
But the team that plays the Dutch is playing for the future — for the 1992 European finals.’
Algeria will be going to the finals if they beat Egypt in Cairo next Sunday, but without the national team's coach, Kamel Lemoui.
He resigned after Sunday's 0-0 home draw with Egypt.
Norwich City yesterday confirmed that they have received an enquiry from the FA of Ireland about the availability of the club's central defender Andy Linighan.
The Hartlepool-born Linighan qualifies for the Republic by virtue of a family connection.
The Chelsea manager Bobby Campbell is considering an offer for Bradford City's 24-year-old central defender Lee Sinnott.
Albert Geldard, who gained an FA Cup-winners' medal with Everton in 1933 and won four England caps, has died in a Bury hospital, aged 75.
Geldard, a winger, holds the record, with Ken Roberts of Wrexham, for being the youngest player to appear in the League.
He played for Bradford Park Avenue against Millwall in the Second Division 60 years ago at the age of 15 years, 158 days.
Squash: Jansher has cash complaint
From RICHARD EATON in Singapore
JANSHER KHAN, who regained the world title on Saturday, has criticised tournament organisers for withholding his $15,000 (£9,500) prize money because he left an official dinner in Kuala Lumpur after only 15 minutes.
The 20-year-old Pakistani said: ‘They have no right to do this.
I was told that I would be given the money when I got to Singapore.
Now I find that I am not given it.’
Jansher also complained about the treatment of Pakistani players.
Jansher has been rebuffed in the past by the president of the Players' Association, Chris Dittmar, for demanding too much of tournament organisers.
Dittmar does agree with Jansher, however, that not paying prize money may set an unfortunate precedent.
Nevertheless, the Australian is still likely to preside over the punishment of the opponent who beat him in the World Open final.
He has already been told the prize money will be forwarded to his association.
Moreover, Dittmar takes a very dim view of Jansher's behaviour, because it has occurred before.
‘Jansher was warned by the players’ chairman, Phil Whitlock, for not turning up to the official function at the Singapore Open last month.
That's what makes this so serious,’ he said.
The aggravation did not seem to upset Jansher yesterday as he conceded only a single point to Frank Ellis as the title holders, Pakistan, started the world team championships here yesterday with a 3-0 win over Scotland.
England also began with a 3-0 win, against Finland.
However, Del Harris, the No. 1, returning to action after a month out, had to work hard to avoid going the full distance with Sami Elopuro before winning 9-5, 9-2, 2-9, 9-7.
Rugby Union: Quins complain to Swansea over ‘kick’
By BARRIE FAIRALL
HARLEQUINS have confirmed that they will be following up Saturday's incident in the match with Swansea at Twickenham — when one of their players was apparently kicked in the head — with an official letter of complaint to the Welsh club.
This is currently being drafted by Colin Herridge, the club's secretary, who said: ‘Deliberate foul play cannot be condoned.’
Early in the encounter, Herridge and other spectators said they saw Swansea's flanker Ian Davies kick Richard Langhorn and the Quins' No. 8 later had stitches inserted in a head wound.
Roger Blyth, chairman of the Swansea selectors who was one of Saturday's touch judges, said: ‘I didn't see the incident but it's quite obvious that the bloke was cut from contact with a boot.
It's only dirty play if there is intent there.
Until we get the letter we won't be able to do anything, but we will speak to the people concerned.’
With Sandy Sanders — a former Harlequin and this season's president of the Rugby Football Union — keen to eradicate violence in the game, this latest incident is particularly upsetting.
Just a fortnight previously on a black day for rugby, Gareth Chilcott, the Bath and England prop, was sent off at Gloucester for punching and, in another league match, two Richmond forwards were badly injured in the game with Rugby at the Athletic Ground.
Richmond have since sought help from Middlesex in pursuing the issue while Chilcott, dismissed for the fourth time in his career with Bath, awaits the result of tonight's meeting of the Somerset Disciplinary Committee.
Finlay Calder, the Lions captain, is unavailable for Scotland's international against Fiji on 28 October.
Calder, who had been expected to win his 22nd consecutive cap, feels he is short of fitness having spent September fulfilling a number of engagements in the aftermath of the tour.
‘A burst knee muscle also set me back by about three weeks,’ he said, adding that the Fiji match would be an ideal opportunity to blood another flanker in front of a home crowd.
‘I would, though, very much like to go to New Zealand with Scotland at the end of the season.’
Brian Smith, this season's Oxford University captain who is looking to become a dual international by adding Irish caps to the six he has won already for Australia, plays against some of his former Wallaby team-mates on Sunday at Iffley Road.
Smith, born Down Under but with Irish grandparents, leads Oxford against a World XV in a match to raise funds for GOAL, an Irish-based international charity which provides financial assistance to the Third World.
Included in the Australian contingent for Sunday's match are Simon Poidevin, who leads the side, Bill Calcraft and Enrique Rodriguez, the prop who turned out for Argentina before emigrating and playing for Australia.
Smith went on Ireland's recent tour of North America and the stand-off is now hoping to gain selection for Leinster in a push for a place in the Irish side to face the All Blacks next month.
Phil Matthews, of Ireland, has pulled out of the Barbarians side to play Newport this evening.
Noel Mannion, another Irish international, and the Orrell lock Bob Kimmins have also withdrawn.
Matthews is replaced at flanker by the former Wales captain, David Pickering, while the Bath lock John Morrison comes in for Kimmins.
Mannion's replacement will be Owain Williams of Bridgend.