

On the horns of the Bull Ring dilemma: The people of Birmingham should be allowed to vote on the future development of their city, Jonathan Glancey believes
By JONATHAN GLANCEY
BIRMINGHAM'S infamous and exhausted retail hub, the Bull Ring, just 25 years old, has been placed on architecture's death row.
There will be no stay of execution and few mourners for this spoiled concrete child of the Sixties.
Old before its time, the Bull Ring has been accused of the systematic rape of the second city.
It also stands accused of murdering the much-loved area around the old Bull Ring market that had grown up in piecemeal fashion over the 800 years since Birmingham was granted a market charter in 1150.
This had survived the worst the Luftwaffe could do, but was no match for ‘comprehensive redevelopment’.
The Bull Ring, completed by Laing Developments in 1964, rammed together four levels of shopping, a market hall, a multi-storey car park, an office block, a bus station and a banqueting suite all in one vast complex.
Snaking between its constituent parts was the controversial and overwhelming city ring road designed by the successive and all-powerful city engineers, Herbert Manzoni and Neville Borg.
The most militant fan of Sixties architecture would be hard pressed to support a last-minute appeal for the Bull Ring, although crocodile tears will be shed over the probable demolition of the Rotunda, a monumental steel and glass phallus, that, in the absence of a sky-piercing cathedral, acts as the city's one instantly recognisable focal point.
But what is going to replace the Bull Ring?
Given the stupendous costs involved, should the city be looking to powerful private developers working with big firms of commercial architects to take the lead and replace like with like, albeit in a more acceptable architectural garb?
Or should development be given over to a broad church of interest groups and realised by a catholic mix of architects working in a number of complementary styles?
The debate in Birmingham has reached something like fever pitch, now that the city council is faced with two rival development schemes.
On the one side is the developer, London & Edinburgh Trust (LET) and its architects, Chapman Taylor Partners.
On the other is the pressure group, Birmingham for People, championed by local architect Joe Holyoak.
LET is in a strong position.
It has owned the leasehold of the Bull Ring and surrounding sites since 1985.
As LET's partner in charge of the Bull Ring project, John Newman, says: ‘We don't have to develop the Bull Ring.
We could just sit back and collect rents from an ever-decreasing number of tenants.
Instead, we're willing to take the risk and give Birmingham the retail centre it deserves and needs if it is not to be completely undermined by rival out-of-town attractions.’
The LET scheme is, in outline at least, straightforward.
It envisages replacing the Bull Ring development with a vast new shopping complex, almost free from the graffiti-sprayed subways that have characterised central Birmingham since the mid-Sixties.
Shoppers approaching what LET have named The Galleries from New Street and High Street will be channeled along a brand new street flanked by granite and stone-clad pseudo-Classical shops and offices, entering the new mall under a vast glazed dome, second in diameter only to that of St Paul's Cathedral.
From this generous lobby, looked down on by diners perched high in the dome's galleries, shoppers will be able to pass either directly down to the open-air market in the shadow of old St Martin's church, explore the curving three-storey shopping halls or snack in a galaxy of glitzy cafes.
The attractions of LET's scheme are easy for city councillors to appreciate.
The Galleries will act as a one million sq ft magnet to six million shoppers, not just from Birmingham, but from the entire West Midlands conurbation and beyond.
Birmingham is well served by public transport, while its frequently denigrated ring road system allows traffic to flow at a remarkably fast pace (17.5mph in rush hours compared to central London's 9 or 10mph).
Parking for 3,500 cars, either underground or else in a well disguised Post-Modern palazzo, will encourage shoppers to steer away from rival retail developments in surrounding Solihull, Leamington Spa and Kidderminster, along with the out-of-town Sandwell Mall and Merry Hill Centre.
The Galleries will bridge the snarling ring road, which will be buried in decorous tunnels.
Rodney Karen, the affable architect in charge of the design of The Galleries, guarantees that they will have a truly urban character.
This will not be theme park shopping, Karen insists, nor will The Galleries be closed at night.
They will form a integral part of the city, opening up new pedestrian routes, while upgrading existing ones.
But Joe Holyoak and the Birmingham for People group believe The Galleries will simply repeat the mistakes made in the early Sixties, but on an even bigger scale.
Holyoak's attack, published in a recent issue of The Architects' Journal, is based on two premises.
First he takes the city council to task for presenting the LET scheme as a fait accompli, criticising it for ‘accepting without question LET's objective of redevelopment in the form of 500-metre-long, inward-looking building’.
Holyoak gleefully points out that architect Tony Ridell, of Chapman Taylor Partners, has, rather unfortunately, described The Galleries as ‘a huge aircraft carrier settled on the streetscape of the city’.
Second, Holyoak attacks the monumentality of The Galleries which, in his words ‘is the latest in the big developers’ move to privatise city centres — to eat up public space and reshape it as internalised, homogenised, security-patrolled private space'.
Instead, Holyoak proposes a People's Plan for the Bull Ring.
This consists of a return to traditional principles of town planning, of conventional streets, markets and shops.
The People's Plan includes houses, which the LET scheme expressly discounts.
‘A healthy city,’ says Holyoak, ‘needs a diversity of uses as well as diversity of design.’
But, more than that, the People's Plan is an attempt to allow for incremental growth and change.
‘Its development,’ says Holyoak, ‘would not necessitate the great cataclysm of demolition; the plan is designed so that parts of it can be built independently in phases.’
Holyoak has another trump card up his sleeve.
‘The removal of through traffic, pedestrianisation, new public spaces, new mixed uses, living in the city, environmental quality, removal of subways: all these aspects of the Peoples’ Plan are city council policies contained in the City Centre Strategy published in 1987.’
Holyoak believes that the council has been bamboozled into adopting LET's monolithic scheme which has had outline planning permission for the last year.
‘If,’ he says, ‘the city council grants full planning permission for The Galleries in the next few weeks, it will not simply be shooting itself in the foot but blowing off its entire leg.’
John Newman of LET is unrepentant.
‘Holyoak talks about building houses in the centre of Birmingham.
But who wants to live there?
Would you?
I think he's lost in a Victorian vision of Britain.’
But what about using a variety of architects and splitting the scheme into a number of smaller related parts?
Newman explains that LET works with big practices of commercial architects because time and time again they come up with the goods, on budget, on time and with none of the tantrums of the prima donna.
LET's experience of working with ‘name’ architects has not been very fruitful.
‘Chapman Taylor on the other hand,’ says Newman, ‘understand exactly what the retailer wants.’
Chapman Taylor architect Rodney Karen thinks Holyoak's scheme is a case of ‘fiddling while Rome burns’.
He warns: ‘Birmingham has to compete with outlying attractions.
At the moment all the centre offers is anxiety.
I see The Galleries as a focal point, a powerful force aiding the city, a proper part of the centre designed to enhance its life and character.’
But what sort of character?
Whether Birmingham city council should push ahead with the LET scheme or stop to consider Holyoak's counterblast must turn on what sort of centre the city wants.
Does Birmingham want a centre where people live and work, or a shopping complex that draws in people who live and sleep at the end of the bus routes?
Do they want to plan for organic change or reap the fruit of a retail giant that might, no matter what the quality of the architecture, be redundant in another 25 years?
It is difficult not to sympathise with the People for Birmingham's scheme.
It might be quixotic, it might be full of contradictions and loopholes (how will the traffic flow if the ring road is downgraded as Holyoak plans? why save the Rotunda, when trying to recreate a traditional city centre?), but it does recognise that a city centre works best when it is the sum of a number of interrelated parts.
The people of Birmingham ought to be allowed to vote on this all-important issue.
Are they, and do they want to be, urbanites or suburbanites?
Both Joe Holyoak and his rivals really ought to know.
A prayer for the brick cathedral facing St Paul's: Bankside Power Station is a masterpiece worth preserving, Gavin Stamp argues
By GAVIN STAMP
FROM the top of the dome of St Paul's Cathedral the view is no longer dominated by City church steeples but by an intrusive cacophony of drab, characterless Sixties boxes.
One building stands out in this dispiriting panorama of post-war mediocrity: a dark powerful mass of brickwork with a tall central tower that stands right across the Thames from Wren's dome.
This is not an office block, nor a church — although its sublime form might suggest that its architect was adept at designing cathedrals.
It is, in fact, the now redundant oil-fired electric power station that sits on Bankside next to the site of Sam Wanamaker's new Globe Theatre.
Bankside Power Station should never have been built.
Its architect had spent the war years with fellow Royal Academicians planning the orderly and spacious London of the future, free of smoke and industry.
But, when asked in 1947 to replace an old dirty power station that had been on the site since 1891, he soon forgot such idealism and, like any architect, was glad to have the job.
The project was controversial and the power station was only permitted providing the smoke was clean and the building did not challenge the visual dominance of St Paul's.
So the single chimney rose only to 325ft, some 45ft below the height of the cross above the cathedral.
The irony is that had the tower been higher and had the teak ‘scrubbers’ been less efficient, the smoke would have gone straight up into the air.
As it was, the ‘smokeless shimmer of vapour’ was so cooled by cleaning that it drifted across the river to cause mischief with the leadwork on Wren's great dome.
Bankside Power Station should not have been built.
But, as it was built, it should not now be demolished.
That is because it is a magnificent structure, the supreme architectural expression of the heroic, monumental phase of power station design and the creation of a great architect.
Bankside was the work of Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, OM, the architect of Liverpool's Anglican Cathedral, the rebuilt House of Commons and some of the last vital products of the Gothic Revival.
He was a designer of extraordinary versatility, being responsible for the standard ‘traditional’ red telephone kiosk, Waterloo Bridge and several power stations.
Bankside represents the fullest realisation of his industrial aesthetic.
Scott's first venture into this unlikely field of design was at Battersea where, in 1930, he was wheeled in as a famous knighted architect by the London Power Company to try to make acceptable the coal-fired monster power station to which the residents of Chelsea and Westminster were taking strong exception.
This was a brilliant move.
Scott was so successful in styling the building in fine brickwork with ‘jazz-modern’ fluting (as John Betjeman called it) that, when the Battersea ‘A’station was opened in 1934 it was widely acclaimed as a supremely successful modern treatment of a building type that seemed quintessentially twentieth century.
When, in 1939, The Architects' Journal conducted a survey to find what were considered the best modern buildings in Britain, Battersea was placed second — and was the favourite of such unlikely celebrities as Sir Kenneth Clark, Rebecca West and Charles Laughton.
Scott was so pleased with the style he had evolved at Battersea, a treatment that humanised industrial forms without denying their function, that he also used it on the Guinness Factory at Park Royal, west London.
At Battersea, Scott could not alter the basic design of the building and he much disliked the ‘upturned table’ appearance created by the four corner chimneys.
At Bankside, however, he was able to persuade the engineers, Mott, Hay & Anderson, to gather all the flues into a single ‘slender tower or campanile’.
As a result, he was able to create a symmetrical, monumental composition of great power.
As at all his power stations, Scott faced the building in a fine Worcestershire brick that has weathered to a lovely pinky-brown.
But there is nothing homely about the general effect.
Vast overlapping planes of brickwork are modelled with careful set-backs and subtle bands of detail.
The result is an expression of the monumental aesthetic of the early twentieth century, with strong American overtones.
When the campanile is seen from a distance, it seems to belong to some strange Expressionist church one has not noticed before.
Not for nothing were such power stations described as ‘brick cathedrals’; Bankside is the finest manifestation of this tradition.
Now it is redundant.
Smoke shimmers no longer from the tall tower.
But Bankside is nevertheless a sound structure which, like the best mills of the Industrial Revolution, is well worth preserving and is perfectly capable of adaptation for a new commercial use.
Such re-use is, of course, much encouraged by a building being listed, something which, until recently, was not possible with architecture of so recent a date.
Two years ago, however, the Department of the Environment at last began the listing of post-war buildings in England that were more than 30 years old.
Bracken House, the former home of the Financial Times, became the first candidate and English Heritage then submitted some 70 recommendations to the Department of the Environment; these included Bankside.
This, however, was too much for the Government and, using the excuse that public opinion was not yet ready to accept the protection of many unpopular modern buildings, Lord Caithness, the Minister of State for the Environment, arbitrarily whittled down English Heritage's list to 18 buildings -excluding Bankside — although it represented a more traditional approach in the Fifties to the now-unfashionable Modern Movement.
However, Caithness himself stated that this first selection was ‘in no way a definitive list…
I have no doubt that others will be added.
The important thing is that the Thirty Year Rule is in force and that we can respond to developing perceptions of our times.’
Earlier this year, in my capacity as chairman of the Thirties Society, I asked Caithness's successor, Virginia Bottomley, to reconsider English Heritage's recommendation of Bankside for listing.
My argument was that, as Michael Heseltine had so boldly listed Battersea Power Station in 1980, it was illogical not to protect a much finer and more complete industrial work by the same architect.
Furthermore, the listing of Battersea had ensured the building's survival for conversion to a new use — in that case, as an entertainment centre which the Prime Minister herself had praised and inaugurated.
After two months' silence, I was informed that ministers stood by their decision.
I wrote back asking the reasons for this, pointing out that, if any large modern power station deserved to be listed, it was Bankside.
I have received no satisfactory reply.
Of course, I know perfectly well why the Department of the Environment declines to list it.
Listed building procedures might impede the full commercial realisation of the site when the electricity industry is privatised.
Furthermore, British Rail has its eyes on the Bankside site for bringing up the spoil from the tunnel for Channel traffic which it is, so absurdly, driving under the middle of London at astronomical cost.
Listing, in theory, is an objective assessment of architectural or historical importance which does not necessarily prevent demolition.
In the case of Bankside Power Station, the ultimate ‘temple of power’ and a masterpiece of industrial architecture by a major twentieth-century British architect, our historic building system is being perverted for purely political reasons.
Architecture Update: Sites and scenes
By GAVIN STAMP
THE BBC 2 Building Sites series (Wednesdays, 10.20pm) takes viewers on a tour of Janet Street-Porter's gingerbread-style house in London's Smithfield.
Ms Street-Porter does the talking, while her architect, the clever Piers Gough, seems unnaturally quiet.
This cannot be said of the colourful house, which turns out to be as likeable as its architect.
Less likeable is a thoroughly daft idea by Rochdale Council to purchase compulsorily weavers' cottages in Clegg, Lancashire.
Theme Park Britons,(tonight, Channel 4, 9.15pm) details the council's plan to oust local residents and turn Clegg into a ‘multi-century themed village’.
The living, working residents will be replaced by dummies ‘re-enacting scenes from working life’.
Architecture Update: Views from Leeds
By GAVIN STAMP
PROFESSOR Peter Smith believes that ‘reasoned architectural criticism has given way to inflammatory metaphor’.
Tomorrow he delivers a lecture Beyond the Rhetoric: a cool look at architectural judgement as the first in a series by new professors at Leeds Polytechnic.
Lecture begins 5.30pm, Brunswick Building lecture theatre, Merrion Way, Leeds.
Tickets from Lynda McStay (0532) 463231.
Architecture Update: All the way from the Bank
By GAVIN STAMP
THE WORK of Ron Herron, an architect whose career spans the now unfashionable Hayward Gallery and Queen Elizabeth Hall on London's South Bank, the heady days of Sixties pop architecture, to his recent computer-generated designs, is on exhibition in London until 21 October.
Herron's pop collages should not be missed, nor should the opportunity to be guided by computers through his latest projects.
‘Sets + Things’ is at the Heinz Gallery, Portman Square, London W1, Mondays to Fridays 11am to 5pm; Saturdays 10am to 1pm.