

All the fun of the fair: Jim White takes a fresher look at the company a student might be keeping
By JIM WHITE
A COUPLE of years ago, a rumour swept Oxford that the National Front was to have a stall at the Freshers' Fair.
A posse of huge anti-fascists from Ruskin, the workers' college, disguised themselves as undergraduates and infiltrated the Examination Schools building where the event is traditionally held.
Once inside, however, they found that the only remotely fascistic stand was one occupied by a pimply youth from the Wagner Society.
He spent an uncomfortable day surrounded by burly miners threatening to smash his Dansette with baseball bats every time he put on another part from the ‘Ring Cycle’.
At this year's fair, Wagner's fans had wisely absented themselves.
But the CV Society was there.
Under the banner ‘The Unhackable Hierarchy — Bullshit is our Business’, they were selling presidencies at £4 each.
‘Employers look not simply for participation in social societies, but for those who attain officer status’ read a framed commendation on their stand, typed on the headed notepaper of a firm of City solicitors.
That it was signed by a partner called Hugh Jarse would lead the wary to conclude that the CV Society was as adept at pinching stationery as at extracting money out of fun-loving freshers: after only an hour it had sold four presidencies, six other posts and had about 40 names on a list headed ‘I'm interested in your society but don't want to cough up any money at the moment’.
Like the desert after a flash flood, Freshers' Fair is decorated by societies which bloom for just a day.
Take the Singles' Society, which seemed to exist solely so that its smartly dressed president could chat up pretty girls; or the Alice Society: ‘You didn't sign up for that did you,’ said one newcomer to his friend as they left.
‘You're so bloody gullible.’
Others have been in existence for years, yet seem to hold out little hope of attracting new recruits.
A stall hung with a poster picturing smiling folk-dancers and the legend ‘Do you think Hungary is likethat?
No!’ was unmanned.
Next door, two elderly ladies from the Esperanto Society smiled more in hope than expectation at every preterpasanto — or passer-by, as you or I might say.
London's South Bank Poly, unlike its longer-established cousin, had opened its doors to outside organisations.
Freshers were obliged to run a gauntlet of computer software, insurance and Student Railcard salesmen and a host of banks seeking their overdrafts, before reaching the union societies' billeted in the sports hall.
Here were sporting clubs and the Conservative Association run by two youths in heavy metal tour T-shirts.
There was also, inexplicably, a mountain of Pot Noodle cartons in one corner, just next to a leaflet on the wall reading ‘Anarchist Society — no need to join'.
At Oxford, not only could you join the anarchists, you could debate the class struggle with a shambolic figure in a wispy beard and a ‘No Entry’ sticker pasted to his flies.
He was buried under subversive literature between the Gardening Society (whose president sat framed by snaps of himself communing with plants) and the Women's Group, unhappily eyeing the occupant of the Rocky Horror Society stand, who, dressed in regulation suspenders and holed stockings, was doing roaring business.
Dressing up was a constant theme: soldiers in the outdoor adventurists' room (which also housed the Scout and Guide Association), men in deer-stalkers behind the Sherlock Holmes counter and countless Arthurian knights, Gilbert and Sullivan pirates and American footballers.
Two men with cans of Guinness strapped to their baseball caps wore yellow T-shirts emblazoned with the logo of the Leprechaun Society.
On closer inspection this turned out to be the L'Chaim Society, a Jewish good-time gang which presumably also has a stout approach to Judaism.
At South Bank Poly the commercial pressures came from outsiders.
At Oxford they were provided by the students.
The Investment Society, for instance, offered members ‘trips to City institutions, talks from investment professionals and advice on making the most of your grant’.
‘Don't wait until your third year to learn about careers in the City’, ran a flier pinned to the stall.
Hard by, the persistent salesmen from the Union Society (membership £70), offered a green plastic folder crammed with professional-looking information sheets.
But the Union is not faring as well as it might think.
Its president had a bleeper attached to her belt.
Her South Bank Poly counterpart had a mobile phone.
BOOK REVIEW /Up the Shining Path: ‘The Vision of Elena Silves’— Nicholas Shakespeare: Collins Harvill, 11.95 pounds
By ANTHONY QUINN
WHEN Saul Bellow wrote of America as the place where the ‘modern action’ is, he might as well have included the whole continent: Central and South America, with their chaotic flux of civil wars, bloody massacres, assassinations, coups and putsches, are about as modern as the action gets.
Small comfort for those languishing in the prisons or holed up in the hills, one suspects, but their toils have been translated into the stuff of great writing — Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Mario Vargas Llosa and Graham Greene have, in different ways, picked over the moral and political wreckage of Latin America, and you feel it needs writers of their calibre to make sense of it.
The influence of all three is perceptible in Nicholas Shakespeare's first novel, though it is not so much the magical flights of Marquez as Greene's Catholic mysticism which I found the most intriguing.
Tiny hints of The Power and The Glory and the later brilliance of The Honorary Consul flicker here and there, but the event pivotal to Shakespeare's novel also recalls -perhaps unconsciously — the miracle at the close of The End of the Affair.
It turns out that The Vision of Elena Silves operates on a more secular footing, but its meditation on the transcendence of human love over the coercions of church and state is a quietly compelling achievement.
The plot is a simple one, despite the author's shuffling of time sequences between 1965 and 1986.
Gabriel is a student revolutionary of Chinese extraction living in Belen, a town in the jungle of the Amazon Valley.
Having read Schiller, Conrad and Bakunin by the age of 12, he is now moved to join the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) terrorists, but finds his ideological ardour diverted when he meets Elena Silves, a bewitching girl of 17 and a devout Catholic.
They fall in love, but before they can consummate it Elena has a vision of the Virgin Mary, which throws the local authorities into a tailspin.
Having performed a healing miracle, she is packed off to a remote convent.
Gabriel becomes a Senderista and ends up in prison, from which he finally escapes to go in search of Elena.
This story is framed by the ramblings and reminiscences of three old men who hang out in the town square, acting as a comic chorus to the action and sketching in the historical background.
It is not one of the book's better strokes, since their discourse makes the opening stages drag a little.
Once Elena experiences her vision, however, Shakespeare hits his stride.
He neatly unfolds two opposing wings of a Catholic authority now required to pass judgement on the event.
On one side is the spineless Bishop Barrantes, representing the worst aspects of the Church's mugwumpery and corruption; on the other is Father Maby, confidant of Elena and friend to the poor and displaced in his jungle retreat; his work is less glamorous than the revolutionary's, but his wisdom and gentleness make him the unexpected hero of the novel.
Through him Gabriel learns the true nature of Elena's vision, which points to the sovereignty of love amid the warring clamour of Catholicism and Communism.
The book has the weight of research behind it, though this has been unobtrusively stitched into the narrative.
The shadowy figure of Abimael Guzman, subject of an essay Shakespeare wrote for Granta last year, surfaces here as Presidente Ezequiel, while the ritualistic savagery of Peru is detailed in some brief, shocking images.
Here, for example, is how Elena's ancestors dealt with an enemy: ‘They would eat his tongue for wisdom, his heart for courage, and for fertility make their women chew his genitals’(not difficult to imagine who gets the worst of that deal).
Back in the present, enemies of the guerrillas' 'new democracy' have their feet and heads hacked off and crudely sewn back on — the wrong way round.
Such violent grotesquerie is seen as one more consequence of political madness.
The Vision of Elena Silves, despite its rather cautious prose style, is in the end a quite moving story of individuals swallowed up by dogma's greedy maw.
The ‘modern action’ of Peruvian politics exacts a heavy price, and Shakespeare has given us a very plausible sense of the people — lovers, priests, guerrillas, soldiers — who have to pay it.
Ambiguity that is intolerable
By PETER JENKINS
BLACKPOOL: Conservatives are meeting here with the pound sliding around their ears.
The markets have exposed the fatal flaw of Margaret Thatcher's government.
This is not the fallacy (although some allege it to be so) of Nigel Lawson's exchange rate policy, nor the fallacy (which others allege) of the money supply policy which Mrs Thatcher would prefer, but the fallacy of supposing government can be conducted successfully on the basis of ambiguous vacillation.
Ambiguity concerning exchange rate policy offers markets the opportunities for the kind of one-way bets speculators like best.
They believe they have such an opportunity at the moment and no one here dares say where the pound may stand against the Deutschmark when the Chancellor rises to speak tomorrow.
Look what has happened in the last few days.
On Thursday Mr Lawson, his hand forced by the Bundesbank, raised the minimum lending rate from 14 to 15 per cent.
Since then financial markets concluded they have three good reasons for betting on a devaluation of the pound against the DM.
First, that interest rates are as high as they can go politically, certainly while the party conference is in session.
Second, because the president of the Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pohl, has said publicly that the DM needs revaluing against the currencies of high-inflation countries, of which Britain is the leader.
Third, because there is reason to suspect that the Prime Minister herself might prefer a devaluation to further expensive and, probably, futile attempts to ‘buck the markets’ by penalising her heartland constituency of home owners.
On this last point it is not necessary to authenticate gossip about renewed disagreement between Mr Lawson and the Prime Minister's own personal economic adviser, Sir Alan Walters, or of new rifts between the Prime Minister herself and the Chancellor.
They are probably false.
In the run up to the Conservative Party conference it is hardly surprising if Mrs Thatcher swallowed her intellectual objections to intervention and backed the Chancellor's expensive efforts to defend the pound in the hope of avoiding or postponing a further increase in interest rates.
Mr Lawson is not solely to blame for the uncertainty and muddle.
Whether or not they were promoted to the level of policy disagreement, everyone knows precisely what differences of opinion exist between Number 10 and Number 11.
That in itself is a destabilising factor.
No amount of holding hands, kissing in public, or mingling of blood is going to persuade speculators that Mrs Thatcher and Mr Lawson are at one when they are not.
Markets have learned to judge when one approach becomes incompatible with the other, as was the case in May last year when Mrs Thatcher effectively vetoed further attempts by Mr Lawson to hold the pound below DM3.
Today, markets have judged that Mr Lawson's endeavours to hold the pound at above DM3 had reached their limit — or hers.
That gave them their one-way bet.
The markets have correctly judged where the strongest political pressures lie.
The monetarist line is the populist line and to prove it, Sir Rhodes Boyson was peddling it around the Winter Gardens yesterday.
Mortgages hit family incomes more directly and forcibly than paying more for the Volkswagen or Sony video recorder which would be among the potentially inflationary effects of devaluation.
The mood of the conference is plainly hostile to higher interest rates and in favour of letting the pound float where it will in best Thatcherite, free-market fashion.
Some conference representatives may have been influenced by a fiercely polemical front page editorial in yesterday's Daily Mail.
It denounced Mr Lawson as ‘This bankrupt Chancellor’ and called for his dismissal.
Instead of his high interest rate policy, the pound should be allowed to fall but then, the Mail added, Britain should join the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
But this last is precisely what Mr Lawson has long wanted to do and the Prime Minister absolutely forbidden.
When Sir Geoffrey Howe last summer tried insisting that she name a date for next year she refused and later sacked him from the Foreign Office.
Mrs Thatcher's veto against putting the pound in the ERM has obliged Mr Lawson to set interest rates higher than would have been otherwise necessary to sustain sterling and, some economists think, to beat inflation.
If recession and rising unemployment are now the results, she must share the blame.
In a clear display of leadership from the fringe yesterday, Michael Heseltine put forward his own radical strategy for industrial and social regeneration based on policies of sound money.
On the last point he said ‘a formal relationship with the DM would signal the long-term determination to accept the discipline that our counter-inflationary policy needs.
Outside but shadowing the DM, we deny ourselves the support of the system at times of currency fluctuation.
We could accept a lower parity as part of a decision to join because it would be coupled with the disciplines of the exchange rate mechanism.’
Otherwise, he argued, to devalue would be to sanction the inflationary wage-increases which had vitiated so much of Britain's post-war economic history.
If coherence of this kind could be brought to the conduct of government policy, the prospects for the economy remain far from forlorn.
But whether a monetarist or exchange rate policy is preferred it ought to be clear that the country can no longer endure an ambiguous mix of the two.
Mrs Thatcher should do either as the Mail demands and replace Mr Lawson with a Chancellor of whose policies she can wholeheartedly approve or, as Mr Heseltine urges, lift her veto against the only course which could give credibility to an exchange rate policy.
Either would be preferable to continuing to try to muddle through with neither.
More than a little private problem: On the eve of Nigel Lawson's key address to the Conservative conference, Roger Bootle says the Chancellor must take the balance of payments deficit more seriously, and Nicholas Faith argues that the Tories have failed the entrepreneur
By ROGER BOOTLE
The author is chief UK economist with the investment bank Midland Montagu.
The Chancellor makes his speech tomorrow in Blackpool in the midst of an economic crisis.
If a single economic statistic can be blamed for the recent slide towards panic it is the balance of payments figures.
The latest batch, showing a deficit of £2bn for the month of August, were the last straw.
Now the Conservative Party, the markets and the country at large all desperately seek reassurance.
What none of these groups would find reassuring is a repeat of the old Lawson line that the deficit does not matter.
The Chancellor has defended this line with a variety of arguments.
Perhaps the most appealing has been the idea that the deficit is really not as large as the official figures suggest (because of gross inadequacies in the data).
Nevertheless it is not consoling.
For however inaccurate the figures are, their inaccuracies cannot have increased sufficiently to explain the sharply deteriorating trend of the balance of payments over the last few years.
In fact the Central Statistical Office's view is that the published deficit overstates the real level by no more than £2bn or £3bn.
Our current account deficit is now so large that it can be reduced by a mere £2bn or £3bn and still be huge.
Of all the arguments the Chancellor deploys, the most powerful is the contention that the deficit does not matter because it does not represent borrowing by the public sector — in effect the deficit is all in the private sector.
Accordingly, he has argued, it should be of concern only to those involved in the respective private sector transactions.
If only the markets and the media would get over their obsession with the current account numbers then the Government too could forget about them.
This argument derives from an idea with a distinguished academic pedigree.
The reasoning is simple.
If a country has a current account deficit, then collectively it is spending more on things produced abroad than it is earning from abroad.
This gap must be financed by borrowing or selling assets.
If we divide the domestic economy into two sectors, public and private, then the deficit must correspond to a financial deficit by one or both of these sectors.
In the UK at present, the public sector is in substantial budget surplus,(ie the excess of tax receipts over government spending).
Accordingly, the current account deficit must reflect net borrowing (and asset sales) by the private sector.
Whether the money has been borrowed for investment or for consumption, both borrower and lender have made a judgement about the viability of the project and its returns.
Why should the extent of this activity be of concern to the public authorities?
After all, in every other aspect of economic behaviour we now espouse a liberal philosophy.
Why not in this aspect also?
The main problem with this argument is the consequence of a current account deficit for the exchange rate.
Take Britain's case with a deficit running at about £20bn a year.
This will mean £20bn-worth of sterling coming on to the market to buy foreign currency.
To prevent this from depressing the exchange rate, £20bn of extra capital inflow has to be forthcoming.
For a while this may happen easily, not least in circumstances when interest rates are very high.
But without high rates, or when foreign investors become worried about the short-term prospects for the currency, these inflows will not be readily forthcoming at current exchange rates.
Accordingly the exchange rate will fall until they are forthcoming.
Now granted that current account deficits bring downward pressure on a currency, should this be a source of concern for the authorites?
It need not be if the authorities do not acknowledge a responsibility for control of inflation or if they believe that exchange rates (just like changes in wage rates, or indirect taxes) do not influence inflation but rather have their effect on relative prices.
Accordingly, they can be ignored by monetary authorities seeking to control the overall price level.
Inflation is determined by money supply growth.
This is the position apparently held by various government ministers in the period 1979-81, when sterling was allowed to soar.
Something like it still seems to be believed by some economists close to Mrs Thatcher.
Yet this is most definitely not Mr Lawson's position.
He believes that the exchange rate is relevant to the control of inflation and indeed has gone to great lengths to show it, including raising interest rates in an attempt to stop the pound from falling.
Accordingly, it follows that he should be concerned about the current account deficit as a matter of public policy.
In eight years Britain has moved from a current account surplus of 2.5 per cent of GDP to a deficit of 4 per cent of GDP.
This turnaround of the external accounts has made the domestic performance of the ecomomy look decidedly better than it has been.
It has enabled living standards to be higher and inflation lower than they would have been if the existing current account position had been maintained.
But now that the patience of the exchange markets is exhausted and Mr Lawson finds he is unable to raise base rates any more, the chickens are coming home to roost.
The surpising thing is not that this is happening now, but rather that it was staved off for so long.
He seems to have made the mistake of believing his own propaganda.
If you had told any of Britain's hard-pressed post-war chancellors that they could expand the economy vigorously and turn round the external accounts by 6.5 per cent of GDP without adverse consequences, would they not have jumped at the chance?
As for the comparison with regions within the country which do not have balance of payments accounts, the balance of payments is a record of transactions between areas with genuine informational content even in these examples.
Where areas have their own separate currencies, the forces revealed in the accounts have a vital bearing on the prospects for exchange rates; where there are not separate currencies these same forces have a bearing on the prospects for the real economy, including unemployment.
For a separate currency area like the UK, a weak balance of payments may amount to the basis for a depreciating currency.
For an area within a currency block, like north-east England, it may amount to a tendency towards high unemployment.
If much of this information disappears after 1992 (with the demise of customs barriers), the problem to which it relates will not.
The suggestion that it will is like the idea that we can deal with inflation by ceasing to collect data on the price level.
The Chancellor should be wary of the argument that the deficit does not matter because it is in the private sector.
Given his concern with the exchange rate, the argument does not stand up to analysis.
The truth of the matter is that the current account deficit is a touchstone for the success of the Thatcher revolution.
As the deficit developed, it enabled the fruits of that revolution to seem greater to consumers than they really were.
How quickly the deficit falls without resort to recession will tell us how effective the revolution has been in transforming Britain's producers.
Mr Lawson is in danger of striking the market as complacent about the current account deficit.
It would be far better to admit the problem openly and set about tackling it.
Such a frank appraisal would elicit sympathy from the markets and the British people alike.
If Mr Lawson could bring himself to go a stage further, admit some mistakes and consider other policies to use in combination with high interest rates, he might even win their support.
If only the Prime Minister were a Thatcherite
By NICHOLAS FAITH
THE LATEST rise in interest rates finally quashes the foolish delusion that Margaret Thatcher's economic policies were designed to help the entrepreneurial classes, for they need low, stable sources of credit.
In fact, her target audience has always been the unenterprising middle- classes, in big private companies as much as in the public sector, looking for security in the form of a home, a pensionable job and a company car.
She has taken care not to touch any of these totally unentrepreneurial perks.
Mrs Thatcher's priorities were set before she became party leader.
Her most notable contribution to the 1974 election campaign was the promise that the interest rate on mortgages would be limited to 9.5 per cent, and she has never been unfaithful to her mystical attachment to the concept of home-ownership.
Ironically, it is precisely this religious fervour which has landed her Government in the present mess: not so much mortgage tax relief (which is limited) as the failure to tax the unlimited capital gains available from selling the prime family residence.
The sums involved are enormous: 70 per cent of the total growth in the nation's wealth since 1979 has been due to the rise in value of the housing stock.
Over the past few years the bourgeoisie has taken probably £10bn of completely untaxed, totally unearned capital profit from selling their houses.
These gains, usually lavished on travel abroad, foreign cars and luxuries, are the single biggest cause of our balance of payments deficit.
Moreover the hitherto unstoppable rise in property value has formed an apparently solid base for the credit spiral which so bedevils government economic policy.
Politically, her pro-home bias was perfectly sensible.
Entrepreneurs, by their nature, are relatively thin on the ground — and an ungrateful lot not given to remembering those who helped them on the first, shaky steps on the ladder.
Moreover, since Michael Heseltine's departure, there is no one in Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet to remind her of the nature of Entrepreneurial Man.
When he stalked out he left her with a motley crew mostly of accountants and lawyers.
This group of professionals has not even bothered to ease the biggest problem facing entrepreneurs — apart from the unavailability of cheap finance — which is the lack of cash flow that results from customers not paying bills on time.
These delays cost small businesses well over £1bn a year but Mrs Thatcher's Government has not followed our EC partners in providing for automatic charging of interest on overdue bills, a step recommended 10 years ago by the Law Commission.
This lack of cash flow does not worry the typical Thatcherite so-called ‘entrepreneur’, who is not really a risk-taker.
He is a partner in a service business or professional partnership: estate agencies, solicitors, surveyors or accountants' practices.
Agents for other people's money, they do not venture their own capital, and their firms are not truly entrepreneurial ventures.
They do not make the sort of sacrifice — the second mortgage, the move to a smaller house, the seven-day weeks, the abandonment of any thought of holidays for years on end -required of those starting up new commercial or, above all, industrial businesses.
You can tell her priorities from a glance at the obituary columns.
Every day half a dozen or so old ladies leave a million pounds or more, generally widows whose major asset was a decent house in the South-east.
But these unearned gains concern only the older generation.
Houses are no longer the gold-plated investment they have been since the war.
The British bourgeoisie is going to have to look elsewhere for capital appreciation.
They may actually have to take risks: all the fault of Mrs Thatcher, but not because she was too interested in the entrepreneurs; quite the contrary, because she over-egged the pudding for the house-owning classes.
Leading Article: High time for monetary union
By NICHOLAS FAITH
THERE is no excuse for further delay.
Britain should enter the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System immediately.
The case for taking this step has long been powerful, and is now overwhelming.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, said he had one weapon with which to beat inflation: the interest rate.
That weapon has been shown by events to be inadequate.
The rate has been raised quite high enough to deal with overheating in the domestic economy.
Mr Lawson is right to argue that, given time, this desirable objective will be achieved.
But if anything, the rate may already be too high, bringing with it the danger that it will not only remove excess demand, but push the economy into recession.
A base rate of 15 per cent is perilously close to monetary overkill, let alone the still higher rates which might be needed to appease the rapacious gods of the foreign exchange markets.
It follows that the interest rate can no longer be used to defend sterling.
The maintenance of a firm currency has an important part in the battle against inflation, but if pursued uniquely by means of offering foreign holders of sterling an ever-increasing interest rate premium, the result will be severe damage to the British economy and the Tories' chances of re-election.
This elementary drawback has long been foreseen, as has the means of avoiding it.
Instead of being obliged, indefinitely, to keep British interest rates higher than domestic conditions warrant, we can join the ERM.
The pound would then no longer be an isolated currency, to which greater risk attaches, necessitating a premium rate of return to induce people to hold it.
The Government's official position, dictated by the Prime Minister, has been that Britain will join the ERM when ‘the time is ripe’.
Because this phrase has been understood to mean, as far as Margaret Thatcher is concerned, ‘over my dead body’, an announcement that the time is now ripe would be interpreted as a climbdown.
So it would be, but even the Prime Minister ought to see that it is the least bad course open to her.
When West Germany raised its interest rate last week, Britain was forced immediately to follow suit.
The economic sovereignty which Mrs Thatcher claims to defend is a chimera.
This so called sovereignty amounts to a choice between a continued run on the pound and an interest-rate-induced slump.
The refusal to join the ERM is harming the nation, as narrow-minded nationalism generally does.
The refusal also makes the Government incapable of carrying conviction in its overall economic policy.
So long as a fissure is known to exist between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor about the ERM, the task of convincing the financial markets that policy is in safe hands will be made infinitely more difficult.
The achievements of the past 10 years will be jeopardised not only by the present bout of inflation, but even more by a general loss of confidence in the Government's ability to deal with it.
The rate of inflation would be less high if Britain was already subject to the discipline of the ERM.
An announcement now, by the Chancellor, that he has instructed the Governor of the Bank of England to start negotiations on entry with his European counterparts, would transform the situation.
Leading Article: Private gifts for public arts
By NICHOLAS FAITH
ACCORDING to Peter Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council, in the United States 90 per cent of the arts are funded by individual donors.
In Britain, the balance between public and private sector funding is five to one and individual rather than corporate benefactions form a ‘negligible’ element of the private sector.
Many people have made substantial personal fortunes in the past few years, Mr Palumbo writes in the council's annual report, and having inherited the mantle of the great patrons of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, they should acknowledge their responsibilities by returning a portion of their good fortune to the community.
Mr Palumbo's central point is sound, his argumentation less so.
For a start, much of that earlier patronage was for the benefit of the patrons and not of the public.
Great collections were formed primarily for personal enjoyment.
Only in the nineteenth century did some of them find their way into the new museums.
If Lord Chandos commissioned operas from Handel, it was not for the public's enjoyment.
Many of the great fortunes in this country are still in the hands of the landed aristocracy who tend to be preoccupied with maintaining their great estates and country houses, no doubt feeling that opening them to the public is in itself a form of patronage.
Old, or unearned, money tends to be neither acquisitive nor outward-going, whereas new money tends to be both.
In the United States there is more new money, the social structure is different, and the tax regime encourages private giving.
Nonetheless, there have latterly been some notable donations from individuals in Britain: like the Sainsbury brothers' new wing for the National Gallery and the Clore Foundation's for the Tate; Terence Conran's £7m for the establishment of the Design Museum in Docklands, and Paul Hamlyn's cheap weeks for children at the Royal Opera House.
To tap the wealth of the highly salaried, American-style tax incentives are needed.
An American giving to a non-profit-making organisation can deduct such donations from taxable income.
So a company chairman earning $750,000 a year and giving $250,000 to the local orchestra would pay tax on only $500,000.
The sole equivalent here is the modest ‘give as you earn’ scheme, with up to £480 a year deductable from taxable salary if donated to a registered charity.
Tax advantages are not the only factor making donations to the arts so popular among rich Americans.
In state capitals, the standard of museums and of the performing arts is a source of pride, and helping to raise those standards confers prestige and social cachet.
In Britain, the old tradition of private patronage in the great provincial cities is reviving — but not fast enough.
More needs to be done to popularise the arts as a focal attraction of regional life.
Substantial state funding of major artistic enterprises will continue to be required if their standards are to be maintained.
Corporate funding, which rose to around £30m last year, has its part to play, irritating though it is when executives parade as great patrons while giving away their shareholders' money.
Private donations are unequivocally good.
They should be encouraged by the tax system and give from a desire to share or spread pleasure rather than a sense of guilt or duty.
A world beyond our Ken
By MILES KINGTON
STAGGERINGLY, an unknown Shakespeare play has been unearthed in a small computer in The Independent.
This is its first publication anywhere.
The History of King Kenneth I The court.
Enter King Kenneth I, with lords, including Earl Wapping, the Duke of Fleet Street and the Lord of the Isle of Dogs.
King: How now, my noble lords, good morrow!
You bring us news of what the public prints Think fit to say upon our royal performance?
Lords: We do, my lord.
We have this morning's here, Chock full of column inches on yourself.
King: Then tell me what the inky-fingered crew Have new concocted to admire, or damn, in me.
Am I today the ‘Young man in a hurry’?
Or is it time for ‘Gilded Ken’ again?
Lord Wapping: My Lord, tis none of these today, I fear…
King: Your name, old man?
King: Then stand not so, dear Wapping, when you speak, All stiff and formal as you were a judge Preparing to send a murderer to the scaffold.
Relax!
Let go your hands!
Put on a smile!
This is a young man's court from this day on We'll bid old ways and styles of talk begone!
Wapping: My Lord, this is the way I always stand And have stood so for 60 years or more.
I cannot change it now, tis far too late.
King: I beg thy pardon, Wapping.
I find in me A strange compulsion to direct all men E'en to the way they stand and walk or move.
Sometimes I stop a total stranger in the street And say to him: Let's do that one more time, But this time walk past slower, with a limp, Or smiling to yourself, as one gone mad.
Think you this strange?
Wapping: I cannot say, my Lord.
King: And just as well.
So, tell me then what sport The hacks of Fleet Street have with me today.
Isle of Dogs: They talk today of your new book, Beginning, And seem uncertain whether to praise or blame.
King: It grieves me, sir.
We actor kings, you know, We Shers and Simon Callows, write our books About ourselves for one good single reason.
Knowst what it is?
Wapping: For vanity?
Wapping: To make sure Melvyn Bragg cannot Write posthumously on your life and times?
King: I like your jest, but no.
Tis to ensure By being author of a hardback book, That we are handled by a book reviewer To make a change from endless drama critics.
Wapping: How very interesting, my Lord.
And now With your consent, we'll go about our tasks.
King: So, farewell, Wapping, faithful Fleet Street too, And Lord of the Isle of Dogs, adieu to you.
Exeunt lords, severally.
Enter to him Emma, his Queen.
King: But see where yonder Emma comes to me, In such a light as blinds the eye to tears, The which casts shadows o'er her lovely face And totally muck up the shot, I fear.
Put out the light!
And do the take again!
Emma: My Lord, I have not time to waste on that -I have an interview with Vogue ere midday strikes.
But tell me who those men were, walking out.
King: Press barons, moguls, mediamen, that's all.
Emma: Sweet Kenneth, do not trust these gentlemen!
They smile and nod like flowers in the sun, But come a nasty squall or shower from the West, And they will squeal and shout, and say of you, We never liked young Kenneth much before And now this change of climate proves us right.
Emma bursts into tears, and does it very well.
Letter: Monetarism and the ‘Thatcherite miracle’ that never happened
From Dr CHARLES BEAN
Sir: William Rees-Mogg ('Creating money to buy trouble with', 9 October) writes that ‘to run a stable economy one needs…the right ideas’.
I agree.
Unfortunately, his advocacy of a broad money target coupled with entry into the EMS ignores recent evidence and rests on doubtful economics.
The following table gives the average rate of growth of narrow money (NIB M1) and broad money (M3) over selected periods together with the annual inflation rate at the end of each period.
Broad money was dropped as a target because it gave completely misleading signals during the 1979-81 recession.
Furthermore, a variety of indicators, including capacity utilisation and vacancies, have been giving clear signs of inflationary pressure in the economy for some time.
Why just look at broad money?
The Government would be well advised to choose to direct its monetary policy either towards domestic monetary conditions or to the exchange rate.
Either will do, but the present confusion has only added to uncertainty in the financial markets.
Targeting both the money supply and the exchange rate would be daft since the Government has only one effective instrument available, the level of interest rates.
Overfunding is not a way out of this box, because at the end of the day this too works via interest rates.
Perhaps Lord Rees-Mogg should stick to picking European mastersingers?
Letter: Monetarism and the ‘Thatcherite miracle’ that never happened
From Professor WYNNE GODLEY
Sir: In his article ‘Creating money to buy trouble with’(9 October), William Rees-Mogg puts forward the surprising view that the early 1980s constitututed a ‘Thatcherite miracle’.
This, he contends, was achieved by the targeting of M3, the money supply measure, which was the backbone of the counter inflationary policy of Mrs Thatcher's first administration…
It was painful but it was successful.
Inflation was brought down to below 5 per cent, the balance of payments remained healthy and productivity improved rapidly.
But M3 was not successfully targeted in the early Thatcher years.
For instance, in the Financial Statement and Budget Report for 1980/81 the target range for the four years 1980/81-1983/84 averaged 5.5-9.5 per cent per annum ; according to Economic Trends (Annual Supplement 1989), the outrun was 13 per cent — about double the centre of the targeted range.
Almost all the subsequent targets were exceeded until the attempt at control was abandoned.
And over the whole six-year period 1979-85 the average growth of M3 was 13 per cent, which happens to be exactly the same as it was between 1965 and 1973, the period analysed by William Rees-Mogg in his famous article in The Times (13 June 1976), ‘How a 9.4 per cent excess money supply gave Britain 9.4 per cent inflation’, which denounced the conduct of economic policy in the early Seventies.
As M3 grew so fast in the early Eighties, its performance can hardly explain the reduction in inflation, which I believe to have been caused by very high and rising unemployment together with a very large and destructive appreciation in sterling.
Moreover it is not true that ‘the balance of payments remained healthy’.
The current account surplus in 1985 was more than entirely accounted for by oil, which had improved from a deficit of about £700m in 1979 to a surplus of £8bn in 1985.
The underlying trend of the balance of payments was extremely adverse; although the average growth of total output was only just over 1 per cent(slower than in any six-year period previous to Thatcher), the current account excluding oil moved from a small surplus in 1979 to a deficit of £5bn in 1985.
It is true that productivity in manufacturing (though not in the economy as a whole) grew rapidly, though no faster than in the six-year periods ending 1969 or 1973.
But there is no merit in improved productivity without any other sign of improved performance.
And of this there was little.
Manufacturing output and investment in 1985 were both far below their 1979 levels absolutely.
And the ability of manufacturing industry to compete in world markets (defined to include our own) had deteriorated markedly; exports of manufactures rose 2 per cent on average whereas imports rose by 6 per cent.
Taking everything together, I strongly suggest that the idea that an economic miracle took place in the first six Thatcher years is a very dangerous myth.
Letter: Concern over statistics
From Mr B. A. J. QUIRKE
Sir: The Institute of Statisticians' role over the last 40 years has been to promote and protect the professional integrity of statisticians not only in this country but in the many others covered by our membership ('Wide support for impartial check on official statistics', 10 October).
After the Rayner Report in 1981, we were party to discussions with Sir John Boreham, the then Head of the Government Statistical Service, and others with a view to setting up a National Statistics Council.
These discussions failed through the basic problem of lack of resources to fund the operations of such an organisation.
The Institute of Statisticians continues to be deeply concerned with both the provision of adequate statistical information and the monitoring of potential misuse, be it by political parties, television, radio and the Press or any other vested interest group which might benefit from such misuse.
Our concern certainly includes official statistics such as the retail price index and unemployment figures, but is cognisant of similar dangers associated with clinical trials testing, opinion polls, advertising claims, etc.
This institute believes that some form of National Statistics Council has a role to play but with the following provisos: 1.
It should be genuinely independent of all vested interest; 2.
It should be properly representative of all the sectors at risk; 3.
It should be adequately funded.
Letter: Campus ‘Kremlin'
From Mr GAVIN COULTHARD
Sir: As a former student at the then University of Rhodesia, I was appalled at the decision of the Zimbabwe government to close down the university.
During the UDI (Unilateral Declaration of Independence) years there was little love lost between the Smith regime and the university — indeed it was often referred to as ‘the Kremlin on the hill’.
At no time, however, did they use such draconian measures to stifle dissent.
On 28 July 1971 the Rhodesia Herald published a letter from me in response to a vitriolic attack by a Rhodesia Front Party MP: When Mr Irvine claims that the university campus is both a hotbed of evil living and orientated to the ‘unpractical arts’ subjects, did he visualise arts and social science students abandoning their studies in history, sociology and political science to take up carpentry and plumbing?
These students would then, no doubt, be accused of depriving immigrants of their sole source of livelihood.
Sadly events have turned full circle and those who defended the university then must do so again.
Letter: Gallery view
From Ms PHILIPPA TOOMEY
Sir: When it comes to supporting the arts, very little seems to have changed since George Farquhar in his Discourse on Comedy described his audience in 1702 as: a pit full of City gentlemen, a gallery full of cits, a hundred ladies of court education and about 200 footmen of nice morality.
It could be, of course, that these are the only people interested in the arts and it is a waste of time trying to increase the proportion of the modern equivalent of the footman of nice morality.
I write as a cit in the gallery.
Letter: All-night licences for ‘Acid House’ parties
From Mr TONY COLSTON-HAYTER
Sir: Your leading article ‘The freedom to party’(9 October) made a number of valid points.
We as organisers of all-night dancing parties would welcome the reasonable regulation of parties.
We are not criminals — we are a legal tax-paying enterprise which organises, up until now, perfectly legal, private, dance music warehouse parties.
The idea that so-called ‘acid parties’ are a dangerous drug crazed youth cult is a sensationalist fantasy of the gutter press.
We would welcome a system of licensing which allowed private clubs to apply for all-night music and dance licensing in suitable venues.
Local authorities, fire officers and the police would inspect the venue for safety and suitability (we already fulfill all safety conditions).
We would then organise the party along the lines of other large events such as pop concerts or sports meetings, in co-operation with the police.
The crux of the problem is the duration of the event.
The massive popularity of our parties is partly due to the fact that we offer all-night dancing, this proves the need for a facility to obtain all-night licences for one-off events.
This would solve the problem of fly-by-night organisers.
By all means outlaw unsafe parties, but the Government must consider how to allow properly organised events to take place.
If the Government introduces blanket laws to prevent all-night parties it will be making an ominous step towards removing the right to freedom of association.
A government committed to freedom should reconsider.
Letter: Time for Dr Higgs to return to her work
From Dr GEOFFREY WYATT
Sir: Following your interview with Dr Marietta Higgs (6 October) I write to support her case to be allowed to return to work in Cleveland.
I do so because I believe she has been made a scapegoat for what happened.
In turn, that may be damaging child health care in the county.
Dr Higgs always appeared the most likely scapegoat for what happened in Cleveland in 1987.
She had been in the post for only seven months when the inquiry started, had little public or professional support, and there was unlikely to be any backlash to her being blamed.
Yet since 1987, the level of child sexual abuse diagnosed in Cleveland has been shown to be no higher than elsewhere in the country, and an increasing number of people locally take the view that she should be treated in the same way as myself — allowed to return to work as a paediatrician in Cleveland, but restricted from working in child abuse for the time being.
That would allay concerns about public confidence in the paediatric services at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
To blame an individual doctor for making a diagnosis of child sexual abuse because adults find anal abuse difficult to understand and accept has serious implications.
Fear of public criticism may well be intimidating some doctors, making them less inclined to consider the diagnosis.
Children may be denied the possibility of such abuse being detected.
The political will to deal with the issue is reduced, affecting the resources available.
And the wider community is denied the opportunity to deal with the issue compassionately.
The publicity Cleveland attracted understandably disturbed many people here.
They found thinking about child sexual abuse emotionally distasteful.
Aspects of the ‘crisis’, such as the separation of children from their family homes, worried and frightened them, and the possibility that the doctors were wrong brought welcome relief from the pain of child sexual abuse and precipitated denial and anger in the community.
Two years on, Cleveland should be allowed to move from anger and denial to acceptance and compassion — for the sake of children and the people abusing them, both of whom need effective help.
Without open debate and education, the local community cannot move to the clearer understanding of the nature of child sexual abuse that is necessary for professionals to receive the help and support they need from the public.
Professionals alone cannot tackle this difficult and distressing subject.
It has to be a shared responsibility.
Scapegoating an individual prevents the debate and delays community understanding.
While Dr Higgs is excluded from Cleveland, other doctors in Cleveland cannot discount the same thing happening to them.
They may as a result lack the confidence to raise a concern about child sexual abuse despite government advice following the inquiry that the possibility should be considered in the differential diagnosis of many physical conditions.
Thus while Dr Higgs continues her exile, both public and professional issues here remain unresolved.
Lord Justice Butler-Sloss in her concluding remarks on Dr Higgs's role stated that ‘She alone did not create the crisis.
She was one among many professionals and shares with others the responsibility for what happened.
To place it all upon her is to distort reality, and an unjust over-simplification of the complex issues which arose in Cleveland.’
The scapegoating of Dr Higgs is not justified.
If she returned to share her burden as the ‘Cleveland scapegoat’ we could all make progress with this very serious issue of child health.
Letter: Redundant chapels
From Mr ALAN BEITH, MP
Sir: Clive Fewins's article (Weekend, 7 October) rightly praised the excellent work of the Redundant Churches Fund, but it should also serve as a reminder that there is still no Redundant Chapels Fund to conserve some of the best examples of Non-Conformist buildings, many of which are in imminent danger of demolition or drastic alteration.
The one Non-Conformist chapel referred to in the article has been saved because it subsequently became a parish church and thus qualified for the fund.
The root of the problem is that there is no Non-Conformist equivalent of the church commissioners who, as well as contributing in large measure to Church of England clergy stipends, share with the state the responsibility for providing the Redundant Churches Fund.
There is no way the non-established denominations can be expected to make a comparable contribution, and the Government must therefore take a larger role in providing some mechanism for preserving some of the notable places of worship which, as well as being delightful buildings, are an important testimony to our religious and social history.
Letter: Fitting tribute
From Mr STEPHEN BINGHAM
Sir: The recent death of your food correspondent, Jeremy Round, was a cause of great sadness not only for his family and friends but also to the many thousands of readers who regularly enjoyed his articles.
World Family was greatly touched, therefore, when Mr Round's family requested that donations in lieu of floral tributes should be sent to us, to assist our work with children in less developed countries.
Readers may be interested to know that the money given will go towards nutritional programmes in one of the poorest areas of Cairo.
May we, through your newspaper, thank all those who contributed; the Cairo project seems to us a most fitting tribute to a fine young writer.
Letter: Street credibility
From Mr F. J. GRIFFITH
Sir: It would appear that the Prime Minster is overlooking a perfect opportunity to put her theories into practice — why not assign the security arrangements at Downing Street to a private security firm?