

Panama coup plotters died ‘in Noriega bloodbath’
From DAVID ADAMS in Panama
‘NORIEGA just exploded and the conspirators died where they stood.’
Diplomatic and military sources, after speaking with people who were trapped inside General Manuel Noriega's military headquarters during last week's coup attempt, say a bloodbath took place when the plot leaders surrendered.
In the days following the attempt, sources said that some of those detained also were killed.
There are further reports of torture of rebels and the persecution of their families.
As the bodies of victims of the fighting are buried, there is growing alarm over the scale of the killing both during and after the battle.
According to evidence drawn from diplomats, military analysts and family members of the dead and detained, it appears that as many as 24 people were killed and 100 injured.
Some of those detained may have been tortured.
The government is still sticking to its account, which names 10 dead and a further 37 detained.
But so far only four men have been buried and no autopsy results have been disclosed.
‘Where are the bodies?’ asked a European diplomat who monitors military affairs.
Yesterday, one of the detained rebels, Captain Nicasio Lorenzo, was buried.
Government reports assert that Captain Lorenzo hanged himself in his cell.
Family members at his funeral said they do not believe official accounts.
‘We know who is doing the killing,’ said one.
Captain Lorenzo is the first member of General Noriega's inner military circle, known as the Strategic Military Council (CEM), known to have died.
Another two CEM members are reported as detained.
The coup leader, Major Moises Giraldi, was buried on Monday beside three other rebel graves.
Only close family members attended the service, some of whom say that his body showed signs of torture.
As they wept around his coffin, one relative who said she had dressed the body, said: ‘It looked as though he had been tortured.’
She said that, in addition to several gunshot wounds, Giraldi had fractures of the skull, ribs and one leg.
During the service, one relative collapsed after shouting: ‘They will pay for this.’
Reports are growing of continued division within General Noriega's Panama Defence Forces.
Sources say the brutal way in which the coup leaders have been dealt with has caused a dramatic loss of morale within the army.
‘Before Noriega had to worry about the gringos,’ said one diplomat.
‘Now he's watching his own people.’
US troops in Panama remain on the highest state of alert.
A curfew imposed by the government is still in effect, although it seems directed more at confining soldiers and policemen to their barracks than at keeping civilians off the streets.
A draconian set of ‘emergency war laws’ is being drawn up.
The package of 16 measures is likely to be presented shortly.
The measures are expected to include new financial and tax laws, a revision of the military and penal codes and restrictions on freedom of movement and transport.
Regulations have also been discussed regarding the suspension and dismissal of public employees who do not express loyalty to General Noriega.
Abortion debate moves to fore in US state polls
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
THE FLORIDA state legislature began a special session yesterday devoted entirely to abortion law.
Earlier this week, the first television debate in a fascinating and closely-fought Virginia gubernatorial race was dominated by the arguments for a woman's right to choose and a foetus's right to life.
When the Supreme Court decided in July to weaken the nationwide constitutional right to abortion granted in 1973, political pundits predicted a flurry of abortion-restricting legislation and political blood-letting at state level.
They also predicted abortion would overwhelm all other issues in a series of gubernatorial elections this autumn and in the state legislative and US Congressional elections next year.
The pundits have proved half right.
The Supreme Court's July ruling admitted for the first time in 16 years the right of individual states to restrict abortions during the first six months of pregnancy.
The decision has generated sheafs of proposed new abortion legislation, pro and anti, at state level.
It has possibly become the dominant issue in several state races but has also produced a more compromising approach to the abortion issue.
The Supreme Court decision instantly awakened the large silent majority in favour of basic abortion rights.
Since the early 1980s, the Pro Life lobby had made all the political running, especially in the Republican Party where candidates at local and national level, including George Bush, were forced to amend their views to fit the new conservative orthodoxy.
The political re-awakening of the Pro-Choice lobby has made it electorally essential for Republicans to abandon the simplistic Pro-life slogans of the Reagan years.
Take, for instance, the recent experience of three conservative Republicans.
The day after the July ruling in the Supreme Court, Bob Martinez, Governor of Florida, promised a special session of the state legislature to push through abortion-restricting laws.
When he saw the extent of the Pro-Choice backlash against the Court decision, he temporised.
The Pro Lifers insisted, and he called this week's special session.
It is predicted the Democratic majority in the legislature in Tallahassee will block his proposals, giving a valuable psychological victory to the pro-choicers.
Meanwhile, Marshall Coleman is making his second attempt to become governor of Virginia.
He won the Republican nomination this year largely because he persuaded conservative voters that he favoured ‘life’ more than his two principle opponents.
Come July and the Supreme Court decision, Mr Coleman found Virginia voters were two to one in favour of the retention of a broad right to abortion.
His Democratic opponent, Doug Wilder, hoping on 7 November to become the first black governor of a US state, has been forcing him to back-pedal since.
The two went into yesterday's television debate dead even in the polls.
Mr Coleman promised he would not push for legislation which would severely restrict abortion in Virginia.
For New Jersey, the Republican candidate in the November gubernatorial elections, Congressman Jim Courter, has been a prominent and powerful campaigner against abortion in the US House of Representatives.
He has stated that, as Governor of New Jersey, he would not push for legislation to restrict abortion drastically.
He has challenged his Democratic opponent in electorally more productive areas, such as public funding for abortions.
Political commentators suggest that the political migration of such prominent Republicans has a positive side.
The US abortion debate, long entrenched in the absolute positions of the opposing activist camps, is moving toward the more moderate that reflect the broad plains of US public opinion.
The Supreme Court is expected to weaken further the nationwide constitutional protection for abortion early next year.
Most states can be expected modestly to regulate access to abortion, rather than radically restrict it.
Kluge crowned king of America's wealthy
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
THE TITLE of America's wealthiest person bestowed each year by Forbes magazine has passed to John Kluge, a media baron from Virginia less known for his billions than his wife's passion for the British royal family.
Forbes's 1989 list of the 400 wealthiest people in the United States estimates Mr Kluge's net worth at $5.2bn (£3.3bn), much of which he realised in a sale of six television stations to a fellow media mogul, Rupert Murdoch.
Mr Kluge displaced the long-time title holder, Sam Walton, only because Mr Walton chose last year to divide a $9bn Wal-Mart stores fortune among his children.
In world-wide rankings Mr Kluge comes ninth, behind six Japanese billionaires, the richest of whom is weighs in at $15bn.
The passion of Mr Kluge's third wife, Patricia, for the royal family has periodically thrust her 75-year-old husband into the public eye.
Mrs Kluge, 40, has pursued the royal family relentlessly, to the point of buying a 75,000-acre estate next to Balmoral Castle.
But her cause was badly damaged in 1985, the day before she was to sit next to the Prince of Wales at a dinner in Florida, when it was revealed that she posed as a nude model in magazines and appeared in pornographic films in the late 1960s.
Mr Kluge also appears to suffer from anglophilia.
His Virginia estate includes an 850-acre game reserve, where Mr Kluge last year advertised an ‘authentic British shoot’.
The shoot was waylaid by litigation, however, after Mr Kluge's Irish and British gamekeepers were convicted of killing hundreds of protected hawks and owls — and some of the neighbours' dogs — in an authentic effort to keep the game alive for the pleasure of the guests.
Mr Kluge built a communications conglomerate, Metromedia Inc, from scratch.
It included radio and television stations, paging devices, mobile telephones, Orion Pictures and the Harlem Globetrotters.
When he sold his stations in 1985, he got $2bn — 15 times the cash flow of the stations, rather than the usual multiple of nine to 11.
Amnesty hits at Colombian army killings
By ISABEL HILTON
KILLINGS of unarmed civilians in Colombia by sectors of the armed forces have reached unprecedented levels, according to a report by Amnesty International published today, writes Isabel Hilton.
The report argues that the drug crisis should not be allowed to obscure a pattern of gross human rights violations committed by members of the armed forces, often working in collusion with alleged drug traffickers, and paramilitary groups acting on their orders.
In the past year-and-a-half, 2,500 Colombians have been killed by such groups and a further 250 have disappeared after being detained by security forces, according to Amnesty.
The killings are part of a campaign of intimidation and elimination of supporters of the political opposition.
The report says that recent judicial investigations in Colombia have established that political killings have been planned and organised by army officers and carried out by irregular groups operating on behalf of the armed forces.
The victims have included priests, human rights workers and members of the judiciary investigating human rights abuses.
In one of several examples in recent months of mass killings, the report says, 43 people, including three children, were massacred in the gold-mining town of Segovia in November 1988.
The report says that court investigations established that the security forces were directly responsible for the massacre, which was believed to be directed against supporters of the left-wing party, the Patriotic Union.
The judge investigating the case has also received death threats.
Burmese release spy chief
From TERRY MCCARTHY in Bangkok
THE BURMESE government has released a disgraced former intelligence chief, but is continuing to arrest civilians in a growing ‘terror campaign’, according to diplomats in Rangoon.
Criticism of alleged ‘foreign interference’ by Western embassies and news organisations in Burmese affairs has also been stepped up by the military.
Brigadier-General Tin Oo was unexpectedly released from Insein jail last week, after nearly seven years.
He was head of the Military Intelligence Service (MIS) until his fall from grace in 1983, when it was thought that Ne Win, Burma's autocratic ruler since 1962, perceived him as a threat to his leadership.
The MIS, with its vast network of informers, was designed by General Ne Win to consolidate his hold on power.
Diplomats think that by releasing General Tin Oo now, General Ne Win may be trying to counter the growing power of the MIS head, Khin Nyunt.
The military government, officially called the State Law and Order Restoration Committee, has promised to hold elections by May.
But diplomats say that with many opposition politicians in jail and the continuing arrests, few Burmese expect the elections to affect the military's control of the country.
The regime has done little to reassure people.
‘Democratic activities can be carried out, but it should not be forgotten that the Tatmadaw (army) is the life of the nation,’ warned a slogan in the government-run Working People's Daily.
Arrests are being made nightly.
Many people are taken away hooded and chained and are interrogated for several days before being released.
One woman who was kept in solitary confinement for three days said: ‘The whole idea is to worry people.’
An envoy said: ‘It is ironic that the two most important people in the country are completely removed from the population.’
He was referring to the opposition leader, Aung San Suu Kyi, whose home on Inya lake, northern Rangoon, is surrounded by troops to enforce her house-arrest and General Ne Win, whose residence on the other side of the lake is also surrounded by troops and who rarely ventures out.
Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the National League for Democracy, has been under house-arrest since July.
She is becoming Burma's most famous non-person, much to the anger of the military, who were hoping she would fade away as a political force.
The regime is also trying to minimise contact between Burmese and foreign diplomats, whom they accuse of interference.
Foreign publications have been criticised for alleged one-sided reporting and their correspondents have been denied visas.
Myth and menace merge in India's poll campaign: Tony Allen-Mills writes from Uttar Pradesh on a Hindu-Muslim row over a mosque that could influence the general election later this year
By TONY ALLEN-MILLS
AT THE end of the Treta, or Second Age, Dasaratha, the childless king of the Solar race, performed the Aswa-medha sacrifice of horses and begged the gods to grant him a son.
It was a time of great alarm in the Hindu heavens, for Ravana, the Rakshasa king of Lanka, had obtained terrible powers and was threatening the world.
Vishnu, the second god of the Hindu triad, resolved to return to earth in human form.
Dasaratha's wish was granted and, in the sacred Solar capital of Ayodhya, the divine baby Rama was born as Vishnu's seventh incarnation on Earth.
So began a glorious episode in Hindu legend, leading not only to Ravana's defeat at Rama's hands, but, centuries later, to problems for the secular forces ruling modern India.
Ayodhya, a placid centre of worship on the Ghaghara river in eastern Uttar Pradesh, has become the focus of a religious and political wrangle that could influence India's general election this year.
Both government and opposition are grappling with the awkward consequences of an upsurge of religious tension inspired by militant Hindu claims to a disused Muslim mosque on a site believed to have been Lord Rama's birthplace.
Ayodhya's Babri mosque was built on the ruins of an old Hindu temple during the Moghul invasions of the late 16th century.
Four hundred years later, after the British division of the sub-continent and the Muslim exodus to Pakistan, the mosque fell into disuse.
After years of frustrated attempts to regain control of the site, Hindu extremists brought the issue to an explosive head this year by threatening to tear down the crumbling mosque and build a temple devoted to Lord Rama.
The dispute has been referred to the Uttar Pradesh high court and the government recently secured a tentative promise from Hindu militants that the mosque would not be harmed pending a ruling.
But tension remains high and bricks for the new Hindu temple, each inscribed with Lord Rama's name, are being baked and blessed at ceremonies around the country.
Irrespective of the court proceedings, Hindu activists have chosen 9 November to lay the foundation-stone of the new Ram Janmabhoomi temple less than 100 yards from the mosque's front gate.
The threat to the sanctity of the Babri mosque has infuriated India's Muslim minority.
Abdullah Bukhari, imam of the Jama mosque in New Delhi, threatened earlier this year to retaliate to any assault in Ayodhya by ordering Muslims ‘to attack, to crown the downtrodden with victory; to destroy the tyrant’.
A group of radical Muslim youths has formed a ‘demolition squad’ which has pledged to build an even bigger mosque in place of the Babri.
As myth and menace merge, there have been clashes in several towns: in neighbouring Faizabad, five Muslims and one Hindu were killed.
The dispute is worrying the Congress (I) Party of Rajiv Gandhi, the Prime Minister, who faces a strong challenge from Hindu fundamentalists in the election.
These parties accuse Mr Gandhi of pampering India's minorities at the Hindu majority's expense.
In recent months their flagrantly communal slogans ('Say it with pride — I am a Hindu') have propelled them to significant gains in municipal and other elections.
The controversy is also seriously embarrassing leaders of India's mainstream opposition alliance.
It is generally agreed that opposition success in the election will depend on a unified challenge to Congress, especially in the densely-populated Hindi-speaking states of the north.
Secular parties like the Janata Dal, led by a former Congress cabinet minister, VP Singh, are hoping to come to an election agreement with the powerful pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), to ensure that the opposition vote is not split.
But the Communists, Socialists and other secular groups in the opposition alliance appear increasingly disheartened both by the narrow religious chauvinism of the BJP and by its open links with even more extreme Hindu groups like the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, which is spearheading the Ayodhya campaign.
Last week leaders of four left-wing parties accused the BJP of ‘spreading communal poison’ and urged the Janata Dal not to deal with it.
The opposition's difficulties have enabled Mr Gandhi to retrieve ground lost to the BJP.
He has been busily sowing further discord by congratulating the leftist parties for their stand while damning the BJP for their destructive policies.
The Congress-run state government in Uttar Pradesh has also moved to defuse Muslim ire by formally endorsing Urdu, spoken by most Muslims, as the official second language in the state.
Despite government efforts to strike a compromise enabling both mosque and temple to stand side-by-side in Ayodhya, the threat of a communal eruption remains.
Before this year, Ayodhya, a community of 30,000 Hindus and 2,000 Muslims, had never witnessed a religious clash.
‘Dingo case’ duo claim 2.6m pounds
By TONY ALLEN-MILLS
DARWIN (AFP)— Lindy and Michael Chamberlain, the couple wrongly convicted of the murder of their baby in the ‘dingo case’, are seeking dollars A5.38m (£2.6m) compensation for nine years of hardship and legal costs, officials said yesterday.
Their nine-week-old daughter, Azaria, disappeared in August 1980, when the family was on a camping holiday near Ayers Rock.
The Northern Territory Attorney-General, Daryl Manzie, told the parliament in Darwin yesterday that he was denying the Chamberlains' request for confidentiality because the claim for legal expenses was almost double the figure given in a submission last year.
In 1982 Mrs Chamberlain was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder, while her husband was convicted as an accessory and given a suspended 18-month jail term.
Mrs Chamberlain, who insisted that a dingo had killed the baby, was released after three-and-a-half years in jail.
In September last year the couple's convictions were quashed.
Migrants row raises tension between China and Hong Kong
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
CHINA increased its patrols along the border with Hong Kong yesterday in an apparent effort to prevent an exodus of its people into the colony following a dispute over immigration procedures.
The dispute was triggered by Hong Kong's decision to allow the top Chinese swimmer, Yang Yang, who had sought political asylum in the West, to travel to the US last week.
However, the dispute reflects more the growing mistrust between the two sides rather than an argument over visas and numbers.
Hong Kong officials said negotiations with China to end the dispute were continuing and that the colony's border guards were in a state of ‘high alert’ in preparation for a possible influx.
Police sources said China had doubled its patrol on the border.
An official from the New China News Agency office, China's de facto embassy in Hong Kong, said no progress had been made in the negotiations and that an early solution was not expected.
He said Hong Kong must show its ‘sincerity’ before the dispute could be resolved.
On Sunday China refused to accept back from Hong Kong a group of 71 Chinese illegal immigrants, saying it was in retaliation for allowing Mr Yang, a pro-democracy activist, to leave for asylum in the US.
It subsequently accused Hong Kong of breaking a 1982 agreement on immigration and said it would handle returns on a case-by-case basis.
Already 206 Chinese are waiting to be repatriated.
Up to 100 Chinese a day have previously been repatriated.
Yesterday the Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, said he was ‘concerned at the action the Chinese have taken’, but argued that the decision to allow Mr Yang to travel to the West had not breached the 1982 agreement.
Sir David said: ‘In handling the Yang Yang case, which was a very difficult case because it was used by various groups for propaganda purposes, we have not in any way gone against the 1982 understanding.’
The disagreement follows China's recent assertion that Britain was responsible for the crisis of confidence in Hong Kong and that Whitehall had ‘connived’ with locals who were attempting to overthrow the Chinese government.
Hong Kong's relations with China have grown increasingly sour in the wake of Peking's crack-down on the student-led pro-democracy movement in June.
China is angry over Hong Kong people's support for the democracy movement and some see the border dispute as an attempt by Peking to press the government to take action against the Hong Kong Alliance, a political group that has provided financial support to China's democracy movement.
Community leaders say China's latest act of ‘bloody-mindedness’ will further undermine Hong Kong's confidence.
Sir David will strive to bolster confidence today, when he gives his annual address at the opening of the new session of the Legislative Council.
He is expected to announce the construction of an airport costing £640m, a project that will be hailed as evidence of Britain's confidence in Hong Kong's post-1997 future.
But he will probably avoid restating Britain's position that it is mainly China's responsibility to restore Hong Kong's confidence, and will instead urge locals to build the territory as a separate but valuable part of the ‘one country, two systems’ model under which it is to return to China.
Following Britain's recent dispute with China over the stationing of People's Liberation Army troops in Hong Kong after 1997, Whitehall has been at pains to keep its distance from the immigration row.
But Hong Kong people are keen that Britain should maintain a tough stance in its dealings with Peking.
Out of France: Crime news?
Just cherchez la femme…
By PATRICK MARNHAM
PARIS — The other day the window of the police station was open and an angry male voice could be heard shouting: ‘But you have to sign the statement, Madame.’
Then there was a banging noise as of a large, hairy fist striking a desk.
Afterwards, nothing.
Silence.
No stifled sobs.
Just silence.
One was left to imagine the scene being played out inside the commissariat and the events which had led up to this incident.
Women are making such progress in the world of French crime that they sometimes seem to be monopolising the police report headlines.
Over in Nancy, Simone Weber, the so-called ‘Devil of Nancy’, is now the undisputed record-holder for imprisonment on remand.
Next month she will have been locked up for 4 years without being charged or tried, while an examining magistrate struggles to assemble enough evidence to convict her of murdering first her husband and then her boyfriend.
The magistrate has two problems.
As far as the husband goes, he has the corpse but no clear evidence of murder.
With the boyfriend there is evidence that Mrs Weber killed him and chopped him up with a chain saw, but there is no corpse.
This week Mrs Weber's lawyers lodged the 18th application for her release on bail, and received the 18th refusal.
Then there is Christine Villemin, whose 4-year-old son Gregory was found near the village in the Vosges where he lived, floating in a river with his hands tied behind his back.
That too was four years ago.
First Mrs Villemin's husband's cousin, Bernard Laroche, was charged with the murder.
Then the examining magistrate changed his mind, released Mr Laroche and charged Mrs Villemin with killing her own son.
Then her husband Jean-Marie went round to Mr Laroche's house and shot him dead.
So then Jean-Marie was charged with his murder.
Then the original examining magistrate was dismissed from the case for making such a muddle of it.
Four years after the murder of ‘little Gregory’ his successor is still pondering the whole business, and until he makes up his mind Mrs Villemin cannot finally be cleared of all suspicion, and her husband cannot be tried for shooting Mr Laroche.
Mrs Villemin is the wife of a peasant farmer.
Mrs Weber is also from an unprivileged background.
These two women who have never been tried have become two of the stars of the French press's Chamber of Horrors.
They are now joined by a very different woman, Marie-Elisabeth Cons-Boutboul, who was charged on Monday with being an accessory to the murder of her son-in-law, who was found shot dead in the hallway of his Paris apartment block in 1985.
The case is made slightly untoward by the fact that both Mrs Cons-Boutboul and her former son-in-law were at one time barristers.
The prosecution's case against Mrs Cons-Boutboul is simple.
She is the mother of Darie Boutboul, celebrated as one of the leading female jockeys in France.
It is a fact that her son-in-law, the barrister Jacques Perrot, was in the process of divorcing her daughter.
He was trying to get custody of their only child.
In order to hamper his wife's objections to his custody application, Mr Perrot apparently tried to blackmail his mother-in-law.
He had a means of doing this since she was at the time in danger of being disbarred after allegations that she had defrauded a Catholic charity active in Africa.
Mrs Cons-Boutboul, it is said, therefore decided to have Mr Perrot bumped off.
She hired a hit-man from Le Havre called Bruno Dassac, once a member of the Zemour gang, and paid him about £14,000 to do the job.
Mr Dassac, in his turn, was found shot dead with a bullet through his head last year.
Mrs Cons-Boutboul denies any connection with either murder.
But she also denied knowing Dassac, and the police subsequently discovered that she had had numerous telephone conversations with him and paid him large sums of money under a false name through a Swiss bank account.
Guilty or innocent, Mrs Cons-Boutboul, like Mrs Villemin and Mrs Weber, gives the impression of being an extremely tough nut.
Mrs Villemin had no difficulty in seeing off her first examining magistrate.
Mrs Weber has so far undergone 200 hours of questioning, and is admitting nothing.
No doubt all three ladies will have participated in many scenes such as the one recently overheard through the open window of the commissariat.
Chirac declares war on the car
From SARAH LAMBERT in Paris
PARIS is suffocating.
Like most large cities, it can no longer cope with the traffic that blocks the city centre almost all day and the Mayor of Paris, Jaques Chirac, presented a plan to the city fathers yesterday to restore the capital to its residents.
But the residents are the problem, or rather the lack of them.
People are leaving Paris at the rate of some 20,000 a year, chased out by soaring property prices and the shortage of rental accommodation — especially of flats big enough for a family.
The flight to the suburbs accelerates every year.
For every person who leaves Paris, two move to the suburbs; the Ile de France now has a population of some 10 million, most of whom work in the capital.
So, every day, some 3 million cars flood Paris and the peripherique — the ring-road built to by-pass the city centre — is often at a standstill in rush-hour.
The authorities have been grappling with the problem for a decade, but still the cars choke the cobbled streets.
Mr Chirac is tackling the effect rather than the cause of the problem.
His scheme involves eliminating 100,000 parking places and installing 15,000 parking-meters.
He has also ordered a crackdown on parking offences.
Some 65,000 cars a day are illegally parked and anyone unlucky enough to get caught in future could lose their driving licence for a time.
But the plan envisages the creation of 5,000 parking places a year and any new apartment block will have to provide more parking spaces than flats.
Of Paris's 950 miles of road, 200 miles carry 80 per cent of the traffic.
An underground toll road beneath the peripherique would ease congestion in the south and enable the creation of extra bus routes through the city centre.
The heart of Paris, around the Louvre and the Hotel de Ville, would be entirely reorganised with pedestrian zones, one-way systems and extra bus routes.
Once the huge car park near the Louvre is finished in 1991, tourist coaches will be banned from the centre.
Parisians remain unconvinced that the project will be approved, especially since it is not the only idea on the drawing board.
A private consortium has financial backing for a scheme to build an entire underground toll-road system.
Traffic would be directed through a double-decker tunnel 30ft in diameter sunk between 90 feet and 150 feet below ground.
Thirty exit points would take no more room than the entrance to a multi-storey car park and the tunnel would carry one three-lane ‘layer’ of cars travelling in one direction and a bottom ‘layer’travelling in the other.
The Laser project, as it is known, has its supporters in the government though Mr Chirac is not one of them.
The political dimension makes any long-term transport project hard to carry out.
Responsibility for Paris's traffic problem falls upon the Interior Ministry and the Police department, not on the mayor — which Mr Chirac complains is ‘anachronistic’.
Court orders UK to let back an armada
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
BRITAIN HAS been instructed by the European Community to suspend immediately key provisions of the 1988 Merchant Shipping Act, designed to repel a 100- strong armada of Spanish vessels fishing in United Kingdom waters.
In an urgent ruling yesterday, the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg ordered the government immediately to repeal specific clauses of the act which relate to the Spanish presence, on the grounds that they illegally discriminate against foreigners.
The provisions were incorporated in the act to prevent Spanish trawlers joining the UK shipping register and freely exploiting the fishing quotas which have been allocated to Britain each year since 1983 under the Common Fisheries Policy.
The effect of the act, which came into force in April this year, was to exclude almost 100 boats operated by Spanish owners, mostly in waters off the south-west coast of Britain.
Ireland has also taken action to expel the boats.
However, yesterday's ruling means that only about 10 of those boats will be able to resume operations immediately.
The court was considering only a limited application by the European Commission for the suspension of parts of the act considered to be most at odds with EC non-discrimination laws.
These stipulated that any person operating in British waters must not only be resident in Britain but should also be a British citizen and that the ship should be British-owned.
Both requirements will have to be repealed pending full court actions already under way in Luxembourg and London.
British officials sought to play down the significance of yesterday's move.
‘Clearly we regret the court's ruling,’ one said.
‘But the number of ships affected will be small and we underline the need for the Commission to find a long-term solution.’
Baker invites Israel and Egypt to talks
From PAUL TAYLOR of Reuters
JERUSALEM — The US Secretary of State, James Baker, has invited the Israeli and Egyptian foreign ministers to Washington in an attempt to break a stalemate in the Middle East peace process.
But Israel has complicated US mediation efforts by demanding a veto over Palestinian representatives to peace talks.
Mr Baker proposed a meeting with Israel's Foreign Minister, Moshe Arens, and his Egyptian counterpart, Esmat Abdel-Maguid, after Israeli leaders last Friday rejected Egypt's invitation to meet a Palestinian delegation in Cairo.
‘The problem is that Israel wants to choose both teams on the football field,’ a diplomat said.
Sources said Egypt, co-ordinating its actions with the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), could not accept an Israeli veto.
Egypt has drafted a list of potential Palestinian delegates composed of PLO supporters from the occupied territories and deportees who are senior PLO activists.
President Hosni Mubarak has said any delegation would have to have PLO blessing.
Western diplomats in Cairo said yesterday that Washington had asked Egypt to persuade the PLO to accept the exclusion of Palestinians from outside the Israeli-occupied territories in such a delegation, but they felt that neither the PLO nor Egypt was likely to accept this.
In Jerusalem, a foreign ministry spokesman said: ‘One of our basic principles is that Israel will not agree to any move that will bring direct or indirect contact with the PLO.’
He said this did not amount to a demand for a right of veto: ‘The principle we stick to is that the PLO will be totally out of the picture.’
Sources close to the Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, said while he welcomed greater US involvement, he had misgivings about the wording of Mr Baker's proposals, presented orally, because they did not ensure a clear-cut Israeli veto power.
Diplomats said Washington was reluctant to offer any formula in writing because this would mean taking sides.
Israel was also said to be determined that the agenda for a meeting with Palestinians be restricted to agreeing details of the conduct of elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Israel proposed in May that Palestinians in the occupied territories hold elections to choose delegates to discuss interim self-rule with Israel.
The Defence Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, whose Labour Party forced last Friday's inner cabinet vote on the Egyptian proposal, dismissed talk of a deadlock: ‘I have time and patience and I am not pessimistic,’ he said.
Mr Rabin said he favoured allowing some deportees to join the Palestinian delegation, but he ruled out the two deportees on the reported Egyptian list because they were PLO officials.
Captain Henrick Kurt Carlsen waves from the Flying Enterprise, which he refused to leave for seven days in 1951 as it foundered in the Channel after a storm.
From PAUL TAYLOR of Reuters
Captain Henrick Kurt Carlsen waves from the Flying Enterprise, which he refused to leave for seven days in 1951 as it foundered in the Channel after a storm.
His determination to prevent the vessel from being claimed for salvage earned him a bravery award from the US Congress.
He died on Saturday at the age of 75 
Aliens in full 
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — Further details emerged yesterday of the reported visitation of alien beings to the Soviet city of Voronezh, writes Rupert Cornwell.
The newspaper Sovyetsyaka Kultura quoted Voronezh residents as saying that between 23-29 September they had repeatedly seen UFOs — including a three-eyed humanoid, a robot and a raygun which makes mere earthlings disappear.
The newspaper's local correspondent admitted that ‘it is hard to believe what happened, but there's no doubt that something did’.
Bogota bombs
By RUPERT CORNWELL
BOGOTA (Reuter)— Suspected drug traffickers set off 12 bombs, injuring 35 people, in the latest round of violence here linked to the country's cocaine war, authorities said.
In Medellin, two employees of the El Espectador newspaper were shot dead by gunmen.
Expulsion call
By SIMON STRONG
LIMA — Peru is to propose the expulsion of Panama from the so-called group of Eight at the third summit of Latin American presidents beginning today because of the refusal of its military dictator, General Antonio Noriega, to institute democracy, writes Simon Strong.
Strike mounts
By PATRICK MARNHAM
PARIS — French customs officers along the entire length of the Pyrenees announced yesterday that they were joining the 19-week-old strike by the country's tax collectors and would be closing the border to commercial traffic, writes Patrick Marnham.
Defendant faints
By PATRICK MARNHAM
ANKARA (Reuter)— A Turkish schoolboy who had scratched the word ‘Marxism’ on his desk fainted when he was cleared of spreading communist propaganda, after spending a year in prison and psychiatric hospitals.
The state prosecutor had demanded Melih Calayoglu be sent to jail for at least five years.
Greek poll
By PETER THOMPSON
ATHENS — The Greek President, Christos Sartzetakis, is today expected to name the Supreme Court President, Yannis Grivas, as Premier of a caretaker government until elections on 5 November, writes Peter Thompson.
Despite talks with party leaders yesterday, Mr Sartzetakis failed to find a way out of the impasse created by the resignation on Saturday of a conservative-communist coalition government which was formed in July.
Galileo fears
By PETER THOMPSON
WASHINGTON (Reuter, AP)— Opponents of NASA's plan to launch 48 pounds of plutonium in the power pack of the Galileo space probe, said it could cause a nuclear accident worse than Chernobyl.
Galileo is scheduled to be launched tomorrow on the space shuttle Atlantis, but opponents went to court yesterday in an attempt to stop it.
At the same time, NASA reported an engine problem that could ground the shuttle launch.
Troops order
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — The Supreme Soviet voted the government an extension of its powers to send in troops if necessary, to restore order to the railways of Transcaucasia, thrown into chaos by Azerbaijan's blockade of neighbouring Armenia, writes Rupert Cornwell.
Fears of fresh fighting between the now entirely separated Armenian and Azeri communities within Nagorny Karabakh itself have been heightened by discovery of an arms cache hidden aboard an Armenian helicopter, which landed on Sunday in a football stadium in the Armenian-controlled section of the enclave.
Mujahedin barrage kills 23
By RUPERT CORNWELL
ISLAMABAD (UPI, Reuter)— Mujahedin guerrillas fired five rockets at Kabul yesterday, killing 23 people at a bus stop, Radio Kabul reported.
The barrage was the most devastating in a series of recent rocket attacks on Kabul by the Western-backed mujahedin.
The New York Times reported that Soviet military advisers wearing Afghan army uniforms were supervising and firing Scud missiles on behalf of the Kabul government at mujahedin positions, possibly in violation of the Geneva accords.
The newspaper quoted a confidential US government document that said ‘all functions connected with the security, transportation, storage and launch of the Soviet-supplied Scuds were handled by Soviet advisers’.
Nusrat Bhutto, Pakistan's deputy prime minister who is leading its delegation to the UN General Assembly, said in New York that Moscow had agreed to talk to the mujahedin on the establishment of an interim government in Kabul that would involve the present Soviet-backed administration.
Local officials press Honecker for reform
From EDWARD STEEN in West Berlin
WHILE the East German leadership yesterday remained defiantly committed to another Tiananmen Square if need be, local party officials increasingly called for openness and dialogue with the opposition.
The confused evidence suggests they are acting on their own initiative, not on directives from East Berlin to play for time.
In Dresden, long known for a softer line than elsewhere, the Mayor, Wolfgang Berghofer, announced after talks with 20 church and New Forum opposition activists that he was willing to discuss their nine-point proposal, and release anyone arrested who was not accused of violence within 24 hours.
The proposal deals with basic demands such as freedom of travel and of the press.
Although Mr Berghofer reportedly said he was ‘not competent’ to negotiate legalising the banned New Forum group, he said he too wanted ‘elections to be elections again'.
Also in Dresden, police yesterday released 500 protesters held after the past week's unrest.
In East Berlin, the well-known opposition figure, Pastor Rainer Eppelmann, said the talks set an example for the whole country, and called for a two-week period of calm on the streets.
But church leaders denied a West German radio report that the Church had struck a deal with the authorities to stop the demonstrations.
News of the Dresden talks was announced to some 20,000 people packing churches there, and was broadcast on the city tannoy system in Leipzig on Monday afternoon.
It is thought to have helped calm tension.
Church sources in Leipzig were delighted by the extraordinary joint declaration of three local party secretaries and the city's director of music, Kurt Masur.
It read in part: ‘We all need a free exchange of views about how Socialism is to be continued in this country.’
Newspapers, apart from the party paper Neues Deutschland, began to drop the pretence that the troubles were not the main concern throughout the country.
The Union, organ of the puppet Christian Democratic Union Party, even admitted giving a one-sided picture of them.
It was not right, it said, to criminalise ‘the unrest, worries and questions which drove thousands of Dresdeners on to the streets’.
The usually ultra-orthodox organ of the Free German Youth (FDJ), which on Monday attacked ‘pervasive bossiness’ by the President of the Writers' Union, Herrman Kant, quoted a sermon in the opposition centre, Leipzig's church.
It ridiculed those who still thought the Berlin Wall was ‘a piece of benevolence’.
People had been waiting for years for freedom ‘and they've now had enough’.
It is all in stark contrast to the two pages Neues Deutschland devoted to feting the ‘fundamental lesson’ to be learned from China, and showing demonstrators to be vicious thugs.
One group was quoted as ranting at a young police woman: ‘We're going to cut your belly open.
We'll remember your face.’
As in previous attacks on the protesters, the real agents provocateurs are said to be the Western media egging on the rabble.
Curbs fail to halt flood of refugees
By PATRICIA CLOUGH
BONN — As the net of restrictions which prevents East Germans leaving their country grows tighter, the flow of refugees through the few remaining gaps continues steadily, writes Patricia Clough.
Another 479 people crossed the Hungarian border into Austria in the 24 hours ending Tuesday morning while the number who have taken refuge in the West German embassy in Warsaw is now around 500.
Another 30 are in the embassy in Prague.
It looks as if roughly 130,000 East Germans have emigrated, illegally or legally, to the West this year.
By the end of September, the number was 110,184, of whom 71,355 came with full permission of the authorities.
Since then, about 13,000 who took refuge in the Prague and Warsaw embassies have been transported to the West while 450 to 1,200 have been crossing daily through Hungary.
Most of the refugees who arrived after Hungary opened its border with Austria on 11 September, and aboard the special trains last week, have been taken to reception camps where they are given West German citizenship papers and DM200 (£66).
Many quickly join relatives or friends living here, while the rest go to transitional camps set up by the Land governments.
There they wait until they have found housing and jobs.
Meanwhile they have all the benefits of West German social security — unemployment pay, health insurance and so on.
Jobs, government officials say, are much less of a problem than is housing.
E German clerics strive for peaceful change: Patricia Clough in Bonn examines the intermediary role played by the Protestant Church during the exodus to the West
By PATRICIA CLOUGH
IF EAST GERMANY finally sets out on the path to reform without further bloodshed and repression, it will be largely thanks to the efforts of the Protestant church.
Church leaders have been tirelessly urging the country's leaders to find out why thousands have been fleeing and pleading with would-be refugees to stay and work for change.
They have been protecting dissident groups and appealing for non-violence.
Prayer meetings in the great barn-like churches of East Berlin, Dresden, Leipzig and other cities have been the focus of protest, drawing many thousands of people until no more could squeeze in and the crowds spilled into the streets.
Often these were the starting points of big demonstrations which were broken up by the police.
East Berlin church leaders, for instance, issued ‘Four Urgent Pleas’ on Monday night — the first being an appeal to East Germans ‘from now on to exercise freedom of speech fearlessly, so that the discussion of our future can begin.’
The second plea was to the regime for ‘clear and convincing steps’ towards putting the country on a just, democratic and socialist course.
Police and security forces were urged to exercise the ‘greatest possible restraint’ in face of the ‘impatience of critical citizens’and reformists were begged not to take part in unauthorised demonstrations.
Individual pastors have helped to found some of the numerous opposition groups while bishops have intervened to put an end to confrontations between the police and reformers.
While the Protestant church, like the Polish Catholic church, has played an important role in the efforts for reform, the nature and situations of the two churches could hardly be more different.
While the Polish church has always been a vital element in the Poles' national identity, neither the Protestant nor the Catholic churches in Germany — much less East Germany — have ever had this function.
And while the Polish church is conservative and traditionalist, the Union of Evangelical Churches in the German Democratic Republic is composed of radical churches founded by the great Reformation leaders, Luther, Calvin and Zwingli.
There is now little difference between them: they focus on the Bible, on preaching and on the importance of the individual conscience.
(The much smaller East German Catholic church is conservative and less active in political life, but has also recently urged reforms.)
The union or Bund is composed of eight regional churches, each run on relatively democratic lines with synods and councils in which lay members play a prominent part.
Women pastors have long been regarded as something quite normal.
The root of the East German church's involvement lies in the agonising sense of guilt and self-accusation among many clergy during and after the Second World War for not having spoken out against the Nazis in time.
With heroic individual exceptions, both the Protestant and Catholic churches supported Hitler and, in East Germany in particular, were determined that such a thing should never happen again.
During the harsh, repressive years after the war, life was extremely difficult as the Communist regime actively preached atheism and railed against outdated ‘superstitions’.
With Ostpolitik and acceptance of the division of Germany in the late Sixties the church removed one of the worst bones of contention by leaving the pan-German Evangelical Church.
It formed the Bund and committed itself to a critical modus vivendi with the state by declaring itself to be a ‘church within socialism’.
Members still suffer for their faith, for instance, by being denied university education or worthwhile jobs.
Both the church and the Communist Party ban dual membership.
No one, including the church itself, knows how many members it has.
The most common estimate is between 3.5 million and 4 million, with the Catholic church at around 1 million out of a population of almost 17 million.
But the regime allows the church itself considerable freedom, perhaps as a kind of safety valve.
Its leaders and pastors have long been the only people who can say what they think; its press, although censored, is freer than the state media and its synods and congresses are the only places where people can openly discuss the problems in the country.
Adversity breeds a special kind of Christian and it has remarkable members who devote their lives to helping, for instance, people abandoned by the state, such as punks, conscientious objectors or would-be emigrants.
The church is not a political opposition — its present, more vocal, leaders would be happy with a freer, more democratic and humane form of socialism.
But it believes it must take its message into all areas of life, to press causes, such an end to official silence on environmental problems, an investigation into glaring election fraud and above all an honest look at why so many are leaving.
Bankers agree on cure for Soviet economic ills
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
SEPARATED BY just a few miles in distance and a few hours in time, the West's most powerful central banker and the Soviet prime minister were yesterday at one: immediate and full scale price reform would only confront the Soviet Union with runaway inflation.
This notable agreement between men who might be supposed to represent the opposite poles of economic ideology came on a day when Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov disclosed grim new evidence of wage inflation here, and Dr Alan Greenspan, the visiting chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board, wound up three days of discussions with Soviet ministers, bankers and economists.
The similarity of their views — if only on that one key point — is a measure of how the superpower thaw is extending from arms control to economic matters as well.
It testifies both to a new realism in Moscow's approach to the country's profound economic crisis, and acknowledgement by the Western financial community that red-blooded free market therapy cannot alone provide the answer.
Naturally, the emphases were different.
Addressing the Supreme Soviet during a debate on emergency price curbs, Mr Ryzhkov was far blunter than a man accustomed to the velvety circumlocutions and understatements, second nature to Western central bankers.
Over the third quarter of this year, he told parliament, output by Soviet industry had risen at a rate of one per cent while wages were soaring at an annual pace of 15 per cent.
‘We are not against pay rises, but people have got to sensible,’ he said, defending the three per cent ceiling on pay rises which has just come into force here.
Mr Ryzhkov made plain the government would steer a middle course between the two extreme strategies on offer — unbridled market economics and a return to the discredited command economy of the Stalin and Brezhnev eras, buttressed in the current emergency by a broad price freeze.
‘Neither course is acceptable,’ he said.
Blanket price controls would destroy the very basis of economic reform, but reliance on market mechanisms alone would unleash a price explosion.
‘Now we argue whether inflation is three, four or five per cent.
If we fall back on market laws in our present position, this figure could multiply tens of times.’
Instead, the government intends to resist pressure from the unions for a freeze, and separate suggestions for a generalised rationing system.
Its preference is for measures to ‘stabilise the consumer market’, which would include strict controls on various key commodities.
Detailed proposals are likely later this month.
Dr Greenspan made his comments at a press conference after meetings with officials including Leonid Abalkin, the deputy prime minister in charge of economic reform, the state bank chairman (and his notional Soviet opposite number) Viktor Gerashchenko and Valentin Pavlov, the finance minister.
He is not the first Federal Reserve chairman to visit Moscow, but never can one have been paid as much attention.
Diplomatic throughout, Dr Greenspan insisted that he was no expert on the Soviet economy, and had not come to offer instant solutions.
Central banker to the core, he would not entertain the notion of crisis.
‘I did not get the impression they were reaching out for help, there was not a general mood of crisis.’
Had he met anyone to be considered a socialist, he was asked.
There was a long pause and then a smile: ‘I assume I did.’
Britain warns against faith in ‘liberal Tsars’
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE, Minister of State at the Foreign Office, called yesterday for the improvement in human rights in the Soviet Union to be codified into law.
They should not depend on the personal commitment of one leader, he said.
‘There have been liberal Tsars before.’
Speaking at an Amnesty International meeting in Blackpool, Mr Waldegrave said that up to a few years ago the Soviet Union's record was appalling and its policy unyielding.
But today things were changing, with Mikhail Gorbachev trying to renew Soviet society and create a better life for the people.
Yesterday, the Soviet Union blamed Britain for the cancellation of a visit by a human rights delegation, saying British officials insisted on sending Mr Michael Bourdeaux of Keston College — someone they knew would not be given a Soviet visa.
Earlier, Mr Waldegrave had said that ‘We could not, of course, allow the Russians arbitrarily to exclude an expert in a key area of human rights from our delegation…
I hope the decision will be reversed; if not, it could prove a poor omen for the way in which the Soviet authorities will approach the 1991 Human Rights conference in Moscow.’
However, Mr Waldegrave did concede that many abuses were ending, and the human rights provisions of the Helsinki agreement had become a useful yardstick to measure Soviet behaviour.
Jewish emigration continued to increase, and this year 33,000 people had left the Soviet Union, nearly double the figure for the whole of 1988.
Of that number, 6,776 left in August, the highest monthly total so far.
Yet the Soviet authorities had not fulfilled their commitment made during the recent Vienna conference to resolve all outstanding cases within six months.
Mr Waldegrave said Britain was continuing to press Moscow over long-term ‘refusenik’ cases, and had achieved a reasonable response, with more than 70 per cent of cases raised being resolved.
But many had not been settled, and Britain had a list of 50 names it had presented to the Soviet authorities.
Mr Gorbachev had said there were no longer prisoners convicted for political or religious beliefs, and most prisoners of conscience known to the West had been released.
But a number of citizens remained in prison or labour camps on the flimsiest of pretexts, and the West would continue to press their cases, Mr Waldegrave said.
Budapest apparatchiks contemplate the dole
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
THE GOLD lettering on the socialist-realist facade of the White House overlooking the Danube was still there yesterday morning as hundreds of bureaucrats showed up for work.
But the building no longer belonged to the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party, and the apparatchiks, once the backbone of the party state, were contemplating the possibility of unemployment for the first time in their lives.
In the middle of the night, the ruling party's congress wound up its work with a resolution to hand back to the state all superfluous assets.
Though it failed to define the new Socialist Party's financial needs, the party's holiday homes, hotels and hunting lodges were obvious targets for re-nationalisation.
‘I cannot see how they are going to pay all of us from membership dues,’ an embittered party bureaucrat said at headquarters, adding that most of them would have to be given six months' notice.
Congress was not able to address that question because the delegates ran out of time.
But they rushed through another resolution surrendering control of the 60,000-strong Workers' Guard to the government.
Ferenc Glatz, the Minister of Culture, told The Independent that the government, at its meeting on Sunday, had already decided to disband the old party's private army.
A formal announcement will be made in Parliament by the end of the month.
‘This party now has a programme and will have an internal structure of which any West European socialist party would be proud,’ Imre Pozsgay, the party's candidate for next month's presidential candidate, said.
He denied that any hardliners would be expelled, expressing the hope that ‘they will decide to join a party which still clings to the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat’.
Last night, reformers were still waiting for their wish to be fulfilled.
While a lunatic fringe was organising a new party, leading conservatives such as Karoly Grosz, the outgoing General Secretary, and Janos Berecz, the former ideologist, were refusing to reveal their intentions.
Mr Berecz said he still considered himself a member of the old party and refused to recognise the new one — despite voting for its establishment — but did not rule out the possibility of seeking admission to it.
He is bound to realise he can hurt the reformists most by joining them.
The dilemma facing Hungary's allies is even more serious.
Congress delegates waited in vain for the congratulatory telegram from Moscow when the new party was formed.
In May last year, Mr Gorbachev's cable arrived several minutes before Karoly Grosz's election to the leadership was announced.
This time, the new name deserved no greetings.
Two days later, when Rezso Nyers was elected president, he received Mr Gorbachev's personal greetings.
Conspicuously absent from the telegram were any of the customary ‘fraternal’ formulas.
But whatever reservations Moscow may have about the latest changes in Budapest, Mr Gorbachev must be aware that the old party would have been annihilated in next year's elections.
Mr Nyers and his reformists now stand a very good chance of becoming the biggest party in the new parliament.
In one of his congress speeches, Mr Nyers drew the curious analogy with the collapse of the Fourth Republic in France, and ‘democracy’ by General de Gaulle.
The Hungarian Socialist Party, he said, now faces the even greater task of creating democracy in a country run dictatorially for decades, in full awareness of the possibility of being devoured by its creation.
Militias submit to power of the flower
By STEVE CRAWSHAW, East Europe Editor
AS 70,000 East Germans streamed through Leipzig on Monday night in the largest demonstration the German Democratic Republic has ever seen, a few marchers approached the line of the workers' militia units, on standby in a side-street there.
A young woman put a flower into the buttonhole of one of the militia.
He recoiled in apparent disgust.
But his colleague received the flower gracefully.
And then a series of extraordinary dialogues began between the woman and the militia, and with groups of demonstrators who clustered round the militias, all along the street.
They chatted, almost amicably, about the need for change.
Just an hour or so earlier, many demonstrators had been worried by rumours that the workers' militia might open fire on the crowds.
There was a climate of fear after anonymous tip-offs claiming that live weapons would be used.
In the event, the authorities refrained from violence.
So far, so good.
All credit to the authorities in Leipzig who made a clear decision not to intervene.
The local party leadership even broadcast messages, applauded by the marchers, calling for dialogue.
Until then, almost every demonstration had been broken up.
But the moral for the East German leadership is worrying.
If 70,000 dared to go on the streets feeling they might be beaten up or worse, how many might demonstrate if that fear is removed?
Most provocative of all is how unprovocative are the slogans.
The truth is that a whiff of counter-revolution is hard to find — dismaying though that may be for party propagandists.
In one window of the Nikolaikirche with the burning candles and the flowers for those arrested, was a slogan demanding: ‘All power to the people — for a democratic, more human socialism.’
Even the churchmen, closely tied to the opposition, stress they do not wish to be seen as ‘anti-Communist’.
Among many demonstrators, with their calls for ‘Freedom!’ and ‘We stay here!’, there remains an attachment to some aspects of life in East Germany: perhaps best described as socialism with a very small s.
Popular attitudes in the German Democratic Republic remain full of contradictions, however.
Some may indeed dream of a united Germany: few believe it is politic to speak or even think of such a thing.
Those bold enough to put their heads above the parapet — still by no means the majority — feel that to make demands even for basic freedoms is radical, in the present climate.
If the calls for change are allowed to build up peacefully in Leipzig, then there will clearly be an escalation in the number of those who press for change.
But if the authorities return to violent methods resentment will grow even more, and could explode violently.
There would be little chance of continuing to see flowers in militias' buttonholes.