

Another danger to the ozone layer
By JANET DALEY
EVER since the new Booker shortlist failed to include some of this year's most frenetically over-promoted stars (thereby affording the rest of the authorial population a good smirk) the media have been publicly soul-searching about hype.
The arts community has always gone in for manic attention-seeking, of course— the oxygen of publicity (to borrow a phrase) being crucial to its survival.
Ironically, the proliferation of outlets for arts coverage — more quality newspapers, expanded review sections, late night television programmes, local radio chat shows — has brought not a wider, more varied selection of material but an ever more imitative and uniform one.
The Kenneth Branagh phenomenon is a cautionary tale but apart from the aren't-you-sick-of-him response, there has been little serious attention paid to the growing predictability of the media circus.
The official excuse for a sudden wave sweeping every column inch of coverage is that a genuine revelation has occurred.
By some spontaneous telepathic inspiration, the entire world has begun talking about the new genius in its midst.
The analogy is with instinctive mystery — an arcane communing which erupts suddenly at a mutually understood signal, like an entire species of bird becoming aware that it is time to mate.
But when all the arts journalists in London start fluffing up their tail feathers in unison, the effect is not so much of natural compulsion as of chummy conspiracy.
Perhaps conspiracy is too strong a word.
No raincoated figure skulks furtively in the shadowy corners of the Groucho club, hissing ‘Martin Amis is in.
Pass it on.’
But the arts media circuit is nothing if not socially cohesive.
If everybody knows everybody else and they all go to the same parties, then there is bound to be a certain unanimity, if not in their judgements at least in their objects of attention.
This is an almost inevitable function of the clubby atmosphere of the media in what is, after all, a very small country.
I think it is an American character in one of Paul Theroux's short stories who says of England, ‘This isn't a country, it's an interesting room.’
It also has something to do, I am sorry to say, with intellectual laziness.
If something or somebody seems to be all the go, it takes a determined editor to ignore it even if he thinks it wildly over-rated.
The incestuous atmosphere of media discourse is exacerbated too by British xenophobia.
A (probably correct) belief that anything foreign will be regarded as either irrelevant or incomprehensible tends to reinforce parochial cross-fertilisation.
What has become apparent is that the hype chorus has become counter-productive by its very volume.
There is an anarchic, bloody-minded streak in British public taste which likes to feel that it is striking out on its own with idiosyncratic preferences and non-conforming views.
All of the authoritative voices shrieking in concert that X is the greatest actor since Olivier or Y the best novelist since Dickens, are virtually guaranteed to cause the ordinary punter to mutter, ‘Oh, yeah?’
Hence, the backlash to which so many poor devils have been exposed after a premature elevation to megastardom.
This is probably what accounts for the fact that being featured in one of those articles entitled ‘Faces to Watch in the New Year’, or worse, ‘Who Will Be Who in the Coming Decade’ is almost inevitably a ticket to total oblivion.
It is not just artistic ephemera which suffer from metal fatigue in the heat of ubiquitous exposure.
Issues of life and death also ride the roller coaster in the same trivialising way.
When the current affairs machinery started to roll on the Aids issue, it quickly became apparent that this one had everything: public anxiety about health; the awakening of incipient guilt over sexual freedom and either compassion or vengefulness, depending on your sympathies, for the gay community.
Predictably, it shot to the top of the dinner party list of mandatory topics and was talked relentlessly into the ground on every conceivable broadcasting medium.
Never has so much explicit description of the mechanics of intercourse been rivetingly televised with such unimpeachable justification.
Six months or so of this produced not only a degree of understandable tedium -even the most terrifying things can become boring if lived with long enough — but what I would call an inverse effect.
Out of sheer perversity, the thinking human seems impelled to say something contrary to whatever received opinion has been yelling at him.
Hence, the spate of was-the-risk-exaggerated, debunking stories.
Aids is now on the downward trajectory of fashionable worries, barely able to keep its head above the surface of apathetic extinction.
Green concerns may well be about to travel the same route.
The greenhouse effect is deeply in danger of being Branaghed largely because of the mind-numbing saturation with which it is being covered.
It is only a matter of time before somebody decides to rubbish the whole global warming theory out of sheer desperation at finding a new angle.
With the consumer industry and media boffins jamming up behind one another to support the unquestionably fine ideals of conservation, one can only wish that they would ask themselves as they prepare to board one more rolling bandwagon whether they really have anything to add to what has already been said.
Sacrificed to the cause of poverty: Keith Joseph, whose ‘cycle of deprivation’ speech halted his political rise, talks to Mary Kenny about the problems of poor, young mothers
By MARY KENNY
‘YOU WON'T ask me about abortion, will you?’ said Lord Joseph, apprehensively.
No, of course not, I replied, wondering why he had brought the subject up: why, too, was he so anxious to avoid it?
‘Because I feel so complicated about it,’ he sighed.
‘It's so awfully difficult — I'd be bound to get myself in a muddle trying to explain myself.’
A characteristic Lord Joseph approach: honest, serious and keen to apologise for a complexity of thinking even before being quizzed.
In him, too, one sees an aspect of the Jewish secular conscience: anxious to think morally, but anxious, too, to do what is practical.
It would be inappropriate, however, to avoid the general subject of birth control, since it was this very question which ostensibly destroyed his ambition to lead the Conservative Party, and indeed, to be prime minister.
He was, in the early Seventies, spoken of as a possible future Tory leader.
And then, as Morrison Halcrow describes it in his new biography of Lord Joseph, Sir Keith (as he then was) made that celebrated 1974 speech which created such a storm.
‘The balance of our population, our human stock, is threatened,’ he proclaimed.
‘A high and rising proportion of children are being born to mothers least fitted to bring children into the world…
Some are of low intelligence, most of low educational attainment.
They are unlikely to be able to give children the stable emotional background, the consistent combination of love and firmness, which are more important than riches.
They are producing problem children…
Yet proposals to extend birth control facilities to these classes of people, particularly the young unmarried girls, the potential young unmarried mothers, evoke entirely understandable moral opposition.
But which is the lesser evil?’
The reaction was an uproar: Sir Keith had managed to offend both the left and the right, as well as touching on two taboos in one theme: sex and class.
Barbara Castle, then social services minister, was outraged, as was the left in general, by his infelicitous use of key eugenic phrases such as ‘human stock’, ‘low intelligence’ and ‘these classes’.
But in apparently suggesting that armies of feckless teenagers should be supplied with free contraceptives, Sir Keith irked the right too, which has been traditionally critical of the notion of indulging the young with the means of sexual hedonism unhampered by restraints.
Yet, looking back today, it might seem that the reaction to that birth control speech was a little over-heated.
By and large, he was saying what most ordinary people think: that it is not a good idea for very young girls to embark on motherhood, especially if they are poor or a bit dim.
Maybe time does give it some perspective, he agrees, but he is determined to take the blame for the controversy it provoked.
‘It was my own fault entirely.
It was a calamitous representation, by me, of a perfectly honourable and generally accepted proposition.
The reaction to that speech -and my reaction to that, the attempt to explain and apologise — put a firm stop to any hope I might have had that I might have been a candidate for leadership of the party.’
Would he have liked to lead the Conservative Party?
‘I was flattered by the idea.
It was the thought that I liked.
But it was absolutely clear to me then that I hadn't the political antennae, the political flair.
That speech, its reception, and my reaction, too, confronted me with what I had already suspected — that my candidacy was a fantasy.’
The speech itself was passed by Conservative Central Office without any objection: it had been partly inspired by his close reading of the material supplied by the Child Poverty Action Group, and with his concern of the ‘cycle of deprivation’, a phrase he popularised — or even, perhaps, coined.
He now wishes he had used the phrase ‘cycles of disadvantage’ instead, though it all comes to the same thing — when poverty is perpetuated through family patterns, generation after generation.
Lord Joseph has been interested in the causes of poverty for a long time: as a young man he joined the Howard League for Penal Reform as well as a Quaker group which busied itself about improving the social conditions of the poor.
Yet he claims to have been a late developer in many respects, a dreamy boy who grew up absorbed in cricket and poetry, still unaware, at Oxford in 1939, of anti-Semitism in Germany.
He was the only child of a rich, upper-class and cultivated Jewish family, distantly related to the Samuels, Lyons, Glucksteins.
Nigel Lawson's late wife, the beautiful Vanessa Salmon, was his cousin.
Lord Joseph's family was ‘minimally observant’ but ‘maximally acknowledging’of Judaism, and his concern for poverty is, in a way, quintessentially Jewish, underpinned by a sense of charity and a belief that prosperity can be encouraged, as can his favourite condition, embourgeoisement.
Lord Joseph is now 71, in the House of Lords and out of the political fray.
His influence on Margaret Thatcher has been acknowledged — particularly his insistence that many problems associated with the quality of life come from low productivity and bad management.
‘I retain a belief that by means of higher productivity and better crafted tax and welfare policies we could reduce poverty.
Of course, poverty itself is not that simple.
There are those who are poor because of circumstances beyond their control.’
He is still, I suspect, most concerned with the problems of the ‘cycles of disadvantage’, of poor young girls having babies too soon.
He reads, almost obsessively, the material published about the sources of family poverty, and the failure of the truly ‘disadvantaged’ to become embourgeoisee.
‘There are some initiatives going on which interest me, whereby young women who had a child when they were adolescent, and although they love the child, regret very much that they were too young, too immature, and too unsupported to care for it effectively: it's being suggested that they should go into schools and talk to girls about the glories of motherhood at the right time, but begging them not to embark on it too young.
A baby is a joy, but it can be a stinking, leaking prison for a young lone mother.’
The famous 1974 address still remains, in some respects, a benchmark of his thinking and of his central concern.
He was first drawn to the whole theme of cycles of disadvantage, he says, by some research which suggested that the mature and the middle classes use birth control more effectively than the young and the disadvantaged.
It is, however, a puzzle to me why this should be a surprise to anyone, or should even require exhaustive research.
Long before the Child Poverty Action Group was ever thought of, folks were singing ‘the rich get riches and the poor get children’.
Long before Planned Parenthood observed that education, the development of other distractions such as television, or increased cultural activity reduced fertility, the Italians had a saying that ‘the conjugal bed is the poor man's opera’.
Long before experts scratched their heads over the increase in teenage pregnancies, Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet demonstrated the essential hotheadedness, spontaneity and damn-the-consequences timeframes of teenagers.
Why should anyone wonder that if the young and poor live in a culture of sexual freedom babies will ensue?
Lord Joseph shakes his head.
‘In the past 50 years we've done a great deal of abolition.
We've abolished, largely, the concept of sin.
We've abolished, largely, the concept of hellfire.
We've tried to abolish destitution.
We've tried to abolish stigma.
When you actually abolish these things, you can't expect behaviour to be totally unchanged.
You can't imagine a political party saying we're going to bring back these things that have gone.’
The best we can do today, says Lord Joseph, is warn young people, as much as possible, that poverty and teenage single parenting are inextricably linked.
Having sacrificed his career, in a way, for this mission, he talks as though he means to continue with it, of returning again and again to the theme that the stable family is the means of prosperity and, to some extent, happiness.
Being such an advocate of the family, it strikes a sad note, in his biography, that Lord Joseph's own four children are unmentioned, or that, after 30 years of marriage, he separated from his wife to become, in effect, a single parent himself.
Raise the kids, raise the money: Ann Roberts finds US schools have demanding standards for parents
By ANN ROBERTS
THE SUPERMARKETS are now full of pumpkins.
Every day the children worry about their Hallowe'en costumes for the school fancy dress parade.
A sharp note has come home informing me that the costume must be made by the child.
We all know what that means — it will take 10 times as long.
We also have to traipse round the neighbourhood on All Hallows Eve, calling on neighbours, who give our children sweets.
Newspapers and television implore us to slit all the candy open to ensure that it contains no foreign body.
The local hospital even sets up a Hallowe'en candy X-ray service.
The children have been back at school for only a month and already I am exhausted.
There have been fund-raising events, back-to-school meetings and enough notes sent home to make me wish I could employ a filing clerk.
I thought that I would have plenty of time to work once the children went back after the 10-week summer holiday.
But I reckoned without the Parent Teacher Association or American public holidays — today it is Yom Kippur and Columbus Day.
At my youngest child's public kindergarten, the equivalent of a British state school, the main event currently is a fun run.
It costs $15 for adults and $7 for children for the excitement of running not a few miles.
Why waste time and energy on sponsors when the runners are prepared to pay to suffer?
Of course, most ‘achieving’ American parents are in an almost permanent state of training.
But there is no escape for non-runners, who are required to sign up for light duties.
That takes care of Sunday.
We cannot refuse, because we are in awe of the formidable women running the PTA.
They have doctorates in education, and pace the halls in jogging suits.
Also this Sunday, our eight-year-old's school holds its Fall Festival.
There will be food, provided by the stalwart parents, plus games and pony rides.
Some hotshot parents cheat by calling in at the food store and ordering a gourmet prawn salad for 20 — at a cost of $60.
We parents also have the dubious pleasure of ‘getting acquainted’ while funds are earned for the school.
But as one parent said at the last gathering: ‘Why do we all have to be so matey?’
Most of the mothers work.
They wear ‘power suits’, attend ‘power lunches’ and cope magnificently.
Their children's lunch boxes are nutritionally correct.
They have a master calendar in the kitchen and they never forget anything.
Not for them the hollow reply, ‘What meeting?’ when a call is made to check that they are bringing something to the pot luck supper at school that very evening.
Perhaps you have got to do this stuff for a whole lifetime to be any good at it.
I know that in Beirut I simply took my child through the checkpoints and delivered her at the school gates.
Once a year I attended the school play.
In London, the Notting Hill Gate primary school did not encourage us to linger.
We were happy to run the school jumble sale, and the weekly book club meeting in the staff room, with parents and children talking about books, was a delight.
But this American fund raising business is just that -a business.
Every day brings a new request.
Tonight we must visit the classroom to ‘become acquainted with the teaching materials’ and generally appear involved.
Fathers are not excused, not even senatorial ones.
A buffet supper, provided inevitably by mothers, is considered a sufficient counter attraction to those on Capitol Hill.
We will be lucky to be out by 10pm.
Our 16-year-old daughter goes to an enormous high school with almost 2,000 pupils.
On back-to-school night all parents attend 15-minute orientation sessions with each teacher in every class.
Bells ring.
Loudspeakers admonish us to hurry to our next classroom (up three flights of stairs and along endless corridors).
The halls look like Dante's Circles, packed as they are with anxious parents grasping their child's schedules, trying not to be late for class.
We parents in America seem to be cowed a lot.
But the orders come down from above and we jump to it.
Private school or public, it makes no difference.
Funds must be raised and we are commanded to raise them.
This week's newsletter advises that a contribution of $40 per family will bring the PTA funds up to satisfactory level.
And this is a state school.
How many computers do they need, before enough is enough?
Some parents leap forward eagerly and some must be dragged to the battle lines.
But in the end we are all caught up.
Land of the Free?
A likely story.