

De Klerk gives order for Sisulu's release
From LAURINDA KEYS of Associated Press
PRESIDENT F W de Klerk last night announced the unconditional release of eight prominent political prisoners, notably Walter Sisulu, 77, former secretary-general of the African National Congress and the closest political associate and oldest friend of Nelson Mandela, with whom he was jailed for life in 1964.
The move is seen as presaging Mr Mandela's release, perhaps early next year.
In a politically bold move whose timing was widely interpreted as a favour to Margaret Thatcher with a week to go to the Commonwealth summit in Kuala Lumpur, Mr de Klerk said that the prisoners would be released as soon as prison formalities were dealt with.
‘Most South Africans are tired of confrontation and wish to speak to one another about the road of prosperity and justice for all,’ he said in a nationally broadcast statement.
Mr de Klerk telephoned Mrs Thatcher at the Conservative conference in Blackpool to tell her of the decision before it was announced in South Africa.
Five of the eight prisoners due to be released were convicted of terrorism and sentenced for life in the famous Rivonia Trial of 1964.
They are Mr Sisulu, Andrew Mlangeni, Raymond Mhlaba, Ahmed Kathrada and Elias Motsoaledi, all of whom are more than 60 years old.
Also to be released is Wilton Mkwayi, who took over the overall command of the ANC's military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, after the others were jailed but was himself arrested and jailed for life in 1965.
Mr de Klerk also announced the release of Oscar Mpheta, a legendary figure in the black trade union movement who, at 80, is the country's oldest political prisoner.
Mr de Klerk said Mr Mandela was fully aware of the proposed releases, lending substance to the belief that the world's most famous political prisoner has played a decisive negotiating role with the government way beyond the political limitations normally placed on prisoners.
Mr de Klerk, who said Mr Mandela's release was ‘not on the agenda now’, expressed the hope that the release of the prisoners would contribute to a spirit of reconciliation.
Of the eight prisoners, Mr Sisulu is the best known, second only to Mr Mandela in both symbolic and substantial political importance.
His ‘unconditional’ release, by which it is understood he will be able to operate freely in politics, represents a risk for Mr de Klerk, since it is clear Mr Sisulu will have a capacity to generate mass political gatherings, as well as give a revitalised direction to anti-apartheid politics.
Explosives found on Hampstead Heath
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
A LARGE QUANTITY of explosives and what detectives described as ‘terrorist paraphernalia’ was discovered yesterday in two bags dumped on Hampstead Heath, one of London's most popular parks.
Anti-Terrorist Squad detectives from Scotland Yard began an investigation.
The area was sealed off, sniffer dogs were called in to search for more explosives and the bags taken to the Metropolitan Police forensic science laboratory for examination.
Although there was no confirmation last night, it was being widely assumed that the explosives were Semtex and the discovery part of a pattern of similar finds and explosions in an IRA mainland campaign that has continued for more than a year.
The most recent explosion was the Deal bombing on 22 September in which 10 Royal Marines bandsmen were killed.
Commander George Churchill-Coleman, head of the Anti-Terrorist Squad, last night appealed for the public to be vigilant as a result of ‘this timely reminder’.
He refused to give details of the type, quantity and condition of the explosive or identify the ‘terrorist paraphernalia’, although it is possible this might include timing devices or detonators.
Scotland Yard added that it was a ‘significant find’, which suggests there was a sizeable amount for forensic analysis, but said connections with other incidents was ‘mere speculation’.
It is possible the discovery could be part of Middle Eastern terrorism — two months ago a terrorist was blown up by his own bomb in a London hotel in an incident later linked to the Satanic Verses affair.
The cache was discovered by a workman on the site of an old hospital about 50 yards from Spaniards Road, a main road running across the heath near areas used for car parking by visitors.
Detectives are working on the theory that the bags had been there for some time.
If the IRA is involved, they may have been dumped after the discovery of an IRA bomb factory in Clapham, south London, last December, in which 150lb of Semtex, arms and other equipment were discovered, with a list of 100 potential targets.
Subsequently, 22lb of Semtex was found dumped in water filter beds in Stoke Newington, north London, and then 25lb of Semtex and some firearms were found near Scarborough, North Yorkshire.
Detectives named two men sought in connection with Clapham as Patrick Sheehy and John Conaghty, who are believed to have been the core of a cell of about five or six.
The Conservatives in Blackpool: Lawson speaks from beyond the graveyard
By STEPHEN WARD
NIGEL LAWSON went missing from Blackpool yesterday.
He had wanted to be alone while he wrote tomorrow's vital speech to the Conservative conference.
The only place peaceful enough in the midst of an economic crisis, it seemed, was his early Victorian former vicarage home at Stoney Stanton, in his constituency, two-and-a-half hours' drive away.
This also had the advantage of giving a signal to the money markets.
Staying in Blackpool to ride out the storm might have been unduly bullish, while retreating to London could have prompted undue alarm bells.
But just to be on the safe side Mrs Lawson was stationed in 11 Downing Street, giving her husband a convenient reason to visit the capital if circumstances took a sudden turn for the worse.
It was also suggested that should the Chancellor need to make urgent calls to the International Monetary Fund, his telephone at home was likely to be more secure than calls from a hotel in Blackpool surrounded by journalists.
The image Mr Lawson presented holed up in his home behind a securely locked gate was unfortunate, in view of the speculation over his political future.
The only way to view the Chancellor was by scrambling through the neighbouring graveyard and looking at the house across a row of tombstones.
In the middle of the morning a reporter climbed over the low fence into Mr Lawson's garden and rang his entry phone.
Mr Lawson's disembodied voice told him he was trespassing.
At 1.30pm a portly white-shirted figure looked anxiously through the downstairs front window at the growing assembly of reporters and photographers and disappeared.
An hour later the village bobby was let into the house by Mr Lawson, and shortly afterwards they emerged together for the Chancellor to give the message the world's money markets had been waiting for.
‘I'm working on my speech,’ he said in a tired and slightly world-weary voice.
‘If I pose for a photograph will you all go away and leave me to some peace and quiet?’
‘Can you tell us what you're planning to do about the fall..?’
He went back inside without another word.
The policeman shepherded everybody away and padlocked the churchyard.
‘He's one of my parishioners.
Leave him alone now,’ he said.
Pressure grows for rethink over EMS: Pound's slide raises speculation about UK move towards entering Exchange Rate Mechanism
By PETER TORDAY and MICHAEL PREST
PRESSURE on the Government to reconsider its strong opposition to full membership of the European Monetary System mounted yesterday after the authorities failed to arrest another slide in the pound.
Deepening concern over the Government's monetary policies and a gloomy stock market forecast compounded nervousness in financial markets by sending London share prices into rapid retreat yesterday.
The FT-SE 100 Index closed 28.2 points down at 2,218.8.
The Bank of England stepped into the currency markets three times as the pound continued its slide below 3 marks — once seen as a level which would attract critical support from the Government.
Selling pressure also sent sterling briefly below DM2.95 for the first time since August 1987.
By the London close, the pound was 2 pfennigs weaker at DM2.9537.
Against the dollar it lost 1.9 cents to finish at $1.5585.
So nervous were the markets that the disappearance of Nigel Lawson from the Conservative Party conference in Blackpool obliged the Treasury to issue a statement that he was writing his speech at home.
Sterling lost ground against the dollar after the US central bank, the Federal Reserve, signalled that it was not about to reduce its interest rates.
There had been considerable speculation and concern that it was about to do so.
Yesterday morning shares seemed to recover from Monday's collapse.
They had gained 14.2 points by early afternoon, but the market was thrown sharply into reverse by a forecast from a consultant to the stockbroker Barclays De Zoete Wedd that the market could fall to 2,100-2,200 by the end of the month and to 1,800 next year.
Since its post-crash peak a month ago, share prices have fallen by 8.5 per cent.
Sterling's dramatic weakness in recent days has reawakened speculation in financial markets that the Government will not be able for much longer to resist joining the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the EMS, the system of semi-fixed exchange rates to which most members of the European Community belong.
Margaret Thatcher has personally opposed joining the ERM.
However, the widely-perceived reluctance of the Government to raise base rates again has encouraged expectations in financial markets that it is seeking alternative monetary policies.
Mr Lawson's speech to a City banquet at the Mansion House next week is seen as one occasion on which new policies -possibly even a step towards full EMS membership — could be outlined.
Gavyn Davies, chief UK economist in London for the US investment house Goldman Sachs, said: ‘If they joined the pound would spontaneously recover.’
He added that the market gloom was caused by fears of recession.
But Professor Alan Budd, chief economic adviser to Barclays Bank, said of the Government's predicament: ‘In the short run there is nothing that can be done.
When the markets go against you there is nothing that can stop it until the market adjusts.’
He added that the Government had ‘neither an exchange rate policy nor an interest rate policy’.
Professor Budd's remarks echo a widespread belief in the City that the Government needs to develop a credible monetary strategy.
There is scepticism that a return to controlling the growth of broad money supply would work when many of the economic pressures on Britain are external.
The sense of instability in financial markets increased when Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the US Federal Reserve and one of the world's most powerful central bankers, appeared to criticise the international efforts to stabilise currencies recently agreed by the Group of Seven main industrial nations, which includes Britain.
Mr Greenspan said: ‘Great importance may be given to the short-run stabilisation of domestic financial markets or foreign exchange markets.’
But he added: ‘Such considerations, however, may ultimately be counter-productive if they are allowed to obscure or cause long delays in achievement of price stability (zero inflation).’