

Law Report: Representative defendant cannot claim contribution — Choudhury v Hussain.
Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Slade, Lord Justice Neill and Lord Justice Ralph Gibson), 26 September 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
Order 5, rule 5 of the County Court Rules 1981 (SI No 1687 (L20)) does not give the court jurisdiction to make an order for contribution in favour of a purported representative defendant against a member of the class which he was said to represent.
The Court of Appeal allowed an appeal by the appellant, who was not named as a party to the action, against an order that he was liable to pay £861 with costs.
The plaintiff claimed damages of £2,000 for wrongful dismissal in 1983 from his employment as a community worker at the Islington Asian Centre.
The only defendant named was sued as ‘General Secretary of the Management Committee of the Islington Asian Centre, sued on his own behalf and on behalf of the members of the management committee’.
The centre was an unincorporated association run by its management committee.
In 1986 the plaintiff was awarded damages.
The judge found that six members of the management committee, including the appellant and the defendant, resolved to dismiss the plaintiff.
In 1988 the plaintiff applied for a charging order on the defendant's house in respect of damages, interest and costs.
The defendant applied for an order that the five other members of the management committee, including the appellant, be joined under Order 5, rule 5 as persons responsible to pay damages and costs to the plaintiff.
Each of the six members of the management committee was ordered to pay the sum of £861.
When the appellant received notice of the order, he applied for the order to be set aside on the grounds that he had no notice of the proceedings and had nothing to do with it.
His application was dismissed.
The appellant appealed on grounds, not raised below, that the judge had no power under Order 5, rule 5 to entertain an application by the defendant for enforcement against the appellant of the plaintiff's judgment against the defendant and that any claim by the defendant against the appellant was statute barred.
Alan Bayliss (Chas J Nicholls) for the appellant; Simon Croall (Timmis Desai) for the defendant; the plaintiff was not present or represented.
LORD JUSTICE RALPH GIBSON said that neither the plaintiff nor the defendant applied to the court at any time before judgment for an order under Order 5, rule 5(2) appointing the defendant to represent all or any of the members of the management committee.
From that fact considerable difficulty had arisen.
If either had applied promptly, the appellant would have brought into the action at an earlier stage and the defendant would, in all probability, have been forced to give consideration then to the making of a claim to contribution in respect of his liability, if proved, to the plaintiff.
His Lordship accepted Mr Bayliss's submission that Order 5, rule 5 did not give power to make an order for contribution in favour of a representative defendant against a member of the class which he was named as representing; and that the only power it gave was that of giving leave to a person, in whose favour a judgment or order had been given or made, to enforce the judgment or order against a person not a party to the proceedings who was bound by the judgment or order.
Paragraph 5 of the rule was directed not only at enforcement of a judgment in favour of a claimant who had obtained judgment in his favour but also at preventing, by means of the principle of res judicata, relitigation of the same case by a person who was properly represented by a claimant against whom judgment had been given dismissing the claim, whether that person tried to pursue his claim against a named defendant sued in his own right only, or against a named defendant sued both personally and as a representative of a class, or against a member of that class.
The rule dealt with persons who had ‘the same interest in any proceedings’.
It made no express reference to proceedings between a named representative of a class and a member of that class who might well have sharply different interests, as betweeen themselves, as to the substance of the plaintiff's claim.
Paragraph 5 referred simply to enforcement of a judgment or order against a person who, under the rule, was bound by it.
It did not purport to enlarge the class of persons who might enforce the judgment or order and there was no basis for attributing any such intention or effect.
There was no reason to suppose that in proceedings under Order 5, rule 5, it was intended to enable a named representative defendant to claim against a member of the represented class without complying with the requirements of the county court rules.
Accordingly the county court judge had no power under Order 5, rule 5 to make the order by which, on the defendant's application, the appellant was ordered to pay £861.
As to whether the defendant's claim was barred by section 10 of the Limitation Act 1980, the defendant's right to claim contribution accrued on the date when the plaintiff was given judgment: 6 February 1986.
The defendant did not commence proceedings against the appellant until 7 March 1988.
The claim to contribution, being commenced more than two years after the date of the judgment, was out of time.
The claim was plainly within section 1 of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 and was therefore caught by section 10 of the 1980 Act.
For the reasons above, Order 5, rule 5 provided no alternative basis of claim.
Accordingly if the defendant had commenced proceedings in which the court would have had jurisdiction to order contribution against the appellant, the claim would have been statute barred.
It was not necessary for the court to decide the issues raised on the ground that the judge was wrong to treat the proceedings as properly constituted representative proceedings, although the vital importance of the making of an application under Order 5, rule 5(2) promptly and before judgment was observed.
High Court fight by nuns ‘will decide fate of egg industry’
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
THE FUTURE of the egg industry rests on tomorrow's judicial review in the High Court of the case of 14 Northamptonshire nuns fighting to save 5,000 chickens, egg producers said yesterday.
If the judge rules in favour of the nuns it will call into question the Zoonoses Order 1989, which allows the Ministry of Agriculture to slaughter an infected flock.
One legal source says the ministry could face claims from hundreds of egg producers whose flocks have been slaughtered.
To date, 669,532 laying birds from 59 flocks have been slaughtered.
If this is allowed to continue it means the destruction of the British egg industry, according to United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association, which represents around 80 per cent of producers.
The nuns from the Our Lady of Passion Monastery at Daventry are seeking to block an order to slaughter one of their flocks, which is allegedly infected with Salmonella typhimurium.
The fundamental issue behind the arguments that will be heard is that the nuns are not permitted to see the results of the Ministry of Agriculture tests confirming the presence of infection.
There is no right of appeal within the law.
Under the Testing of Poultry Order 1989, egg producers must test birds who are 18 weeks or older once every two months.
Swabs are taken from up to 60 birds and five dead birds must be sent to a ministry laboratory for testing, at the producer's expense.
If salmonella is found, the producer is informed, a Zoonoses Order is issued banning the sale or movement of eggs from the farm, and ministry officials carry out further tests on the flock and the environment.
If the tests prove positive the flock is slaughtered.
A Disinfection Order is also placed on the premises and further testing carried out to ensure that it is salmonella-free.
Compensation is paid to the producer, a total of £524,008 so far, which works out at about 78p a bird and is far from adequate, according the egg producers' association.
‘For many farmers it spells financial disaster and few of the smaller ones have recovered.
Hundreds have gone out of business,’ Andy Oatley, the association's chairman, said.
All the egg producers wanted was a ‘fair hearing’ and to establish a workable framework for testing flocks and protecting public health.
The nuns claim that their eggs have never been associated with an outbreak of food poisoning, and although salmonella is present in the environment it is not necessarily in the eggs.
Since eggs became the focus for the food poisoning scare, the association has called for the testing of the eggs themselves to establish infection.
The ministry does not do this and no studies have been carried out.
There are more than 2,000 strains of salmonella.
The best known — because of their association with eggs — are Salmonella enteriditis and Salmonella typhimurium, which is alleged to have infected the nun's flock.
Professor James Duguid, former professor of microbiology at Dundee University, said yesterday that if salmonella is found in swabs taken from the hen house or in the chickens, it does not follow that the eggs are infected to a level that can cause food poisoning.
‘It has been assumed that the eggs are contaminated too but the evidence is weak,’ he said.
Viewpoint: Seeking a fair deal on salmonella policy: Richard North, an environmental health adviser, presents the small egg producer's view of slaughtering to beat salmonella
By RICHARD NORTH
SALMONELLA is everywhere — in farms, domestic houses, people, birds, including seagulls and starlings, and in every type of warm-blooded animal.
There is even a type found in snakes.
To seek to eliminate it from the environment is impossible; a fact acknowledged by the Minister for Agriculture and his advisers.
It is also unnecessary.
The organism is a marginal pathogen, not normally transmissible person-to-person.
For illness to occur, salmonellas usually require a growth medium such as prepared food and exposure to warm temperatures for a prolonged period, to allow multiplication to their 100,000 to 100,000,000 cells which constitute an infective dose.
Against that background, the minister seems intent on wiping out salmonella, but only in the egg-laying flocks.
His action has already caused the premature death of 700,000 birds with miserly compensation to owners.
At the current slaughtering rate, the UK egg industry will be wiped out within 10 years.
It is that alarming situation which egg producers wish to address and which the battling nuns have brought into public focus.
Politically aware, Mother Catherine, 82 and mother superior at the Our Lady of the Passion Monastery in Daventry, Northamptonshire, has made the running, fully conscious from the start of her publicity value.
She has offered her plight as an example of what is happening to many small producers.
Far from being used by the producers, it is her insistence that there is no absolute link between salmonella in birds and its presence in eggs that has attracted supporters to her cause.
Running one of the UK's most technically advanced husbandry schemes, Sister Gabriel, her flock manager, who is a graduate biologist, is also adamant about the absence of risk.
And risk there is not.
Ten months after Edwina Currie raised the alarm as a health ministry Under-Secretary of State, researchers have not been idle.
The egg industry, in the form of United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association (Ukepra), has submitted a definitive proof to the Richmond Committee, under the umbrella of the Secretary of State for Health, Kenneth Clarke, saying intact eggs, consumed immediately after breaking, cannot cause food poisoning.
Even in the rare instance that salmonella is found in an egg, a phenomenon known since at least 1913, numbers detected are low; usually fewer than 10 organisms.
And tests on naturally contaminated eggs show multiplication cannot occur in an intact egg, not even in the yolk.
Statistical studies, such as that published recently in the British Medical Journal, show that there is no association between the consumption of lightly boiled eggs and illness.
Yet where egg products exposed to the risk of contamination are involved, such as mayonnaise, the association is extraordinarily strong.
An examination of the ‘Currie 49’ outbreaks shows that, while 53 per cent of their 1,000 egg-associated cases in 1988 were related to the salmonella strain enteriditis, more than 60 per cent involved mayonnaise.
All that shows beyond reasonable doubt that eggs were not responsible for the increase in food poisoning, which has gone up 36 per cent this year, despite an overall 24 per cent drop in egg consumption and the 700,000 birds slaughtered.
Evidence from Sweden, where enteriditis has never been found in a poultry flock, shows food poisoning in humans exactly matches the UK profile and, in percentage terms, is running at a higher rate.
This evidence was available to the chief veterinary officer last December but never given to the Select Committee.
Small wonder, therefore, that egg producers feel they are not getting a fair deal.
They believe that the current slaughter policy is a political expedient designed to allow ministers to show that they are doing something to curb food poisoning.
The measures have little relevance to public health.
The race is now on to show that the Government is wrong before the last bird in the UK is slaughtered.
Even now it might be too late: imports are rushing in to replace the shortfall.
Bank gives 500,000 pounds to sponsor arts fringe
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
A RECORD sponsorship deal of £500,000 for fringe theatre, dance and music companies was announced yesterday.
Barclays Bank is making the grant over a three-year period to encourage independent companies.
Peter Leslie, the bank's deputy chairman, said that fringe theatre should be admired as ‘the product development sector of the theatre industry’.
Under the sponsorship terms, money will be provided for eight new productions a year to be performed for limited seasons at the Royal Court in central London.
Entries are invited from groups representing cabaret, dance, mime and puppet shows.
Community projects, children's theatre and stage productions of ethnic benefit will also be considered.
Applications for Barclays New Stages, as the project is called, must be in by 31 January.
A report examining the structure of arts funding is likely to be laid before Parliament next Wednesday.
The report, by Richard Wilding, former head of the Office of Arts and Libraries, is likely to recommend merging some regional arts organisations.
The regional arts associations want to see more decentralisation, but Richard Luce, Minister for the Arts, said that when Mr Wilding undertook his inquiry at the start of the year he was unhappy about the accountability of some regional arts associations.
Mr Luce was urged yesterday by Mark Fisher, Labour arts spokesman, to reopen the books on next year's arts grant to avoid widespread closures and cuts.
Delivering the Drew lecture on ‘Government and the Arts’ at the Central London Polytechnic, Mr Fisher pointed out that when Mr Luce announced three-year funding for the arts in November 1987, he had said the figure could not be reviewed ‘unless the situation changes substantially in ways that cannot be foreseen today’.
Since the rise in inflation, which had seriously eroded the three-year funding, was unforeseen, Mr Luce should honour that commitment.
To recover ground lost since April 1988 will require a 10 per cent increase, he added.
Protester arrested in clashes at tree vigil
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
ONE MAN was arrested and scuffles broke out yesterday as protesters battled to save a line of beech trees from being felled.
Peace was restored after the demonstrators, police and council leaders at Stroud, Gloucestershire, agreed to let a court decide the fate of the trees.
The scuffles broke out when more than 60 protesters began tearing down a fence while it was being erected by council contractors around the trees on a strip of land at Stafford Park.
Further clashes were averted after Mike Snell, the district council engineer, gave an assurance that the trees would not come down until the issue was resolved in court.
He said the fencing was being put up to deter trespassers.
The protest campaign was sparked by a council decision earlier this year to fell the trees — 10 beech, one scots pine and one yew — to make way for a road improvement scheme said to be needed for a new supermarket.
Protesters rallied against the decision and built treehouses from which to direct operations and protect the trees.
As workmen moved in to put up fencing yesterday, more demonstrators joined a small group of protesters who had been on a 24-hour vigil at the site.
Ron Birch, the protest leader, said they would accept the fence for the time being but would step up their campaign to protect the trees from a surprise attack by council workmen.
Cost of tunnelling raises doubt over Channel rail route
By COLIN BROWN and ROSIE WATERHOUSE
THE ‘HORRENDOUS’ cost of tunnelling in south London has driven Cecil Parkinson, the Secretary of State for Transport, to consider seriously an alternative route for the high-speed rail link to the Channel tunnel.
Mr Parkinson is concerned that the cost over-runs of the tunnel, which rose last month by £1bn to an estimated £7bn, could be repeated in the building of the rail link from Folkestone to London.
The costs of the preferred British Rail route have risen from £1.7bn to between £3.5bn and £4bn partly because of extra tunnelling insisted upon by ministers after protests in south London and Kent.
Mr Parkinson is coming under heavy pressure from competing private consortia to approve an alternative route to a new terminus at Stratford in east London, which they say would be cheaper than the British Rail scheme to Waterloo and King's Cross.
If Mr Parkinson agrees, BR would have to abandon the private Bill it is planning to introduce in Parliament next month, to build the link.
It could cause further delays to the scheme, which has been fiercely opposed in Kent.
It was emphasised yesterday that Mr Parkinson has yet to reach a decision.
But it was confirmed he is concerned that the cost of tunnelling through south London could be ‘horrendous’.
At least two consortia are lobbying Mr Parkinson to accept the Stratford route.
They say it would be cheaper because it would avoid the difficult tunnelling terrain of waterlogged sand and gravel which has prevented the building of Tube lines to much of south London.
One consortium includes the bank Manufacturers Hanover, and Bechtel, both American companies, with the contractors Laing and Mowlem, and Warburg, the merchant bank.
The costs of its route are claimed to be about £2.5bn.
Another group is led by Ove Arup, which was among the original six contenders to build and finance the link in partnership with British Rail.
They claim they dropped out because of the increasing costs and argue their route would only cost about £1.7bn.
But BR sources said that their independent survey showed that one alternative, known as the Talis route, would be more expensive.
They also pointed out that the alternative would not ‘plug into’ the east coast rail lines from King's Cross unless an expensive underground link was built from Stratford into central London.
Newham council, whose east London borough includes Stratford, wants the terminus in Stratford to revive the run-down area.
It has published a feasibility study by consultants to persuade Mr Parkinson to change the route.
But the BR source warned that there would be environmental objections to the alternative route, which would have to cut across other parts of Kent and marshes in Essex.
Two consortia — one led by P & O and the other by Trafalgar House — are still bidding for partnership with BR, which is due to announce its choice by the end of the month.
Rumours have been circulating that both groups and BR say the link is not financially viable without government funds.
Ministers remain anxious that the Government could be brought under pressure to provide public funds, even though the Channel Tunnel Act expressly forbids the Government from providing any finance for the tunnel or the infrastructure needed to serve it.
As recently as two weeks ago sources close to Mr Parkinson ruled out changing the route at this late stage, saying it would revive uncertainty, antagonise people who had escaped the BR route, and cause an unacceptable delay to legislation.
Mr Parkinson will give no hint of his decision in the transport debate at the Conservative party conference in Blackpool today.
HIV cases ‘rising at rate of five per day’
By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor
CASES OF people infected with the Aids virus, HIV, are now increasing at a rate of almost five a day, according to the latest government figures.
But it is publicly acknowledged that these numbers, which represent people who have put themselves forward for testing, are underestimates.
The Department of Health also said the 88 new Aids cases reported last month was the highest increase for some time.
The known number of HIV positive cases was 11,218 at the end of September, 424 more than the cumulative total at the end of the previous quarter.
But it is believed that between 50,000 and 100,000 people in this country, who are free of symptoms are likely to be carrying the virus.
Experience shows that 80 per cent of HIV cases will go on to develop Aids, on average within eight years.
The number of cases of developed Aids is now more than 2,649.
David Mellor, the Health Minister, warned last night that while still small, a ‘reservoir’ of infected heterosexuals was now established.
‘The steadily increasing incidence of new reports of Aids in injecting drug users and in people infected heterosexually has been maintained in the third quarter of this year.
The number of drug users with HIV infection and of people infected heterosexually, continues to grow,’ he said.
‘Although these groups presently account for only 7 per cent of Aids cases in the UK they represent a reservoir from which the spread into the general heterosexual population can occur.
This is a particularly worrying possibility and I urge everyone, homosexuals, heterosexuals and drug abusers to remember the risks and dangers of HIV infection.’
Michael Adler, Professor of Genito-Urinary Medicine at the Middlesex Hospital, London, said the figures illustrated that the problem was not going away.
‘The figures are a movable feast, but they show how important it is for anonymised prevalence testing to get under way so we can get a true picture of infection in the population.’
A selection of the 36 classic sports and competition cars that are expected to fetch several million pounds at a Brooks auction during the London Motorfair
By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor
A selection of the 36 classic sports and competition cars that are expected to fetch several million pounds at a Brooks auction during the London Motorfair at Earl's Court on 26 October.
In the foreground, Mark Beattie, of Brooks, climbs out of a Porsche Carrera.
Alongside are two Austin-Healeys and a replica Frazer Nash 
Prescott questions ‘cosy relationship’ over safety
By ANDY GLINIECKI
THE INDEPENDENCE of the body appointed to oversee Channel tunnel safety was questioned yesterday by John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman.
He has received a leaked internal memo which he said indicates a ‘cosy relationship’ has been established between Safety Authority and Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will own and operate the tunnel.
The memo originates from Eurotunnel.
According to Mr Prescott it indicates that ‘urgent advice’ was sought from Eurotunnel by Robert Bailey, secretary of Safety Authority, a panel of independent experts, on questions of safety raised by the MP.
They concerned the key issue of whether passengers should be separated from their cars on trains using the tunnel.
Mr Prescott said that the Safety Authority ought to have been able to answer the questions without reference to Eurotunnel.
The questions, which Mr Prescott also raised with Cecil Parkinson, the Secretary of State for Transport, and the Health and Safety Executive, centre on the £600m order for rolling stock made earlier this year, although the issue of whether passengers should stay with their cars or be segregated had not been resolved.
Mr Prescott wanted to know why the order had been made before the Safety Authority was satisfied with the non-segregation procedure; whether the design was ‘open ended’ and could be adapted to separate passengers from their cars; and whether, by acting before getting firm permission from the authority, the order had been made entirely at Eurotunnel's own risk.
At the time, Eurotunnel said the contracts had been placed on the assumption passengers would stay with cars, but that the rolling stock could be altered, if required, by the Safety Authority.
Separating passengers would add time to the tunnel journey and some observers believe it could destroy any time advantage over ferries, putting a question mark over Eurotunnel's entire operation.
The memo, dated 23 August, states: ‘Robert would like urgent advice on how best to answer these questions.
He is of the opinion that Mr Prescott has probably given wide broadcast of these questions.’
Mr Prescott said yesterday: ‘For the authority not to have been able to answer these sorts of questions, without going to Eurotunnel at that late stage when rolling stock had already been ordered, is totally unacceptable.’
He added that he would be raising the matter in Parliament when it reconvenes.
The Safety Authority said last night that Mr Bailey was a Department of Transport official, in addition to being secretary to the authority.
He had been acting in his departmental role, gathering information for Mr Parkinson, when he contacted Eurotunnel.
Genetic engineering curbs tightened
By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor
THE SAFETY of genetic engineering is to be controlled more tightly by the Health and Safety Executive under new regulations laid before Parliament yesterday.
About 330 laboratories and industrial plants are involved in genetic manipulation work in the UK.
The new rules place a statutory duty on anyone who wants to alter the genetic structure of living creatures in the laboratory — or to use such organisms after they have been genetically engineered — to notify the executive well in advance so that it can assess independently the safety of the proposed activity.
The executive has been policing the safety of genetic engineering since the mid-1970s, but parts of the system were voluntary agreements rather than legal requirements and some parts have been overtaken by developments in the technology.
Richard Clifton, chief administrator of the executive's medical division, said the voluntary arrangements had worked well, but ‘voluntary arrangements are not enough.
They will not reassure the public’.
Each proposal to carry out genetic manipulation was assessed on a case-by-case basis by an Advisory Committee on Genetic Manipulation, which had representatives of trades unions and employers as well as expert scientists, he explained.
Mr Clifton paid particular tribute to the work of the trades union representatives on the advisory committee.
Because the membership was so widely based, the UK had succeeded in establishing an ‘open, sensible and pragmatic structure for safety regulation’.
The new rules still fall short of the ‘positive consent system’ proposed by the European Commission and agreed by the Council of Ministers last month.
To fulfil the terms of the European Directive, still tighter rules are expected to follow from the ‘green’ Bill the Government is expected to introduce.
Judge cautions jury over rape evidence
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
THE JUDGE hearing the case of the uniformed policeman accused of rape said yesterday it was ‘dangerous’ to convict upon the evidence of the alleged victim alone.
Mr Justice Jowitt told the jury that previously it had been shown in cases of alleged sexual misconduct that women may be tempted to exaggerate or fabricate.
‘I am not saying she has been subject to a temptation to exaggerate, but I merely remind you of those matters which can exist in relation to a woman's evidence.’
He told the jurors they should look for corroboration of the 18-year-old woman's claim that she had been attacked in the officer's marked police car.
The only corroborative evidence, he suggested, was the bruising to her arm and legs, which could have been caused by the exertion of force.
The judge was summing up at the end of the Old Bailey trial of PC Peter Anderson, 41, based at Surbiton police station in Surrey, who is accused of raping the woman on 4 April last year.
He admits having sexual intercourse with her but denies rape, claiming she instigated the act.
The judge said that the officer was not on trial for being a ‘faithless husband, womanising in his motor car or for breaching police regulations’.
Mr Anderson was married and had a mistress at the time of the alleged rape, the jury has been told.
The jurors only had to consider whether the woman had consented or not to the intercourse taking place.
The woman has alleged that after agreeing to give her a lift home from a discotheque, the officer drove her to a deserted allotment, threatened her by pushing his truncheon under her chin and then raped her.
She claimed he then forced his fingers into her, causing pain and threatened to insert his truncheon — only stopping after she begged him not to.
She said she did not report the rape because he had destroyed her faith in the police force.
Earlier, Jean Southworth QC, for Mr Anderson, suggested that the woman had been ‘hoisted by her own petard’.
Miss Southworth said the woman had made up the story to friends and was then forced to go through with it, after complaints were made to the police.
She claimed her client, with both a wife and mistress, ‘was not sex-starved’.
Godfrey Carey, for the prosecution, told the jury that the young woman had ‘only taken a lift from someone in whose hands you could not really expect to be more safe — an officer in uniform’.
That man, who was old enough to be her father, had ‘completely destroyed her trust,’ he said.
Aldington ‘hardened heart’ over fate of Cossacks
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
LORD ALDINGTON told a High Court libel jury yesterday that he and other British Army personnel ‘hardened our hearts’ when obeying orders to repatriate about 40,000 Cossacks at the end of the Second World War.
The former Brigadier Toby Low said that he had known many of the Cossacks would be tried and executed as war criminals by the Soviets.
‘I did not make a fuss about it.
I got on and did my job,’ he said.
The peer, who is suing over allegations that he is a war criminal, described himself as a ‘human being and a good Christian’.
He told Mr Justice Michael Davies and the jury he did not expect the Cossacks to be massacred without trial — the fate of many thousands.
Lord Aldington, who lives at Knoll Farm, Aldington, Ashford, Kent, is claiming libel damages over allegations in a pamphlet that he arranged the repatriation of around 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs, knowing they would be massacred on their return.
Count Nikolai Tolstoy, 53, a historian and author, of Court Close, Southmoore, Abingdon, Berkshire, and Nigel Watts, of The Old Courtyard, Church Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, deny libel.
They claim the pamphlet is true, although they contest Lord Aldington's interpretation of it.
Cross-examined by Richard Rampton QC, for Count Tolstoy, on the eighth day of the libel trial, Lord Aldington told the court that he now considered the interests of the Cossacks had not been given a sufficiently high priority by the British Army and the War Cabinet.
But the Cossacks had been fighting for the Germans and the British Army's main concern in Austria in May 1945 was to comply with the Yalta agreement ordering repatriation so that the Russians would honour a promise to return British prisoners of war.
Mr Watts circulated 10,000 copies of the pamphlet among staff and parents of pupils at Winchester College, to old boys, MPs, Aldington villagers and the Press in March and April 1987 in an attempt to force Lord Aldington's resignation as college warden.
Count Tolstoy provided much of the information.
Lord Aldington, 75 and a former deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, is an ex-chairman of the Sun Alliance Insurance Group.
He has told the jury that he is the victim of a campaign of harassment by Mr Watts, who was annoyed by the company's failure to ‘pay out’ on the death of his brother-in-law.
Law Society warns over wider role for solicitors
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
THE Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, should ensure that judges cannot thwart plans to give solicitors rights of audience in the higher courts in England and Wales by adopting the framework of Scottish proposals, the Law Society urged yesterday.
The White Paper on changes to the Scottish legal profession published yesterday by Malcolm Rifkind, the Secretary of State for Scotland, says that once trained, Scottish solicitors should have unrestricted rights of audience in the higher courts, with the standard of performance achieved in training as the sole test.
Any rule directly or indirectly restricting solicitors' freedom to undertake all the actions necessary for the preparation and presentation of cases will need the approval of both the Secretary of State and the Lord President of the Court of Session.
But in what the Law Society also interpreted yesterday as a clear shift in emphasis from the English proposals, the paper makes it clear that the role of the Lord President would be no different from the one he currently exercises when approving training and professional rules.
Under the English White Paper, rights of audience rules drawn up by the Law Society in conjunction with an advisory committee will be subject to the ‘concurrence’ of four senior judges.
The society fears that the Bar and judges will exert subtle pressure to build in ‘case separation’ requirements.
The Master of the Rolls, Lord Donaldson, one of the four, told barristers recently that the interests of justice might require preparation and presentation of criminal, matrimonial and judicial review cases to be in separate hands.
The suggestion could mean that barristers would retain much of their monopoly over advocacy in the higher courts.
In their response to Green Papers earlier this year, a majority of judges suggested standards of conduct and competence might decline if lawyers who took instructions directly from clients (solicitors) were also allowed to present cases in court.
Fine Italian goblet found in cesspit
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A fifteenth-century gilded goblet (below) made of the finest Venetian glass has been discovered in a medieval cesspit west of the Tower of London, writes David Keys.
Unearthed by archaeologists from the Museum of London, the 10-cm high goblet which is almost intact, probably belonged to an Italian merchant.
The glass is only one millimetre thick, and is pale amethyst in colour.
It is covered with gold leaf into which is etched a pattern of oak and bay leaves — and a medieval North Italian inscription, the surviving words of which suggest that it said: ‘In this little goblet one often acquires happiness’.
The goblet, which has no known exact parallel, was probably made in Murano, an island near Venice.
Correction: ‘Mail’ joins anti-Lawson chorus
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A statement on page two of The Independent yesterday, attributed to Charles Wilson, editor of The Times, saying that the Chancellor of the Exchequer should have let the pound drop lower, was in fact made by Sir David English, editor of the Daily Mail.
We apologise for the error.
Farmer killed
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A murder investigation was launched in Lancashire last night after James Parkinson, a retired farmer aged 82, died after a savage assault at his Staining home, near Blackpool.
Liver donor
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A possible donor liver was found last night which could save the life of Linda Prime, two.
She was at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, for assessment after an organ was located following an appeal.
Police inquiry
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
The Police Complaints Authority is going to investigate three complaints against officers involved in the Hillsborough football disaster which killed 95 people last April.
Dental closure
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A campaign to prevent the closure of Edinburgh's dental school ended in failure when the Universities Funding Council announced its intention to phase out the school's grant from next autumn.
It is expected to close in five years.
Murder charge
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A man aged 30 from Stourbridge, West Midlands, will appear before Worcester magistrates today charged with the murder of Elizabeth Page-Alucard, 41, a drugs counsellor.
Deadline set in Marchioness case
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
Lawyers representing the 51 who died when the Marchioness pleasure boat sank after being in collision with a dredger on the Thames, have given the owners of the vessels until tomorrow evening to agree to pay full compensation -estimated at between £6m and £7m.
If they refuse, the lawyers say they will begin proceedings in the High Court for damages.
Damages for injured nurse
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A former nurse, hurt on duty and unlikely to work again, was awarded £157,500 by Newcastle Crown Court yesterday for a serious back injury.
Deborah Fitzsimmons, 30, was injured at Hexham General Hospital eight years ago.
She and a student nurse were lifting a six-foot patient out of bed.
Mr Justice Brooke ruled that Northumberland health authority should have specified that three staff were necessary.
‘This has got massive implications because back injuries are the most common suffered by nurses,’ Nupe, the union supporting the case, said.
Soviet ‘threat’ to 3bn pounds anti-tank missile projects
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
BRITAIN'S plans for a new generation of anti-tank weapons, involving projects costing more than £3bn, could be thrown into turmoil after the discovery of new armour on Soviet tanks.
Ministry of Defence sources say that two of the Army's three new anti-tank missiles will be ineffective against the frontal armour of new Soviet tanks.
Warsaw Pact tanks have been fitted in recent years with additional armour, designed to explode when hit by an anti-tank missile, so neutralising its effect.
This is called reactive armour.
The Army's new anti-tank weapons are being designed with ‘tandem warheads’; the first explodes reactive armour and the second penetrates the shell of the tank.
Now it has emerged that Soviet tanks are being fitted with two or three layers of the reactive armour, which probably renders the tandem warhead ineffective.
Les Aspin, a member of the US Congress and chairman of the powerful Armed Services Committee, said he had a ‘nasty surprise’ when he saw Soviet tanks fitted with the multi-layer reactive armour during a visit to the Ukraine in August.
In the latest Jane's Defence Weekly, he says this discovery ‘can't be anything but bad news to forces planning to defend against these tanks with current anti-tank weapons’.
The Army is taking delivery of LAW-80, a short range anti-tank weapon costing £400m.
But it cannot penetrate the frontal armour of new Soviet tanks, MoD sources say.
Britain is collaborating with France and West Germany, in a project called Trigat, to develop medium and long range anti-tank missiles.
The cost to Britain is £780m and £1.85bn respectively.
Medium range Trigat has been designed with a tandem warhead and is due to enter service in the mid-1990s.
It will be ineffective against the multi-layer reactive armour, experts say.
Long range Trigat is being designed to make a diving attack on the roof of a tank, where the armour is normally at its weakest.
Explosive reactive armour, which is fitted in box-shaped panels, has been fixed to the turret roof of modern Soviet tanks.
The long range weapon is not due to enter service until the late 1990s and may be delayed while scientists attempt to modify the warhead to defeat the multi-layered Soviet armour.
Further delays could have a serious effects on Army plans to introduce a fleet of gunship anti-tank helicopters, for which the long range Trigat is intended to be the primary weapon.
The MoD may be forced to incur further costs by buying another anti-tank missile as an interim solution until the long range Trigat is ready.
Some officers familiar with the medium range Trigat project are sceptical that it can be modified to defeat the new armour.
They believe Britain should pull out of the project and find another weapon to fill the same role.
Reactive armour has hardly any effect on the solid, armour-piercing rounds fired from tank guns.
The new development may strengthen, therefore, the case of those who back the early replacement of the Army's Chieftain tank fleet.
Mines are also still effective against Soviet armour as it is difficult to fix reactive armour under armoured vehicles.
Russians sold on peaceful cartoons
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
TRAMPY, PC BOOT and Margot the ballet shoe are about to become cartoon heroes of children in the Soviet Union, after the biggest publishing deal between East and West.
Fifty million copies of The Shoe People by James Driscoll have been sold to the Soviet Union as part of a three-year, £16m deal which includes televison rights.
The animated film of the stories will be the first Western cartoon series to appear on Russian television.
Mr Driscoll created the cartoon characters as bedtime stories for his children, Adam and Holly.
After the children grew up, the stories remained in a drawer until three years ago when Mr Driscoll, who owned a mail order business, decided to publish them.
When he had difficulties finding a publisher, he formed Storm Publishing in Stourbridge, West Midlands.
The Shoe People has since been televised in 52 countries and has spawned a multi-million pound empire.
Mr Driscoll hopes to float the company on the Stock Exchange in December.
The £16m contract is the biggest joint publishing link between the East and the West, with the prospects of further millions from merchandising.
But the deal has even greater cultural significance, as The Shoe People has been given the official stamp of approval to become a major influence on millions of Russian children.
Mikhail Polyakov, the First Secretary of the Soviet Embassy in London, said yesterday: ‘We welcome any new trade links between our two countries.
But it is excellent this type of agreement will create the spirit of co-operation at the earliest possible age.’
Mr Polyakov was speaking at the Soviet Embassy School, where Russian schoolchildren had a preview of the books that will be available in the Soviet Union from next month.
Nastya Gorohova, 7, liked the pictures of the people ‘because they are funny.
Margot the ballet shoe is my favourite’.
Natasha Kossov, the children's English teacher, believed The Shoe People would be a big success in the Soviet Union.
‘They are very colourful and amusing characters.
They also have a very good message, they teach children to be kind and honest.
It is very important for our children to see your cartoons, which are a good first message of what Western children watch.’
Mr Driscoll said the Russians liked the television series and books because of their ‘innocence and non-violent message’.
He made the Eastern breakthrough via his Yugoslav publishers, who thought the non-violent message would be well received by Russians.
After showing the books to the leading Moscow publishers Mezhdunarodanaya Kaniga a joint publishing company, Yunona, was formed and a three-year contract signed.
The venture has the full support of the State Committee of the USSR for Publishing, Printing and Book distribution.
Speelman's blunder leads him into trap
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
THE Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals will resume this afternoon at Sadler's Wells after a rest day yesterday.
Karpov and Yusupov, each of whom has used his sole permitted time-out, will be playing their fifth game.
Karpov leads by 2½–1½.
Timman and Speelman, without time-outs, are now up to game number seven.
Speelman lags 3½–2½, needing to win one of the two remaining games to force the match into extra time.
After a blunder in the opening of the sixth game, Speelman may feel lucky to be still in the match.
The first 13 moves were identical to those of the fourth game, then Speelman varied, capturing a black bishop with a knight instead of his pawn.
The next three moves were also known to theory, but Speelman fell into a trap with his 17th move.
IRA may have hidden Semtex
By TERRY KIRBY
THE cache of Semtex explosive and suspected bomb making equipment discovered on Hampstead Heath in London may have been hidden by an IRA cell for a bombing attack, it emerged yesterday, writes Terry Kirby.
As forensic scientists began examining the explosives and ‘terrorist paraphernalia’ found in two holdalls 50 yards from a main road, it was being suggested the bags may have been hidden, rather than dumped, more recently than first thought — possibly within the past weeks.
It is understood the holdalls contained about 80lb of Semtex.
The ‘terrorist paraphernalia’ is believed to include bomb making equipment but not firearms.
The cache could provide valuable clues in the hunt for the IRA cell responsible for the explosion at Deal barracks, Kent, last month, which killed 10 men, and links with explosions at Army barracks at Mill Hill, north London, and Tern Hill, Shropshire.
It is possible the explosives were left over from the Deal attack.
The Semtex can be compared with fragments from those incidents and that found in the bomb factory at Clapham, south London, last December.
Recovered wrappers and other manufacturer's signs can be useful in establishing explosives' movements.
Explosives found in jail shoes
By TERRY KIRBY
EXPLOSIVES smuggled in the soles of training shoes were to be used in an attempted daylight breakout by more than a dozen IRA men in a top security prison, it emerged yesterday.
Balls of Semtex — slightly bigger than Maltesers but powerful enough to blast away doors — were found in the shoe heels, which had been hollowed out and then bonded together again, security sources disclosed.
So far, about 6lb of Semtex, a number of rounds of ammunition and a loaded pistol have been found at Crumlin Road jail, Belfast.
About 4lb of Semtex was discovered rolled up and primed in a prison lavatory.
When the authorities learned of the attempt by the IRA to free key men from east Tyrone and south Derry last Saturday, all 570 inmates of the jail were ordered to remove their socks and shoes.
Security chiefs believe that terrorists on the outside were planning to fire at — and bomb — two rear lookout towers as part of the escape plan.
At the same time, between 12 and 14 IRA men selected to make the escape attempt were apparently preparing to blast an inside gate with some of the smuggled Semtex.
But the plan was foiled after a 750lb bomb — not 500lb as earlier reported -was found in the bucket of a JCB digger on a building site, and four hijacked and unoccupied cars, with keys in the ignition and driving licences behind the sun visors, were found in a street near by.
Most of the 570 prisoners at Crumlin Road are loyalists and republicans who are on remand and awaiting trial.
They are entitled to three visits and three food parcels a week and are allowed their own clothes, with one pair of shoes — usually trainers — supplied by relatives.
Employers to get new powers against unofficial strikes
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
EMPLOYERS ARE to be given new powers to isolate union members who take part in unofficial strikes through selective sackings.
Under proposals outlined in a Green Paper yesterday, unions will have to repudiate unequivocally any wildcat stoppages organised by any of their officials — or risk sequestration.
They must disown the action through writing to all members who could be affected.
Unions could also seek to ‘adopt’ the action by organising a strike ballot.
But unions would be effectively debarred from holding a strike ballot in support of workers already sacked for taking part in unofficial strikes.
This course of action would expose them to the prospect of mounting fines and eventual seizure of assets.
The new measures are aimed at curbing unofficial action, which last year accounted for 40 per cent of the days lost through strikes.
They are likely to be included in a new employment Bill, alongside measures to make all secondary action unlawful and abolish the pre-entry closed shop.
The Government has shied away from forcing unions to discipline members who take part in unofficial action, and has put proposals to curb strikes in essential services on the back burner.
The moves to stem wildcat stoppages, condemned by unions and the Labour Party and the independent Industrial Society — are thought to be the first time ministers have sought to legislate against the individual.
Changes to current restrictions on selective sackings and rehiring form a key plank of planned legislation.
Those sacked for wildcat strikes would lose their right to appeal against unfair dismissal to an industrial tribunal.
Unveiling the Green Paper, Norman Fowler, the Secretary of State for Employment, said unofficial action cost jobs and undermined Britain's international competitiveness.
He cited recent strikes by railway workers, London Underground staff, North Sea oil workers and steel erectors in central London to bolster the case for legislation.
Michael Meacher, Labour's employment spokesman, later branded the proposed measures as ‘another example of uncalled for interference in industrial relations for party political reasons’.
He said: ‘Union bashing is always the first refuge of this government when it wants to distract attention from its mishandling of the economy.
Banning unofficial action will put individual workers entirely at the mercy of unscrupulous employers who will be able to dismiss them selectively on the slightest pretext, without any right of appeal.’
He added that two of the unofficial disputes named by Mr Fowler — North Sea workers and steel erectors — were staged in protest at unsafe working conditions.
Alistair Graham, director of the Industrial Society, said the proposals were ‘misguided and counter-productive’.
‘After 10 years of employment legislation focused on what unions and their members may not do, the Government would do better to spell out the positive rights it believes trade union members are entitled to at the workplace.’
Norman Willis, the TUC general secretary, said the UN-based International Labour Organisation had already condemned the Government's employment laws.
‘Where strikes do occur it is usually because of a serious problem at work.
The important thing is to solve those problems rather than trying to drive grievances underground by a further set of hasty legislation.’
6bn pounds deals ‘valid if illegal’
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
TRANSACTIONS on the money market worth £6bn undertaken by Hammersmith and Fulham Council may have to be honoured, even if ruled unlawful, it was suggested in the High Court yesterday.
John Chadwick, QC, counsel for four of the banks which stand to lose millions of pounds should the deals be ruled void, said enforceability depends on how they might be judged unlawful.
If the court found the west London council had no powers to undertake them whatsoever, then ‘the banks’ private rights' to enforce the deals would go.
However, if it were merely the scale of the transactions that was unlawful or that payments had been made out of the wrong fund, it may be the council could be forced to honour the contracts.
Using the analogy of company law, Mr Chadwick said there were many examples where contracts had been entered into that were ultra vires from the company's point of view but enforceable by third parties.
That was the position of the banks in this case.
He was opening the case for the banks on the sixth day of the application by the district auditor to have the transactions ruled ultra vires— beyond the council's legal powers.
Five banks: Midland; Security Pacific National; Chemical Bank; Mitsubishi Finance International and Barclays have been joined as respondents and Mr Chadwick represents all but Barclays.
He pointed out that when the council was barred from making further payments on the transactions, it had made a profit.
‘The appeals which Anthony Scrivener (counsel for Hammersmith) made to safeguard the interests of the ratepayers are difficult to reconcile with the position actually shown on the accounts.’
The council has not had to raise funds to make those payments and unscrambling the transactions would, he said, lead to ratepayers losing out.
He added that the council, which accepts the transactions were unlawful, was not concerned with the two years of accounts (1987-88 and 1988-89) at issue in the case but was seeking to ensure its future position.
Woman died after taking ‘ecstasy’ at acid house party
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
AN ACID house fan died when she collapsed in a fit and suffered liver failure after taking a single ‘ecstasy’ tablet, an inquest was told yesterday.
Collette Margaret McCarthy, 21, a receptionist, never recovered consciousness and, despite a liver transplant, died on 16 August, 16 days after taking the amphetamine-based hallucinogen, Southwark Coroner's Court in south London was told.
After the hearing, Dr Bernard Portmann, a pathologist from King's College Hospital, where Ms McCarthy was treated, said the case was ‘highly unusual’.
Liver failure was not normally associated with amphetamines, which could induce fits and coma, he said.
The death suggested a possible previously unrecognised side-effect of ecstasy.
He agreed with warnings from Sir Montague Levine, the coroner, that the amount of ecstasy needed to induce an hallucinogenic state was very close to the fatal dose.
During the hearing, Sir Montague said that people trying the drug for the first time were in particular danger.
‘I could say without doubt that this lady would have been alive today if she had not taken drugs at that party.’
Sir Montague returned a verdict of death due to‘non-dependent abuse of drugs’.
Dr Portmann told the court that the post-mortem examination indicated all the signs of intoxication with amphetamines.
Ms McCarthy's liver had small drops of fat in it, normally found in children suffering Reyes syndrome.
She might have had an unknown liver defect or the symptoms were induced by the drug.
Ms McCarthy was out for the evening with a friend, Stacey Gallacher, when they heard that acid house partygoers were meeting on Clapham Common.
They were driven to the party in Peckham at about midnight.
Ms Gallacher, 20, a hairdresser, told the court that there were about 500 people at the party in a warehouse or old school.
‘Some guys approached us and gave us one (tablet) each.’
They did not have to pay the usual £20 a tablet and both took one.
About 3am Ms McCarthy became ill.
‘We were both dancing and then she sort of fell over and went into a fit.
I held on to her and called for help.’
Ms Gallacher said that Ms McCarthy had tried ecstasy once or twice before but had never had a fit.
Apart from the single ecstasy dose, she believed she had drunk only a glass of wine that night.
After the hearing Ms Gallacher said: ‘People who go to acid house parties are getting younger and younger.
If the parties were drug-free they would be fine, but as soon as you go in you get offered drugs.’
Last March, an acid house partygoer in Surrey collapsed and died after taking two ecstasy tablets.
Air crashes lead disaster teams to review tactics
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
(First Edition) The first international conference to discuss openly air disaster contingency plans was told yesterday that the recent spate of major incidents, including the Lockerbie and Kegworth tragedies, has led to a review of emergency tactics.
The police, fire brigades, ambulance workers and rescue services, including the RAF and other military branches, are now working in far closer contact.
Plans cater for both an immediate accident and the long-term care of individuals who survive or are caught up in the disaster — including the rescuers.
More than 250 delegates from 19 countries are at the Cranfield international emergency management conference at Castle Donington, near Loughborough — not far from the scene of the Kegworth crash in January.
The Cranfield Institute of Technology is mainly engaged in post-graduate teaching and research and has a disaster preparedness centre at the Royal Military College of Science.
It is the first time aviation experts and the rescue services have held a joint conference on the importance of working together.
There is also a need for joint detailed pre-planning for disasters.
John Rolfe, conference chairman, said: ‘People within the industry have known for some time there is a need for such a gathering.
This is the largest and most comprehensive of its kind and does address the very real problems people have to cope with in the event of a major disaster.’
The conference was told yesterday that police forces have introduced a new command structure.
Chief Supt Ian Herd, head of territorial operations within the Metropolitan Police, said that, given changes in technology and equipment, there had been a clear need to review policies which involve local emergency services responding to an incident and police co-ordinating operations.
The Government has announced it will appoint a civil emergencies adviser with a small team geared towards encouraging multi-disciplinary planning.
Mr Herd said police forces were using a new command structure with one senior officer, referred to as ‘gold’ overseeing strategy for any big operation.
A second senior ranking officer, codename ‘silver’, would ensure the police response was implemented correctly and co-ordinated.
Finally ‘bronze’ officers would be responsible for post-disaster operations.
The conference also heard detailed evidence yesterday on the more disturbing, but necessary, work of body identification.
The conference heard that out of 732 post-mortem examinations — on victims of the Air India Boeing which crashed into the Atlantic near Cork, Zeebrugge, Piper Alpha, Lockerbie and Kegworth — 80.22 per cent of identifications had been through dentistry records.
The psychological consequences of an air disaster were discussed by Claire Marrison, of the Applied Psychology Unit at Cranfield Institute of Technology.
She said that, contrary to popular opinion, traumas caused by such a disaster were not short-lived.
Estate charges
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
(First Edition) Nine men arrested during a police raid on the Broadwater Farm housing estate in north London were remanded on bail by Haringey magistrates on charges ranging from assault to threatening behaviour and obstruction.
Birds in danger
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
More than a third of Britain's bird species need urgent protection, according to a report by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
It lists more than 40 endangered species — including the golden eagle, bittern, red kite, corncrake, barn owl, nightjar and Dartford warbler.
Tube assault
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
Victoria Carrington, 23, of Northolt, west London, a convent-educated stockbroker who attacked a mother and daughter on an Underground train after they knocked into her newspaper was fined £400 by Knightsbridge magistrates and ordered to pay £600 compensation after being found guilty of assault.
Two jailed for cliff death plot
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
James Palmer, who bungled an attempt to push his neighbour over a cliff in Exmouth, Devon, was jailed yesterday by Bristol Crown Court for 10 years.
James Shaw was given five years for his part in a later plot to kill Stephen Brown by knocking him down with a car.
He was found guilty of conspiracy to murder but not guilty of attempted murder.
Palmer, 43, a painter, had earlier admitted attempted murder.
The jury was told the men were to be paid £1,000 each with £500 expenses by Mr Brown's wife to kill him.
M50 accused ‘seen with lost knife’
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
A NIGHTCLUB bouncer accused of murdering Marie Wilks asked for a cloth to clean his car hours after her disappearance, then asked to keep the cloth, a court was told yesterday.
Irene Jaffray said at Shrewsbury Crown Court that Eddie Browning made the request to her when he arrived at the house she shared with Kerry Evans in Inverurie, Aberdeenshire.
He had travelled there from his home in Cwm-parc, Mid Glamorgan.
The jury was told earlier that after Mr Browning, 36, arrived at the house a thick smudge of blood was seen on his Renault 25.
The prosecution alleges that en route to Scotland, Mr Browning abducted and killed Mrs Wilks, 22, who was pregnant, after he saw her making an emergency phone call on the hard shoulder of the M50.
She was found with a knife wound in her neck.
Clare Evans, 18, of Barry, South Wales, told the jury that Mr Browning took a splinter out of her hand with a butterfly knife on 16 June last year, two days before he is alleged to have killed Mrs Wilks.
She was outside her father's social club at Pentre, South Glamorgan, where Mr Browning worked as a bouncer.
John Griffith Williams QC, for the defence, said: ‘I'm suggesting you saw the knife a week earlier.’
Miss Evans replied: ‘I'm sure it was that date.’
Anthony Palmer QC, for the prosecution, has alleged that Mr Browning told police he had ‘misplaced’ his knife about three weeks before the killing.
Canadian tribes people delivering petition to Canada House, London
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
Innu Indians Simon Michel and Mary-Ann Michel, delivering a petition to Canada House, London, yesterday, protesting at noise and pollution from low-flying Nato aircraft over the Labrador-Quebec peninsula which they say is threatening their survival by killing the animals they hunt.
The tribe is one of the last hunter-gatherer cultures in North America 
Students win abortion case
From ALAN MURDOCH in Dublin
THE SOCIETY for the Protection of Unborn Children yesterday failed in its attempt to bar 14 Irish Republic students' union leaders from giving information on abortion facilities in Britain.
After a two-day hearing in the Dublin High Court, Miss Justice Carroll referred the matter to the European Court of Justice.
The society is appealing against the ruling to the Irish Supreme Court.
In a related case, four Trinity College Dublin student leaders were cleared of contempt after the society sought to have them jailed for alleged breaches of an earlier injunction restricting distribution of literature on abortion services.
Miss Justice Carroll said newspaper reports of the students' activities did not represent prima facie evidence of a breach.
She also refused an application by the society for sequestration of the funds and assets of Trinity Students' Union.
Mary Robinson SC (Senior Counsel), for the students, had said they claimed a right under European law to provide information on services available legally in another EC member state.
She asked the court to refer to the European Court the question of whether Article 59 of the EC Treaty could be taken as meaning that a member state could bar the giving of information in its territory about services in another member state that were illegal in the first country.
She also raised the question of whether such a bar obstructed the freedom to provide services under Articles 59 and 66 of the Treaty and Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, guaranteeing the right to give and receive information.
James O'Reilly SC, for the society, said SPUC would prefer the students not to be jailed.
But he claimed they were well aware they were breaking the law and were prepared to face the consequences.
He argued there were provisions in the Single European Act which ensured that member states could not be obliged to accept abortion services if they did not wish to have them.
Insulin safety reviewed
From ALAN MURDOCH in Dublin
BRITAIN'S official drug safety committee is reviewing warnings to diabetics after deaths of patients taking insulin from human rather than animal sources.
The Committee on the Safety of Medicines wants to see if warnings issued this year are adequate, the Department of Health said last night.
The concern comes after a reported increase in deaths of diabetic patients, most relying on genetically engineered human insulin.
It is thought that form of insulin may not always give vital warnings of low blood sugar, such as hunger or sweating, and that patients may be at increased risk of slipping unawares into a coma.
Confirmation of the official safety review came after a n investigation by Channel Four television into the deaths of patients.
Those switching to human insulin were alerted this year to reduce the dose by 10 per cent, and the need for careful monitoring was emphasised.
The safety review is in consultation with the British Diabetic Association.
The Conservative Conference: Pensioners ‘caught in poverty traps’
By JUDY JONES
THOUSANDS of pensioners have missed out on the prosperity brought about by Margaret Thatcher's administration and remain caught in ‘massive poverty traps’, the conference was told yesterday.
Sid Cordle, of the Yorkshire Conservative Trade Unions, protested that the basic state pension of £46.60 a week for a single person and £69.80 for a couple was totally inadequate.
Despite the spread of private pensions, 75 per cent of pensioners lived on less than £3,500 a year.
He said the Thatcher years would be seen as the time ‘in which existing pensioners missed out on the prosperity afforded to the great majority in this country.
Pensioners have not fared better than other groups and targetting has led to massive poverty traps’.
Mr Cordle was applauded as he demanded the abolition of standing charges for pensioners on gas, electricity and telephone bills as a first step towards helping them.
However, Tony Newton, the Secretary of State for Social Security, defended the Government's record.
Benefits increases for the worst-off pensioners aged over 75, or disabled, had come into effect this week and the earnings rule restricting eligibility for pensions had been abolished.
‘These measures have added nearly another £600m a year to the support we give to those over retirement age.
There could be no more concrete evidence of our commitment to that group.’
Mr Newton made no mention of the future of child benefit, which the Government has frozen for each of the last two years years at £7.25 a week.
But he confirmed that the Government plans to changes the rules covering attendance allowances to increase the number of those terminally ill who can claim it.
At present, patients are prevented from receiving the benefit for the first six months of a terminal illness.
The conference heard an appeal from a wheelchair-bound representative to enable the disabled to run their lives more independently.
Jonathan Hastings-Day, vice-chairman of the Conservative Disability Group, said the disabled should be able to buy the services they need from privately run agencies: ‘I am sick to death of social workers sitting around having case conferences.
We must move away from local authorities’ services.
Schools are being given the chance to run themselves, and hospitals are being given that chance.
‘Why the hell should disabled people not be given the chance to run things themselves?’
The Conservative Conference: MacGregor in plea for teachers not to strike
By JUDY JONES
TEACHERS were urged by John MacGregor, the Secretary of State for Education, yesterday not to disrupt classes with strikes next year in their pay campaign.
The £600m earmarked for their salaries was 55 per cent more than the amount set aside this year, he said.
The teachers' public image had been badly damaged by the ‘posturings of a few’ in the strikes two years ago.
‘It is important for their standing as a profession that such antics by the few are never repeated.
After all, teachers’ pay rose by only 6 per cent after inflation under Labour.
It has risen by 30 per cent in our period of office.’
Mr MacGregor also defended the Government's plans to introduce top-up student loans next autumn.
The move would bring Britain into line with most developed countries.
‘A broader base of funding has to be found if we are to achieve the increased access to higher education we seek.’
The minister disappointed some supporters when he confirmed the Government had abandoned plans for legislation to curb the activities of the National Union of Students.
To include that issue in the forthcoming Student Loans Bill would make the measure hybrid and deny it any prospect of a swift passage through Parliament.
But he remained concerned over the claims of the NUS to speak behalf of individual students on political matters and the ‘no platform’ policies operated by certain local unions that challenged the principle of free speech.
Earlier, Alex Aitken, of the Conservative Collegiate Forum, was loudly applauded when he said it was ‘intolerable’ that taxpayers should have to fund the left-wing propaganda of the NUS.
‘Unless the Government acts to free students from this sort of red fascism, then all the words of the Education Reform Act will have been in vain.’
The Conservative Conference: Howe echoes Heseltine in urging an ‘energetic’ boost for manufacturing
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
SIR GEOFFREY HOWE, the deputy prime minister, yesterday joined Michael Heseltine in urging ‘energetic’ action to bolster manufacturing industry.
In a conference fringe speech which appeared to set out his own personal manifesto, the Leader of the Commons also echoed Mr Heseltine's views on the need to take a more positive attitude to the European Community, and he called for a moderation of the Government's confrontational style.
But the most remarkable section of Sir Geoffrey's address to a meeting organised by the Conservative Bow Group — an influential Tory centre grouping — dealt with the trade deficit.
Michael Heseltine said on Tuesday that Nigel Lawson was wrong to dismiss the deficit as a minor matter — something which he said smacked of ‘socialist naivety’.
Speaking as a minister, Sir Geoffrey was less robust, but his message was similar: although the deficit was ‘not all bad news’, it did ‘identify that part of our economic performance and vitality which most needs to be strengthened’— manufacturing industry.
‘Manufacturing must be seen to matter,’ Sir Geoffrey said.
That did not mean Labour-style intervention, but he added: ‘I do visualise and urge the energetic use of existing agencies and resources, private and public sector alike, to give potentially fruitful initiatives a helping hand.’
His text cited the success of the Welsh Development Agency and Scottish Enterprise, government-backed bodies, in pump-priming inward investment.
Mr Heseltine has long advocated an extension of such agencies to other British regions, and Sir Geoffrey's new-found support could signal Cabinet debate on industrial policy — an issue which has been omitted from this week's conference agenda.
Sir Geoffrey said Britain needed to adopt a less fearful and inhibited approach towards the EC; arguing that sustained economic recovery depended to a significant degree on an ability to shape Community policies.
‘That means that for economic as well as for political reasons, we need to make certain that our power to influence Europe's future is as great as can be,’ he said.
But he added: ‘It is not evident that most of our partners often perceive us in the same constructive light as we see ourselves.’
As for government style, Sir Geoffrey warned that in spite of Margaret Thatcher's revolution there was a pervading temptation for the country to revert to its ‘besetting sin’ of complacency.
Political persuasion was required to keep up the political momentum, and given the changing age profile of the electorate — many of whom had not been adults a decade ago — Sir Geoffrey warned: ‘We've got to choose the style to match the mood of Britain.’
He said the Conservatives had to win a reputation for being ‘a listening party’, showing a willingness, where necessary, ‘to reappraise’.
The party had to show that it was good ‘not just at winning battles, but at winning arguments and friends’.
Sir Geoffrey said that at Labour's Brighton conference last week, hope had been nurtured that the Thatcher generation of voters, ‘like youngsters offered a sickly-smelling cigarette at a party, will experiment as their elders did with the notion that Labour knows best.
‘We must be sure that they are alive to the evidence here, no less than in the East, that socialism does not work.’
The Conservative Conference: Parents to pay for crimes of children
By JOHN PIENAAR
PARENTS who fail to prevent their children committing crimes are to face heavy financial penalties, under legal changes foreshadowed by Douglas Hurd, the Home Secretary, yesterday.
Courts will weigh parents' financial means in imposing fines and compensation, and they will be ordered to attend court hearings, he told the conference.
The measures to enforce ‘parental responsibility’ will be included in a wide-ranging criminal justice White Paper in the next parliamentary session.
Legislation is planned for 1990-91.
‘The family is our first defence against crime,’ the minister said.
‘For too long in this country we have pushed parental responsibility into the sidelines.
‘But it is more important than anything else to bring parental responsibility back to the centre of the stage.’
The law, he said, ‘should reinforce the principle that parents have a responsibility for the actions of their children.’
The means-tests would be accompanied by powers to bind-over parents to prevent their children from offending and to ‘hit them in the pocket if they don't’.
Mr Hurd's response to the debate on law and order, always a difficult test for Conservative Home Secretaries, was markedly well received and ended to a standing ovation.
Calls for the restoration of the death penalty were applauded loudly, but did not dominate the event as in past years.
The warmth of his reception stemmed in part from a pledge, based on recent spending negotiations with Norman Lamont, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, to increase uniformed police manpower by a further 1,100 next year.
Mr Hurd also outlined proposals to establish Home Office teams in areas at risk from the spread of the drugs crack and cocaine.
They would co-ordinate the work of government and council agencies, local businesses, churches and voluntary groups.
Nine would be set up in areas to be announced shortly.
And John Patten, the Home Office Minister of State told reporters later that a further 11 would follow.
On sentencing, the Home Secretary confirmed plans to publish detailed guidelines to courts.
‘Our sentencing system has become muddled, and many of our fellow citizens lack the confidence which they should have in the decisions of our criminal courts.
Too often, people think that the sentence by a court is not proportionate to the crime committed and the sentence actually served is too different from the sentence passed.’
Serious and violent offenders should receive ‘long stays’ in prison, and the parole authorities should ‘make the protection of the public their first and overriding prison concern.’
During the debate, there were repeated calls for tougher sentencing and more resources to buttress law enforcement, tempered with praise for new powers to challenge ‘over lenient’ court decisions.
‘For too long some judges have appeared to be out of touch,’ Edward Hess, of the Conservative Lawyers, said.
But some speakers emphasised the importance of crime prevention, community liaison and education.
Kevin McKenna, from Manchester Wythenshaw, said: ‘No industry has failed as comprehensively as the prison industry.
What we need are new ideas to prevent re-offending.’
The Conservative Conference: Patten sets state role as guardian of environment
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
CHRIS PATTEN, Secretary of State for the Environment, yesterday steered further away from the philosophy of his predecessor, Nicholas Ridley, and emphasised the need for state regulation to protect the countryside.
In a key speech to the Blackpool conference, Mr Patten announced the immediate withdrawal of proposals to relax planning controls over rural land use.
Conservationists had protested that Mr Ridley's plans for broadening economic activity on farmland could lead to a rash of theme parks, shopping developments and housing estates.
The Secretary of State paved the way for the greening of all Whitehall departments through a White Paper to be published next year and set a target on the recycling of household waste.
The aim should be to re-cycle half of the 18 million tonnes of domestic rubbish produced in Britain each year within the next 10 years.
‘It's for government to regulate on behalf of the community, to set the standards and environmental goals,’ Mr Patten said — a statement that would have jarred on his predecessor, and, until recently, on the party faithful.
‘We must harness market forces and the market place to prevent pollution, to change the sort of conduct that degrades the nation's resources, and to find the most efficient and effective ways of delivering environmental quality.’
Planning was a form of regulation to enhance quality of life.
The environment debate showed conference representatives concerned about unsuitable housing development in the countryside, freeing derelict land in the cities, and litter.
One young representative, Colin Mason, a computer systems manager from Streatham, who branded environmental controls as ‘socialism by the back door’, was gently advised by the Secretary of State to read the Tory philospher Edmund Burke.
Mr Mason had criticised Mr Patten's stand against the proposed new town at Foxley Wood, Hampshire.
‘We must still trust the market at the end of the day.
I don't want restrictions; I don't want controls,’ Mr Mason said.
But Mr Patten told him good government should be founded on fact, not fantasy.
‘The greatest of Tories, Edmund Burke, reminded us of our duties as trustees for the nation, as good stewards of its traditions, its values and its riches.
A nation, wrote Burke, is a partnership between the past, the present and the future.
So let there be no doubt.
Just as there is an overwhelming moral argument for prudent management of the economy, so there is an overwhelming ethical argument for prudent management of the environment.’
Filling in more detail on the Environment Protection Bill for the coming session of Parliament, Mr Patten said the public would be given more access than ever before to information about industrial pollution and about how individual firms would be obliged to clean up their operations.
Fines for litter louts will go up from a maximum of £400 to £1,000.
Local authorities will have a duty to keep the streets clean, on pain of being taken to court by members of the public.
The Bill will also place a duty on councils to include re-cycling in their waste disposal plans.
Of the 18 million tonnes of household waste produced annually, only 2.7m tonnes is treated or re-used.
‘We want industry to cut down on its own waste and make better use of other people's.
We should aim to re-cycle half our household waste within 10 years.’
Turning to the White Paper, to be published before the next party conference, he said it would set out the Conservatives' agenda for the rest of this century.
Mr Patten said the Government wanted to tighten agreements already reached towards ending the depletion of stratospheric ozone.
‘We intend to work just as creatively to negotiate a convention on climate change — a framework of action for the nations of the world.
We can then fit into the convention binding agreements on subjects like energy efficiency and forestry, as the science and the political will come into balance.’
The Conservative Conference: Government heeds warnings on poll tax
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
TORY councillors at Blackpool yesterday left the Government in little doubt about the need for the £1.3bn package of concessions to ease the introduction of poll tax.
Shortly before David Hunt, Minister of State for the Environment, announced drastic changes in the ‘safety net’ arrangements to the conference, he was warned once again that poll tax payers in prudent council areas should not have to subsidise the profligate.
‘Let the mud stick where it belongs,’ Peter Skolar, leader of the Conservative group on Labour-controlled Camden Council, said in the local government debate.
‘Don't remove the accountability of Camden to their public, allowing them to blame all their ills on the Government.’
The safety net is supposed to cushion the impact of the change from rates to poll tax next April.
But Mr Hunt told the conference that, instead of phasing the system out over four years, the cross-subsidy from gainers to high-spending areas which lose would be abolished after the first year.
‘So the gainers will then get their gains in full.
The protection for losing authorities (for the following three years) will be paid for by the Exchequer,’ Mr Hunt said, answering a demand for central funding repeated in the debate.
The concession will save contributor areas a total of £685m over the three years.
‘We listened.
You were right, and we have acted,’ the minister said.
Typical of the complaints had been that of David Fletcher, a Wirral councillor, who said his constituents ‘objected most strongly to subsidising the extravagancies of hard-left councils like Liverpool’.
Mr Hunt also announced a three-year transitional relief scheme for individuals — costing £300m next year — to protect ratepayers who face the largest increases in the change.
It takes the total cost of the package for Britain to at least £1.3bn.
‘This new scheme will ensure that, where local authorities spend at a sensible level, no ratepayer or ratepaying couple anywhere in the country will be more than £3 a week worse off when the community charge is introduced,’ he said.
Pensioners and the disabled would be singled out for special treatment, whether they paid rates or not.
Sufferers from Alzheimer's disease were to be exempt from the tax — a concession which opposition parties had fought for.
Clive Condie, of Hazel Grove, warned that the unpopularity of a system, under which his area subsidised high-spending neighbours like Labour Rochdale, could cost the Conservatives marginal seats like Hazel Grove.
‘The community charge is brilliant.
But the arrangements for funding the safety net are not,’ Mr Condie said.
‘It is wrong that residents of prudent spending areas should cross-subsidise the profligate.’
Eric Pickles, leader of Bradford Council, cautioned that it took time to get budgets under control.
In some cases it was going to take years.
‘We need to give decent people a chance to elect a sensible council.’
Murdo Fraser, of Scotland Young Conservatives, urged the party to heed the lesson of Scotland where the poll tax was ‘universally reviled’ and the electoral position of the Tories ‘nothing short of disastrous’.
Though he supported the poll tax, in operation in Scotland since April, party activists had not been equipped to fight for it.
They had not been given details of the legislation and so were unable to counter opposition scaremongering.
The Conservative Conference: Conference quotes
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
‘It's 24-hour drinking here.
Why the hell do you think we come?’— Blackpool woman representative queuing to enter the conference headquarters hotel in the small hours ‘I'm bound to say that when considering some examples of modern architecture I enthusiastically join those who say, ‘God bless the Prince of Wales’.'
-Chris Patten ‘I have spoken four or five times at party conferences and people always laugh at everything I say.
And I'm trying to be serious today.’
— Norman Hazell, Wakefield councillor ‘It is not wise to expect to have immediately all the material possessions you might covet.
It is rewarding to work and save over time to earn them.’
— John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education ‘Every Conservative candidate will be able to say on every voter's doorstep, ‘I can save you money’.
And this means that every council in the country could be a Conservative council.’
— David Hunt, Minister for Local Government Today the conference will debate economic policy and taxation, farming and food, defence, European Community and foreign affairs, transport, and Sunday trading.
The Conservative Conference: Hostile shadows loom over haven from reality
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
KENNETH BAKER'S brave vision of Agincourt is each day looking more like an avant-garde film version of the Little Big Horn.
In perfect keeping with the genre, the encircling savages turned up whooping yesterday in bizarre fancy dress.
Hostile forces seemed to be everywhere in Blackpool, emerging from the sea and even, in the case of Rowan Atkinson, from inside a television set.
As the Tory faithful trumpeted their green credibility in the Winter Gardens, Ann Taylor, the Labour environment spokeswoman, was on Blackpool beach amusing photographers and terrifying holidaymakers by paddling in the shallows in a white laboratory coat and protective wellingtons.
Specimen jar of sea water in hand, she cheerfully highlighted the embarrassing prospect of European Court prosecutions over the pollution of nearby pleasure beaches.
‘We won't let them sit back and talk amongst themselves, as if everything in the garden is rosy,’ she explained earnestly.
‘From now on, up to the election, it is one long campaign.’
An attendant Labour press officer mumbled: ‘We're shameless aren't we?’
He had been seen earlier dodging the massed constabulary around the Winter Gardens, thrusting Labour press releases into the hands of reporters queuing for their body searches and radar scans.
For the first time in memory, the conference press room telephones have been besieged by warlike members of the Shadow Cabinet, volunteering a stream of unsolicited scorn in advance of successive ministerial speeches.
Around the conference centre, the party rocks on with blithe disregard for the economic and political turbulence beyond.
Watching the happy, milling crowd at the conference, one Tory MP muttered: ‘It's a good tribal rite, but it doesn't have much to do with reality.’
Even Sir Geoffrey Howe unwittingly contributed to the general impression, as he addressed the Bow Group from an Opera House stage set for a performance of Cats.
It was, he said, a ‘good time for us as Conservatives to think afresh about the direction of British politics; about where we have come from, what we are doing, and where the future is taking our nation and our party.’
The deputy prime minister seemed oblivious throughout to the vivid backdrop of broken bicycle wheels and overflowing rubbish bins.
At another fringe-meeting, Rowan ‘Blackadder’ Atkinson led a measured onslaught against the Government's proposals for the future of broadcasting.
His own contribution was sober and only occasionally spiced with alternative wit.
There was no attempt to liken any Conservative minister, or downtrodden Chancellor, to Baldrick or anyone else.
But his mere appearance ensured a packed audience, eager for anything approaching intentional humour at their party conference.
In this respect, Kenneth Baker's jocular early reference to Labour's ‘Gould mine’ of political gaffes may conceivably have fallen a little short.
Only the organist in the conference hall seemed to be properly tuned-in, belting out a rendition of Bewitched, bothered and bewildered as the representatives filed in for their annual law and order debate.
Extra penny on stamps to raise £1m for charity
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
CHRISTMAS STAMPS this year will offer people the chance to make a donation to a £1m charity appeal.
Four charity stamps, covering inland destinations and the most popular overseas countries, each have an extra 1p added to their price.
Last Christmas the Post Office handled 1.5bn letters, cards and parcels; this year, from 1p per stamp, it aims to raise up to £1m to help charities carrying out community projects.
The Post Office will absorb a ‘significant portion’ of the administrative and related costs involved, so 90 per cent of the money will go directly to charity.
It is also meeting the costs of the publicity and of the huge printing run of tens of millions of charity stamps.
This year's Christmas stamps, to be issued from 14 November, will feature Ely Cathedral, Cambridgeshire, which is celebrating its 800th anniversary.
They show different sections of the cathedral, including Romanesque arches, the central tower, and a stained glass window featuring a medieval peasant.
One non-charity Christmas stamp will be available, at 15p — the most popular price for Christmas cards — featuring four peasants framed by a row of Gothic arches.
Ordinary stamps will continue to be on sale at the normal price.
The money will be distributed by the Charities Aid Foundation, set up to co-ordinate the raising and distribution of funds to other charities.
Priority will go to emergency and crisis cases.
Pioneering projects breaking fresh ground could receive up to £50,000.
Charities wanting to improve services will receive up to £5,000.
Applicants from charities registered with the Charity Commissioners or those approved for charitable status by the Inland Revenue should send their name and address on a postcard to: Ann Derby, Post Office Charity Stamp Appeal, Charities Aid Foundation, 48 Pembury Road, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 2JD.
Art Market: Record price paid for Islamic casket
By GERALDINE NORMAN
CHRISTIE'S SET an auction record for Islamic metalwork on Tuesday when it sold a silver inlaid brass casket for £242,000.
The estimate had been between £40,000 and £60,000, but competition between the Khalili Galleries of London and an unnamed museum drove the price through the roof.
Elaborately inlaid medieval metalwork from the Middle East is rare enough, but the products of Jazira in Mesopotamia, where this casket was made, are especially rare.
The great metalworking centres of the time were in Mesopotamia, Iran and Egypt.
The best works of Jazira have an edge on the others.
The inlay depicts intricate little scenes, including a group playing backgammon and another group with a tray of drinks.
It covers the sides of the casket densely.
The rarest feature of the casket, however, is the combination lock; it is one of only five known on boxes from Jazira.
The impact of the big price appears to have spilled over into Sotheby's yesterday where a Timurid brass jug inlaid with gold and silver, dating from 1495-96, was bid to £60,500 against an estimate of £8,000 to £12,000.
It was bought by a dealer from Kuwait.
Sotheby's Islamic sale was full of surprises.
The front runner was a 15in Syrian blue and white jar of about 1400, which sold for £137,500 (estimate £30,000-£40,000)— again to Dr David Khalili of the Khalili Galleries.
He bought it on behalf of a private institution in Switzerland.
The decoration of the jar is lifted directly from Chinese porcelains of the fourteenth century which were highly prized in the Middle East at the time.
Iznik pottery of the sixteenth century was again in great demand.
Two prices were far out of line with Sotheby's predictions.
A dish, circa 1560, centred on a turquoise ground panel containing two lions, a deer, a hare and a bird, soared to £82,500 (estimate £5,000-£8,000), selling to a private Swiss collector.
A single rectangular tile, circa 1575, decorated with a pattern of interlocking arabesques secured £28,600 (estimate £6,000-£9,000).
Dealers emerged from the first day's sale of the Blackmer library gasping at the high prices.
The collection is devoted to books on Greece, Turkey, Egypt and the Levant; there are further sales today and tomorrow.
The top price was £66,000 (estimate £15,000-£20,000) for an exquisitely illustrated account of a journey in Greece and Turkey, by Louis Dupre, published in 1825.
Dupre was a pupil of David, the towering genius of French neoclassical painting, and the views and costume studies echo his clarity of line and ornamental composition.
Entitled Voyage a Athenes et a Constantinople, it includes 40 finely hand coloured lithographed plates.
Self-defence murder case is dropped
By GERALDINE NORMAN
A MURDER charge against a man who stabbed a burglar was dropped yesterday.
The Crown Prosecution Service announced at Tower Bridge Magistrates' Court that it was not continuing with a case against John Graham, 53, a lift engineer.
Mr Graham had said he stabbed Anthony Sweeny in self defence after catching him and another man breaking into a neighbour's flat in Bartram Road, Brockley, south London, on August bank holiday.
He said the two men attacked him with a tyre lever, hammer and a craft knife.
He struck back with a knife which fell in the struggle from his chest of drawers.
After his first court appearance he received dozens of letters of support from the public.
Michael Freeman, for Mr Graham, said: ‘It is plain that the evidence of self defence has guided them.’
Mr Graham was ‘extremely relieved and grateful’ that the case had been dropped, he said.
When Mr Graham first appeared in court reporting restrictions were lifted and Lorna Burns, for the prosecution, described how police arrived at the flats to find a man with a scarf around his face lying unconscious on the first-floor landing with a stab wound in his chest.
On the next landing was Mr Graham, heavily covered in blood.
Asked by police what had happened, Mr Graham said: ‘He attacked me with a hammer and I stabbed him.’
Miss Burns said: ‘He discovered the victim and another apparently burgling room six.’
Christopher Voelcker, stipendiary magistrate, said: ‘Mr Graham's £260 legal aid payment will be remitted to him in full.’
Kenya road death facts refused
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
THE FOREIGN OFFICE is being asked to intervene with the Kenyan government over the death of a British teacher, killed while on his honeymoon when an army ambulance mounted a pavement in Nairobi.
The Kenyan authorities have failed to respond to inquiries by British police, via Interpol, about John Graham Garrod's death, Southwark Coroner's Court in south London, was told yesterday.
Sir Montague Levine, the coroner, said he took a very poor view of their attitude and would seek Foreign Office help to get more information.
He said the only details available, apart from a death certificate, had come from Mr Garrod's family.
‘I view with very much concern the comments I have had to make in this inquest.’
Sir Montague returned an open verdict on Mr Garrod, 35, who was revisiting the country where he had met his wife, Leanne, 30, and spent seven years teaching before returning to England last Christmas.
His family is suing the Kenyan government over his death from a fractured skull after the vehicle veered on to the wrong side of the road on 3 August, hitting the couple from behind.
Mrs Garrod suffered minor injuries.
The inquest heard that the driver ran off after the accident, in which a motorcyclist and a pedestrian were also injured.
Mr Garrod, who had been appointed head of geography at a Chesterfield school, was rushed to hospital by a passing motorist but never regained consciousness.
He was put on a life support machine, but died four days later.
Last-ditch attempts to stop deportation of Kurdish refugees
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
TWO Kurdish refugees will be deported this afternoon to Turkey — where they say they face persecution and torture — unless they win a last-minute reprieve.
They are among eight Kurds facing imminent deportation who have been moved from Haslar detention centre, near Gosport, to Winchester prison.
They are being kept in cells under close observation because of fears that they may become suicidal or stage a protest.
The Home Office wants to prevent any repetition of last week's incident when two Kurds facing deportation from Heathrow Airport set fire to their room at the nearby Harmondsworth Detention Centre.
One died and the other, Dogam Arslan, remains seriously ill with burns at Stoke Mandeville Hospital.
He has since been granted temporary leave to stay in Britain.
Ten Kurds who had been in detention were released from Haslar yesterday with permission to stay while their applications for political asylum are processed.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees has said Selahattin Osberk, 30, who is due to be put on a flight to Istanbul today, should be granted refugee status and has a well-founded fear of persecution.
Yesterday Amnesty International sent an urgent letter to Timothy Renton, Minister of State at the Home Office, urging him to reconsider Mr Osberk's case.
He is in Blackpool at the Conservative Party Conference and has given no sign of a reprieve.
Michael Hanley, Mr Osberk's solicitor, says his client fears he will be tortured by Turkish police trying to trace his brother, a member of an illegal Kurdish independence organisation who is in hiding.
‘There is medical evidence to show that he is suicidal and clinically depressed,’ he said.
Mr Hanley will go to the High Court this morning in the hope of winning a last-minute judicial review.
He has been refused one review already.
Another Kurd represented by Mr Hanley, Halil Guzel, is due to be deported on another flight to Istanbul this afternoon.
The UN has called on the Home Office to reconsider the ‘humanitarian aspects’ in his case, but has not said he deserves asylum.
About 3,500 Kurds came to Britain last May and June, before a visa requirement was hurried in to stem an influx.
Their applications for asylum are being processed gradually; most are still awaiting a decision.
If they are told the Home Office is ‘minded to refuse’ asylum they can apply for a judicial review.
But that can be granted only to a refugee who is seeking asylum on the ground that the Government might have administered a case improperly and not followed its own rules for processing refugees under a United Nations Convention.
The only way the ground for the deportation decision can be challenged is if the refugee returns to the country from which he fled and launches an appeal there.
The Kurds come mostly from Kahramanmaras in south-eastern Turkey, a poor region where there are communities of Arabs, Kurds and Turks.
They are young and middle-aged men, many with wives and children in Turkey, who say they have suffered repeated imprisonments, police beatings and torture because of their sympathies for communist and Kurdish independence groups.