

Football: ‘Volatile’ Knighton pulls out of United deal
By DEREK HODGSON and FRANK KANE
MANCHESTER UNITED yesterday settled into an uneasy peace after a face-saving operation by which Martin Edwards and Michael Knighton mutually agreed to tear up the contract that would have sold the club to Knighton.
The 37-year-old property developer will in turn be given the chance to buy the 1,000 shares necessary to become a club director.
Officially what Knighton called ‘the vilification’ is over, the two men are friends and colleagues again.
Edwards, Manchester United's chief executive and major shareholder, was at pains to emphasise that Knighton had been in a position to complete the deal, but had not done so ‘in the interests of the club’ and had at no time sought compensation.
The idea that he should become a director came from Edwards.
Laing & Cruickshank, Knighton's stockbrokers, confirmed that funds for the deal had been available.
‘We received enough indications over the past few days that he could have gone through with it,’ a senior spokesman said.
Exactly why he chose not to proceed will be a matter for debate in financial and footballing circles for some time.
One merchant banker, who was privy to the late night talks on Tuesday that ended in yesterday's withdrawal, said: ‘He was very volatile.’
Another reason, according to the same financier, was that ‘at least two of his backers were not acceptable to the United board, while the third was so murky it was not even clear who it was.’
In the course of an acrid, 30-minute press conference, called at midday and starting at 3.42, both men implied that the deal could be resurrected at some time later: ‘I might consider selling my majority shareholding in the future,’ said Edwards, ‘but certainly not this season.’
Knighton added: ‘If Martin does decide to sell some of his shares at some future date, he knows I will be there.’
But he will think long and hard before he again takes on the United board.
The whole affair has cost him more than £650,000 in fees for legal and financial advice, his spokesmen said last night.
As much as £150,000 of that will go in fees and costs to Laing & Cruickshank, who were taken on only last week.
There could be further fall-out from the financial authorities today.
The City Take-over Panel, which has to give its blessing to the ending of the contract, could take a dim view of the decision not to proceed with a formal bid.
Knighton, much paler than when the whole saga began, 56 days ago, never smiled through an acrimonious exchange of questions.
He and the club's solicitor and director, Maurice Watkins, sat either side of Edwards while on the flanks were placed two more lawyers, one representing Knighton's take-over firm, MK Trafford Holdings, and the other, United's merchant bank, Ansbacher.
Was the invitation from the Board to Knighton to become a director unanimous?
Watkins intervened: ‘It was a common agreement.’
Was there a vote?
Edwards: ‘Yes.’
Then it wasn't unanimous?
‘It was a common agreement to be ratified at the next board meeting on 20 October’.
Knighton's fiercest response came when he was asked about reported demands.
He denied angrily that he had ever sought compensation of up to £1m ‘although this has been a very expensive operation’, adding: ‘I could have proceeded had I been totally selfish for there were several options on the table, financially very attractive.’
Edwards, looking strained and weary, stressed: ‘What United need most now is a period of stability’.
No one present would have disputed that but the feeling was that all we had seen was the closing of one chapter of a story in which there is much more to come.
Amer Midani, the wealthy Lebanese businessman who sits on the United board, is still favourite to eventually take over the club, and to install Bobby Charlton as chairman.
Yesterday's denoument will also turn out to be good for Edwards, who will be able to sell his stake for a good deal more than the £10m on offer.
‘Mr Edwards did not get the best price he could have,’ a merchant banker said.
‘Buying Manchester United would be like buying a Van Gogh — you just cannot put a value on it.’
Football: Shilton's point duty shows the route to Italy
From PATRICK BARCLAY in Chorzow
Poland.
.0 England.
.0 A SECOND successive goalless draw saw England through to the World Cup finals here yesterday, when Poland practically burned themselves out in an often scintillating hour and yet fanned an ember in the last minute when Ryszard Tarasiewicz's shot struck Peter Shilton's crossbar.
Thus a suspect defence completed the qualifying programme of six matches without conceding a goal; they must be doing something right, although not for the first time their debt to Shilton was manifest.
As a relieved and slightly rueful Bryan Robson put it: ‘Shilts always complains that his worst night is when he has nothing to do.
We thought we'd give him some work this time.’
Bobby Robson's delight at having guided his team to another major tourament was coupled with gratitude to the 40-year-old goalkeeper.
‘He was incredible.
The Poles picked an attacking side and had us under siege for a while but Shilton made vital saves at vital times.’
Sweden could still claim top place in Group Four, which would diminish England's hopes of being seeded in Italy next summer, but the Swedes must win here in a fortnight and on yesterday's evidence that could be difficult.
Poland did more than enough to win in every respect except finishing and must have regretted Dariusz Dziekanowski's failure to beat Shiton with a header after half an hour.
The veteran contributed his customary reassurance while Terry Butcher made important interventions and Robson and Steve McMahon toiled in midfield.
But it was not an impressive performance; indeed, recalling the swashbuckling victory in Yugoslavia that sent England to the European Championship, one questions whether any genuine progress has been made.
Still, in the art of qualification they have few equals.
How the likes of Poland, now incapable of reaching Italy, must envy the continuity and consistency established under Bobby Robson.
In June, the Poles came to Wembley and, dismally, lost 3-0.
Under new management, and with widespread team changes, they have certainly improved.
Shilton dived to turn behind a deflected drive from Robert Warzycha; and clawed away a devilishly unexpected chip from Piotr Czachowski.
But Shilton should not have been allowed to make his crucial save.
The Poles were building beautifully at times, and one example engineered by Japek Ziober and Janusz Nawrocki ended with Robert Warzycha curling over a perfect cross from Dziekanowski.
The Celtic striker, however, put his header too close to the keeper.
McMahon strove to retaliate but was denied by an advance by Jaroslaw Bako of which the maestro at the other end would have been proud.
Meanwhile, for all the tousled-haired trickery of Ziober and Roman Kosecki on the flanks, and the delicate midfield skills of Tarasiewicz, the Poles had a tendency to waste possession by shooting from ludicrous range.
At the begining of the second half England again had cause to be grateful as a marvellous five-man move graced by Tarasiewicz's stunning volleyed pass ended with Ziober drifting a benign shot over.
Poland needed a goal.
They had set themselves a pace that could not survive 90 minutes and, sure enough, began to sag.
A lapse in concentration invited England to move ahead when Robson was allowed to head a corner into the goalmouth.
Gary Lineker swung a foot, but missed.
England then funnelled back and the match died.
Its brief revival was sparked by Dziekanowski who fed Tarasiewicz and for once a long shot had Shilton in trouble.
It swerved, dipped and smacked the bar.
He said later: ‘I never thought it would go in.’
He could be forgiven that.
Football: Southern comfort as Whelan leads way
From JOE LOVEJOY in Dublin
Republic of Ireland.. 3 Northern Ireland..... 0 THE celebrations were on the point of becoming a full-blown ceilidh when the score was corrected: Spain had not won 2-1 in Budapest, but the Hungarians had equalised eight minutes from time, and a bizarre set of circumstances could yet deny the Republic their first appearance in the World Cup finals.
Logic dictates that the Boys in Green will accompany the Spaniards to Italy next summer.
For them to miss out, they would have to lose their last qualifying tie, in Malta next month, while the Hungarians were winning by a handsome margin in Seville.
Nobody believes that is going to happen, least of all Jack Charlton, who says taking the Irish to the finals will give him as much satisfaction as he drew from winning the competition with England in 1966.
Billy Bingham, Northern Ireland's manager, believes the hurricane style blowing the Republic to the finals could take Italy by storm — if the isobars are favourable.
Bingham acknowledged that his southern neighbours deserved their first appearance in the finals after beating the North for the first time in four attempts.
‘They blitzed us,’ was Bingham's verdict.
George Dunlop, of Linfield, preferred to Allen McKnight, held out for 42 minutes, but when Fort Dunlop came under siege, the defences were found wanting, and the only Irish-based player on the field was at fault for the important first goal.
Dunlop elected to punch a cross from Steve Staunton, but succeeded only in presenting the ball to Ronnie Whelan, who drilled it back past him from 18 yards.
Six minutes later Whelan, outstanding in a mother hen role, created the space for Kevin Sheedy to deliver an incisive cross.
Tony Cascarino dispatched it with a towering header, and that was that.
The North, outplayed in all departments, were never going to score twice against the meanest defence in Group Six (five clean sheets in succession) and a third Republic goal, a 20-yarder from Ray Houghton, served only to improve their useful goal difference.
Houghton and Whelan were the game's dominant influences, running the midfield despite the painful attentions of Norman Whiteside, but it is Cascarino's increasing effectiveness which is giving the Republic most satisfaction.
‘His power and persistence will cause any team problems,’ Bingham said.
‘He reminds me a lot of Billy Hamilton in that he's rangy and big and he gets in there on the end of crosses to do untold damage.’
The punctured Dunlop will attest to that.
Football: Bosman polishes off Wales
From JOE LOVEJOY in Dublin
Wales............ 1 The Netherlands.. 2 EVEN without Ruud Gullit and with Marco van Basten on the bench, The Netherlands looked polished and stylishly effective in brushing aside Wales on their way to the the top of Group Four at Wrexham.
They now need only to beat Finland on 15 November to be sure of their place in Italy.
The European champions got off to the best possible start when the full-back Graeme Rutjes headed them into the lead after 12 minutes.
Wales had opened brightly, but were then caught out when Gavin Maguire gave away a free kick on the right.
Ronald Koeman swung the ball into the area and Rutjes headed firmly past Southall.
Wales did find the net in the 32nd minute through Malcolm Allen, but it counted for nothing because Dean Saunders had fouled Hans van Breukelen.
The Netherlands replaced Rijkaard with Johnny Bosman at half-time and resumed in irresistible fashion.
Koeman was involved everywhere and cracked in a 35-yard shot which cannoned back off the post after 48 minutes.
Three minutes later he brilliantly beat three men and found John Van ‘t Schip, whose low shot was deflected away by the desperate boot of Jeff Hopkins.
The game was put beyond any lingering doubt after 69 minutes when Van ‘t Schip crossed and Bosman headed home.
Mark Bowen's goal two minutes from the end brought some consolation to Wales.
Football: Sexton set for friendlies
From JOE LOVEJOY in Dublin
DAVE SEXTON, the England Under-21 manager, is prepared to search for friendly fixtures if his side fall out of the European Championships at the qualifying stage for the first time in 12 years.
Sexton's team registered an encouraging 3-1 win over Poland, in Jastrzebie Zdruj on Tuesday afternoon, to become joint leaders of Group Two with Sweden.
But the Swedes will qualify if they avoid a heavy defeat in their final game in Poland, on 24 October.
Sexton is eager to keep his side together and has already discussed with Football Association officials the prospects of arranging friendly fixtures.
He said: ‘We have never had to worry about fixing friendly matches before as we have always reached the quarter-final stage at least.
But if Sweden go through this time we will try to arrange extra games.
Most of the lads in the squad are still eligible to play at under-21 level and we don't want it to break up.’
Steve Bull, one of the over-age players, scored twice in England's win, but Sexton was keen to point out it had been a team performance, with Manchester City's David White and Dave Smith, of Coventry, particularly effective.
Brian Talbot, the West Bromwich Albion player-manager, has pulled a muscle in his back and is struggling to be fit in time to face Wolves, at The Hawthorns on Sunday.
Frank van Hattum, the New Zealand international who appeared in the 1982 World Cup finals in Spain, is having a trial with Fourth Division Colchester.
Van Hattum has been capped more than 60 times for his country.
John Sheridan is in line to make his league debut for Nottingham Forest, at Coventry on Saturday.
The £650,000 signing from Leeds could step into the first team if midfielder Steve Hodge fails to recover from the hamstring injury he suffered while training with England last weekend.
Forest's assistant manager, Ron Fenton, said: ‘Hodge looks very doubtful.
Hamstring injuries don't clear up overnight.’
Sheridan, a Republic of Ireland international, has made just one first team appearance — against Third Division Huddersfield in the Littlewoods Cup — since his arrival at the City Ground during the summer.
Dunstable have cancelled the registration of Herbie Smith after the team's recent walk-off during an FA Cup tie at Staines.
After Smith and two other Dunstable players were sent off during the match, the rest of the team left the field.
George Shipley, the former Charlton midfield player who was released by Gillingham at the end of last season, has officially retired at the age of 30 on medical advice, after a series of knee operations.
Doug Bell, Shrewsbury Town's experienced midfield player, has agreed to join fellow Third Division club Birmingham City.
Bell, 30, was a member of the Aberdeen squad who won the European Cup-Winners' Cup in 1983 and is a former Scottish Under-21 international.
The fee will be decided by an independent tribunal.
Football: Three Greeks sent off
From JOE LOVEJOY in Dublin
YUGOSLAVIA, already qualified for the World Cup finals, maintained their unbeaten run in Group Five by beating Norway 1-0 last night, despite having only 10 men from the 13th minute.
It was a night of sendings off — Norway also had a man dismissed, shortly after Faruk Hadzibegic's decisive penalty.
There were four sendings-off, three of them Greek, as Bulgaria beat the visitors 4-0 in a Group One match at Varna.
In Budapest, Spain clinched qualification from Group Six when they drew 2-2 with Hungary.
Julio Salinas and Michel scored for the Spaniards, while both Hungary's goals came from Pinter.
Football: Leighton lapse costs Scots again
From DON LINDSAY in Paris
France.. 3 Scotland.
0 JUSTICE can be a forlorn friend in football, and so was the verdict against Scotland here last night.
Despite constructing one of their most positive displays for some time they lost to a French team who profited from the only genuine opportunities they created.
It now requires the Scots' nerve, and more importantly their defence, to hold firm against Norway at Hampden next month to earn the point still needed to qualify for the World Cup finals in Italy next summer.
The test is sure to prove an onerous one.
Andy Roxburgh's side was radically different from that which lost so decisively against Yugoslavia in Zagreb last month.
Richard Gough returned to fill a central defensive slot alongside Alex McLeish and Maurice Johnston resumed his relationship up front with his Rangers team-mate, Ally McCoist.
Significantly, Roxburgh decided to pay heed to the excellent club form of Gordon Strachan and the Leeds United man displayed an admirable combination of cockiness and sheer resolve on the right side of a midfield which contained the Celtic pair Roy Aitken and Paul McStay, and the former Parkhead workhorse, Murdo Macleod, who is now enjoying a renaissance in West Germany.
All Scotland's impressive technique and tactical shrewdness went for nought in the 26th minute, though, when they lost a depressingly poor goal.
It was particularly disappointing as the Scots had shown signs of a refreshing midfield arrogance which had been missing from many of their recent displays.
Jean-Marc Ferreri and Eric Cantona accumulated a series of short passes on the edge of the Scots' box and the ball broke to Didier Deschamps 10 yards from goal with Gough nowhere in sight.
Again, Jim Leighton's judgement was at fault as the little Nantes midfielder managed to steer a shot between the keeper and his near post.
It was the second time in successive World Cup ties that Leighton had let down his colleagues.
Of all those entitled to feel disappointed, no one less deserved such ill fortune than McStay.
There was real distinction about his elegant yet powerful performance, but further misery descended cruelly upon the Scots 18 minutes into the second half.
With an equaliser the priority, the Scots were caught embarrassingly exposed at the back by Ferreri's sweeping ball and Cantona found scoring a joyous simplicity.
The goal did a lot to temper France's discomfort at the dismissal of the centre-back Eric Di Meco for hacking down Johnston and incurring both the referee's displeasure and a second bookable offence.
Jean-Philippe Durand scored a third for France three minutes from time.
Referee: K Roeghlisberger (Switzerland).
Rugby Union: Seabrook distanced by rugby's divide: Steve Bale reports on growing alarm about the health of the game in the North
By STEVE BALE
WHERE it matters — on the field — the north of England does rather well, successfully managing widely dispersed resources and usually playing winning rugby.
Yet with the new season have come new strains which have opened up a fundamental debate about its future.
Its past is also well remembered.
Next month brings the 10th anniversary of the North's celebrated defeat of Graham Mourie's All Blacks.
Those players -Beaumont, Smith, Cotton, Uttley and the rest — became part of northern folklore and, more importantly, went on to form the hard core of the England team who won the Grand Slam in 1980.
as if in reminder, the new All Blacks have arrived this week, and for the North the contrast between 1979 and 1989 could hardly be greater.
Where there were eight northern Grand Slammers, England's first, 41-strong squad this season had only three — Dewi Morris, Wade Dooley and Bob Kimmins — from northern clubs.
In the more recent squad of 35 the figure was up to four after Sale's David Baldwin had been brought in as cover for Dooley.
Yet these same squads each had no fewer than 10 northern players attached to more southerly clubs.
It is rugby's version of the north-south divide, given further emphasis when last season's England captains Will Carling and Rob Andrew, who play for Harlequins and Wasps respectively, decided they had had enough of travelling and declared for London.
This is not — not yet — a crisis but it is a significant problem, reflected in the depressed state of northern club rugby, where Orrell carry the standard alone in the English First Division.
Thinly spread playing strength and rugby league are imposing pressures different from anything experienced elsewhere in the country.
Twickenham is a long way away and the message from the North is that the Rugby Football Union needs to plough more resources into its missionary work in the area.
Otherwise, in Lancashire and Yorkshire at least, rugby league will take over completely.
‘We've found it increasingly difficult to attract youngsters into the game because of the success of, and publicity for, rugby league here,’ Des Seabrook, coach of Orrell and Lancashire, said.
Seabrook speaks with authority — he also coached the ‘79 North side.
‘The teachers’ strike had a big effect on many of the schools playing union in this part of the country — and rugby league simply stepped in.
We've been telling the Rugby Union for years that we want help; what they're doing now is like shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted.’
The RFU is recruiting youth development officers and, of the 11 so far appointed, eight are in the North.
But as Seabrook points out, rugby league already has the same sort of thing in every town.
‘I'm very concerned and I just wish the Rugby Union were as concerned as I am,’ he said.
Seabrook believes the clubs' hands would be strengthened by a change of selection policy so that only those based in the North play for the North.
‘If the players are to be given some incentive, they really have to get the North going as it was.
In 1979, with the single exception of Roger Uttley, they were lads from northern clubs.
‘It would be hard on people like Peter Winterbottom but they have taken a decision to go to London and there's no room any more for sentiment.’
Seabrook's opinion is not universally shared.
David Robinson, the North coach, accepts the principle but not, for now, the practice.
‘We can't just cut off our nose to spite our face,’ he said.
Andrew also differs: ‘Those of us who play outside the North are just as much northerners.’
But Andrew said this last April, after leading the North to victory over the US, and the sharply increased requirements — club, divisional and national -of a new season have rapidly changed his, and Carling's, mind.
‘It's down to individual players,’ he said.
‘If they're northern-born and bred and happen to live elsewhere, they should still have the opportunity to play for the North.
‘But as much as I'd like to continue playing for the North, I suddenly thought there's more to life than sitting on the M1.
I look as if I've made an about-turn but in terms of simple logistics it's getting itself out of all proportion.’
If others took the same decision it would spare the North selectors some uncomfortable choices.
But for Robinson the answer lies elsewhere.
‘The club scene in the North isn't too healthy because the players are spread so thinly but there are still plenty of good ones about,’ he said.
‘To find this talent and bring it on, above all we need the county championship.
But the Rugby Union has seen fit to let it degenerate and from next season, when it's played at the same time as the divisional championship, it will be virtually kaput.
‘The clubs have that much power over players it's as if they own them, and this isn't good for the game in the North.
If the county championship was still there as it used to be, then I could pick only northern-based players and in two or three years I'd have a very strong side.’
Robinson, who was England B coach with Alan Davies until both were dumped in the summer, reluctantly accepts he is fighting a lost cause: ‘It isn't going to happen and the situation is beginning to get worrying.
The Rugby Union is oblivious to us; they mean well but they just don't realise what's going on up here.’
Rugby Union: Cardiff first in firing line
By STEVE BALE
IT IS small consolation to Cardiff that they will be spared the full force of the All Blacks on Saturday.
Yesterday's initial tour selection is so strong as to make no difference.
There are 10 of the players who beat Australia in August, all but Mike Brewer having started each of New Zealand's five summer Tests.
Indeed Alex Wyllie, their coach, already expects to reselect his Test team en bloc: ‘There won't be changes as long as those players keep their form.’
The rest of the party will therefore have to produce something exceptional to oust the well-established incumbents.
That in turn threatens the worst for the teams they face, Cardiff being the first to dip their toe in the water.
This is a suitable metaphor after the rain pouring from leaden skies which greeted the All Blacks to training yesterday.
It was just like home, really -and the tourists looked at home too, working with an urgency and precision which would put our domestic equivalents to shame.
Saturday's team reunites five of the Auckland backs who recently cut a swathe through NZ rugby.
Matthew Ridge, a full-back of Anglo-Armenian parentage and astonishing gifts, and centre Craig Innes are among those making their first impressions.
Otherwise Graeme Bachop, Bruce Deans's scrum-half understudy for Canterbury as well as New Zealand, the prop Ron Williams and beanpole lock Ian Jones are the ‘outsiders’ brought in.
The tour's prestige refereeing appointment, the Barbarians game at Twickenham on 25 November, has rightly gone to the world's best, Clive Norling.
The Welshman has also received his annual invitation to take the University match on 12 December.
French Barbarians have included Harlequins' England forwards, Paul Ackford and Peter Winterbottom, and the Springbok stand-off Naas Botha against Fiji in Bordeaux on Sunday week.
Eric Vergniol, an ex-rugby league international, is a provocative choice on the wing in a French Selection against the Fijians in Bergerac on Saturday.
Rugby Union: Young rekindles Waspish spirit
By BARRIE FAIRALL
Wasps.................... 25 Loughborough University.. 17 THE FIRST priority for Wasps this week is to get back to winning ways in the League after their reversal at Harlequins.
Unbeaten Gloucester are their Courage visitors on Saturday and it was Loughborough, previously unbeaten until they met Quins, who stepped out at Sudbury last night.
Wasps can only wish then that this weekend's activities are as fruitful, the students putting on a brave show with two second-half tries from their dashing wing, Andy Parton, but Wasps — fielding only two of this season's first-teamers — winning with something to spare thanks largely to the goal-kicking of Paddy Young.
The referee's first task of a damp evening was to ask Wasps to change their jerseys in order to avoid confusion and they emerged with a far more waspish look about them in black-and-yellow hoops.
Stung by this delay, they drove the students back many a yard at the opening scrum.
This may have embarrassed Loughborough's Richard Wareham, the tight-head who played in the England Under-21 front row when they hammered Romania in Bucharest last May, and the youngsters continued to go backwards at a rate of knots in tight and loose.
Wasps soon moved ahead when twice catching their opponents offside, Young landing penalties from bang in front of the posts.
The best that Loughborough could manage was a penalty in reply from their full-back Chris Dossett after 18 minutes.
Moments later Loughborough lost their flanker John Hastings with a cut around the eye.
Wasps pressed on with another penalty from Young while the students' best hope of winning possession came from their 6ft 9in lock Derwin Jones.
But by the interval they had fallen further behind, Tom Hillier sprinting to the blind side and Ian Armstrong crossing for the try in support.
Sport in Short: Tennis
By BARRIE FAIRALL
JIMMY CONNORS, who beat John McEnroe in a bitter final eight years ago, returns to Wembley next month, having been given a wild card for the tournament which begins on 7 November, when the 37-year-old faces McEnroe again.
ANDRE AGASSI, the second seed, was knocked out of the Hong Kong Open in the first round yesterday by Haiti's Ronald Agenor.
The world No. 5 from the United States claimed jet-lag had made him tired.
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Swimming
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Snooker
By BARRIE FAIRALL
WILLIE THORNE reached the semi-finals of the Continental Airlines London Masters at the Cafe Royal with a 4-3 victory over Steve Davis.
Sport in Short: Rowing
By BARRIE FAIRALL
DENIS OSWALD, of Switzerland, is to take over immediately as president of the International Rowing Federation (FISA) following the death of his compatriot Thomas Keller, who suffered a heart attack last month.
Sport in Short: Rallying
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Olympic Games
By BARRIE FAIRALL
ISL, the international marketing agency which has the International Olympic Committee among its clients, is up for sale.
Members of the West German Dassler family, who own Adidas, the sports equipment company, have decided to sell their 51 percent holding in ISL.
Sport in Short: Judo
By BARRIE FAIRALL
Middleweight (86 kg) Pool B, first round: D White (GB) bt S Freudenberg (WG) koka.
Second round: White bt G Vismara (It) decision.
Third round: White bt Nan Wang (Ch) yuko.
Pool B, final: B Spykers (Neth) bt White decision.
Third places: Lobenstein bt White yuko, Karger bt Freudenberg yuko.
Final: Canu bt Spykers decision.
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Hockey
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Golf
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Cycling
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Cricket
By BARRIE FAIRALL
NOTTS CCC yesterday criticised the county council's refusal to support its ground improvements at Trent Bridge.
Sport in Short: Boxing
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Badminton
Sport Page 39
Sport in : American Football
By BARRIE FAIRALL
HERSCHEL WALKER, the Dallas Cowboys running back, is wanted by the Minnesota Vikings, who are thought to have offered running backs Darrin Nelson and Allen Rice, cornerback Carl Lee., two No. 1 draft picks and a No. 2 draft pick in exchange.
Rugby Union: Stanger earns his wing for Scotland
By BILL LEITH
THE BRIGHT new right-wing talent was acclaimed yesterday.
Not in the conference halls of Blackpool but at Murrayfield after Tony Stanger, the 21-year-old Hawick threequarter, had been included in Scotland's team for the opening international of the season, against Fiji, on 28 October.
Confirming Stanger's inclusion, the only new cap in a team to be captained by David Sole, Bob Munro, the selection chairman, said the player had grasped his opportunity on the summer trip to Japan.
‘Although we were disappointed at losing to Japan the emergence of Tony Stanger plus Ian Corcoran, Cameron Glasgow and Adam Buchanan-Smith emphasises the value of touring,’ Munro said.
Finlay Calder, who has yet to regain full fitness, is replaced by Graham Marshall, a 6ft 3in specialist open-side flanker who also excelled in Japan.
His only previous taste of international rugby was as an interval replacement against the Wallabies last year.
United seek values of a visionary: Ken Jones reflects on a tarnished ideal as Old Trafford struggles for a new sense of stability
By KEN JONES
MANCHESTER UNITED supporters in middle-age and beyond no doubt heaved a great sigh of relief yesterday when something akin to reasonable order was restored at Old Trafford.
Theirs is not an ideal shared by a generation raised on crude manifestations of pop culture, most conspicuously in this case, a brash attempt to seize control of our most internationally famous football club.
The ideal grew out of one man's initiative and people who referred to Sir Matt Busby as a visionary did so without hesitation because, of all the titles bestowed upon him, none appeared to be more appropriate.
He remains synonymous with Manchester United which is more than will ever be said about the principal figures in that disturbing saga of boardroom intrigue which has been occupying our attention this season.
Now this may sound like fatuous bluster but suspicion of businessmen ought to be understandable in an era of commerce made squalid by stock-market muggings on a grand scale.
When the dust settled yesterday Michael Knighton, a thwarted professional footballer who has been elected to the Manchester United board, spoke bitterly of the vilification he claims to have endured since moving in on the club and Martin Edwards, the chief executive.
In my trade this is thought to be par for the course.
The point is that Knighton, for all the ludicrous exhibitionism with which he announced himself to the Stretford End, decided to withdraw, despite evidence that he could indeed finance the original deal.
Not that the incumbent emerges from all this with any credit.
Having agreed to sell his shares to Knighton, thereby relinquishing the control he inherited from his father, Martin Edwards remains, at least temporarily, in the chief executive's chair although his authority will not carry much conviction.
‘The saga is at an end.
It is good news for the club and the fans,’ Edwards said yesterday.
‘I believe Manchester United needs a period of stability.
The last thing we want at the moment is talk of selling.’
Of course there is no reason why the takeover of a football club should arouse greater interest than controversial manoeuvres in any other area of commerical life but this ignores the status Manchester United have acquired so the negotiations were bound to provoke serious misgivings.
Further moves can be expected, if not from without then certainly within and anyone with a feel for football, particuarly as represented by Manchester United's history, will draw some comfort from the possibility that Bobby Charlton will eventually emerge as their figurehead.
Rugby League: Iro offers the only reasons to be cheerful
By PAUL WILSON
Bradford Northern.. 8 New Zealand....... 26 BRADFORD NORTHERN have been making an effort this season, and reasons to be cheerful at Odsal have included cheerleaders, improved results, increased gates, two men in the Great Britain rugby league squad, an Australian at half-back and a Welshman on the wing.
Unfortunately, only the cheerleaders were in evidence last night.
Involved in a Yorkshire Cup semi-final replay this Sunday, Bradford shamelessly fielded a second-string side, risking action from the League authorities and the possible loss of a fixture against Australia next year.
The loyal few who paid full price at the turnstiles deserved better, but the real losers were Sheffield Eagles, who wanted a tour game and would have used the opportunity much more imaginatively.
New Zealand, too, fielded a side below full strength, though that is their privilege, and an uninspired 80 minutes signified little, beyond underlining the value of Kevin Iro to whichever team he happens to be playing in.
Iro's direct running down the wing always looked the tourists' most promising mode of attack, and on the stroke of the interval, he muscled past three defenders to give the Kiwis a 10-4 half-time lead.
Bradford had opened the scoring through Graham Mackay, taking advantage of Morvin Edwards' defensive naivety, but conceded a try and the lead shortly afterwards by losing the ball in their own half and enabling Dean Clark to present Tony Kemp with a simple opportunity.
Iro squandered a couple of chances close to the line at the start of the second half, but held on to Clark's pass to make room for Edwards to score in the 50th minute, Phil Bancroft adding a touchline goal off the post.
The tourists had looked decidedly ordinary at times during the first half, but combined more fluently in the second to run up their most convincing victory to date, albeit a hollow one.
Clark scored a fourth try, Roger Simpson clinging ineffectually to his shirt, though the visitors' impetus was halted when Mark Elia was sent to the sin bin for a high tackle on David Cooper.
Mackay scored a last-minute try for Bradford.
More worrying for the Kiwis, however, was the departure of Adrian Shelford with what looked like a pulled muscle.
Shelford, with Iro, is one of the few players of undoubted world class the tourists presently possess, and his absence would seriously dent New Zealand's Test hopes.
Rugby League: Mackey joins Warrington's first violins
By PAUL WILSON
GREG MACKEY, Warrington's Australian scrum-half who came as a two-month stop-gap but has figured prominently in the club's unbeaten start, has agreed to spend the full season at Wilderspool, writes Paul Wilson.
Mackey, 27, is rebuilding his career after being sacked by Canterbury, his Sydney club, and will make his ninth appearance for Warrington in Saturday's Lancashire Cup final against Oldham.
‘Six weeks ago I thought my whole career might be up, but I love it over here,’ he said.
‘I was aware when I came that I was only Warrington's third choice, after Michael Hagan and Trevor Kissell, so I feel doubly lucky that things have gone so well.’
In addition to orchestrating the defeat of Widnes in Tuesday's semi-final, Mackey was one of the players to receive the kind of attention which prompted Brian Johnson, his coach, to remind referees of their duties.
‘Head tackles are supposed to warrant full dismissal,’ Johnson said.
‘Referees now have no hesitation in sending off players for tripping, but often take a more lenient view of use of the elbow, which causes far more damage.’
Salford, who turned down a Leeds approach for Ian Bragger, yesterday listed Steve Herbert for £20,000, at his own request.
Paul O'Neill, a 21-year-old wing from Leigh Miners, has signed professional at the Willows, while Swinton announced the signing of Vince McCue, a 23-year-old centre from New Zealand.
Rugby League's disciplinary committee will consider a case against Castleford's Australian forward, Ron Gibbs, in Leeds next Thursday after Gibbs was cited by Hull for dangerous tackling, in their Stones Bitter Championship game last month.
The League's board of directors decided in Leeds last night that there was a case to answer.
Motor Racing: Ferrari attack Balestre
By PAUL WILSON
FERRARI yesterday criticised the International Motor Sports Federation (FISA) for not giving Nigel Mansell a fair hearing in the continuing row over sanctions against him following his disqualification at last month's Portuguese Grand Prix.
The Ferrari team were upset by FISA president Jean-Marie Balestre's statement on Tuesday that an appeal against the $50,000 fine imposed on Mansell would go ahead on 18 October, despite their request that it be postponed because the Japanese Grand Prix is on 22 October.
Ferrari spokesman Franco Liistro said: ‘It's the same vice again of the defendant not being given a hearing.
Mansell can't be in Portugal and Japan at the same time,’ he said.
Mansell received the fine and a one-race ban, which FISA applied to the Spanish Grand Prix, after he illegally reversed his Ferrari in the pits and failed to stop at a black disqualification flag, waved three times during the race in Estoril on 24 September.
Liistro would not comment on Balestre's announcement that FISA's World Motor Sport Council had confirmed that Mansell's ban from the Spanish Grand Prix would stand and agreed that the result of the race, won by Senna, would stand.
Ferrari and Mansell have appealed to the International Automobile Federation (FIA), an umbrella organisation which includes FISA, against the race ban.
The Italian team gave evidence to an FIA tribunal in Paris last Thursday.
The FIA tribunal postponed any decision, but Balestre said it had no right to rule on the case until after the Portuguese hearing and should not have heard representation.
‘It's strange for Balestre to criticise a tribunal he created,’ Liistro said.
Balestre is president of FISA and FIA.
Mansell showed his personal well-being yesterday by shattering the lap record on Ferrari's home track at Fiorano as he tested his car for the two remaining world championship races in Japan and Australia, clipping nearly two seconds off the old record.
Bernie Ecclestone, the vice-president of FIA will go to Buenos Aires in March to start talks with Argentinian officials on resuming Formula One events — last held there in 1981.
Golf: Seve on a road that Jack built
From TIM GLOVER at Wentworth
LIKE the Burma Road itself, Seve Ballesteros was showing distinct signs of wear and tear after a long, hot season.
Manipulating a lump of putty from finger to finger, hand to hand, he looked as if he was auditioning for the lead role in The Caine Mutiny.
The air was thick with paranoia as the conversation turned to the perfidious question of appearance money.
Volvo, the European Tour's main benefactor, had accused the leading money winners of disloyalty by not committing themselves to the end-of-season showpiece, the Volvo Masters in Spain.
Despite the attraction of bonuses worth £250,000 and a £400,000 prize fund, it looks as if Masters Ballesteros, Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle and Bernhard Langer will not play in Spain.
Yesterday Ballesteros, who is at Wentworth for the Suntory World Matchplay Championship, read one British newspaper and nearly choked over his cornflakes.
The story is that the Volvo Masters is not on his schedule because it will not pay him to appear.
Perish the thought.
‘It is very sad,’ he said.
‘My reasons have nothing to do with appearance money.
I never negotiated with Volvo and I am in a different position to Nick Faldo and Sandy Lyle.
If I decided to play in it, it would not be because of $50,000 but because I felt better.
I can't remember feeling so tired.’
Appearance money is officially frowned upon by the European Tour but the creases in the foreheads of the officers have not been discerned by the Spaniard.
He is the number one draw in the game, sponsors will almost bankrupt their companies to get him and he can afford to play the market.
‘Appearance money is not a problem,’ he said.
‘You people are the problem.
It is very simple.
When Jack Nicklaus plays in a golf tournament, do you think he is playing under the same conditions as everybody else?
Everybody keeps quiet but under the table he's making money.
This is how it is.
I think Jack is right.’
For Jack read Seve.
Ballesteros's dilemma is not how much money to make but how much to reject.
After Wentworth he will play two tournaments in Japan which means he will also miss the World Cup in his home country.
‘It is not true that I only play this game for money.
I always play for my country when I have a chance,’ Ballesteros, who last played for Spain in the World Cup in 1977, added.
Even so, he admits he has not rejected enough this year.
‘My schedule has been wrong.
After all the strain of the Ryder Cup I feel even more tired.
I haven't taken more than a week off at a time and I need some rest.’
The prospect of equalling Gary Player's record of five victories, and the fact that he has a bye into the second round on Friday, has enticed Ballesteros to make his 14th successive appearance in the World Matchplay.
The field is without the Open champion, the US Open champion and the US PGA champion but rumours that Mark McCormack was thinking of inviting another of his clients, Wayne Shelford, to tackle the Burma Road are exaggerated.
Cricket: Larkins back on the rails
From TIM GLOVER at Wentworth
THE OLD and the new combined successfully in Delhi yesterday as England claimed victory over The Railways.
Wayne Larkins, who last represented his country eight years ago, scored a century then Angus Fraser, playing his first one-day game for England, took four for 21.
It added up to an emphatic win by 137 runs, in the first of the tourists' warm-up matches before Sunday's opening Nehru Cup match against Sri Lanka.
Larkins, who made 103 before retiring to give his team-mates a bat, could not have wished for a better comeback, and with Robin Smith making a stylish 70, England made 263 for four from 50 overs.
Railways were unlikely to threaten that target but, just in case they harboured any ambitions to get close, Fraser removed three of their first four batsmen for 10 runs in the space of 22 deliveries.
He came back later to claim another victim and the hosts were dismissed for 126 with 5.2 overs remaining.
‘It was a pleasing performance after just two days’ practice over here,’Micky Stewart, the England manager, said.
‘It gave everyone a good introduction as to what we can expect — the weather was hot and the pitch typically flat.’
The only disappointment for the tourists was captain Graham Gooch's failure.
He fell for eight, bowled by 22-year-old welfare officer, Srinivasan.
At least Gooch had the consolation of getting out to the best of the home bowlers, and to a man who is coached by former Indian captain, Kapil Dev.
Allan Lamb, the England vice-captain presently on duty in India, has been reappointed captain of Northamptonshire for 1990.
The county have signed up four youngsters for next season, including two local 18-year-olds -all-rounder John Hughes and batsman Russell Warren — on summer contracts.
Terms also have been accepted by Paul Berry, a 21-year-old batsman from Manchester, and Rugby School's prolific runscorer, Richard Montgomerie.
Golf: Daunting deficit faces Douglas
By JOHN BOLTON at Stoke Poges
ALTHOUGH there are only four more tournaments to count towards the final Order of Merit, there will be no end-of-season relaxing for the professionals on the European women's Tour, who tee off in the Laing Charity Classic here today.
A tendon injury in her left hand makes last year's winner Marie-Laure de Lorenzi, from France, an absentee this week, while Alison Nicholas, the 1987 winner, who is at the qualifying school in America, is also missing.
With winnings of £75,134 from 11 tournaments this year, De Lorenzi is almost assured of retaining her Order of Merit title.
She could conceivably be denied by Kitrina Douglas, the winner of this season's St Moritz Classic and European Masters, although even if she were to win each of the last four tournaments, she still might not make up the £30,000 deficit on De Lorenzi.
Elsewhere there are other incentives at stake in the shape of £10,000, £6,500, £3,500 and £1,500 end-of-season bonuses for the top four in the final Order of Merit.
For the leading three there is the additional prize of a place in the Dinah Shore tournament, while the leading two will earn invitations to next year's US Women's Open Championship.
Not surprisingly a strong field has assembled for this last tournament of the year in Britain.
Laura Davies, whose aim at the beginning of the year was to win on both sides of the Atlantic, again attempts to complete the second leg of her target.
Having won the Lady Keystone Open in the United States, Davies, seemingly lacking inspiration, has not finished better than fourth in her seven European outings.
The biggest threat to Davies may well come from Scotland's Jane Connachan, never out of the top seven in her last five tournaments, and Trish Johnson, who finished third in the Italian Open two weeks ago.
Squash: Parke's benchmark of success
From RICHARD EATON in Singapore
SIMON PARKE, 17 on Tuesday and England's youngest ever international, helped his country to their third 3-0 victory, this time over The Netherlands, here yesterday, ensuring a place in the quarter-finals of the world team championships.
Such is Parke's improvement that England felt able to rest their No. 1, Del Harris.
Indeed they may well risk their pale-faced prodigy again in the match against Egypt today — even though this must be won if a vital quarter-final seeding place is to be secured.
Parke, who yesterday beat the Dutch champion, Erik van der Pluym, 3-9, 9-2, 9-3, 9-0 may continue in the team to allow the captain, Bryan Beeson a rest.
Beeson, who has been showing the strain of captaincy, secured his third carefully crafted win by beating the Dutch No. 1 Hans Frieling 9-2, 9-5, 7-9, 9-1.
Jason Nicolle also won in four games, against Raymond Schaffer, but had to fight back from a game and 6-7 down in the second, and his place in the sudden-death phase at the weekend could be under threat from Parke.
Meanwhile the Australians, who hope to deny Pakistan their fifth successive world title, have their worries.
Rodney Martin, who had 12 stitches inserted in his scalp after hitting his head on a street sign, yesterday lost the first two games before recovering to beat the Finnish No. 3 Marko Pulli.
No one can quite be sure whether he will be really ready for the expected showdown with world champion Jansher Khan, which is likely to decide Tuesday's final.
By contrast, Jansher conceded only four points to the capable Swedish champion Anders Wahlstedt.
Yesterday the International Squash Players Association confirmed it had received the $15,000 (£9,400) withheld after Jansher's walkout from the World Open's official dinner.
The ISPA plans to pay him this money later in the week but is also to discipline him.
The most likely punishment is a modest fine and a zero points score on the computer for the World Open.
Boxing: Stretch takes the short cut to victory
From NICK HALLING at the London Arena
IN ONE of the quickest and most decisive finishes to a British title fight, the glamour boy of boxing, Gary Stretch, successfully defended his light middleweight championship with a first-round stoppage of Derek Wormald.
Stretch, making the first defence of a title he won more than a year ago when he out-pointed Gary Cooper, caught Wormald with a perfectly timed right hook to the chin.
Although he managed to beat the count, Wormald was in no position to defend himself and referee Dave Parris stopped the contest with 35 seconds remaining in the opening round.
The result was all the more remarkable as the champion has looked vulnerable in his last two contests.
Although a competent fighter, Stretch was not considered to be one of the game's bigger punchers.
The first clean punch of the fight was landed by Wormald, who caught the champion with a solid right to the jaw.
But Stretch, whose aftershave-commercial good looks and bright personality have helped make him one of British boxing's most marketable commodities, soon recovered, and began to take the fight to the challenger.
The end was as sudden as it was unexpected.
Though not the most powerful punch ever thrown, Stretch's right hook was delivered with perfect timing.
This victory may set Stretch up with a world-title elimination fight with Britain's other leading light middleweight, Chris Pyatt.
Pyatt, fighting on the same bill, was in equally devastating form ending the challenge of Wayne Harris of Guyana in the third round.
Despite conceding large advantages of height and reach, Pyatt went to work on Harris's body with solid shots to the solar plexus.
Pyatt has outstanding hand speed and he demonstrated it to full effect against an opponent who was clearly out of his depth.
Pyatt crashed in combinations at will in the third and a punishing left to the jaw broke the Guyanan's resistance, and referee Richard Davies rightly intervened.
Basketball: Ramsey's wonder of the bar
By DUNCAN HOOPER
KEITH RAMSEY'S match-winning shot for Manchester Giants in the 105-104 victory over Sunderland 76ers on Tuesday night made him the toast of the Stretford Sports Centre, particularly as all of their supporters had been confined to the bar.
Less than four hours before the scheduled start, the local fire brigade refused to issue a safety licence for the arena.
The centre's system for emergency lighting runs from a generator, which would fail in the event of a fire cutting off main electricity, so the fire officer said spectators could not be allowed in.
As Sunderland were already on their journey, the Giants director Jeff Jones, who is also the coach, could not call off the game and decided against moving the match.
When Sunderland arrived their coach, Craig Lynch, agreed to play in the absence of spectators.
Of the arriving crowd of 800, some 150 stayed to watch on closed-circuit TV from the centre's bar.
Giants could not charge admission and after cancelling match sponsorship from a local computer company, they lost some £2,500 on the evening's promotion.
Jones is hoping for an offer of compensation from the local authority and must now look forward with added enthusiasm to 1991, when Giants are scheduled to move into their own purpose-built, multi-sport arena.
Ramsey's winning shot guarantees Giants will qualify for the semi-finals with Southern group leaders Kingston and Bracknell.
The final spot is contested by Sunderland, Leicester and Derby.
Last night's NatWest Trophy Match between Leicester and Derby was abandoned when Leicester's 6ft 10in Scott Paterson smashed the backboard while dunking the ball in the pre-game warm up.
Snooker: The young Thai breaking new ground: JANICE HALE reports on the rapid rise of James Wattana, Asia's snooker ‘natural’
By JANICE HALE
WATTANA Po Ob Orm is a 19-year-old Thai, self-taught and naturally talented, who is the best snooker player Asia has produced.
With his name Anglicised to James Wattana, he will play his first match in front of British television cameras in the fourth round of the Rothmans Grand Prix on Monday.
He started his first season on the professional circuit by winning 21 of his first 24 matches, reaching the final of the Asian Open in his native Bangkok in August, with three wins over top 10 players before losing to Stephen Hendry.
Yesterday Silvino Francisco became his victim for the second time.
In the fourth frame of their third-round match, Wattana was on course for a maximum but missed the 12th black with the rest after potting the first 12 reds and 11 blacks.
This new prodigy, already 36th on the provisional list after only three ranking events, started playing in his mother's snooker club when he was nine; at 13 he made his first century and at 16 his first 147.
On 24 occasions, he has taken 15 reds, 15 blacks and all the colours.
Competitively, snooker has until the last few years been confined to Britain and its old Commonwealth, but there have always been a few tables in the Far East, catering for the needs of expats.
The scene changed dramatically for two reasons.
Export sales of Pot Black immediately proved popular with Thai television viewers, and annual tours in the early Eighties by Steve Davis and the rest of Barry Hearn's merry men presented the game's superstars in the flesh.
Commercial clubs started to open and snooker now has an exceptionally high profile with Wattana a national hero, and Sportsman of the Year after winning the world amateur title in Sydney last November.
Wattana first came in contact with the Davises and Jimmy Whites of the snooker world when he was 16, the year that a Chester club owner, Harry Wau, was on holiday in Bangkok and introduced himself to local snooker officials.
The outcome was a year in Chester for the young Thai, learning to speak English and furthering his snooker education.
He made 165 centuries in 11 months, and reached the final of the British junior championship in which he lost to Barry Pinches, a teenager from Norwich whom he was to defeat in last year's world amateur final.
Leading 10-8 and within a frame of the title, Wattana had the sublime confidence of youth to go for the $100,000 jackpot prize on offer for a 147, choosing reds more suitable for continuing the red-black sequence than those which offered maximum certainty of winning the title-clinching frame.
He reached 96 with red-blacks anyway, more than enough to secure the title.
He is now based in Bradford, birthplace of his manager, Tom Moran, who moved in the Sixties first to Nigeria and then to Thailand as an engineer.
Moran helped another expat, Maurice Kerr, with the fledgling Thailand Association in the early Eighties and now takes Wattana's important career decisions on behalf of a six-man syndicate answerable to the association.
Already Wattana has contracts with Nestle and Thai Airways, but the commerce of the game scarcely impinges on his single-mindedness.
‘So far as I can see, he only thinks about snooker, his girlfriend and pop music.
That's about it,’ Moran said.
‘Some people said that he'd have to change his style when he turned professional, but so far he's stuck to his natural game, and he hasn't done badly with it so far.
I think he can win a ranking event this season.’
Cricket: Boycott walks out of meeting
By DEREK HODGSON
GEOFFREY BOYCOTT'S credibility as a member of Yorkshire's general committee was dented further yesterday when he left the emergency meeting an hour before the end, writes Derek Hodgson.
Sid Fielden, an erstwhile ally and chairman of the county's public relations sub-committee said afterwards: ‘I find his conduct difficult to understand and impossible to explain.’
The meeting had been called, in advance of the general monthly gathering, to investigate Yorkshire's dismal record last season and to discuss a suggestion by the captain, Phil Carrick, that players born outside the county be recruited.
A motion calling for the signing of an overseas professional was rejected unanimously; only three votes were recorded in favour, one presumably Boycott's, of signing players born outside the county.
The cricket chairman, Brian Close, after what was described as a ‘well-briefed’ report invited comments.
Boycott was asked for ‘constructive questions’ but according to the chairman Brian Walsh, ‘he had none or declined to ask any’at which point the former England opener left.
At the end of the four and half hour inquest the cricket sub-committee was asked to re-define the role of captain and chief coach, to consider whether it required a team manger and ordered to report back on 28 November when, presumably, a decision will also be made on the captaincy for next season.
Close said he had found the meeting ‘very instructive’.
He added: ‘A few people had their eyes opened.
A lot of the points discussed had also been considered by the cricket committee and we shall now make a thorough investigation.’
A memorial service for Norman Yardley, the former Yorkshire and England captain who died last week at 74, will be held in Sheffield Cathedral, at noon, on 26 October.
Judo: White's hopes fade out
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
DENSIGN WHITE, Britain's leading men's hope for a medal in the world championships leaves Belgrade without any medal at all.
But he came so close.
He did not look particularly inspired at the start of the day, but survived to make the semi-final where he met his old rival, Ben Spijkers, of the Netherlands.
It was very much a revenge match for White — Spijkers had beaten him for a bronze in the Seoul Olympics, though then White was injured.
Now White was fit — but it made no difference.
In the intense, cagey and close match that followed, White put in more attacks, but perhaps Spijkers' attacks were more effective.
Chris Bowles, the British coach, was circumspect.
‘It sometimes looked as if Densign was attacking under pressure,’ he said.
In the bronze medal fight against Axel Lobenstein, of East Germany, White appeared to start with more aggressive determination, but his attacks were way off target and he was thrown for a yuko (five points) as he got up off the ground.
Jane Morris, the 21-year-old light heavyweight from Kent, also lost in the bronze medal fight, to Weifung Wu, of China.
But no one could question her readiness and her courage.
She took a decision from Stefana Drzewiecka, of Poland, was strangled by the Frenchwoman, Aline Batailler, but then had two good wins in the repechage.
Dennis Stewart, the Olympic light-heavyweight bronze medal-winner, lost his first fight against Jens Geisler and was not given an opportunity for the repechage.
Rallying: Title within Biasion's reach
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
MASSIMO BIASION, of Italy, won the brief third stage of the San Remo Rally yesterday to keep alive his hopes of a second successive world title.
Though the Lancia works driver lies third overall, with a repeat of his 1988 triumph at San Remo seeming beyond him when the event ends today, a place in the top three will secure his world crown two rallies before the end of the season.
Yesterday, he took his new 16-valve Delta Integrale around the bumpy, one-kilometre asphalt circuit at Genoa's Christopher Columbus airport in 1min 26sec, edging out Alessandro Fiorio, his team mate and compatriot, by one second.
Dario Cerrato was third to complete an Italian and Lancia sweep of the top three places.
It was the day's only special stage before the drivers regrouped in San Remo for a midnight start to the fourth and final stage.
Spanish Toyota driver Carlos Sainz, the overall leader since Tuesday, has a margin of one minute over Fiorio and 1 min 41 sec over Biasion.
Drugs in Sport: New test under attack
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
THE International Weightlifting Federation, stung by a wave of positive drug tests, has introduced a controversial testing system which has not been approved by the Olympic movement.
‘We are ready to adopt the steroid profile procedure,’ Tamas Ajan, the general secretary of the IWF, said.
‘It would be a good idea if other sports followed.’
Under the system, created by West Germany's Manfred Donike, the amount of steroids in an athlete's body can be detected not only at the time the test takes place, but several months beforehand, although the actual drug is not identified.
The procedure has not gained formal approval by the International Olympic Committee because it does not give conclusive proof of drug use.
Ajan said that athletes who tested positive under the technique would not be banned, instead a warning would be issued to the national weightlifting association involved.
The decision was bitterly attacked by Arnold Beckett, a member of the IOC medical commission, who said: ‘Warning someone is tantamount to saying ‘you took steroids’.
These tests do not prove that.
All they show is that someone has a depressed steroid profile.
They don't show why.’
Sailing: Soviet skipper found hanged in forest
By STUART ALEXANDER
ALEXEI GRYSCHENKO, the joint skipper of Fazisi, the Soviet entry in the Whitbread Round the World Race, was found dead yesterday, hanged in a forest a mile from Punta del Este, Uruguay, writes Stuart Alexander.
Gryschenko had been missing for more than two days.
Police immediately began an investigation, but foul play was not suspected.
Early reports suggested that a note was found in Gryschenko's pocket, though neither the police nor the Soviet Embassy in Montevideo would comment.
Gryschenko had been known to be unhappy about embarking on the first leg of the race.
Eventually, he decided to continue in the role of co-skipper with the American, Skip Novak.
There were doubts, however, that the Soviet would be on board for the second leg.
Gryschenko, from Kiev, married and with a child less than a year old, joined with all the team working long into the night at Hamble to prepare Fazisi's bare hull for the race.
They had to overcome engineering problems, a last-minute change of keel, and the withdrawal of their sponsor.
Nevertheless, the yacht did well on the first leg, finishing sixth.
No immediate statement was made on whether the death of Gryschenko would alter plans to continue when the race leaves Punta, bound for Fremantle, on 28 October.
Equestrianism: Smith's Picnic in America
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
STEVEN SMITH'S new rapport with the unpredictable Brook Street Picnic will be put to the test later this month, when he begins the tour of shows in Washington, New York and Toronto on the North American Fall Circuit, writes Genevieve Murphy.
Smith had Picnic's full co-operation when winning last week's leading showjumper of the year title at Wembley, making a timely impression on the selectors who have chosen him for the British team.
He will be joined by his brother, Robert, Peter Charles and EmmaJane Mac, who won four contests at Wembley.
‘I bought Picnic because Nick Skelton told me to, he knew I didn't have the biggest cash flow in the world,’ Steven Smith said of a horse whose awkward streak would have been reflected in the price.
Skelton will compete at Stuttgart while Smith is on his American tour with Picnic.
The German show, which offers substantial prize money, has attracted all four members of Britain's European Championship-winning team — Skelton, Joe Turi and the Whitaker brothers — as well as the reserve, David Broome.
Racing: Muddle concept gains ground: JOHN KARTER reports on plans for an all-weather race track coming to fruition
By JOHN KARTER
INSPIRATION may not spring readily from the prosaic-sounding north Midlands town of Southwell but it is the black stuff that dreams are made of in the eyes of Ron and Richard Muddle, the father and son team of racing entrepreneurs extraordinary.
Southwell, as well as Lingfield, has been chosen as a first venue for all-weather racing in this country.
The opening meeting on the new surface at the Nottinghamshire track is on 1 November, two days after Lingfield stage their historic fixture.
Coming second, particularly to a course they once owned, is not a little irksome to the amiable Richard Muddle, a former Flat jockey, who allied his vast international racing experience to his father's business acumen to bring a whole new concept of sound commercial practice to racecourse management in this country.
‘We like to be first in everything,’ Richard says.
‘We designed the all-weather track for Lingfield before we sold it, so they had everything set up for them.
‘But we will have the first National Hunt racing on all-weather anywhere in the world at our first meeting (Lingfield's opening card is all Flat) and we are also staging the first trials at racing pace on the new surface (they take place on Sunday).’
The type of track used at Southwell is an innovative Muddle ‘first’.
Officially described as Fibresand (a composite of silica sand reinforced with rot-proof synthetic fibres), which is used widely for exercise gallops, the Southwell track is actually a mixture of Fibresand, rubber particles and polymer.
The building of a hotel and golf course as well as an extra 30 corporate hospitality boxes at Lingfield was the sort of commercial diversification that the Muddles see as a prerequisite to transforming racecourses into the nice little earners they should be.
‘When we took Lingfield over it was losing £50,000 a year and the year before we sold it to Leisure Investments, it made a profit of £690,000,’ Muddle junior says.
He is justifiably proud of what he and his father achieved at Lingfield, not least the deal they struck with the redoubtable Cyril Stein of Ladbrokes when they bought the course from his company seven years ago.
‘There was a year of negotiation before the deal was closed and we refused their persistent demands to increase our offer of £750,000,’ Muddle says.
A year ago, the Muddles sold Lingfield to its present owners for £7m.
Having cleaned up at Lingfield, the Muddles took a circuitous route to Southwell to follow their dream of building a new super track.
Their hopes of starting from scratch with a leisure complex incorporating a racecourse at Thurrock in Essex were dashed at a public inquiry two years ago.
Then, last year, their planned purchase of Nottingham racecourse fell through.
In the end they fell upon Southwell, and the earth has literally moved for them since they purchased it in March.
They are completely tearing up the whole site, including a new turf course as well as the all-weather, but Muddle'splans extend far beyond the obvious.
‘There's a lot more to all-weather tracks than just racing,’ he says.
That is just as well, because, after the initial curiosity value, Muddle expects the attendance to fall to around 500.
Already he has schemes under way to make Southwell handsomely viable, however.
Besides building an 18-hole golf course, and charging trainers to exercise their horses on the track, he is instigating another new concept in this country by constructing American-style barns so that training can be done at the track as it is in the United States.
These will be sold or leased to trainers with living accommodation.
All this may seem quite enough to be going on with for ordinary mortals, but, amazingly, Muddle informs us ‘Southwell is just a guinea-pig for Telford’.
The Muddles have acquired a site of undeveloped agricultural land west of Birmingham which is well served by motorways and which they believe is perfect for building the ultimate racecourse.
The opening is scheduled for 1 January, 1991, even though they have still to obtain planning permission and Jockey Club approval.
‘We've learnt from our past mistakes in approaching Thurrock and Nottingham and we'll use the experience we gain from Southwell to the full at Telford to build something on a far grander scale,’ Muddle says confidently.
Theirs is the sort of Muddled thinking we could all use.
Racing: Pace on for Nashwan
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
MICHELOZZO, winner of the St Leger by eight lengths, will take on Nashwan in the Champion Stakes at Newmarket a week on Saturday after being supplemented for £10,000 yesterday.
Henry Cecil's colt proved himself a thorough stayer when running on strongly at the end of the 1 ¾ miles of the St Leger on rain-softened ground at Ayr, but the Champion is run over half a mile less.
It will be the first time Michelozzo has tackled 1 ¼ miles, but he did win over a distance of 1 mile and 50 yards at Nottingham in April.
Although his owner, Charles St George, obviously feels his colt has the necessary speed for Newmarket, he and trainer Henry Cecil will no doubt be hoping for a strong pace on 21 October.
That appears a certainty as Sheikh Hamdan Al Maktoum, Nashwan's owner, paid £20,000 yesterday to supplement two horses for the race — Polemos and Wabil, to act as pacemakers for his Derby winner.
The Sheikh's brother Maktoum Al Maktoum has also supplemented his easy Ascot Festival Handicap winner Braashee.
Altogether, there are eight supplements for the £200,000 race, taking the list of acceptors to 35.
Nashwan won the Eclipse Stakes over the Champion Stakes distance at Sandown in July but was disappointing in the Group Two Prix Niel at Longchamp on his latest outing, finishing third to subsequent Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe flop Golden Pheasant.
Sheikh Mohammed's Irish 2,000 Guineas and St James's Palace winner Shaadi is one of 10 horses declared for the Group One Prix de la Foret at Longchamp on Sunday.
The Michael Stoute-trained colt, who will retire to stud at the end of the season, is likely to be joined by Dick Hern's improving colt Gold Seam in the seven-furlong event.