

Sleeve Notes
By GILES SMITH
THE LAST batches of refugees to slip loose over the Hungarian border before regulations tightened up again, included an East German thrash metal band.
They call themselves Rektum, and all signs suggest they enjoyed what you might call a safe passage.
Not surprisingly, in their rush they were disinclined to hump mounds of electrical equipment into the west with them, and would now find themselves without so much as a guitar string to their name, were it not for the warm-hearted generosity of the British thrash metal community.
The band came to rest in Bristol, where they are currently being housed by Shane, owner of the city's thrash record label, Manic Ears.
Last night a benefit concert was set to take place at the Bristol Bierkeller, featuring Extreme Noise Terror, perhaps Britain's foremost thrash band, now legendary for turning out songs which clock in at under one second.
Doctor and The Crippens were also scheduled to appear, as were Sore Throat, and the guest list seemed likely to be something of a hardcore Who's Who?— or at any rate, a hardcore Who's That?
Rektum will spend the money on reassembling their career in a less pressurised climate: up to now their recordings have only been available on bootleg cassettes, while their live performances have taken place exclusively underground.
FORBES, the American business magazine has published its table of top-earning show-business stars, which reveals that, for the second year running, Michael Jackson is the world's highest-paid entertainer.
Last year he took home something in the region of $60 million: this year he will have to find room under the bed for 65.
You would have thought this would be enough to keep him in bread and circus animals for the foreseeable future, but there are rumours that he intends to watch the money grow by buying out Jobete Music, publishers of the Motown catalogue — a snip at $175 million.
Jackson already owns the rights to most of The Beatles' songs and would, if successful, suddenly have shares in former label-mates Stevie Wonder and Diana Ross.
This is rather like growing up and buying your parents.
Meanwhile, Brian Wilson, the former Beach Boy, would be happy enough to get some of his own songs back.
His father sold off some copyrights in 1969 when, as Wilson's lawyers now claim, Brian could not be claimed to be of sound mind.
But then, in 1969, who could?
INTERVIEW /Message misunderstood: Singer and songwriter Joe Jackson, playing in London after a three-year absence, talks to Giles Smith
By GILES SMITH
IF THERE is one thing Joe Jackson particularly dislikes, it is being made a fuss of.
And if there is one thing that West London hotels particularly enjoy, it is making a fuss of Joe Jackson.
Which might go some small way towards explaining why this weekend's concerts are Jackson's first in London for three years.
It was the kind of hotel where detailed civilities attend even the most straightforward arrangements.
While Jackson, who had just returned from filming a television clip, was mildly bemoaning the pressure it had placed on him to be ‘incredibly entertaining for one minute’, his press officer was engaged in ordering him a beer from room service.
Her hand cupped over the receiver, she began to relay the endless continental choices, in a list sounding like a Bavarian family tree.
You noticed a vaguely pained expression enter Jackson's eyes, as if he was wondering why nothing ever proved simple.
But then large portions of Jackson's years as a recording artist have been spent picking back through complications he had no intention of creating.
Take, for instance, his most famous song, ‘Is She Really Going Out With Him?’.
Where Jackson had in mind a playful swipe at other people's romantic success, some of those other people read a venomous resentment.
‘It was as if I had a vast chip on my shoulder.
That was supposed to be a funny song, and I can't understand how people couldn't see it.
You open a song with a line like ‘Pretty women out walking with gorillas down my street’— well, what do you have to do?’
Jackson may well have the spirit of punk to blame for the misunderstanding.
His first two albums (Look Sharp! and I'm The Man, released at either end of 1979) owed their sweaty energy to the push and shove of new wave.
Meanwhile Jackson himself, a gangly six foot four, with a hairline not so much receding as speeding flat out towards his neck, was easily slotted in with the other unlikely pop stars, taking their surly revenge on the conventional way of doing things.
Nevertheless there were features that set Jackson apart even then.
For one thing, very few punks could claim to have passed through the Royal College of Music on a piano scholarship, nor really to have worked on their musical discipline by backing bouzouki players in Greek restaurants, or a plethora of cabaret acts in The Playboy Club, Portsmouth.
In fact, while punk was at its phlegmy height in 1977, Jackson was employed as musical director for Opportunity Knocks winners, Coffee and Cream.
‘I wanted to make a living out of music, any way I could.
I figured it was better than working in a factory.
And cabaret and pop are hardly on different planets.’
In retrospect, it seems unsurprising that subsequent Jackson LPs should have found themselves weaving through a variety of musical styles.
Yet somehow it brought him more explaining to do.
‘I get this image foisted on me — the musical chameleon, changing my style all the time.
People say that after my first two ‘punk’ albums, I did a ‘reggae’album (Beat Crazy, 1980), and then a ‘swing’album (Joe Jackson's Jumpin' Jive, 1981).
When I listen to a piece of music, my first questions have to do with whether it moves me, does it have anything unique to tell me, and questions about what style it's in are way down the list.
Critics seem to have it the other way round, so there's a lot of stuff talked about me using different styles, but there doesn't seem to be much said about whether it works, or whether it's done with taste, or whether the end result is worth having.
I think I've made different kinds of Joe Jackson albums.
There's a thread running through them, but you have to sit down and listen to them before that sinks in.’
Jackson recently sat down and listened through his collected works, prior to making selections for the current live show, and found the thread wearing a little thin in places.
‘Hearing the early stuff can be embarrassing, like discovering love letters you'd written when you were 15.’
So the song ‘Sunday Papers’ has had to go ('I re-wrote the lyrics for the last tour -called it ‘Monday Papers’.
There was nothing I could do for it this time'), but ‘Is She Really Going Out With Him?’, formerly ditched, now finds itself reinstated, although apparently in a setting designed to tease out its reluctant humour once and for all.
If his own reactions to past work are subject to shifts, the response of fans bewilders him even more.
‘I still find it amazing that intelligent-looking people will come up and say they think Look Sharp! is a good record.
But then people do have a thing about first albums.’
Jackson is the first to admit that the numbers of people having a thing about some of the later material have taken a dip.
He had his largest commercial success in 1982 with Night and Day, directly following his emigration to New York.
The album pulled a few Manhattan fads (salsa, jazz, R&B) into snappy pop figures and also revealed a newly flexible capacity in Jackson's voice; previously hard-edged and impatient, it could now sit comfortably on the grand slopes of a ballad like ‘Breaking Us In Two’, a Top 20 hit in America.
Yet subsequent projects revealed an almost unerring instinct for commercial blackspots.
The album of music for the film Mike's Murder was left looking limp after John Barry had been hired, at the last minute, to replace sizeable parts of Jackson's score on the actual soundtrack.
Then there was the three-sided live LP, Big World (1986), during the recording of which the audience was asked to observe silence.
And the accounts department at A&M probably stopped short of throwing a party when Jackson delivered the tapes for 1987's Will Power, an orchestral instrumental album.
('I got called pretentious for that, but you have to watch the rock ‘n’ roll posing on MTV to see people really taking themselves seriously. ')
This year's Blaze of Glory featured in the region of an hour of strong tunes, eclectically arranged, and it is among these that the current live show centres.
‘It's meant to be theatrical, by which I don't mean lasers and fireworks.
There are 11 people in the band, all dressed to project their own characters.
A Canadian reviewer said they looked like people I'd found at a bus-stop, which I was very flattered by.’
It is, perhaps inevitably, some way from the limb-flinging Jackson performances of old, during which, twisting into the microphone, Jackson's body would appear to be making off in several directions at once.
‘The idea then was to go completely beserk for an hour, but there's more to life than that.
Besides, if that's what people want, there will always be young bands with raging hormones ready to supply it.’
These days, Jackson seems to be minding his energies more carefully, prepared, in at least one respect, to make a small fuss of himself.
The opening show was still days away, but he was valiantly avoiding cigarettes in the interests of his voice.
‘I have a passion for Disque Bleu, and it doesn't do the singing much good.
‘Actually, I've thought about giving up,’ he added.
‘The singing, that is.
So I can concentrate on smoking full time.’
Joe Jackson appears at the Hammersmith Odeon tonight and tomorrow.
RECORDS /Around the world in a daze
By JIM WHITE
ERASURE Wild (Mute C Stumm 75) Vince Clarke is a one-man exception to the rule that manufactured, electronic pop lacks imagination.
First with Depeche Mode (who, despite his departure, remain the group exception), then Yazoo and now in Erasure, with Alison Moyet soundalike Andy Bell, his career is littered with fine, soulful tunes.
And this album continues that tradition, presenting a boggling variety of melody and pace, which, only once, on ‘You Surround Me’, resorts to the awful ‘Oxygene'-style bubbling rumble which passes for rhythm in the world where the programmer is king.
There are guitars in here, a piano and even a harpsichord.
Either that, or Vince's computers are even better mimics than we thought.
The lyrics, strangely, seem more mechanical than the tunes.
‘Piano Song’, for instance, includes lines like ‘My vulnerability rushes up to me’ and ‘The deeper I delve into the conciousness of me and you’, which sound as though they have been selected from a random computer-search for meaningful phrases in a dictionary of pretension.
But never mind.
From the jolly cod-flamenco romp of ‘La Gloria’, to the ‘infinite complexities’ of the wonderful top ten hit ‘Drama’, this album will keep you dancing and jogging, if not singing, all autumn long.
REAL SOUNDS OF AFRICA 7 Miles High (Big 1) One of the attractions of World Music, as identified by its advocates, is that it offers an antidote to the studio world of Erasure and their ilk.
Fresh, spontaneous, natural and not sung in an American accent, it is a proposition implicit in Real Sounds of Africa's very name.
But, if it is untainted purity you are looking for, go elsewhere.
This is very much the hybrid sound of Africa, and all the better for it.
Growing up in Zimbabwe the group were as likely to hear a record by The Beatles as they were one by a local performer.
Their distinctive sound grew from adapting rock forms and instruments, and, eventually, it was in the pubs and folk festivals of Britain that they began to achieve some sort of prominence, while back home the discos of Harare pulsated to the real sound of Whitney Houston.
The result of this cocktailing of influences is a vastly entertaining album, with lots of spritely guitars (ex-Housemartin Norman Cook was responsible for the mixing) and get-up-and-jig rhythm.
Perhaps it is only in some of the lyrics, which exhibit a kind of simple, home-spun philosophising strangely absent from an Erasure album, that Africa remains untainted.
Could you imagine John Lydon, for instance, admitting to the importance of the matriarch like this?
‘When I was young my mama used to say ‘grow up and see how tough the world is’ ' and ‘I was unhappy at my mother's death/ I was unhappy at my father's death/…
I had no one left to give me advice’.
But it is only in some of their lyrics that this cleanliness of vision appears.
One song reveals the damaging influence on their minds of their sojourn in London: ‘Soccer Fan’ is a peon of praise to Everton's midfield cruncher, Norman Whiteside. l CURIOSITY KILLED THE CAT Get Ahead (Mercury) You can tell that Curiosity Killed The Cat haven't been around for some time.
Firstly pictures of their lead singer, Ben Volpierre Pierrot, have stopped appearing in the front sections of Sunday newspaper supplements captioned by bad puns on his name, and secondly the single from this album is all about leaving messages on an answering machine.
Whatever enforced their absence for the last couple of years, it wasn't an extensive search for a new musical direction.
Second-hand soul, funky horns, wandering blues-style vocals, all derivative life is here.
The band, made up of sophisticated London rich boys, never really looked happy as teen heart-throbs.
So perhaps their disappearance was a brave bid to shake off that old image (two years is long enough to be forgotten in teen land) and appeal to a broader church.
Brave, but probably mistaken: even teen success is better than no success at all.
l IAN McCULLOCH Candleland (WEA UK: WX303C) Ian McCulloch was the most memorable thing about Echo And The Bunnymen, the Liverpool acid revivalists of the early Eighties (acid as in Syd Barrett, psychedelia and funny oily slides put over the spotlights, rather than mega-profitable discos in aircraft hangars and gate-crashing visits from the uniformed branch).
He was the one with the distant, distracted look and the voice which sounded as though it were the product of an experiment by Dr Timothy Leary.
All of these things can be found here, in an album which could well be a Bunnymen work, were it not for the absence of much of the pomposity to which they were inclined (though, unrepentant fans will note, not all of it judging by track titles like ‘The White Hotel’ and ‘Proud to Fall’).
It is a consistent piece, full of melodies that quickly start to nag, expensive arrangements and above it all McCulloch's ingenuous, whispering, conspiratorial voice.
‘Horse's Head’(a Godfather of a track), ‘The Flickering Wall’ and the title track should provide acid fans with as big a fix as they will need until the next Wonder Stuff album.
l THE JESUS AND MARY CHAIN Automatic (WEA BYN 20) The Reid brothers' leather-clad thrashers were the most punk of post-punk groups.
Ill-disciplined in the hair, stage presence and amplifier feedback departments, their slouched, apparently indifferent performances were the most compelling thing since the demise of the Sex Pistols.
Sad to report, then, that they have been taken into the studio with this album and produced.
There are two or three strange things in there which, while hardly melodies, might qualify as tunes, several of them coming to satisfactory conclusions.
The speakers hardly whine and Jim Reid now sings with a US accent, rather than mumbling in a Scots one — it all sounds improbably adult-oriented.
Blindfolded and presented with this and a Def Leppard album, sensible money could be put on 80 per cent of those challenged failing to tell the two apart.
INTERVIEW /Littlechap at large: Songwriter and performer Anthony Newley talks to Mark Steyn about the return of Stop The World
By MARK STEYN
‘DID YOU know,’ enquires Anthony Newley, by way of an ice-breaker, ‘that Leonard Rossiter died in this dressing-room?
I didn't know him, but I'm told he was a very nice man.’
Perhaps it was Newley's ex-wife and Rossiter's Cinzano co-star, Joan Collins, who volunteered this judgement, for it's hard to find any other connection between a strictly domestic sitcom performer and one of the highest-earning acts in Vegas and Atlantic City.
Surveying the solitary chair and bare mattress, the missing lightbulbs round the mirror, you understand why for much of the time Newley keeps his eyes closed, picturing maybe the backstage steamrooms and personal barmen of American showbiz.
Dressing Room One, Lyric Theatre, who needs it?
‘It's true,’ he says, ‘there comes a time in your life when comfort matters.
America is very comfortable — especially California, but we all know that in a lot of ways it's not culturally satisfying.
You could go mad there.
There are a lot of people who think Newley's very strange.
I think Newley's very strange.’
He refers to himself in the third person quite frequently, almost as if his stage persona is a separate being.
If it is, it none the less dates back explicitly to 1961 when he played Littlechap, the Everyman figure who makes it big, in Stop The World — I Want To Get Off at the Queen's.
But if it's taken him 28 years to rediscover the show, the character's never left him: ‘All that Cockney toughness is just a cover for the inability to love,’ he says of Littlechap, but it could as easily apply to him ('I'm desperately childish.
One does not marry three women if one is an adult human being. ').
That's why he's never tired of singing the show's big ballad.
‘I never had the hit with ‘What Kind Of Fool Am I?’
Sammy Davis did.
But Newley sings it in a way that personalises it.
I sing it practically every night of my life, because, like bits of Hamlet, it's so obvious that the trick is to go against the lyric and stir in your listener the real sense of a man who cannot love.
In the arrangement in my act, the song floats on top of a piano sonata: it's the Brechtian thing of throwing responsibility for the sentiment to your audience.’
Before Stop The World, Newley was a rock'n'roller, spoofing Elvis in the film Idle On Parade.
But the parody was mistaken for the real thing, and the songs made the charts.
Now, his songs are intended as the real thing, but widely assumed to be some sort of parody.
All those mannerisms — the splayed feet, the cupped hands, the exaggerated furrows of the brow, the strange vowel sounds -, surely he can't mean it?
‘I wasn't aware of my effect,’ he insists.
‘I was so inside the lyric, my body had a life of its own.
When I first saw myself imitated, I was in shock for days.
They made me look and sound like a freak: ‘Gonna build a mown-tine.’
I swore I'd never take my hands out of my pockets again.
I may sing like Marcel Marceau, but it was never a style.
It's just the way I make my noise.’
He's specialised in tortured individuals, spilling his guts on self-taunting lyrics like ‘The Man Who Makes You Laugh’: go on, Mr Funny Man, entertain us.
The last time we met he was singing the number at a Friars' Club gala in New York and, for all the lofty intellectual disdain one feels obliged to muster at tuxedo circuit events, it was undeniably impressive to see him afterwards, the only British subject in the room, surrounded by Lauren Bacall, Lena Horne and Gwen Verdon.
‘The respect of my peers has been desperately important.’
He pauses.
‘Perhaps too important.’
He pauses again.
‘The Man Who Makes You Laugh’ is an indulgence.
‘Civilians’ don't really understand it, about the waiters in the deli and all that.
Maybe I should concentrate on pleasing the public more.
But why are you gifted?
Why do you create?
I'd love to be a record success again, but the last LP I made was so bloody personal it was ludicrous: you can't write songs about those you love, your children, and expect other people to buy them…
Perhaps this is all too heavy for you?’
No, but the gloomy prognosis does Newley an injustice.
After all, at a time when the British musical was despised, he did write, direct and star in several notable exceptions to the rule — a sort of Kenneth Branagh of the early Sixties, except that Branagh's yet to take Broadway, doesn't compose music, and has never had a No 1 record.
‘I'm basically a loner in a collaborative field, and I thought everything was possible,’ says Newley.
‘I sometimes wonder what it would be like if Stop The World had had a proper director, who did it for a living.
But I was seduced by the thought that I could pull it off.
Jack of all trades…well, you know the rest of it.’
His best work, including Stop The World, was written with Leslie Bricusse.
‘Why did we stop?
Neither of us knows the answer.
Newley and Bricusse would both like to find another Newley and Bricusse, with somebody else — just to change the sheets.
You have mixed emotions about any collaboration — there's a lot of subjugation, a lot of domination.’
He stops, creases his brows and stares with closed eyelids into the distance, as if wrestling with some new concept.
‘Being gifted without discipline is a wasted gift.
I lack discipline.
Leslie brought form to my passion.
In print this won't look too good over breakfast, but I have to say there is more to this chapter of our being then we know.
I have probably been in a family relationship with Leslie in 12 previous lives.’
The belief in relationships which outlast our present existence might explain why he's been more complacent than Bricusse about his time since the split.
‘Leslie has always been disappointed in me because I didn't continue.
We wrote these extraordinary shows, and then I just put on a dinner-jacket, started singing and gave them up.’
When he returned to the theatre in 1983 for Chaplin, it was an almighty flop.
‘I had an open cheque on Broadway.
Amazing how we screwed it up.
But I'd stayed away too long, I'd forgotten everything.
My God, for 15 years I'd written nothing but a few songs.’
If all this self-doubt is part of the act, it's a brilliant performance.
You begin to appreciate why Newley has become a rich and famous celebrity playing poor failed nobodies.
And, in the end, if much of the promise is still unfulfilled, in his own words, ‘I ain't done too bad.
There was nothing in my background to suggest I wouldn't be just another East End kid.’
Then, at 14, he landed the Artful Dodger in Oliver Twist.
‘Every day, I'd cycle from Clapton to King's Cross, take the train to Pinewood, then the bus to the studio to be directed by David Lean in scenes with Alec Guinness.
Then, every night I'd return to that street and live in one room with my mother.
Why wouldn't one want to stay in that world?
Why would one want to go back to Clapton?’
Today, closer to Clapton (geographically) than he's been in a long while, Anthony Newley is relishing the chance to prove he's still up to a tough dramatic performance eight shows a week and, to follow, he has plans for a musicalised Richard III.
‘I know there are any number of other musical versions and I'm not a Shakespearean actor, yet I feel comfortable with him.
You see, the musical theatre is overdressed at the moment.
I've nothing against aeroplanes landing on stage, but there should be a place for personal musicals, and frankly they're all I know how to write.
I've been on automatic pilot for 25 years.
But now my personal life has been…simplified, and I'm back two doors away from where it all started, maybe I've been offered a new beginning.’
THEATRE /The wax and wane of property values: Singer — RSC, Stratford
By PETER KEMP
ONE OF Peter Flannery's earliest plays was called Savage Amusement.
Singer, his latest work, aims to provide this, along with lashings of fierce emotion.
Billed as ‘a modern Jacobean tragi-comedy’, it seeks to graft the sickening thrills and sickened satire of seventeenth-century revenge plays onto a contemporary drama of cruelty and decadence.
Like its prototypes, it deals in grisly encounters between the evil and the wronged and trades in horror, black farce and exultantly appalled expose of the grossness, callousness and cynicism of the rich and powerful.
At its start, a chorus figure — played with chipper authority by Joe Melia -strolls on stage and talks about the importance of remembering.
He is in ARP uniform; sirens wail and searchlights flicker.
But the memory lane he points the audience down isn't one that starts in Britain.
Dragging open a curtain to reveal an advancing line of emaciated near-cadavers in filth-caked concentration camp uniforms, he takes you back to Auschwitz.
Here, as inmates with red-rimmed eyes and ash-grey faces barter items like a shirt or a spoon for half a bowl of soup, a nightmarish market economy is seen in operation.
Unable to cope with it any longer, one Polish Jew — Peter Singer — sinks despairingly down to die.
Kicking him back to his feet, his nephew Stefan galvanises an urge in him to survive and thrive, the progress of which the play charts over the next four decades.
The initial change in Singer from shuddering zombie to desperate fighter for life is only the first of several metamorphoses — all caught with bravura vividness in Antony Sher's phenomenally versatile performance.
Soon, for instance, he is seen cheekily jostling for prominence among refugees arriving at Southampton.
‘I think you'll find that pushing to the front of the queue is rather frowned on,’ an official disdainfully informs him.
But, to the contrary, Singer finds that in much of post-war British life it is applauded and rewarded.
Dramatising this, Singer virtually splits into two plays.
The first half, modelled on the career of Peter Rachman, is a sequence of cartoon-strip-like scenes chronicling Singer's rise from homeless, oppressed refugee to exploitative property landlord.
Sarcastic cameos of barking Tory predators and their yelping spouses indicate his accomplices in this enterprise.
But also keeping him company is Stefan (endowed with intense integrity in a fine performance from Mick Ford).
A painter whose pictures record the atrocities of the past, he acts as his uncle's conscience and it is partly due to him that Singer — at the height of his spivvy, flashy success -throws himself into a Hampstead pond.
The play's second half offers a contrasting fable.
Ambiguous as to whether or not Singer drowned himself, it looks at an era — 1964 to 1979 — during which the spirit of rapacious capitalism he personified was at any rate submerged.
As a complement to a career based on forgetting the past, the play sketches out an alternative one based on remembering.
This takes — for the new avatar of Singer who features in this part of the play — two forms: first retribution (the hunting out of his Auschwitz guard), then compassion (the running of a soup kitchen for London's homeless).
The play during the latter interludes — humane warmth not being Flannery's forte — seems somewhat enfeebled.
But it flares to acrid life again with the explosion of a second property boom in the 1980s.
Dramatising the ugly repercussions of this, Flannery, with his rip-the-jugular satire, is sometimes carried to over-kill.
But many of his ironies stab home tellingly.
And, once again, his stage swarms with a gruesome crew of rapacious monsters, portrayed with that lurid neo-Jacobean ferocity so many present- day playwrights employ when putting Thatcherism under the arc-lights.
Terry Hands's direction whips all this along at a fast pace.
Performances of outstanding force and finesse from Sher and Ford ensure that, at the heart of the satiric bustle, there is always something emotionally moving.
MUSIC /Head for heights: Joan Sutherland
By WADHAM SUTTON
MANY musical celebrities visit Newcastle but it was a red-letter day on Wednesday, when the Tyne Theatre and Opera House was sold out for Joan Sutherland's first appearance in the city.
It hardly needs saying that Dame Joan is a virtuoso.
Few can deliver high notes of such ringing clarity or trills so impeccably controlled, and she has a chest register many contraltos would envy.
She was accompanied by the augmented Northern Sinfonia, conducted by Richard Bonynge, whose empathy with his wife's interpretations is legendary.
Dame Joan's first contribution was ‘Casta Diva’ from Bellini's Norma, a superb piece of bel canto which explains Chopin's admiration for this composer.
It was delivered movingly, with an accompaniment which breathed with the singer.
The same flair for characterisation and a rapport between voice and orchestra, were evident in Amalia's ‘Tu del mio Carlo al seno’ from Verdi's I Masnadieri.
This was the only opera Verdi wrote specifically for the London stage, and at the 1847 premiere Amalia's role was sung by Jenny Lind.
It says much for the sang-froid of the practised musician that, despite the intrusion of a bomb hoax, both Dame Joan and the orchestra resumed the published programme as if no interruption had occurred.
After the interval came ‘Non temete, milord’ from Auber's Fra Diabolo, the only piece of French music on the programme, albeit with an Italian text, and an important contribution to the field of opera comique.
With its sparkle, its risque connotations (the prudish Mendelssohn was outraged at an early performance) and its bustling accompaniment, deftly played, it was proof again of Dame Joan's versatility.
The orchestral items included an adequate account of Rossini's Semirimide Overture, and a polished performance of Mozart's Divertimento in D (K136).
But the Sinfonia excelled in a suite from Lehar's Merry Widow, music that would sit well in the Palm Court or the pier pavilion, but which merits the stylish performance it received.
The accompanying of the arias was exemplary.
Finally, the Mad Scene from Lucia di Lammermoor.
Donizetti's resources did not run to the excesses a more modern composer would have applied in depicting a tormented mind.
Yet the simplicity is telling.
Dame Joan gave a compelling performance, handling the coloratura apparently without effort, and rising superbly to the final altissimo E flat — a stratospheric note which she then repeated in the encore.
The obbligato flute part was sensitively played by David Haslam.
A standing ovation ensued.