

Around the World
By BRUCE PALLING
Rupe roots for his mate Bob Rupert Murdoch has stirred up the possums in Australia, his former homeland, by praising his mate Bob Hawke, the Prime Minister, and dismissing Andrew Peacock, the opposition leader.
Although he traded in Australian citizenship for an American passport for business reasons, he still has a stranglehold on 60 per cent of Australia's main newspapers.
In a television interview given after appearing in Adelaide at the annual meeting of his parent company, News Corporation, he confessed to having ‘considerable sympathy’ for the way Bob was handling the economy.
Then, in a quick display of candour — or humour — he added: ‘I mean, I could argue one way or the other about that.
I'm not going to say something here which is going to commit my newspapers.
That's up to the editors.’
Rock ‘n’ rail Some months before the troubles developed in East Germany, one of the world's more arcane organisations, the Ireland-German Democratic Friendship Society, announced plans to celebrate in Dublin the 40th birthday of their comrades' dictatorship in the East.
A couple of bands were hired several months ago to jolly up the celebrations, whose main participants appeared to be trade unionists who had been on free holidays to one of the last proletarian paradises.
One band was called ‘Imelda's Boyfriend’ and the other ‘The Train Now Leaving’.
Strong words were exchanged with the latter band by the organisers, who demanded a quick piece of historical rewriting to expunge this accidental slur on the workers' state.
However, the rock group refused and the party went on, with no ill-effects on the tiny number of celebrators or the East German functionaries.
GDR is just a joke The ferment in East Germany is breeding a batch of jokes.
A little old lady, troubled by the unrest, goes to her local Communist Party secretary and asks: ‘Was socialism invented by politicians or scientists?’
He replied: ‘Politicians, of course.’
The old lady nodded wisely: ‘I thought so…scientists would have tried it out on rats first.’
Erich Honecker dies and goes to Heaven, but St Peter bars the way: ‘Erich, you belong in Hell.’
Honecker begs in vain, then finally asks: ‘Can I at least leave my luggage here for a bit ?’
St Peter reluctantly agrees.
Next day, a small but agitated devil knocks on the doors of Heaven.
‘Have you come to pick up Honecker's luggage?’
St Peter asks.
‘No, I'm the first refugee from Hell.’
Cuddly Saddam Iraq is not a country one normally sees being defended, so it is all the more intriguing to read a glowing account of this thuggish regime by Tony Marlow, the right-wing Tory MP for Northampton North.
Having recently returned from a ‘fact-finding mission’ organised by the ‘Gulf Centre for Strategic Studies’, Mr Marlow attacks in the Gulf Report the ‘vociferous and unrepresentative minority that effects (sic) to believe that our way of life and system of government is the measure by which all other countries should be measured.’
Rather than censure the dictatorship of President Saddam Hussein, Mr Marlow believes that its poor image is partly the fault of the British press.
‘The press (and television) increasingly make their money (or secure their viewers) by providing entertainment.’
As for British citizens falling foul of the regime, Mr Marlow believes that ‘No country can be expected to operate a differential system of justice in favour of foreigners’, although he adds that benefits can accrue from the exercise of ‘justified clemency’.
Daphne Parish, a British nurse, has been held incommunicado since last month for giving information on casualties caused by an explosion at an Iraqi missile plant in August.
Farzad Bazoft, the Observer's correspondent, was detained soon afterwards and also denied consular access.
These unfortunate people have more comprehension of the nastiness of the Saddam regime than the member for Northampton North, who gives ‘rugby spectator’ as one of his hobbies in Who's Who.
Cover-up claim as Indian press joins battle over Bofors
From TONY ALLEN-MILLS in New Delhi
AN INDIAN journalist yesterday accused his editor of suppressing information that might have helped to identify the recipients of millions of dollars in bribes allegedly paid to Indian officials by the Bofors armaments company, a scandal which has caused acute embarrassment to Rajiv Gandhi's government.
Narasimhan Ram, associate editor of The Hindu, a Madras-based daily, said at a press conference that it had been preparing to publish documents about the £550m Bofors contract to supply the Indian army with 155mm howitzers.
On Tuesday The Hindu printed copies of supposedly secret Swedish government documents which purported to confirm that, despite denials in India and Sweden, Indian middlemen had received huge payoffs as part of the contract.
The Hindu report infuriated the opposition in parliament and there were renewed demands for the resignation of Mr Gandhi, who has repeatedly been accused of attempting to cover up the scandal.
The Hindu promised fresh disclosures the next day, but Wednesday's paper contained no more reports.
Mr Ram, whose family owns The Hindu, said yesterday that ‘internal sabotage’ had prevented the series from continuing.
He accused his editor, Govindan Kasturi, of ‘arbitrarily’ deciding to discontinue the expose, even though the paper had more documents in its possession.
Mr Ram hinted that Mr Kasturi had been got at by government officials.
Mr Ram said that in the interests of press freedom he was offering The Hindu's reports to rival newspapers.
At least two, the Statesman and the Indian Express, were expected to take up the story in their issues today.
All those involved were cagey about the contents of the reports.
However, for all the heat generated by the scandal, it appeared from this week's developments that the opposition is still far from identifying the ‘smoking bank account’ that would ruin Mr Gandhi's career.
While the press, led by The Hindu, has gone a long way to proving that Bofors handed out millions of dollars to Indian middlemen, the identity of the ultimate recipients of the money remains a mystery.
Allegations that Mr Gandhi or members of his family received large sums have often been heard on opposition hustings, but not a shred of evidence exists that his hands dipped anywhere near the till.
Without proof that money was paid into an account controlled by Mr Gandhi, there is little doubt that the Prime Minister will be able to continue resisting calls for his resignation.
But the steady drip of disclosures, which appears certain to continue right up to the general election later this year, could yet prove fatal to the Congress (I) Party's chances of remaining in power.
Mr Gandhi may not have been personally involved in the Bofors contract, but his government's clumsy efforts to keep the case under wraps have smacked of guilt, and the Prime Minister's ‘Mr Clean’ image of five years ago has all but been destroyed by the scandal.
Shared adversity unites old Communist enemies: Andrew Higgins, in Peking, examines why East Germany and China are blaming the West for their youth's disenchantment with communism
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
‘WARMLY congratulate the German Democratic Republic on its 40th anniversary,’ reads the latest exhortation to adorn the cheerless, half-empty lobby of the Peking Hotel, China's grandest monument to socialist hospitality at its dreary, dust-covered worst.
The Peking Hotel is not alone in its sympathy for Erich Honecker's regime.
United by a sense of shared adversity, party leaders in Peking and East Berlin have now forgotten their past quarrels to confront what both see as their common enemy — the forces of change sweeping the rest of the Communist world.
On one level the sudden and unexpected friendship thrives on little more than mutual back-scratching.
When most countries recoiled in horror at China's killing of unarmed protesters four months ago, East Berlin helped break China's isolation by offering support and congratulations.
Likewise, when China had trouble getting guests for its national day celebrations on 1 October, the 40th anniversary of Communist rule, East Germany was again glad to oblige, along with hardline stalwarts such as Cuba, North Korea, Czechoslovakia and three African countries: the Comoros, Kenya and Burundi.
In its zeal to relieve China's embarrassment at hosting a party with so few guests, East Berlin sent two senior officials — Egon Krenz, a member of the Politburo, and Wolfgang Rachfuss, a member of the Central Committee.
China was quick to repay the favour.
When East Germany celebrated its own equally joyless 40th birthday party last weekend, Peking sent a delegation led by Yao Yilin, a senior Politburo member and veteran central planner who appreciates a well-regimented society.
The Chinese press marked the occasion by scrupulously avoiding any mention of the one subject that has preoccupied the rest of the world's news media: why people keep leaving East Germany.
But the two countries share not only embarrassment but a common mission.
While China insists that its open-door policy remains intact and continues to encourage investment from the West, it has revived a vocabulary of ideological struggle almost identical to that used in East Germany.
Recent national day speeches in the two countries were almost interchangeable.
Jiang Zemin, the newly-appointed secretary-general of the Chinese Communist Party, and Mr Honecker, his East German counterpart, chose the same themes -the superiority and inevitable triumph of socialism, the need to strengthen the leadership of the party and the danger posed by pressure for rapid reform.
The leaders blamed the disenchantment of their young people on an international conspiracy by reactionary forces aimed at, according to Mr Honecker, ‘confusing people and sowing seeds of doubt in the power and advantages of socialism’.
But if neither China nor East Germany is shy about attacking the West, both tread gingerly over the problem at the heart of their common predicament -what to do about their fellow socialists.
For all their bluster about foreign conspiracy, the foreigners who worry them most live not in the United States or Western Europe but in Hungary, Poland and the Soviet Union.
Both Peking and East Berlin have witnessed at first hand just how dangerous the forces unleashed by Mikhail Gorbachev can be.
It was a visit to Peking by the Soviet president in May that helped to bring more than a million demonstrators out on to the streets on two successive days, pushing China's student-led protest movement towards its tragic climax.
The Soviet leader has had a more modest, though not dissimilar effect on East Germany, where his presence last weekend became a focus for calls for change of the type so steadfastly refused by his hosts.
For hardline leaders in East Germany and China, the dilution of party authority in Hungary and Poland represents not reform but treason, a betrayal that threatens to undermine their own legitimacy.
Without absolutist faith in the right of the party to rule, East Germany would lose its sole raison d'etre.
The same faith provides China's leaders with their only explanation and justification for why they sent tanks to crush student protesters who had hurt no one and damaged nothing.
‘History has proved and will continue to prove, that the socialist system has a strong historical vitality and is full of life,’ said Mr Jiang in his national day address.
‘Seeing only the whirlpools and counter-currents but not the progress of the long river of history only reveals the observer's political short-sightedness.’
Mr Honecker chose a different image to make the same point: attempts to destabilise socialism, he said, are like ‘the fruitless attacks by Don Quixote against windmills that continue to turn imperturbably.’
Tibetan protest in New Delhi
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
Tibetan refugees protest in front of the Chinese embassy in New Delhi against a visit to India by Wu Xueqian, a Chinese Vice-Premier attending talks about the Indo-Chinese border 
Out of the USSR: The guard is not yet tired here
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — Once upon a time, in a previous journalistic incarnation, I worked at Westminster.
The first thing which struck me upon attending a House of Commons debate was how few MPs actually turned up to take part.
The second thing was that almost never did it matter since the whips ran the show.
Exactly 11 years later, I find myself doing the same job, this time in the Kremlin.
Riveted and astonished, I can report that in a palace whose previous tenants have included Ivan the Terrible and Stalin, parliamentary democracy is flourishing.
Only last June, when this first Supreme Soviet worthy of the name was elected from the Congress of People's Deputies, everyone predicted that it would be a pretty soft touch.
Many big-name radicals in the Congress had failed to win seats.
True, in a full-time legislature appearances at least would differ from its feeble predecessor.
But when push came to shove, we blase Western correspondents told each other, the government and the party would get their way.
Not so.
For one thing, the deputies turn up.
For the six full sessions every Monday and Tuesday so far, at least 400 of the 542 Supreme Soviet members have been present throughout the day.
On top of that, for the remaining three days each week, several of its 23 permanent commissions beaver away at the mountain of legislation that is being thrust before them.
About 20 major bills are promised this session.
Admittedly, some facilities leave much to be desired.
There is, for example, no Annie's Bar where we may gossip with the mighty over a vodka — although we do have access to a well-stocked cafeteria, where the waitresses are uncommonly polite.
But we can buttonhole anyone we please as they leave the chamber: a privilege akin to the London correspondents of Pravda or Izvestia being able to accost cabinet ministers in the members' lobby of the Commons.
That Soviet fondness for improvisation doubtless explains why the local equivalent of HMSO does a miserable job of providing us with copies of draft laws under discussion.
And on one occasion at least the deputies themselves had to pronounce on a crucial compromise resolution whose text had not even been distributed.
No daily Hansard is at hand, to get us out of a tight corner.
This old Westminster hand misses the joy of watching a backbench procedural expert destroy a day's business, if not a bill, with a point of order or a single wrecking amendment.
But these are early days.
Most important, we are witnessing constitutional history.
In just three weeks, the Supreme Soviet has become a real parliament, in the sense that every problem of national life feeds into it.
Lithuanians protest, Ukrainian mine leaders warn, Armenians walk out.
Already fascinating conflicts between legislature and executive (be it government or party apparatus) are taking shape: over the non-publication of a commission report on the Hitler-Stalin pact of 1939 and its consequences; over the Uzbek corruption affair and the alleged complicity of the Politburo conservative Yegor Ligachev; even, it would now seem, on the overriding issue of the 1990 plan and budget.
But everyone is on their best behaviour.
Such previously unimaginable impertinences must not only be done by the book: they must be seen to be too.
What is at stake in this novelty could scarcely be greater.
Should this well-behaved and well-intentioned parliament fail, then its failure will merely be infinitely depressing vindication of the theory that Russia — and a fortiori the Soviet Union — can only be ruled by a rod of iron.
All Soviet history points that way.
A parliament possessing real power is alien to the country's every tradition.
The last experiment, the post-revolutionary Constituent Assembly, lasted but 24 hours after it had tiresomely refused to recognize the authority of the Bolshevik government.
On 6 January, 1918, the soldiers ‘protecting’ its deliberations marched in to put an end to proceedings.
‘The guard is tired,’ was the explanation offered by Anatoly Zhelesnyakov, commander of the intruding detachment.
His words are as familiar to Soviet schoolchilden as Cromwell's ‘In the name of God, go’ to the Long Parliament over 250 years earlier, is to us.
No one has yet suggested that Mikhail Gorbachev, or anyone else for that matter, should make himself Lord Protector.
But these are turbulent, unpredictable times.
The charms of limitless glasnost have already worn distinctly thin.
A Supreme Soviet of fine words and few deeds could quickly become just an irritant, a scapegoat for a ‘democratization’ which does not put goods in the shops.
Westminster, for all its failings, never faced that threat.
E Germans demand deeds, not words
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
GERMANS in East and West reacted with disappointment and scepticism yesterday to a promise by the East German leaders to talk about change.
‘What good are hints when they do not say when, how and what will ever get better?’ one East Berliner asked Western journalists.
‘After the events in Leipzig and other cities I would have expected more,’ said another.
‘This declaration is not a blind bit of good to the workers who have to take over the jobs of those who have emigrated,’ and ‘Why do we have to wait till the next central committee meeting?’were other grumbles.
Barbel Bohley, a co-founder of the reformist discussion group New Forum, said the promise by the Politburo was ‘only a verbal concession’ which would not have any effect on real life.
The most optimistic were East German Protestant leaders.
Manfred Stolpe, chairman of the Berlin-Brandenburg Church Consistory, admitted not all their dreams had come true but it was ‘a start to the process of dialogue’.
The long statement, read out on East German television after the evening news, followed a crisis meeting of the 21-strong Politburo on the exodus of tens of thousands of East Germans and the mass protests last weekend.
The move in itself was sensational, but after close scrutiny top East Berlin-watchers in Bonn decided its contents were ‘not very promising’.
The hardline leadership admitted for the first time it regretted the exodus, admitted there were problems and conceded it might be partly to blame.
‘But the hints of such things as ‘travel opportunities’ and ‘media that are close to life’are too vague and generic,’one said.
The insistence that the discussion take place through established party channels and the refusal to contemplate changes to the present communist system meant real reforms are extremely unlikely, he added.
Otto Reinhold, an East German ideologue, reinforced this gloomy view by insisting: ‘We do not want reform for reform's sake, but changes which will help the further development of socialism’.
The Politburo statement helped to strengthen suspicions that Erich Honecker's days as East Germany's leader are numbered.
Kurt Hager, the 77-year-old chief party ideologue who first indicated changes were on the way, insisted in Moscow yesterday: ‘The leadership is united and will remain so, even though people keep on trying to invent disputes.’
Informed sources say neither the more realistically-minded East German leaders nor the Russians believe that any sensible changes can be brought about so long as Mr Honecker, 77, whose attitudes have become particularly rigid in recent months, is at the helm.
Not that he will necessarily go soon, but few think he will last longer than the party congress next May.
He is still frail after a gall bladder operation, and his health could be an excellent reason for his departure.
UN force due for Central America
From PETER JAMES SPIELMANN of Associated Press
NEW YORK — The UN Secretary-General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, plans to send a 625-member peacekeeping force to Central America in the first serious test of the regional peace agreement signed in August.
A draft copy of Mr Perez de Cuellar's report to the Security Council shows that the force would be a highly mobile border patrol, equipped with jeeps, helicopters and speedboats.
Its mission is to prevent any nation from mounting an attack on its neighbour, to verify that no rebel forces launch cross-border raids, and to halt any broadcasts by insurrectionary forces.
Canada, West Germany and Spain will provide personnel, and there will also be a Latin American contingent.
The Security Council must approve the force, to be called Onuca.
The presidents of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica wrote to Mr Perez de Cuellar in March, requesting the establishment of Onuca.
It would be the first major peacekeeping force deployed in the Western Hemisphere.
Onuca will have 260 military observers, 115 helicopter and aircrew, 50 naval personnel, 14 medical staff, about 104 UN administrative staff and 82 locally-recruited civilians.
It will have headquarters in Honduras, with a liaison office in each of the five Central American capitals and 31 ‘verification centres.’
In practice, its mission will be to make sure the Contras in Honduras do not infiltrate Nicaragua, and to keep the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front (FMLN) guerrillas in El Salvador from seeking shelter in Honduras.
The US representative to the UN, Thomas Pickering, has stressed that Onuca should deal with the FMLN as well as the US-supported Contras.
Washington seems content to let the United Nations disband the Contras, but Mr Pickering and other US officials have been linking it to the disbanding of the FMLN, without explicitly making it a condition for Washington's cooperation.
Escobar pleads for talks after new arrest
From PETER JAMES SPIELMANN of Associated Press
BOGOTA (Agencies)— A leading member of the Medellin cocaine cartel who resorted to plastic surgery to avoid arrest has been captured and will face extradition to the United States, the Colombian authorities said yesterday.
Shortly after the announcement Pablo Escobar, the reputed leader of the cartel, the largest in the world, reiterated the drug barons' readiness to negotiate with the government in a letter to a Bogota newspaper.
The Administrative Security Department said Jose Abello Silva, indicted in the US in 1987 on drug charges, was arrested on Tuesday in a Bogota restaurant.
It said in a communique that he had undergone facial surgery to avoid detection.
Mr Abello was the fourth-ranking person in the Medellin cartel and the most important suspect arrested since Colombia began cracking down on the cocaine barons nearly two months ago, the department said.
Mr Escobar, in a letter to La Prensa, called for ‘direct dialogue to search for peace’, with participation by government, opposition, judicial, church and journalism representatives.
He promised attacks by his cartel would cease if the government agreed to negotiate.
At least nine people have died in bomb attacks launched by the cartels since President Barco ordered the crackdown on the cocaine traffickers.
The group has also claimed responsibility for a string of murders of journalists and other civic leaders opposed to the cartels and in favour of Mr Barco's decree authorising the drug traffickers' extradition to the US.
Mr Escobar confirmed reports that he had been in contact with the government for over 12 months prior to the crackdown, ordered after the drug-related slayings of a presidential candidate and two other top officials.
On Wednesday, the Bogota newspaper El Espectador temporarily closed its Medellin office after cartel agents killed two of the newspaper's employees there and threatened to murder the bureau's remaining staff of 11.
An executive of the anti-drug crusading newspaper said officials would explore ways of improving office security.
Noriega tries to shore up crumbling power base
From DAVID ADAMS in Panama City
THE PANAMANIAN military chief, General Manuel Noriega, has turned to ‘people power’ as he strives to shore up his tottering regime in the wake of last week's failed coup attempt.
He has declared himself general co-ordinator of a new Parliament of Popular Power which, although it has no legislative authority, appears destined to take the place of the country's National Assembly, which was dissolved last month.
But new evidence is emerging that shows even greater military discontent with the general's rule than was previously thought.
The wife of Major Moises Giroldi, the dead coup leader, has identified other officers who were involved in the plot, but who are still believed to hold their posts.
Following her airlift to the United States with 40 other coup survivors and relatives, Edela de Giroldi said her husband was betrayed by fellow officers who deserted the coup plotters at the last minute.
She named Major Francisco Olechea, the head of Battalion 2000 — the unit which came to General Noriega's rescue during the coup — as one of the initial conspirators.
Major Olechea has not been detained since the coup.
‘Everything was ready,’ she said.
‘But Olechea was playing a winner's game and he failed to come through because of his cowardice.
He committed treason.’
Mrs Giroldi alleged that General Noriega personally killed her husband, ‘even though my husband was his trusted friend’.
In a relaxed and confident address to the Parliament of Popular Power, General Noriega told more than 500 delegates that if he dies, his supporters should seize all government installations and continue a process of national liberation from US imperialism without him.
For the time being the parliament serves only as an advisory body of Noriega loyalists.
But the country's National Assembly, which was dissolved in September, shows no signs of being revived.
Panamanian opposition leaders say that the coup attempt has shown how General Noriega's own supporters are abandoning him.
‘His very own people are rebelling against him,’ said an opposition spokesman, Luis Martinez.
‘He cannot twist this into a fight for the liberation of Panamanians.’
Gold rush comes to Russia
From RUPERT CORNWELL, in Moscow
GOLD HAS always been the ultimate store of value — and so it is proving here today.
With scarcely a consumer item worthy of the name to buy in the shops, and with a rouble in their pockets that loses value by the week, Soviet citizens are staging a gold rush.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, given that Western estimates place the Soviet Union as the world's second producer behind South Africa, gold jewellery and commemoratively minted gold coins have been always comparatively plentiful, though their export is forbidden.
In the last two months, however, jewellery shops have been taken by storm.
Moscow stores alone report sales of gold this year running at double those of last, while those of diamonds and silver have almost quadrupled.
Faced with a demand that could no longer be met, the Moscow city fathers 10 days ago limited purchases to one item per person.
But the queues continue — symbolising a gathering flight from money amid constant rumours that a currency reform is in the offing.
This would be aimed, the argument runs, at confiscating the ill-gotten gains of ‘speculators’ in the much-hated co-operative movement, and at eliminating a surplus currency overhang of up to 150bn roubles (£150bn).
As must any government in similar circumstances, Moscow denies any such intention.
‘I can say firmly and unambiguously ‘no’, ' declared Leonid Abalkin, the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic reforms, when questioned on the subject by the government newspaper Izvestia.
But it has happened, most recently under Stalin in December 1947, when all cash in the possession of individuals above a maximum of 3,000 roubles was forcibly exchanged on a 10-for-one basis.
The method was harsh, but brought a 17 per cent drop in retail prices and an end to formal rationing.
Many trade union leaders and ordinary workers want a repeat dose to wipe out fortunes accumulated on the black market and through high-priced co-operatives of ‘rouble millionaires’.
Currency reform was ‘essential’, said a resolution adopted after a protest here last week of trade unionists from all over the Russian Federated Republic.
Simultaneously, calls are growing for the introduction of a new rouble backed by gold, akin to the Chervonets, a monetary unit brought in by Lenin in 1922 as part of his Economic Policy which permitted a measure of private enterprise.
Worth 10 ordinary roubles, the units could be exchanged for seven grams of gold.
This would have the merit of being convertible into hard currencies and enable the import of desperately needed consumer goods from the West, and it would help soak up excess ordinary roubles on the domestic market.
The Soviet Union certainly has the means.
Gold output is one of the few remaining state economic secrets.
Western analysts put annual production at between 250 and 350 tonnes, and total reserves at up to 2,000 tonnes — worth around $22bn at world prices.
Galtieri walks free as the generals seek vindication
By ISABEL HILTON, Latin America Editor
THE former president of Argentina and the man responsible for one of the most ill-organised military adventures in history, General Leopoldo Fortunato Galtieri, was freed yesterday under a presidential pardon from his comfortable confinement in a suburban military college in Buenos Aires.
General Galtieri's release underlines the fact that the Argentine armed forces may have learned nothing and forgotten nothing, but, by dint of constant pressure on Argentina's elected leaders, they have moved closer to their goal of rewriting history with themselves in the role of hero.
The question now is how much further they will push.
‘The hardliners will not be satisfied with anything short of a total vindication of the Falklands and the ‘dirty war’, ' said one Argentine military analyst.
Those demands were voiced repeatedly in the successive military rebellions that dogged President Alfonsin's administration as dissatisfied military officers refused to accept the judgements that civil society attempted to impose on their conduct in the dictatorship.
General Galtieri was acquitted on human rights charges but sentenced first by a military court, then, on appeal, by a civilian court on his conduct of the 1982 Falklands War.
He was accused under three main charges: that he launched the invasion with no plan to counter a British military reaction, that there was no co-ordination between the three branches of the armed forces and that Argentine forces were left without support as the British advanced.
His defence was to insist that he would do exactly the same again under the same circumstances.
His release is a victory for those elements in the armed forces who reject even their fellow officers' professional criticism of the Falklands campaign and argue that General Galtieri deserved a statue, not a prison sentence, for his actions.
President Menem last week explained the pardon, which embraced 280 people, including former leftist guerrillas as well as officers convicted of torture and murder, as necessary to heal the wounds in Argentine society.
His critics point out that the pardon has proved deeply unpopular and, to the extent that it is likely to encourage the armed forces to insist on a public vindication, could have the opposite effect.
Clashes disrupt peace moves in Western Sahara
By RICHARD DOWDEN, Africa Editor
THE WAR in the Western Sahara, dormant for 12 months after an informal ceasefire, has burst into life again with two attacks in the past five days by Polisario guerrillas on the Moroccan wall dividing the territory.
The Moroccans claim to have killed 101 Polisario guerrillas and lost 11 dead and 10 wounded in Wednesday's battle near the border with Mauritania.
Polisario claims to have killed 180 Moroccans and wounded 150.
It gave no figures for its own losses.
Last week Morocco claimed it had killed or wounded 80 Polisario guerrillas and had lost 14 soldiers, including a colonel, when Polisario attacked its defences near the Mauritanian border.
For the past 13 years Polisario, operating in jeeps across the semi-desert, has mounted surprise attacks on the huge sand wall which runs across the country.
Braving the minefields, guerrillas capture Moroccan soldiers and equipment and retire into the desert.
In February a ceasefire was established after King Hassan met Polisario leaders for the first time.
Meanwhile Algeria, Polisario's main backer, restored diplomatic relations with Morocco and signed a regional co-operation pact with Morocco, Mauritania and Tunisia.
The advantages of regional economic co-operation appeared to outweigh obligations of shared ideology.
Morocco claims the former Spanish colony as Moroccan territory.
Polisario, representing many of its inhabitants, claims it is an independent country.
Both sides have agreed in principle to a referendum on the future of the territory, and the United Nations has been trying to achieve agreement on its details but, despite concessions by Polisario, little progress has been made.
A follow-up meeting between the movement and the king never materialised, and after the two clashes on the border King Hassan has called off a second meeting.
‘Hassan is not serious,’ said Malainine Sadik, a member of the political bureau of Polisario, in London this week.
‘If he was he would sit down at the negotiating table with us.’
This view was reflected by one observer in Rabat, who said: ‘He (King Hassan) has so clearly been playing for time.
I think the Algerians have been angry with him for some time and are prepared to let Polisario have a free hand.’
Frustrated by the delay in the peace talks, Polisario has resumed fighting and claims to have occupied 10 miles of the Moroccan lines.
But without new supplies from Algeria it is doubtful whether it can sustain an offensive for long.
Joyful reunion may make South African history: Albertina Sisulu and Nelson Mandela talked of old times and new strategy, she told John Carlin at her home in Soweto
From JOHN CARLIN in Soweto
IT HAS been a tough quarter of a century for Albertina Sisulu.
Her husband Walter, former secretary-general of the African National Congress, has been behind bars.
She has endured house arrest, detentions without trial, continual harassment by the police and orders banning her from political activity, while, all the time, never shrinking from her duties of leadership in the thankless battle against apartheid.
Now, at last, at the age of 71, things are starting to come right.
Tuesday was the turning point, as well as a day of great joy.
Her husband, President FW de Klerk announced, was to be released.
More immediately delightful, she saw Nelson Mandela, an intimate friend of her youth, for the first time since he was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1964.
And all against the background of what appears to be a historic breakthrough in black South African politics as the cracks in the apartheid edifice widen and the government begins to lose its grip on the affairs of state.
Breathlessly, in an interview yesterday at her home in Soweto, she recounted the events.
‘I flew down to Cape Town and at 9.30 we went — with my daughter, son-in-law and their two children — to Pollsmoor Prison to visit my husband.
We noticed that there was a lot of rushing around.
All the guards looked worried.
‘I asked him: ‘What's going on?
Why all this movement?’ 'Man, I don't know,’he said.
‘But one thing is that we have a meeting at 1pm at Nelson's cottage.
We're going to meet him’.'
‘We’ were the seven political prisoners at Pollsmoor — all senior ANC members — of the eight men whose release Mr de Klerk was to announce that night.
Further suggesting to Mrs Sisulu that she might afford to hope, to imagine that her husband might be freed, was a meeting that she and other leaders of the Mass Democratic Movement had scheduled with Mr Mandela at 6pm.
Ismail Ayob, Mr Mandela's lawyer, had phoned Mrs Sisulu, Cyril Ramaphosa, Murphy Morobe and Cassim Salojee — all MDM leaders — on Monday night to instruct them to be at Mr Mandela's prison house, also in the Cape Town area, at five on Tuesday afternoon.
‘The last time I'd seen Nelson was in the courtroom in 1964,’ Mrs Sisulu said.
‘We were so excited to meet, you can imagine!
We're almost the same age, I'm just a few months older.
And we're cousins, you know.’
How did he look?
‘Oh, he's quite fine.
He's lost a lot of weight, but he looks very fit.
A touch of TB always drains one.’
She was referring to the illness which put him in hospital last year before he was moved out of Pollsmoor to his present quarters, formerly a prison warden's home.
‘The house is posh, man, posh — so many rooms!
He's got a TV and a phone and a little library and a garden.
Man, if it was his own home, I'd say the man was really comfortable!’
The four had supper with Mr Mandela.
‘It was very nice food,’ she said.
‘We had steak, chips and all sorts of salads.
He's got a gentleman there who makes his meals for him and cleans the house.
‘Over the meal he told us that he had discussed with the authorities what people would be released.
That's why he met the seven earlier in the afternoon.
He said the announcement would be made at eight that evening.
‘Suddenly we realised it was eight o'clock and we rushed to the sitting room to put on the TV.
We listened and there it was: De Klerk's announcement.
‘The men around me jumped around and shouted and shook my hand, and Nelson hugged me.
But I was just cool.
I couldn't believe it.
It took a while to sink in.’
They were with Mr Mandela until 10pm, much of the time he and Mrs Sisulu simply recalling their old days together and recounting what they had done all these years.
The main dish, though, was the question of negotiations with the government.
‘He was trying to explain to us how he feels about negotiations, how it was his feeling that in any country, even if there is war, there is time for negotiations.
He said that if the people were ready for negotiations, he wouldn't be against it.
But he said the people must be well educated on this and everything must be explained to them before any steps are taken.
‘He said he had written a document which would explain everything — all his views on negotiations.
And this document will be distributed among the people, it will be made public.
He says it's very important that people know what negotiations are about.’
What about her husband?
What were his political plans?
‘First of all, be sure of one thing.
When he comes back we will celebrate: Oh! we are going to welcome him!
As far as what his political role will be, you know my husband is an ANC man — and he's not going to deny it.
He will stick to the ANC.’
But would he resume his position of leadership?
‘Oh yes, yes!
Some people might think they will be forgotten.
But the people have always said: ‘Release our leaders!’
So, the leaders will be released to lead the people.
They will take their rightful places and we will follow them…
They must take advantage of their unconditional release and go on with the ANC.
We joined these organisations (the MDM, the United Democratic Front) because the ANC was banned.
Now we'll go home to our organisation, to the ANC.’
And the government?
Didn't she think it was odd that they were taking such a risk?
‘Oh, let them gamble!’ she chuckled.
‘Let them gamble!’
Why were they gambling?
Was it perhaps partly that Mr Mandela, did she get the feeling, was pulling strings, leading the government along?
‘Nelson Mandela is twisting them around his little finger.’
CAPE TOWN — Two South African riot police officers were acquitted yesterday of assault charges brought by a fellow policeman who said their unit had acted like wild dogs during protests around Cape Town, Reuter reports.
A court found Major Charles Brazelle and Lt David Roos not guilty of ordering their squads to use excessive violence against anti-apartheid protesters during riots before parliamentary elections last month.
But the court ruled it was clear that members of Lt Roos's patrol had beaten members of the public, and added it was astonishing that they had escaped punishment.
Lt Gregory Rockman, the Coloured (mixed-race) officer who brought the charges, said the verdict was ridiculous and provided patrols with a licence for beating.
Jordan embarks on an electoral road to uncertainty: In November Jordanians will vote in the country's first parliamentary elections in 22 years.
Charles Richards, in Maan, describes changing attitudes to the government
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
THE CHARRED hulks of vehicles beside the highway on the approaches to Maan, 130 miles through the desert south from Amman, remain as mute but eloquent reminders of the limits of public tolerance of an unpopular government when no other expression of opinion is possible.
A newly constructed police encampment on the outskirts of the city underlines that the authorities are prepared for any eventuality.
It was in Maan that riots against price rises started in April.
The unrest, which killed 11 people, spread elswhere in the south, the traditional base for support for the Hashemite regime; first to al Hassaniyeh and al Tufeila, and then up to Kerak, Madaba and Salt.
In response, King Hussein removed his prime minister and childhood friend, Zeid ar-Rifai, and accelerated the announcement of parliamentary elections to be held on 8 November, the first for 22 years.
‘If we had enough money there would be no need for elections,’ said a political commentator.
‘The swiftness and depth of the economic shocks were key factors.
Jordan simply had to come to terms with political and economic imbalances.’
But there is little civic pride in Maan that its actions should have set off the train of events.
Instead townspeople speak of Maan's glorious role in sparking another great rebellion, the Arab revolt against the Ottomans.
The Maan which Lawrence of Arabia knew was a way-station on the Hejaz railway taking pilgrims down to Mecca, and later was briefly capital of Transjordan before the Emir Abdullah, grandfather of King Hussein, moved with his tribal chiefs to Amman.
Whether from shame or fear of the all-pervasive Mukhabarat security police, people are reluctant to talk of the four civilians in Maan who were killed -they do not use the word ‘martyred’ as would Palestinians on the West Bank of the river — during the ‘sorrowful events’as they are known in official parlance.
‘The disturbances were spontaneous outpourings against bad management by the ex-government’ said Mahmoud Talhouni, known as Abu Ammar, a conservative politician, tribal leader and electoral candidate.
He emphasised that people distinguished between the ex-government and the King.
‘When the King came recently, blood flowed in the streets from all the camels killed for him.
This was an expression of the real soul of this city.’
Campaigning for the 80 parliamentary seats opens officially tomorow.
But already candidates have been holding informal sessions, enticing potential voters with great banquets of slaughtered sheep.
Mahmoud Talhouni says that since the last elections, television and communications have increased the electorate's awareness.
‘People can see how across there Israeli politicians fight each other in parliament, and in Greece they bring to account a corrupt prime minister.’
His comments reflect the uncertainity of an experiment where no one under the age of 42 has voted before.
Corruption and the mismanagement of the economy by the previous government are major issues.
A number of people associated with the excesses of the past have already fallen from grace.
Ahmed Shalabi, the Iraqi founder and head of Petra Bank, the country's third largest, has fled the country amid accusations of fraud and embezzlement.
The government has announced that culprits in the scandal will be tried by military court.
The prosecution could open a can of worms, since Mr Shalabai who has denied any wrongdoing had connections at every level.
Other prominent personalities to have departed the scene are Ali Ghandour, the Lebanese Shia head of the national airline, and Abdul Hadi Majali, the powerful police chief and scion of a powerful Kerak clan.
But bread-and-butter issues are alos important.
Maan, with no agriculture, commerce or industry, is especially hard-hit by the country's economic difficulties, including the halving of the value of the dinar, rising prices and more unemployment.
‘The elections mean nothing’ said a local chemist.
‘Nothing has changed.
What matters is that something should be done to give us jobs and money to live on.
If not there will be another explosion.’
There are two explanations put forward for why the King has relaxed his grip on the government.
The first theory is that the move is a safety valve, to defuse popular resentment and a sense of alienation.
In future, government will be more accountable to an elected legislature.
State institutions will be reinforced.
Elections, however, are only the first step.
Political parties are still banned.
Candidates stand as individuals.
As for the future, much depends on how far the King is prepared to renounce constitutional prerogatives.
The experiment has gathered wide support, even from left-wing groups which in the past sought to overthrow the monarchy, but which now express support for constitutional reform.
The second hypothesis is more ominous.
This is that the King is showing signs of not having learnt the lesson of the past months.
He has travelled abroad at sensitive times.
He is used to ruling autocratically, as are his advisers.
There were disturbing hints of this attitude in his televised speech to the nation on Saturday evening.
He effectively cast his own vote against the Islamic trend by calling on his subjects not to vote for extremist religious ideologies — a move which could prove counter-productive.
For 36 years, he has survived through a sure-footed personal response to problems.
He may have reassured himself of the contnuing power of his charisma during recent tours of the south, where he was given a rapturous welcome.
But the jubilation in Kerak and Madaba may have led him to overestimate his popular support in the area where he has traditionally drawn his loyal troops.
There was grumbling that he may not have heard among tribesmen at al Hassaniyeh who are resentful at not being able to voice their grievances freely.
Eventually, he may feel parliament is expendable.
This could happen if 10 or 15 firebrands are elected, whether Islamic zealots or radical Palestinians, or if parliament plays an overly assertive and forceful role.
Were he to deflect the challenge by dissolving parliament, it would confirm he had not properly learnt the lessons of April's disturbances.
Fading star
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
BUDAPEST (AP)— The light illuminating the huge red star atop Hungary's parliament was switched off and will be removed after the Communist Party's decision to disband.
Falling down
Foreign News Page 8
Manila calamity
Foreign News Page 8
Nagorny death
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
MOSCOW (Reuter)— Soviet troops killed a second man in the disputed territory of Nagorny Karabakh and Azerbaijan extended its railway blockade of Armenia to neighbouring Georgia, Soviet newspapers said.
Greek caretaker
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
ATHENS (UPI)— The Greek Chief Justice, Yannis Grivas, was sworn in as caretaker Prime Minister, with a 20-member cabinet of judges and retired army men, to take the country into general elections on 5 November.
President Christos Sartzetakis asked Mr Grivas to form a government after the main political parties would or could not do so.
Union reform
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
CANBERRA (Reuter)— Australia's conservative opposition, led by Andrew Peacock, announced plans to curb trade unions, sell state assets and cut taxes, with a view to the general election a year ahead.
Indians to go
Foreign News Page 8
Inquiry call
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
JERUSALEM (Reuter)— Britain's senior diplomat in the Israeli-occupied territories called for an inquiry into the killing by troops of an Arab youth.
Consul-General Ivan Callan, who visited the occupied West Bank town of Nablus, said a woman there told him she saw Nidal al-Habash, 21, shot after he raised his hands and then shot three more times on the ground.
‘It seemed to be a credible account,’ Mr Callan said.
Pretender's trial
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Maan
BASTIA, Corsica (Reuter)— After 11 years of deliberations, a court has ordered the pretender to the Italian throne to stand trial for manslaughter in the shooting of a German youth.
Prince Victor Emmanuel of Savoy, 52, son of Italy's last king, will be tried in the Corsican capital Ajaccio.
The shooting happened after the prince went in search of a dinghy taken from his yacht.
Peking summons
By KEVIN HAMLIN
HONG KONG — Xu Jiatun, China's senior official in Hong Kong, was summoned to Peking for talks on the dispute between China and Hong Kong over the Chinese swimmer Yang Yang, who was allowed by Hong Kong to go to the US last week, writes Kevin Hamlin.
China retaliated by refusing to accept back illegal immigrants into Hong Kong.
Bug alert
By KEVIN HAMLIN
NEW YORK (AP)— Computer users around the world waited nervously to see whether warnings of a rogue ‘virus’ come true today.
Someone tampered with IBM systems by planting a dormant bug due to wipe out whole data banks as soon as the calendar hits Friday 13 October.
It has been detected in a dozen systems in the US and yesterday the Swiss government announced that 75 of its computers were infected.
Kremlin wars
By KEVIN HAMLIN
MOSCOW (Reuter)— A senior defence official acknowledged that Soviet combat forces fought for a decade in Vietnam and in other foreign wars over the past 40 years.
In what Western experts said was the first recognition of the extent of Kremlin military activity, Lieutenant-General Anatoly Sidorov listed Korea, Egypt, Syria, Angola and Ethiopia as other countries where Soviet troops fought.
Battles at Pope's sermon
By KEVIN HAMLIN
DILI (Reuter)— Pro-independence demonstrators fought with police during a Mass in East Timor for about 100,000 people at which the Pope told Indonesia to uphold human rights after ‘years of death and destruction’.
The protesters waved banners in Portuguese reading ‘Pope, please save East Timor’ and yelled ‘Long Live Fretilin', the guerrilla movement seeking independence.
Vibrant atom-age timekeepers clock up a Nobel Prize
By TOM WILKIE, Science Correspondent
THE NOBEL Prize for physics has been awarded to three scientists who developed ultra-precise techniques that lie at the heart of modern atomic clocks.
Two US scientists have been awarded the chemistry prize for a discovery that has changed scientists’ views about the origin of life.
Norman Ramsey, 74, of Harvard University, shared the physics prize with Hans Dehmelt, a naturalised US citizen born in Germany in 1922, and Wolfgang Paul, 76, of the University of Bonn in West Germany.
In 1949, Professor Ramsey introduced a crucial refinement to previous work on atomic beams which allowed the frequency of atomic vibrations to be measured with unprecedented accuracy.
Scientists discovered the atom vibrates with more regularity than the earth turns on its axis.
So in 1967, the rotation of the earth was abandoned as the basic source of timekeeping.
The definition of a second has since officially been the time it takes a cesium atom to make 9,192,631,770 vibrations.
Professor Ramsey then went on, with other colleagues, to develop the hydrogen maser, which, with recent refinements, may be able to measure frequencies with a stability of one part in a billion billion.
That is the equivalent of a clock set running at the time of the dinosaurs having gained or lost less than a second by today.
Masers have allowed scientists to track the infinitesimally slow drift of the continents across the earth's surface and to check the predictions of Einstein's theory of relativity that gravity or acceleration will cause a clock to run slow.
In the 1950s, Professor Paul carried out the first experiments using a form of magnetic bottle — the ‘Paul trap’— to isolate ionised atoms.
The work was further developed by Professor Dehmelt.
In the 1970s, at the University of Washington in Seattle, he succeeded in isolating a single electron and holding it in his trap for nearly 10 months before losing it.
Brian Petley, who is head of basic metrology at Britain's National Physical Laboratory, says the technique was so sensitive that Professor Dehmelt was able to measure the mass of the proton relative to the electron with an accuracy of one part in 100 million.
That is the equivalent of weighing a fully-laden oil supertanker so accurately that a contraband bottle of whisky in the captain's cabin would register on the scales.
Sidney Altman, 50, of Yale University, and Thomas Cech, 41, of University of Colorado, Boulder, shared the chemistry prize.
In the 1970s, the two were independently studying how the information necessary to specify living creatures, which is stored in the DNA molecule, was transcribed and its instructions expressed to make living cells.
DNA contains huge stretches of ‘junk’ information that have to be edited out.
This is done when the message, written in the DNA double helix, is transcribed into a related ‘messenger’ molecule, called RNA.
Everyone had thought that only special chemical scissors, strips of protein called enzymes, could snip out the junk.
The two scientists demonstrated that some RNA molecules could do the job directly.
‘They deserve the award,’ said David Zimmern of the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Cambridge.
‘It was something that impressed a lot of people.’
The discovery may also be important medically, Dr Zimmern suggested.
Some cases of Hepatitis B are complicated by a satellite virus known as the delta agent and its RNA has been shown to have this catayltic property.
Neo-fascists apologise for disruption in Strasbourg
From DAVID USBORNE in Strasbourg
AFTER 24 hours of disruption, the European Parliament recovered its poise last night when two members of its neo-fascist faction publicly apologised for violently interrupting proceedings on Wednesday.
Bruno Gollnisch of West Germany and Bernard Antony of France had resisted expulsion from the parliament chamber after protesting against a decision to exclude their party from leading official visits abroad.
The resulting fracas led to the suspension of proceedings for two hours on Wednesday and further rancorous debate yesterday.
Both members of Jean-Marie Le Pen's European Right party, the MEPs shouted insults at the President of the Parliament, Enrique Baron, when he announced the measure barring the far-right party from leading delegations to Israel and Switzerland.
Political leaders from across the assembly had resolved earlier in the week that an apparent lacuna in the rulebook which gave the neo-fascists the chairmanship and vice-chairmanship of the delegations should be filled so that the pair could be voted out of their posts.
There was unanimity among all but Mr Le Pen's members that the neo-fascists would be unsuitable to represent Strasbourg abroad, especially at the Knesset.
Glyn Ford, the leader of the British Labour group, was among those speaking out against Mr Le Pen's group.
‘Ever since the elections they have been revealing themselves as the neo-Nazis that they really are,’ he said.
Mr Le Pen said his 17-member party was being persecuted and unjustly accused of racism and fascism.
Earlier, the leader of the Socialists, Jean-Pierre Cot, said Mr Le Pen had ‘improved his Nazi vocabulary’ by his alliance with the West German Republicans, led by ex-Waffen SS officer, Franz Schonhuber.
Mr Schonhuber also voiced anger, saying that ‘squadrons of former Waffen SS officers’ were now members of the Social Democratic party in West Germany.
‘We are seeing a pilgrimage of hypocrisy,’ he said.
Mr Gollnisch had shouted ‘Dictator, dictator’ at Mr Baron on Wednesday and called other MEPs ‘Gestapo men’.
When officials tried to eject him, he tried to punch his neighbours.
Mr Le Pen launched his own tirade of Nazi terminology, suggesting that his party members were being treated as Untermenschen.
In accepting the apology last night, Mr Baron said he considered the case closed.
Several members of the European Parliament, including Mr Cot, had called for the pair to be suspended for five days with financial penalties.
However, Mr Baron also ordered a review of the rules regarding disturbances in parliament sessions to ensure that tougher sanctions can be applied to members causing disruptions in future.
Exhibition of children's books at the Frankfurt Book Fair
From DAVID USBORNE in Strasbourg
A SPECIAL exhibition of books for children forms one of the centrepieces of the 41st annual Frankfurt Book Fair.
This year's five-day fair is the biggest so far, with 8,189 exhibitors from 93 countries; the organisers expect 220,000 visitors.
Britain — represented by 1,041 exhibitors — is the second-largest contingent after West Germany.
But business at the fair — the focal point of world publishing — has been described as quiet.
Works under discussion range from novels by Tom Wolfe to The Complete Book of Portable Power Tool Techniques.
At least one deal has been mooted which would allow European firms to publish simultaneously in several languages.
Well-oiled transfer of power in Norway
From TONY SAMSTAG in Oslo
OSLO — The leader of Norway's minority Labour government, Gro Harlem Brundtland, is not entirely without a sense of humour.
It is no accident that she chose Friday the 13th to resign, writes Tony Samstag.
A new government, a centre-right coalition led by the mainstream Conservative Party, takes over on Monday, with the Brundtland administration caretakers over the weekend.
It is an orderly transition, reinforcing the impression, as it is intended to, that the social-democratic ship of state is on course, its institutions well-oiled and in working order, even though last month's general election left the country with a hung Storting (parliament).
From Monday the world's third-richest nation (in per capita income terms), an important member of Nato and the second-largest oil producer in Europe, will be run by a fragile alliance of Conservatives, who won 22 per cent of the vote, the Centre Party, representing farmers' interests, who won 7 per cent, and the Christian Democrats, whose religious enthusiasts won 9 per cent .
The balance of power will be held by the Progress Party, an unpredictable all-purpose protest party.
Swede is cleared of murdering Palme
From MATS WIKLUND in Stockholm
THE MAN sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of the Swedish prime minister, Olof Palme, was acquitted yesterday after the appeal court overturned the verdict against him.
The court announced that the charges against Christer Pettersson, a social outcast with a history of manslaughter and drugs offences, did not contain enough evidence for a guilty verdict.
As Mr Pettersson left Kronoberg remand centre with a police escort and his lawyer, Arne Liljeros, he declared: ‘I'm of course happy.
After all, I had imagined a future in Kumla security prison.
‘I'm surprised.
I never really believed I would be acquitted, although I am innocent.’
In July Mr Pettersson was convicted by a the crown court in a split decision where the majority, consisting of lay assessors, unanimously voted in favour of a life sentence.
The assessors based their decision almost entirely on the testimony of Lisbet Palme, who without hesitation pointed out Mr Pettersson as the man she saw standing near her and her dying husband.
Olof Palme was shot dead on a Stockholm street on 28 February 1986.
A second shot grazed Mrs Palme.
The text of the appeal court judgement, where trained judges form the majority, will not be made public until 2 November.
But it is safe to assume that the lack of technical evidence — no weapon connected to the murder has been found — and a valid motive will be cited.
Almost certainly, Mrs Palme's testimony will be put in doubt.
Mr Liljeros has maintained that too much time has passed to make it possible for Mrs Palme to point out her husband's murderer.
Mrs Palme was first confronted with Christer Pettersson in December 1988, more than two years after the death of Olof Palme.
An appeal to the Swedish Supreme Court is considered unlikely, so Christer Pettersson is to all practical purposes a free man.
How free is another matter.
There is already talk of changing his identity.
He could also expect record damages after being jailed for almost 10 months.
As for the hunt for Mr Palme's murderer, Swedish police officials have asserted that it will continue.
Aoun rejects deal and says war still on
By HARVEY MORRIS, Middle East Editor
LEBANON'S Christian leader, General Michel Aoun, last night denounced a draft peace agreement produced by the country's parliamentarians in the Saudi resort of Taif on the grounds that it did not set a timetable for the withdrawal of Syrian troops occupying the country since 1976.
The general's effective rejection of the peace charter, which has yet to be formally presented by the 31 Christian and 31 Muslim deputies gathered in Taif for the past two weeks, risks plunging Lebanon into a new cycle of the violence from which it temporarily escaped when the Arab League brokered a ceasefire on 23 September.
Speaking to Christian supporters in east Beirut, General Aoun reminded the deputies in Taif that ‘a war has erupted to liberate Lebanon and it is still on and it will continue until it achieves its goals’.
The general, whose appointment as prime minister a year ago is disputed by a rival Muslim government in west Beirut, did not want Christian deputies to go to Taif in the first place.
In the face of their insistence and that of Arab League negotiators, he warned them not to settle for any deal which did not involve the withdrawal of 30,000 to 40,000 Syrian troops based in west Beirut and the hinterland.
In the event, the deal which has emerged in Taif has justified the general's fears of what he would regard as a sell-out of the Maronite cause.
A working group of senior parliamentarians broke the deadlock at the talks by endorsing a charter which would give equality in parliament to the majority Muslim population and transfer powers now enjoyed by the Maronite presidency to a cabinet headed by a Sunni Muslim.
The charter, if put into effect, would reform the unwritten national charter of 1943, which gave the Maronites political dominance of the multi-confessional state.
The new charter would more closely reflect the demographic predominance of the Muslims, a move which their leaders and their Syrian backers argue is long overdue.
But General Aoun insists no such reforms can be instituted until the withdrawal of Syrian troops, which Christian leaders invited into Lebanon in 1976 as a peacekeeping force.
‘We can achieve such reforms on Lebanese soil once it is free of any conqueror imposing his will on it,’ the general said last night.
The tentative Taif agreement, on the other hand, sets no timetable for a total Syrian withdrawal and refers only to a pull-out from the Beirut area within two years.
The fear among many Muslim Lebanese, who might otherwise favour the departure of the Syrians, is that they would leave behind a power vacuum to be filled by warlords on both sides of the confessional divide.
Most of these consistently criticised the parliamentary peace efforts under way in Saudi Arabia.
The Druze leader, Walid Jumblatt, said in Amman yesterday that the Taif deal would not bring peace to Lebanon and that, although he did not intend to block it, he would not accept it either.
Mr Jumblatt's forces, together with the Syrians, were in the front line of the confrontation with Christian forces — General Aoun's ‘war of liberation’-which began in March and lasted until the Arab League-sponsored ceasefire last month.
Ark Royal sheers off after battle of Lisbon
From TONY SMITH of Associated Press
LISBON — The British aircraft carrier Ark Royal cut short a five-day goodwill visit here yesterday as controversy flared between US and Portuguese officials over the arrest of 121 American and British sailors during an alleged street-fighting rampage.
The Ark Royal, which docked in Lisbon on Wednesday, prepared to return to Portsmouth four days early after shore leave was cancelled following the incident.
‘We've decided to go.
The atmosphere is bad and British sailors could get caught up in the bad feeling if they went ashore,’ said the Ark Royal's captain, John Brigstocke.
‘We're at pains to stress this isn't a protest, but we were here for rest and recreation,’ he said, ‘so if I can't send my men ashore; there's not much point in staying.’
He added: ‘There is no evidence of fighting between American and British sailors…and I am confident my men were not involved in any drunkenness, damage or trouble of any kind.’
Lisbon police said about a third of the 121 sailors detained were British.
They said the sailors were detained after about 500 seamen brawled along Lisbon's dockside, besieging a police station, smashing windows in shops and bars and overturning cars.
They were later released after their commanders promised there would be no further incidents, said duty officer Paulino Cardoso.
But US embassy officials said preliminary interviews with most of the 142 injured US servicemen indicated they were wounded in clashes with police.
Mr Cardoso said the battling started after three black American seamen attacked a white US sailor at the Passport Bar in the gaudy, neon-lit Cais do Sodre area.
Fighting spread from bar to night-club along the narrow cobbled streets of the seedy riverside area as other sailors, including British seamen from the carrier, joined in and police were called in to keep the peace, he added.
US officials, however said there was no proof of fighting among sailors.
Police revised an earlier version that the clashes began between black US and white British sailors.
US and Portuguese officials were yesterday conducting separate investigations.