

Law: Review of administration in Court of Appeal Civil Division
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correpondent
AS A measure for reducing delays in the disposal of appeals in the Civil Division of the Court of Appeal, Lord Donaldson of Lymington, the Master of the Rolls, said the categories of cases in which unsuccessful litigants were required to obtain leave to appeal should be extended.
Lord Donaldson gave the seventh annual review of the organisation and administration of the Civil Division of the Court of Appeal, on 12 October 1989.
He said the purpose of the annual review was to inform the legal profession, the users of the court and the wider public of what problems had been encountered in endeavours to achieve better, cheaper and swifter appellate justice, what steps were being taken to overcome those problems and what success was attending those efforts.
The critical equation The resources of the court, both human and material, were necessarily limited.
Delays would increase or decrease, according to whether the court was presented with more or less work than it could handle.
Over the seven-year period covered by the reviews, that critical equation had produced a state of equilibrium.
Lead times — the period which elapsed between an appeal being launched and its disposal — were largely unchanged.
It was against that background that the judges and staff of the court had throughout the year been examining what measures were feasible which tip the balance in the direction of reducing delays, either by an improved system for screening appeals or by an improved system for handling them or both.
Screening appeals The justification for the present system whereby some categories of appeal could only be brought by leave of the trial judge or of the Court of Appeal was threefold: 1.
It was no kindness to allow a litigant who was unsuccessful in the trial court to incur costs protesting at that result, if the decision was demonstrably correct or, as often in matrimonial disputes, if there was no ‘right’ answer and the trial judge must inevitably be the final arbiter.
2.
Allowing such appeals to proceed caused grave injustice to the successful party, who was denied the benefit of the judgment in his favour, pending the outcome of the appeal, and almost always incurred irrecoverable costs.
3.
The employment of the resources of the court in hearing such appeals inevitably postponed the hearing of other appeals where there was a real issue to be decided.
Extending the requirement for leave to appeal It was to be hoped that in the context of forthcoming legislation, consideration would be given to extending the requirement for leave to appeal across the board, both because there was no justification for allowing any appeal to proceed if it had no prospect of success and because the present dividing lines between those in which leave was required and those in which it was not, was quite illogical.
Thus, a litigant who claimed any form of injunction had an unfettered right of appeal.
So too had parents who disagreed with a judge's decision on any matter, however minor, concerning a child's education or welfare.
Yet a judgment striking out a complete action for want of prosecution or for any other reason was appealable only with leave.
A further, if slightly different, anomaly existed in relation to judicial review.
In recognition of the general interest in avoiding the disruptive effect of such proceedings on the public administration no one could apply for judicial review unless they had successfully applied ex parte for leave.
Where leave was given, it was not uncommon to find on investigation that there were no grounds for granting any relief.
Yet the disappointed applicant had an unfettered right to extend the period of disruption by appealing.
Improvements in the handling of appeals The year had seen two separate and different initiatives.
The first was announced in a Practice Direction (1989) 1 WLR 281, which provided for the much earlier delivery of skeleton arguments which would be studied by the judges before they sat to hear the appeal.
The primary purpose was to reduce the costly time spent on oral argument in so far as that was not necessary for the proper determination fo the appeal.
It was too early to reach firm conclusions as to the direction's effectiveness.
The need to monitor that experiment and the conviction that the court would benefit from improved lines of communication between it and those who used the court, either as practitioners or as litigants, had led to the establishment of a Court of Appeal Users' Committee, representative of both, which would have its first meeting later this month.
The second concerned the acquisition of a small number of ‘in house’ lawyers.
There needed to be a team leader and five other lawyers.
Each lawyer should be in full charge of case management of all application and appeals within his group, giving procedural advice to litigants in person, and, where necessary, providing summaries of the issues raised for the use of the judges.
The groups would be defined by reference to subject matter; eg public law, family law, contract and commercial law and so on.
The lawyers would also have other duties, such as providing an up-to-date data base of the court's decisions relevant to each group.
The Lord Chancellor's Department had now reached the stage of recruitment.
It was hoped that there might be one or more lawyers in post in the relatively near future.
The nature of the court's work There had been a tendency largely to disregard applications as being incidental to the main task of deciding appeals and as not significant in themselves.
The figures for applications heard by a single Lord Justice and two and three Lords Justices went a long way to explaining why, despite the facts that the rate at which appeals were begun had shown little change over the years, there had been some small increase in judge-power and that major improvements had been made in the court's procedures, the number of appeals outstanding at the end of each year and the lead times for hearing appeals showed no real improvement.
The judges now had to hear nearly as many applications as they heard appeals.
A 50 per cent increase in applications to a court of three judges and the overall 33 per cent in full court applications had very obvious implications for the availability of judges to hear substantive appeals.
Two other changes in the nature of the court's work had been identified as contributing to the failure to reduce lead times.
1.
The first concerned litigants in person.
No one denied litigants the right to prosecute their appeals in person, but deprived of the benefit of the assistance of counsel, it could take longer to hear and determine the application or appeal.
There was a 66 per cent increase in the numbers of applications made by litigants in person and a 20 per cent increase in the number of appeals.
2.
The second was the increasing complexity of the legal issues arising in appeals.
Dismissals of appeals without a hearing on the merits were a key factor in the ‘critical equation’.
Twenty-six per cent of all appeals set down were disposed of in that way.
Judge power The authorised number of Lords Justices was at present 26, one less than at the same time last year.
At any one time five were working in the Criminal Division and in the Queen's Bench Divisional Court.
The effective full-time strength of the Civil Division was thus the Master of the Rolls and 21 Lords Justices.
There was undoubtedly a case for a small increase in numbers for the benefit of both divisions of the court.
Courtrooms The lack of sufficient courtrooms had been a continuing problem, but should be resolved when the new courts in the Thomas More Building came into use in January 1990.
Long vacation sittings The court sat in various strengths in the first half of August and the second half of September with judges available for truly urgent matters during the remainder of the vacation.
The future It was peculiarly difficult to predict future trends at the present time when it was anticipated that there would be a major re-distribution of work in the trial courts in consequence of legislation to give effect to the recommendations of the Civil Justice Review.
All that could be said was that the judges and staff of the court would continue to do all in their power to reduce costs and lead times in the disposal of appellant business.
The biggest single contribution in the success of those efforts would probably be a major extension in the requirement for leave to appeal.
During the coming year it was intended to undertake research designed, if possible, to show what would be the effect of any such change.
Law Update: City beckons dons
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correpondent
SALARIES for university law teachers have slipped so badly and professional salaries risen so dramatically that experienced staff are being lost at an alarming rate, the Committee of Heads of University Law Schools reported this week.
From 1984-88, 35 university law departments lost 127 staff, including nine professors, representing around a quarter of the total number of posts, while recruitment has become increasingly difficult, with some commercial law posts being left vacant because no suitable candidates can be found.
An aspiring university teacher appointed in his early 20s is likely to earn at least £4,000 less than an articled clerk in a City solicitors' firm.
‘His former students will within a few years of graduation be earning a salary twice that of his,’ the report says.
‘If the financial rewards are perceived to be grossly unfair and inadequate -and they are — we shall simply not have the staff to sustain the quality of legal education and research,’ it warns.
A Guardian student survey published this week confirms the university law schools' worst fears.
Earning money was rated more highly by students wanting to work in legal services than by the average student and London is selected by 59 per cent of them as the region they would most like to work in.
Law Update: Driven off the road
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correpondent
CONTRARY to popular belief, a £1m damages award is not over generous when a young person suffers severe brain damage in a road accident.
But in the wake of scare stories about so-called ‘defensive’ medicine comes a new twist: defensive driving, Action for Victims of Medical Accidents reports in its latest newsletter.
Questioned about high damages awards following motor accidents, Ivor Carr, Secretary of the British Motorists Association, said there were moves afoot to increase car insurance premiums by 1,000 per cent and this would encourage motorists to indulge in defensive driving to keep premiums down.
This might be thought to be a good thing.
Not so, says Mr Carr.
Many drivers were thinking twice about carrying out risky manoeuvres such as doing 90 miles an hour down the motorway even though such speeds benefited society in speeding up access to distant parts.
He fears motorists are no longer held in high esteem and it was time the Government took steps to limit the amount of damages payable after a traffic accident, otherwise there would soon be no motorists left.
Law Update: In court: who's suing whom
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correpondent
THE Sunday Correspondent has received its first brace of libel writs, with one from Emma Samms over ‘Fresh evidence widens Eagle Trust scandal’ in the 1 October edition and another from Jonathan Maxwell Wylie Samuelson, who claims he was libelled in the same article and also in one headed ‘Payments to Samuelson Jnr’in the 17 September issue.
Rock musician Roy Harper began a libel action against Emap Metro Ltd trading as ‘Q’ magazine, following an article in the July 1989 issue which alleged he snorted cocaine on stage.
Harry Longmuir is suing Derek Jameson, National Magazine Co Ltd and Penguin Books Ltd for libel contained in Mr Jameson's book, ‘Touched by Angels’.
Cricketer Rodney Ontong started an action for personal injuries against the Glamorgan County Cricket Club and others following an accident on 19 August 1988.
Reliance Security Services Ltd is being sued by biotechnology manufacturers APV Holdings plc.
The writ alleges that on the night of 26/7 February 1987 Sean Harris, a night security guard employed by Reliance, set fire to the company's premises at the Manor Royal Industrial Estate, Croydon, causing damage estimated at £460,000.
Mr Harris was ordered to be detained under the Mental Health Act by Croydon Crown Court on 28 April last year.
Law: Crucial battle for the high moral ground: As Parliament prepares to debate embryo research, Simon Lee says the time has come to approach the issues more responsibly
By SIMON LEE
AFTER a five-year delay, the Government is finally bringing forward for legislation the 1984 Warnock Report's agenda on human embryo experimentation.
The coming parliamentary session will provide a momentous opportunity for public debate on a matter of deep moral significance.
The debate will centre on alternative clauses: one outlawing all experiments on embryos from the moment of conception, the other (the Warnock majority's view) allowing them for the first 14 days.
The Bill will be a special one in that the political parties are allowing their members in both Houses a free vote because the issue is deemed to be one of conscience.
But the likelihood is that bad arguments will dominate the discussions.
On all known form, campaigners, opinion-formers and politicians themselves will engage in polarising rhetoric rather than genuine debate, particularly since amendments by pro-life campaigners will seek to yoke the issue of abortion to the question of embryo experimentation.
What a beneficial change it would be if instead it was acknowledged that these issues present tragic choices between compelling arguments which are held on both sides in good faith.
There are five bad lines of approach which should be banished from the debate — and from all discussions of law and morals.
The first line of attack is often name-calling: ‘You would say that, wouldn't you, because you're a Catholic/a man/fertile/infertile/a doctor/a research scientist’.
A second bad approach is seeking to win the debate by definitions.
On the one hand, there are scientists who are only too willing to call a spade a pre-spade.
The term pre-embryo, for example, is now used by some researchers.
Its attracts support for the Warnock majority proposal by implying that the pre-14 day embryo has an inferior moral worth to the post-14 day embryo.
These embryologists, who do not call themselves pre-embryologists, never used that before the Warnock committee drew that line.
All language is morally loaded (one campaigner's unborn child is another's clump of cells) but those who would trick the public by the term pre-embryo should be prepared to concentrate on the moral status of the early embryo, not on dreaming up a new vocabulary.
On the other side we hear the accusation that scientists are ‘playing God’.
But what exactly does this mean?
This is a linguistic smoke-screen which obscures an absence of reasoning.
Surely it is not the scientists who are guilty of hubris here but their accusers, in implying that humans could play God.
A third approach is to pray in aid the so-called slippery slope.
Pro-lifers will claim that if we allow experiments up to 14 days, then next year it will be a month, then three months.
Meanwhile, pro-choicers argue that if we restrict abortion to 18 weeks, then next year it will be 15, then 12.
The reality is that it is extraordinarily difficult to get any change in these kinds of laws — as the last 30 years of procedural mugging by both sides shows in relation to abortion, and the five-year gestation period of this Bill shows with regard to experimenting.
Too often we are faced with clamouring up the slippery slopes to the law more than sliding down them.
We have to accept that the reality is that we are always already on the slope, holding a position.
A fourth bad approach is to claim that the law cannot stop research or whatever is under discussion, so why try?
This is usually expressed in terms of pushing an activity underground (eg pornography) or into the backstreets (eg abortion) or abroad (eg experiments on embryos).
But the law does not stop all murder, yet most of us are grateful that it tries.
A fifth mistaken approach is the facile assertion that opponents are being inconsistent.
There are two lines of rebuttal.
One is to say that there are subtle differences which explain alleged inconsistencies, as for example between banning experiments altogether or after 14 days yet allowing later abortions.
Some people believe that the different intentions of the experimenter and the abortionist, or the different location of the embryo in a petri dish or in a woman's womb, are morally relevant factors.
It behoves the sceptics among us to listen and argue rather than to whoop with delight at the superficial difficulties.
The other plausible strategy is to admit an inconsistency but to accept that the law should not necessarily be consistent across the range of tragic choices.
Indeed, the only way in which a society can come to terms with its conflicting values is to prefer one value in some circumstances and another in different conditions.
It is difficult enough for an individual to be consistent, let alone a society.
Are all pro-lifers anti-capital punishment, anti-nuclear weapons and anti-cars?
Supposing that we did turn away from the cheap arguments, where could we find a better way?
Sadly, the Warnock majority is confused as to its basic philosophical argument, condemning utilitarianism in its foreword but relying on it in justifying its crucial recommendation to allow experiments up to 14 days, only to reject it again in opposing the routine testing of drugs on human embryos at any stage from conception.
The Government has wisely allowed legislators to choose between this approach and one of the Warnock minority alternatives.
But how should we decide between them?
Help is at hand in the more constructive approach of the Glover Report on Fertility and the Family, compiled for the European Commission and now published by Fourth Estate.
Chaired by the distinguished philosopher Jonathan Glover, a small committee of experts recognised that the issue is a classic test of our deepest moral views.
What matters is not just what Parliament decides but how it decides.
In what is heralded as a vote of conscience, any conscience ought to be deeply troubled by the agonising choice between respecting human embryos from their earliest moments and responding to the plight of infertile couples.
The issue represents the ultimate test — and perhaps the convergence — of two opposing moral theories.
Recognition of that and an agreement to forego the linguistic tricks and the cheap jibes would help convince all sides that their arguments have been listened to with respect.
It would also help convince them that politicians have decided not on the basis of the best orchestrated campaign but by seeking to occupy the high moral ground, wherever it might be found.
Law: A bad system for tackling hackers: Proposals to curb computer crime may have the opposite effect, argues Mary Fagan
By MARY FAGAN
A REPORT by the Law Commission on computer misuse, published this week, angered those who believe that hacking for fun should not be outlawed but was treated as a triumph by lobbyists for anti-hacking laws.
Nicholas Ridley added to the general glee by saying the Government was in favour of legislation.
But few believe the findings of the Law Commission, or government action, will prevent either hacking or computer-related crime.
Indeed, there is a strong argument that stretching the long arm of the law to the ‘innocent’ hacker could escalate rather than curb serious crime.
Emma Nicholson's Private Member's Bill against hackers, which failed to make the grade in the last session of Parliament, required anyone who entered a computer to his or anyone else's advantage, or to another's prejudice, to be charged with a serious offence, with a maximum penalty of 10 years.
The Law Commission has been much more exact in specifying intent to commit serious crime as a necessary ingredient for one of the two more serious offences it proposes.
It leaves less to the discretion of the court and has decided on a maximum sentence of just five years.
It has also elegantly solved the problems surrounding theft with the aid of a computer.
This was already illegal, but under the new proposals, potential culprits do not have to have actually stolen anything.
The commission has also thrown out the idea, put forward by some industrialists and businessmen, that special provision is needed for computer fraud.
Most such attempts, it concluded, are actually perpetrated by authorised users, and can usually be covered by existing law.
But there are areas of fraud which still need to be tackled, such as the complicated matter of deceiving a machine.
Under the Theft Acts, it is not possible to deceive a machine ('hole in the wall' banks and automated machinery as well as computers).
Of more urgent concern is the international dimension.
Modern technology makes moving funds around the world all too easy.
The Law Commission pointed out in a report in April that the use of computers has greatly facilitated the ability to plan and implement in one country a fraud that has its deleterious effect in another.
It believes that unless urgent action is taken, on this front, law enforcement agencies will be deprived of a potentially powerful weapon against international crime.
According to Peter Sommer, a computer forensics expert, the commission has done a good job in proposing new legislation which is workable and fits well with other parts of the law.
But the report fails to live up to expectations in looking at how new legislation will be enforced.
He believes there are serious gaps, such as the limitations on using computer information (audit trails and logs for example) as admissible evidence in court.
Mr Sommer also believes the basic offence of entering a computer will be virtually unenforceable, partly because of lack of police manpower and partly because arrest warrants for this less serious offence will involve applying to a magistrate.
‘This is ‘gesture legislation’— a statute that says we do not approve — but without any real means of enforcement,’ he says.
It appears to be the commission's way of making clear that it sees a huge chasm between recreational hacking and hacking for more sinister purposes.
Whether or not this is true, other computer pundits warn that fear of enforcement will drive computer hackers underground.
Alistair Kelman, a barrister, believes this will have two nasty effects: it will prevent ‘innocent hackers’ from informing authorities about lax security or about real computer criminals; and it could drive those who do commit a basic offence into the hands of hardened criminals.
The evidence from abroad is that outlawing hacking has not stopped it.
In the United States, where many states have anti-hacking laws, magazines abound on hacking and how to do it better.
Ex-hacker Stephen Gold says he remains ‘astounded at the arrogance’ of the Law Commission for not drawing on the experience of others.
In the US, he asserts, the government has realised that legislation is not enough and has set up the Computer Expert Resource Team.
This examines hacking and computer crime cases simply to gain experience and hopefully prevent future violations.
But it is commonly agreed among those involved in the computer misuse debate that the Law Commission proposals will make it easier to prosecute those who do mean to do wrong using hacking skills.
Prosecution itself will not necessarily remedy losses incurred or damage done.
The stumbling block which remains is security within companies.
The CBI rejects warnings that companies will hide behind the new anti-hacking laws, rather than make efforts to keep intruders out in the first place.
According to Alistair Kelman, however, many companies do not even comply with the Companies Act by keeping detailed records of what goes on in their computer systems.
The commission's underlying reasons for favouring strong action on hacking stem from the losses and costs incurred by computer systems owners, the possibility of crime and general unwillingness by the public to invest in computer systems.
The onus must now be on the industry to provide more secure machines and on users to make sure that their own security procedures (including the simple step of locking office doors) is unimpeachable.
In spite of the risks, the challenge for hackers remains.
They might fade into the background, but they are unlikely to go away.
Law: Giving the lie to an old-fashioned hunch: Marcus Stone on how to tell truth from fiction
By MARCUS STONE
CAN YOU, just by looking into someone's eyes, know whether the speaker is telling the truth?
As a juror, would you find that a defendant had committed a serious crime on such a basis?
If you can, with confidence and accuracy, you have a faculty which psychology has yet to discover.
Research supports the conclusion that there are no observable signs of lying, only signs of anxiety.
Witnesses may be anxious for reasons other than lying.
In this respect psychology has rendered a service to the courts by undermining the traditional belief in the demeanour of witnesses as a guide to their veracity.
In a proper approach to the evaluation of evidence, three questions arise.
The first is ‘Do I trust this witness?’
Such trust or distrust can only be based on an inference from personal facts about the witness and his circumstances.
Character, personality and motives are to the forefront.
Witnesses may not be lying, or be prepared to lie, just because they desire a particular outcome.
In considering the personal aspects of a witness, courts should always bear in mind the unreliability of subjective impressions and should base their judgments on these as little as possible.
The second main question then follows —‘Is the evidence reasonable?’
This is an objective inquiry and mainly a matter of assessing the effect of inconsistency or improbability in the evidence, which has usually been exposed by cross-examination.
Here, inconsistency refers to conflicts within the evidence of one or more witnesses who speak to the same version of the facts.
Improbability is tested by reference to one's experience of life.
The third question is ‘How does this evidence fit into the rest of it?’
To reach conclusions on any part of the evidence in isolation is dangerous.
The assessment is like assembling a jigsaw into which pieces fit with some inevitability.
Within this context, whether witnesses are lying can usually be decided without difficulty.
A crucial factor is that one witness's evidence, though plausible, may be rejected because it is contradicted by another witness whose evidence is accepted as being beyond doubt.
This is typical of the adversarial system — a total approach in which truth emerges from conflict.
The emphasis is on objective analysis of evidence rather than on a subjective impression of any single witness.
This differs radically from the popular image of penetrating falsehood by perception of the liar.
Experience in court shows how rare this is.
If it were normal, the world might be a different place.