

INTERVIEW /Consuming passions: Alan Howard talks to Sheila Johnston about his role in Greenaway's The Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
It is not every day that an actor gets eaten in a movie.
In Peter Greena way's The Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover, Alan Howard, as the lover, passes through a restaurant, a kitchen, a cold store and a lorry full of putrifying flesh; eventually (the cuckolded Thief, played by Michael Gambon, having visited a terrible revenge), his naked corpse is served up, finely glazed and garnished, as an unannounced extra item on the menu.
It is a meaty role.
‘They made a cast of my body, in sections, the torso, then the legs, then the head.
It's very weird to see yourself; looking in the mirror is not the same thing as seeing yourself three-dimensionally, which is very, very peculiar,’ says Howard, who politely declined the chance to take his effigy home at the end of filming.
By some accounts, both his and Gambon's agent found the script pornographic, and audiences at early screenings were repulsed by the brutality (although the film opens today to piquant reviews).
‘I was profoundly unnerved when I read the screenplay; quite shaking with fear and disturbance.
I suppose, though, that if Titus Andronicus came through the letter-box as a new script, you would be a bit shocked.
But the violence, to me, is not arbitrary; it's a manifestation of the Thief as a power for evil.
What he does with the power is bound to be upsetting.
It is an old-fashioned morality tale in that sense.’
To ponder all these points, the four main members of the cast (Howard, Gambon, Helen Mirren and Richard Bohringer) spent a week prior to filming studying the script.
‘We tried to fit together the enigmas, of which there were a number.
The ambiguities, the secrets, or whatever they are.
The story, as a story.
A fable.
A myth.
A fairy-story, even, I used to think.
And then this vast restaurant; a temple, really.
A kitchen the same size, off which there are small rooms, rather like chapels off a cathedral.
A highly, I suppose, formalised world; highly civilised.
In which, then, an apparently very simple event takes place.’
Howard has a rather formal, almost rhetorical way of speaking, and a deliberate delivery that has been taken for hesitancy, but seems more like the manner of someone who weighs and measures his words.
Of the film's religious imagery, he says: ‘We talked about the Fifty-First psalm (which is sung by one of the kitchen boys); it doesn't give you many clues, but I was reading it again this morning and it started making more sense.
We talked about why the story is set over ten days, which it quite particularly is: ten days of eating, from a Thursday to a Saturday.
Why a sacrifice, why the eating of a sacrifice.
Well, they're very big things to grapple with, and I don't know that there are any answers.
There's simply a number of bloody big questions.
But one does have to think about it a bit!
‘There will be many people who won't like it, won't like it at all, and will walk out.
But you cannot deny Greenaway's craftsmanship, and his intention to put on screen these compound images, using all the arrows in a film-maker's quiver.
And it allows us to make out a vision of our own lives and, more importantly, the whole life, the world's life.’
Howard's other films have not had quite comparable pretensions: he appeared in The Return of the Musketeers, Oxford Blues and ‘just, just’ in David Hare's Strapless.
‘I wouldn't say they were in the same field,’ he says dryly.
‘This is the first time I've done anything significant on film.
I was holed up forever with the RSC, and so just not available.
And perhaps I should have been, because I wanted to do the other as well.’
Presently, he is making six TV films based on stories by Frederick Forsyth.
But that, he says, is ‘another meal, another menu.’
FILM /New releases
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
THE ABYSS This, the biggest and almost certainly best of the current American wave of subterranean movies, nurtures expressly metaphysical intentions: it is, says the producer Gale Anne Hurd, about ‘the abyss inside each of us’.
It is directed by James Cameron, though, and so primarily a first-rate action picture.
The underwater sequences — which occupy most of the film — warrant the price of admission alone.
But, in the most egregious error of judgement, the film, not content with human interest, ropes in aliens as well, arriving like a deus ex machina from the ocean bed, as though the characters were unable to face their darkest selves without prodding from a benign ET.
ASTERIX AND THE BIG FIGHT Asterix, whose village was the last in Gaul to resist the invading Romans, was conceived in the Fifties with, no doubt, the Occupation still fresh in memory.
He has proved a durable fellow, though, inspiring 28 comic books to date and six animated features, the latest being Asterix and the Big Fight.
Gaul might be divided into three parts, but this film, imperfectly cobbled together from two separate stories, displays no such narrative neatness.
Many of the gags expire when extended beyond a comic-strip frame, and few of the clever puns which have secured Asterix an adult following, survive translation.
THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER The most startling feature of Peter Greenaway's new film is its formal visual design: the colour-coding of the different locations, the costumes (by Jean-Paul Gaultier), the constant tracking shots across the extraordinary sets.
The plot is a revenge drama — the film's title is fairly self-explanatory — and has a hand-me-down Jacobean tragedy feel to it, though he could not be accused of copying the richness of the language.
Michael Gambon, who plays the Thief, turns in a resolutely one-dimensional performance.
When Greenaway puts his formalism on a back-burner, and calls upon his actors to produce raw feeling — as with Helen Mirren's speech on the deathbed of her lover — there is nothing but empty pathos, artificiality in its weak form.
Greenaway has said he hates the idea of a shot in a film being only a preposition, linking what went before and after — but what writer would think of despising a part of speech for performing its indispensible task?
DRIVING ME CRAZY ‘The biggest mass art project in the history of the world’ was how the impresario Andre Heller modestly described his plan to stage Body and Soul, an extravaganza of black song and dance.
Nick Broomfield was hired to record the event.
It was a nightmare: early on, his budget dropped from dollars l6m to £300,000, and his crew was reduced to two.
Driving Me Crazy mercilessly records the squalls, the vibrant performances and the inertia of the production team, who spend most of their time solemnly discussing what black music means to them and jockeying for pole position.
Broomfield gets under everyone's feet, but soldiers on and ends up with a revealing, funny film about the petty power plays and outsize egos of showbiz.
LOLA Jacques Demy's Lola, made in 1960, continues the little spate of revivals from the heyday of European cinema.
It plays with Godard's Une Femme est une Femme, made the following year, both graceful and romantic tributes to the MGM musical comedy, and to their vibrant stars, Anouk Amiee and Anna Karina.
NO HOLDS BARRED The title says it all.
This is an over-the-top wrestling caper (not previewed to critics) with the engaging Hulk Hogan.
SHIRLEY VALENTINE Shirley Valentine is a film version, directed by Lewis Gilbert, of Willy Russell's one-woman show, first performed by, and now starring, Pauline Collins.
The story is of ersatz oppression and liberation, oppression by domesticity and chips in suburban Liverpool, liberation by sunshine and retsina on a Greek island holiday.
Russell's screenplay is full of announced sympathy for ordinary people's lives, and actual condescension.
The ways for women to escape or understand their circumstances are systematically disparaged.
Only escapist fantasy is allowed any authenticity.
Still, Pauline Collins is genuinely charming, there are some perky one-liners, and if there was an Oscar for Best Crinkly Smile In A Supporting Role, Tom Conti would have it sewn up.
YOUNG EINSTEIN This is a mock-heroic biopic dedicated to ‘the genius rebel with a clowning sense of humour’.
Probably Yahoo Serious, who not only stars in the film, but directed, wrote, produced and edited it too, would not mind the description being applied to himself.
It begins as Einstein, the hick son of Tasmanian apple farmers, is prompted by a Newtonian falling fruit to discover gravity only 300 years apres la lettre.
The main joke, a cheerily philistine one, is to pitch Australia from the margins of Western thought into its centre.
The jokes are very broad (the credits include a ‘collapsing dunny specialist’): we're in Life of Brian territory, which may be more congenial here than in America, where the film failed to reproduce its massive success on home turf.
FESTIVAL /Stay scared all night: James Rampton highlights two weeks of cinema in Leeds
By JAMES RAMPTON
THE Leeds International Film Festival opens this evening at 8pm at the Cannon 1, Vicar Lane with Lewis Gilbert's charming version of Willy Russell's play, Shirley Valentine about a repressed Liverpool housewife (the eye-catching Pauline Collins, re-creating her award-winning stage performance) who ‘finds herself’ on a Greek island in the arms of local barman Tom Conti.
One of the other highlights this week is a salute to George Romero (who sent a message of thanks to the organisers urging them to ‘Stay Scared’).
The tribute will feature a preview of his latest work, Monkeyshines, a characteristically disturbing psychological chiller about a paraplegic taken over by his pet ape, at the Cannon at 8pm tomorrow, and an all-night retrospective of his celebrated exercises in subversive horror, Night Of The Living Dead, Dawn Of The Dead, and Day Of The Dead at the the Hyde Park Picture House, Brudenell Road from 11pm tomorrow.
Also of interest are: An Evening With Terry Gilliam, at which the ex-Python will discuss the making of such movies as Brazil and The Adventures Of Baron Munchausen, at 8pm tomorrow at the Hyde Park Picture House; Michael Lehmann's black teen comedy Heathers, with Winona Ryder, on Wednesday at 8pm at the Cannon 2; and Bernard Tavernier's (Round Midnight) post-World War One love story, Life And Nothing But, with Philippe Noiret, at the Hyde Park Picture House at 8pm on Wednesday.
The Festival ends on 27 October with Great Balls of Fire, Jim McBride's biopic of Jerry Lee Lewis.
The Independent has free tickets to offer for: Shirley Valentine (2 pairs); Monkeyshines (5 pairs); and Life And Nothing But (5 pairs).
To claim these, readers should present this page at the Festival Central Box Office at The Civic Theatre, Cookridge St from 10am this morning.
First come, first served.
For more details, telephone 0532-462453.
Day Out: Going for the gut reaction: James Rampton visits an exhibition serving Food For Thought
By JAMES RAMPTON
WHAT with that handful of hardline Northamptonshire nuns blockading the door to their allegedly infected chicken coop, food is still Flavour of the Month with the media.
Which makes it an apposite time for the Science Museum to open a new £1.2m permanent Gallery, Food For Thought, to ‘explain the impact of science and technology on today's food’.
But, beyond that, it offers a range of attractive historical displays (de rigueur waxworks and ‘period’ dishes) and ‘interactive’exhibits (instructive computer games and button-pushing).
The exhibition also provides a boon for ‘resting’ actors, who play everything from a sausage-machine operator to the discoverer of quick freezing, Clarence (Captain?)
Birdseye.
The Gallery makes good use of mock-ups: a convincing re-creation of a Futures Market trading floor where big-time foodstuff deals are struck (all braces, bravado and baked beans), or an authentic 1926 Lyons Corner House (graced with a sweetly smiling ‘Nippy’).
Foodies of all ages can have a go at the laborious old-style methods of wheat-grinding, and see sugar-manufacture and milk-bottling in close-up.
(Strict Environmental Health Authority Rules prohibit the use of real sugar and milk.)
On-site tasting of foodstuffs is also forbidden, hence an ingenious, John Waters-esque display called Smellerama.
This functions like a fairground attraction: pick a number from a red barrel, scratch'n'sniff and guess its origin (apple, roast chicken, aniseed, etc).
The exhibits are imaginatively presented.
‘Food poisoning’, for instance, shows the effect of the 44,000 cases of the ‘runs’ reported this year with a cartoon strip depicting bacteria like so many vengeful Smurfs.
The display on consumption utilises the age-old trick of piling up an adult's average monthly intake of food (enormous amounts of chocolate) and invites the visitor to burn off excess calories on an ‘Energy Bike’(it does, of course, take a depressingly long time to nullify the effect of just one grape).
This new Gallery is a welcome contribution to both the British Food and Farming and British Museums Years, and the organisers hope that it will help allay the public's sometimes exaggerated fears about food (they are running a public information service on 01-938 8217 from 10am today).
Just one word of warning: don't drink the milk, it's diluted Dettol..
Day Out: Siobhan Dolan and Owen Slot list shows for the scientifically minded
By SIOBHAN DOLAN and OWEN SLOT
THE SCIENCE MUSEUM Exhibition Rd SW7 (01-938 8000).
Various Exhibitions: Food for Thought (permanent) First floor.
A comprehensive display of the history of food production.
Engineering Futures (to March) Demonstrates the technology behind engineering and its importance in everyday life.
1989, The Year Of The Microscope (to Jan) Largest ever collection of working microscopes on public display; the public are invited to bring along their own specimens and look at them through the different microscopes.
Apollo 2 (to Dec) Marking the twentieth anniversary of man's first step on the moon; various exhibits, aeronautical clothes, a model of the original launch vehicle and the inevitable piece of moon rock.
Housing The Airship (to Dec) Collection of photos and pictures of buildings which housed airships.
Launchpad (permanent) Large number of ‘hands-on’ experiments, which invite visitors' participation.
Wellcome Museum Of The History Of Medicine (permanent) Reconstruction of the major events in medical history.
History Of Veterinary Medicine (permanent) Gory display of veterinary instruments and anatomical model of a horse.
Mon-Sat, 10am-6pm; Sun, 11am-6pm.
Adults £2, Concessions £1.
ALDERSHOT Royal Army Dental Corps Historical Museum HQ & Central Group RADC, Evelyn Woods Rd, Aldershot, Hampshire (0252-24431 ext. 2782).
Examines the history of dentistry within the army.
Close encounters with those instruments of torture such as the forceps, and probe (used in the early days for extracting root).
An opportunity to view provisions made for toothless conscripts — a hard rubber solution (vulcanite) was moulded to the gums and porcelain teeth attached.
BATH Geology Museum 18 Queen Square, Bath, Avon (0225-428144).
The work and collections of 19th-century geologist, Charles Moore.
Includes fossils from the Jurassic rocks of North Somerset.
Also herbarium and a collection of seashells.
BELFAST Ulster Museum Botanic Gardens, Belfast (0232-381251).
Includes impressive archaeological treasures dating from first arrival of man in Ireland c. 7000 BC until late 17th century.
Dept. of Geology has worldwide collections of minerals and gemstones and over 100,000 fossils plus displays of animals and plants of Ireland, the Origin, Structure and Evolution of Life and The Variety of Life.
BOURNEMOUTH Museum Of The Bournemouth Natural Science Society 39 Christchurch Rd, Bournemouth, Dorset (0202-23525).
Occupies listed Victorian house and holds a number of notable collections in Egyptology, botany, geology and zoology with special emphasis on butterflies, insects, birds and eggs and a diorama display of New Forest mammals.
BRADFORD Colour Museum Perkin House, 82 Grattan Rd, Bradford, West Yorkshire (0274-390955).
Located in a former wool warehouse, the museum highlights how we perceive and use colour.
Opportunities to experiment with light and colour-interactive displays.
Also displays on physics and chemistry of colour, optical illusions.
The colour and textiles gallery examines industrial history of coloration industries.
Tues-Fri, 2pm-5pm, 10-4pm on Sat.
Museum Of The Scott Polar Research Institute Lensfield Rd, Cambridge (0223-336540).
Arctic and Antarctic displays with relics from several expeditions.
Also Eskimo carvings, a display of scrimshaw, glaciological information on the Poles and Antarctic ornithology. 2.30-4pm.
CREETOWN Gem-Rock Museum Chain Road, Creetown, Kirkcudbrightshire (067182-357).
Global collection of gems, rocks, minerals and fossils with special displays of fluorescent minerals and Scottish beach agate.
DEAL Time Ball Tower Victoria Parade, Deal, Kent (0304-360897).
Built in 1821 as one of 17 semaphore towers, it was equipped with a time-ball in 1854 which drops daily at 1pm down a 15 ft-mast on the roof.
Displays illustrate the history of maritime communications, from shutter telegraphs, semaphores and time-balls to satellites.
EDINBURGH Museum Of Communication James Clerk Maxwell Building, University of Edinburgh (0506-824507).
Illustrates the development of communication by electrical means.
Exhibits include radio transmitting and receiving equipment.
Museum Of The Royal College Of Surgeons Of Edinburgh Nicolson St, Edinburgh (031-556 6206).
Charts grisly history of surgery in Edinburgh from 1505 to 1900.
Includes pathological specimens.
Plus the Menzies Campbell Collection — the most comprehensive dental collection in Europe.
INVERNESS Loch Ness Monster Exhibition Loch Ness Centre, Drumnadrochit, Inverness (04562-573).
Updated exhibiton with ten computerised audio-visual sections telling the monstrous tale from prehistoric to modern times.
Plus ecological background with emphasis on its deep water fauna.
MANCHESTER Museum of Science and Engineering Castlefield, Manchester (061-832 2244).
Large ‘Xperiments!’ science centre of ‘hands-on’experiments.
Also, collection of running Steam Engines, Air and Space gallery, and ‘Underground Manchester’ with walk-down sewer with real sounds and smells.
All week, 10am-5pm.
Adults £2, Concessions £1.
NOTTINGHAM Green's Mill Museum Belvoir Hill, Sneinton, Nottingham (0602-503635).
Home of George Green, mathematical physicist and miller.
Visitors can see his windmill in action, and an exhibition of his main areas of experimentation: electricity, magnetism, light and sound.
Wed-Sun, 10am-5pm.
Free.
PADDOCK WOOD Whitbread Hop Farm Beltring, Paddock Wood, Kent (0622-872408).
Working farm supplies brewers with a quarter of the hops used.
Of the six Victorian oasts, three are now used as museums containing exhibits of rural crafts, hop-growing and processing.
Chance to see famous Shire horses which pull the coaches of the Lord Mayor Of London and the Speaker of The House of Commons.
SWANSEA Dan-yr-Ogof Showcaves Museum Abercrave, Glyntawe, Upper Swansea Valley, Swansea, West Glamorgan (0689-730284).
Comprises three limestone caves (one of which is the longest in Britain) all of which illustrate how they served as homes for both humans and animals: including the Bone cave, rich in archaeological evidence with details of the Flintsone-like inhabitants dating back to the Bronze Age.
Includes remains of some 42 skeletons which were found in the caves.
10am-5pm; £3.50/ £2.50.