

Talk of the Trade: Surreal memories
By GERALDINE NORMAN
JOHN Armstrong's paintings, ‘built up of remembered things which in my case have been miscalled surrealist’, have a poetic appeal which often beats Dali, Magritte et al at their own game.
A group of 38 of his paintings are on show at Ewan Mundy and Celia Philo's Gallery (top floor, 29 New Bond Street, W1) until 28 October, some on loan from his family and some for sale — mostly from £8,000 to £12,000, but dipping as low as £3,000 and running as high as £40,000.
The catalogue has an introduction by his widow, Annette, through which one glimpses the man and the mind behind the images.
Armstrong was born in 1893 and had a classical education at Oxford before reaching art school just before the outbreak of the First World War.
He died in 1973.
Armstrong fought in the First World War and was a war artist in the Second, sharing with other Surrealists the challenge of creating a pattern out of devastation.
He held fast to beauty of form and colour and added a spice of wit — as pleasingly revealed in Bond Street by his Perspiring Venus.
Talk of the Trade: Chinese treasures
By GERALDINE NORMAN
SINCE artworks began to flood out of China in the early 1980s — mostly smuggled by sea to Macao or Hong Kong — extraordinary rarities, hitherto unknown in the West, have begun to turn up on the market.
Bluett's (48 Davies Street, London W1) has got its hands on a group of three bronze vessels from the Warring States period (third century BC).
There is only one other known example of their size and elegance in the West — in the Freer Gallery in Washington.
Bluett's has a steamer, vase and bowl, each inlaid with intricate patterns and in startlingly good condition.
They are thought to be from south China.
Official excavations have recently unearthed similar pieces, which are unlikely to ever leave the country.
Prices -£850,000 for the bowl and £1.2m each for vase and steamer -reflect their rarity.
Talk of the Trade: Son of Epstein
By GERALDINE NORMAN
THEODORE Garman, whose paintings are on exhibition at the Fine Art Society (148 New Bond Street, London W1), died as a result of pinching a cast from Chelsea Art School's antique room.
He would have returned it, of course, he only wanted it for a painting.
But the principal called the police.
Once his mental instability was recognised, he was sent to hospital, but died of a heart attack in the ambulance.
That was in 1954 when he was 30 years old.
This memorial exhibition combines his explosively colourful paintings with sculptures by his father, Jacob Epstein, and has been organised, following his mother's death, by her friend, Beth Lipkin, to whom most of the pictures were left.
The paintings are a revelation, hidden from the public since his two successful exhibitions at the Redfern Gallery in 1950 and 1952.
Matthew Smith compared him to Van Gogh.
Wyndham Lewis wrote in The Listener: ‘On entering the gallery you are overwhelmed by a rancid vegetation, tropically gigantic…
A little concentration on individual pictures will soon reveal how excellent is the workmanship.’
Kenneth Clark was enthusiastic when he saw some hanging in Epstein's home.
Prices range from £3,000 to £12,000.
Finds: Get to grips with a matchbox: John Windsor meets a man fired with enthusiasm for matchbox covers
By JOHN WINDSOR
AT A top price of £20-£30 —‘through the roof’ says Ian Hooker, with tongue in cheek — commemorative and advertising matchbox grips still cost peanuts compared with even the cheapest London saleroom collectables.
Much other printed ephemera can be picked up just as cheaply, a boon market for collectors sharp enough to spot history mirrored in the disposable scraps of everyday life.
Mr Hooker, a motor trade production foreman who began assembling the world's largest collection of grips 12 years ago, has seen antique fair prices for rare ones rise from a fiver, two or three years ago, to the present £20-£30, all due, he says, to the boom in advertising ephemera.
Production of matchbox grips by small businesses lasted for 42 years, from 1911 to 1953.
They consist of a rectangle of thin metal, bent twice to grip three sides of a matchbox, and a printed paper cover crimped in a protective film of transparent celluloid.
At least 645 different designs were published — the number in Mr Hooker's collection, shown for the first time last weekend at the British Matchbox Label and Booklet Society's annual exhibition in London.
Mr Hooker estimates that 12 years ago, when he paid £1.50 for his first grip, there were up to 100 collectors of whom he knew a couple of dozen.
At the time, the hobby had been on the wane for years.
Today, he estimates, the number of collectors has dropped to about 50.
He knows most of them.
In the past couple of years he has started buying up small collections of 30 or 40, but his weekly forays around antique fairs are now yielding only three or four new designs a year.
His publication last year of the first matchbox grip catalogue has, he says, not contributed to the sudden rise in prices.
But it will certainly put the hobby on the map.
Its three illustrated volumes of 60 to 100 pages have sold 70 copies each, and a supplement of 200 newly discovered grips is due out at Christmas.
The Hooker collection charts not only the claims of obsolete products but also the swell of public sentiment during two world wars, as well as some prize not-in-front-of-the-children examples of publicans' ribaldry.
Matchbox grips, like today's bubble-gum wrappers, were a particularly accurate evocation of the man-in-the-street's pride and prejudices.
During the First World War a box of matches cost 1d and a matchbox grip 4d: a price just substantial enough to warrant a ‘Thank you’ when given free to a pub or grocer's store customer, and just substantial enough to make money for a stationer or the many charities which sold them.
But to prise 4d out of a working man's pocket, the slogans and graphics had to have street appeal.
Nationalism was the most gripping sentiment.
When a popular war hero emerged, like Lt William Leefe Robinson, awarded the VC in 1916 for shooting down the first enemy airship over British soil, the jobbing printers, metal benders and celluloid crimpers worked overtime.
The Leefe Robinson commemorative shows the flaming airship, ‘The end of the baby killer’ and fetches a top price of £20-£30.
Much of the First World War output was jingoistic.
The General Sir John French commemorative of 1916, which the Rose and Crown Hotel in Selby offered its customers at the time, is captioned ‘Souvenir of the Greatest War in History’.
Today's price for run-of-the-mill First World War grips is £7-£15 and for Second World War £3-£8.
Swan pens and Spratt's, the pet food makers, were among regular advertisers.
Football clubs sold grips which listed forthcoming fixtures.
Matchbox grips were a peculiarly British institution.
But the Australians imported them in large numbers.
The coarsest grip jokes date from 1940s Australia, like the Lindeman Island grip captioned, ‘Well, what are you looking at?’, whose illustration is described in Mr Hooker's catalogue as ‘man and woman at a urinal’.
It would fetch about £10.
The Australians are the biggest collectors after the British.
A series of ‘Famous British Film Stars’ of 1946, now worth £5-£10 each, apparently never got off the ground.
Mr Hooker has traced only five showing 10 stars: Patricia Roc and Gene Kent, Margaret Lockwood and Lilli Palmer, Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall, Stewart Granger and Michael Rennie, Phyllis Calvert and Ann Crawford.
Any more, anyone?
Auctions
By JOHN WINDSOR
THE BOOM in colourful, vigorous Impressionist-style paintings which, with some astute promotion by auctioneers, has already rippled through the markets for the Scottish colourists, Italian, Scandinavian and Irish art, now has a chance to affect Belgian art, at Christie's on Thursday.
The 131-lot sale covers the late nineteenth and early twentieth-century Belgian movements.
Paintings come from the Paris-oriented group, Les Vingt, which exhibited Van Gogh, Gauguin, Cezanne, Monet and Renoir well before their reputations were established in France, from the dreamy Symbolists and the more forceful Flemish Expressionists.
There are nine paintings in the sale by Gustave de Smet (1877-1943), whose style switched from Impressionism to Expressionism around 1914.
Before Christie's first sale of Belgian art a year ago, in which a 1930s de Smet of Flemish peasants made £275,000, the highest auction price for the artist was £18,000.
British dealers bite the Big Apple: American collectors set the pace and the prices.
Geraldine Norman looks at the latest developments
By GERALDINE NORMAN
THE AMERICAN art market, overblown on investment cash, is calling the tune internationally.
It is fashionable among rich Americans to buy art, donate art, exhibit art and appreciate art.
But they would not be so rich if they were not adept at minimising tax and maximising profits.
The schemes they have dreamed up for art-related asset-manipulation are being imitated throughout the world, notably in Europe and Japan.
This makes the precedents that have been set in America important to anyone who is interested in playing the market.
At the end of September, 35 English dealers and 15 from the Continent joined 35 American dealers to hold the first International Antique Dealers' Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue, in the heart of Manhattan.
In the course of five days, during which the super-rich flooded through the hall, the Europeans learned just what American collectors want.
The show was a sensational success.
Organised by Brian and Anna Houghton, the London ceramics dealers who have launched two highly regarded specialist fairs in London during the past few years, it offered New Yorkers two innovations; an expert vetting committee, which checked that every item was genuinely what it was said to be — there had never been vetting in America before — and a showcase in their own city of top European dealers' wares.
The benefactors' preview, which cost $500 a ticket, was packed with the rich and famous, despite the approach of Hurricane Hugo, which raised temperatures into the 90s.
Some sweating millionaires were buying while others said they were too hot to think and would come back later — which they did.
Furniture was the focus of interest but, according to John Hill, from Jeremy of the King's Road, London, the Americans did not just want good examples of standard items, they wanted something different, with a gimmick or original style.
A serpentine commode, the central section of which pulled out as a silver table, and a Russian mirror of the 1790s supported on twisting ormolu snakes could have been sold many times over.
Alistair Sampson, whose Brompton Road shop specialises in primitive country wares — pottery, carvings, furniture, embroideries — hit a bull's-eye because of the close parallels with American folk art.
A seventeenth-century painted chest which would have cost $1m if it had been American seemed a bargain at one tenth that price.
‘I had been advised to mark everything up by 20 per cent,’ Alistair Sampson said, ‘because the clients’decorators would come round afterwards asking for a cut.
In fact, I only met one decorator…a young couple wanted to buy a piece and I offered them a discount as they hadn't got a decorator -at which she drew herself up and said: ‘We are not married.
I am his interior decorator.’
' Kate Foster of the Halkin Arcade, Belgravia, the scholarly specialist in Continental porcelain, found the opposite.
‘I suppose we've got to get used to rich people coming along with their decorators’, she said.
‘I met new clients which is what I went for.’
In the oriental field, Bluett's failed to find buyers for a group of Chinese Warring States bronze vessels of extraordinary scholarly interest, while Colnaghi Oriental found spectacularly decorative seventeenth-century bronzes easy to move.
AMERICAN buyers depend on advisers, whether decorators or art specialists, to an extent unparalleled in Europe.
They read publications that keep them abreast of market trends, personalities, lawsuits and prices — rather than delving into art history as do their counterparts in Europe.
Two publications are especially influential: a fat, glossy, monthly magazine called Art and Auction and a bi-weekly insider newsletter, The ARTnewsletter, published by the old-established magazine Art News.
The latest issue of The ARTnewsletter leads off with a report on tax bills, now being studied by committees in both houses of Congress, which are aimed at restoring the fiddle element to tax-deductible museum donations.
In America, the value of a museum donation can be deducted from gross income before tax is calculated.
In 1986 a law was passed that required donations to be valued at cost rather than an invented ‘appreciated’ value for tax purposes — though only in cases where the deductions would reduce the donor's tax bill to zero.
The result has been catastrophic.
The Association of Art Museum Directors recently reported that the value of art donations had declined by 63 per cent between 1986 and 1988.
Many museums have reacted by selling important works from their collections.
However, The ARTnewsletter says it is confident that the bills now being studied by Congress, which would restore the fiddle, will become law next year.
TWO LAWSUITS resulting from Christie's $39.6m sale last May of Impressionists from the collection of Hal Wallis, the Hollywood movie producer, are reported on in Art and Auction, the monthly magazine.
The Wallis Foundation, to which Wallis left the paintings, is being sued by the Los Angeles County Museum and by Wildenstein's, the international art dealers.
It has emerged that in 1980 Wallis's second wife, Martha Hyer Wallis, took four of his paintings, replacing them with copies, to raise a $1m loan.
When the copyists sold the originals to Wildenstein's for $665,000 and decamped with the proceeds, Wallis got to hear of it and had to buy back the pictures.
As part of the deal he gave Wildenstein's the right of first refusal on 15 of his paintings should his heirs seek to sell them.
Wildenstein's claims that this agreement was broken by the sale at Christie's.
The case has brought to light a ‘letter of instruction’ signed by Wallis two weeks before his death in 1986 asking the trustees of his foundation to exhibit the paintings on loan at the Los Angeles County Museum, ‘whether for a definite or indefinite period of time’.
So the museum has gone to law to get the pictures back.