

Food: Strange appetites on the big screen: Can the British digest a film about food, sex and death, asks Deirdre McQuillan
By DEIRDRE MCQUILLAN
I THINK I can safely say that Peter Greenaway's latest film will do nothing to increase the appreciation of food in this country.
Tampopo might have sold a few more bowls of noodles and Babette's Feast caused little hiccups of interest in historic cooking, but The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover plays around with the relationship between food, sex and death in a way that is bound to cause offence.
‘You must learn to appreciate your food,’ instructs the Thief (played by Michael Gambon) as he enters the restaurant in which most of the story takes place.
By this he means acquiring a thin veneer of knowledge to mask his corruption.
But the film goes on to develop graphic, orifice-stuffing permutations on the theme of you are what you eat.
Food symbolises many things in this film, but the recurring image is of a cycle of fleshly decay fuelled by appetite.
Greenaway colour codes the rooms of the restaurant, which mirror food's route through the alimentary canal.
We move from the cool blue, night street outside, where raw inedible food arrives, to the green cavernous kitchen where the unpalatable is prepared for consumption in the rich red dining room and on again to the clinically white lavatories.
The Wife (Helen Mirren) and her Lover (Alan Howard) discover their mutual hunger over the hors d'oeuvres, and proceed to reverse the cycle — they couple in the lavatory, are formally introduced in the restaurant, fall in love in the pantry and are expelled into the charnel house of a butcher's van — the price of tasting the fruit of knowledge.
As a precis this is pretentious, and The Cook & Co is full of the hyperbole and complicated allusions that identify a Greenaway work — The Draughtsman's Contract, Drowning By Numbers, for example— but in the darkness of the cinema the film has a stomach-churning directness.
Actual details of food are fleeting: menus flash up, dishes make a brief appearance and the thief wonders why there is salt in the custard (because it is Hollandaise, naturally).
I expect restaurateurs will be itching to copy Jean-Paul Gaultier's extraordinary staff uniform with the fork epaulette, but the rest of the details are ingredients for thought only.
Asked how he decides on the price of a dish, the Cook (Richard Bohringer) explains that black ingredients are always the most expensive because people like to remind themselves of death.
‘They like to say, death I am eating you.’
It is a nice conceit, but it will prove unpalatable.
In Britain we do not like too much death with our dinner.
We do not buy live poultry from the local market and carry it home squawking and then wring its neck, nor do we insist that the fish we order in a restaurant should have been swimming about only moments before.
The sight of Peter Rabbit hanging up in an old-fashioned butcher's window brings tears to our eyes, while pretty pink portions prepared and hacked by the supermarket cause no such qualms.
Few people enjoy game rich with the taste of decay and cheeses that stink of mortality.
The preference is for things so young — like baby chickens with infant vegetables — that they have barely had an independent existence we might have to acknowledge robbing them of.
The causes, course and consequences of consumption are depicted by Greenaway with excessive physicality.
The Cook & Co pursues the idea that no meal is made without sacrifice to an extreme conclusion that is macabre and funny, but there is an element of truth that ought to be more widely recognised in our squeamish society.
To sustain life we eat, and the cost of that sustenance is death further down the food chain.
Even the vegetarian has to cut the force, that through the green fuse drives the lettuce, in order to be able to live and say that meat is murder.
Our inability to celebrate death takes the flavour from our food and leaves us in a state of wilfully maintained childhood with nursery tastes to match.
Those who cherish the notion that the act of eating exists outside any context of cost, saving that recorded on the bill, will find The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover most indigestible.
Recipe: Package deal for trout
By LINDA SUE PARK
PROMPTED, I would like to think, by my dentist's goading last week, readers have filled the mailbags with filo recipes.
Recent visits to Greece and/or Turkey appear to have been inspirational, with feta cheese oozing (figuratively, of course) from several entries.
Celia Cviic (no, it's not a typist's error) sends two recipes for burek based on street snacks she has eaten on visits to her husband's family in Yugoslavia; one with a meat filling, one spinach and cheese.
Susannah Perry of north London also uses spinach, combined with lamb and pine nuts for her filo rolls, serving them with an egg and lemon sauce.
A bottle of 1987 Torres Milmanda, a Chardonnay wine from Penedes, Spain, goes to Judith Abrahams, London NW1, for her winning recipe below.
The next challenge is for stuffing or dressing for game birds.
The winner gets a bottle of Metusalem Oloroso sherry, reputed to be one of Winston Churchill's favourite tipples, which recently won a trophy in Wine magazine's annual international wine challenge.
Please send recipes to Recipes/Weekend Section, The Independent, 40 City Road, London EC1Y 2DB.
Turbans of Trout in Filo Serves 2 Ingredients: 2 fillets trout 4 sheets filo 2oz butter, melted Salt and pepper 1tsp sesame seeds 1 onion, finely chopped ½ cucumber, diced ½ oz currants Dash powdered ginger Preparation: Melt 1oz butter.
Layer two sheets of filo, brushing each with melted butter.
Fold in two so you have four layers of pastry; brush again with butter.
Season one fillet of trout.
Roll into a turban; place in the centre of filo layers and set aside.
Saute onion and cucumber in the other 1oz of butter; season with salt, pepper and ginger.
Using a teaspoon, fill the trout turban.
Gather up four corners of filo, twist into a bundle.
Brush with more melted butter and sprinkle with sesame seeds.
Repeat the entire process for the second fillet of trout.
Drink: Street smart to lure finer wine seekers: The off-licence chains are making a big effort to catch the up-market customer, says Anthony Rose
By ANTHONY ROSE
‘WE WANT to make it look as though it's a wine merchant,’ says Tim Waters in Clapham's Wine Rack, south London, one of Thresher's five prototype high-street wine shops.
‘Twenty Silk Cut, please love,’ a middle-aged woman asks the manager, a little bemused by the new up-market surroundings.
‘Even the label will be changed to keep the new concept distinct from Thresher,’ continues Tim Waters.
‘What's your cheapest Scotch?’ inquires the next customer, oblivious to the new range of malt whiskies sitting in the window.
‘Based on market research, we're locating the new Wine Racks to target the more affluent, urban areas.
‘We want to focus more on wine, less on the traditional off-licence with its wider range of fags and beers,’ continues Waters, undeterred.
On cue, customer number four walks off dangling a six-pack of Castlemaine XXXX.
A fifth customer, a young man with baby in sling, wanders in.
Yuppie profile, surely.
He buys a can of cider.
A sixth selects orange juice and Perrier.
As we discuss the changing role of the traditional high-street off-licence, it is all too plain that none of the first six customers have browsed or bought wine or done what the market research says they should be doing.
But then a man in a suit heads for the cool cabinet and picks out two bottles of champagne.
At last.
We're in business.
On the morning I met Tim Waters to talk about Thresher's plans for the development of its off-licences, few customers corresponded to the anticipated profile.
But this was not entirely unexpected.
This particular store in Clapham's Abbeville Road used to be an ordinary branch of Thresher.
It metamorphosed to Wine Rack after its conversion to wine merchant lookalike with bottle green colour, smart wooden shelves, wine casks and wicker baskets on the floor for added ambience, and bottles labelled by country of origin with tasting notes attached.
‘We see 50, maybe 100 new Wine Racks in a year's time,’ says Mr Waters.
‘But you can't effect changes overnight,’ he adds, from the vantage point of 11 years with Oddbins.
The Wine Rack is the jewel in the crown of a 1,000-strong chain of shops which have been reorganised into two groups.
There are 550 traditional off-licences carrying the basic Thresher range and 450 ‘wine shops’ moving away from cigarettes and brands to concentrate on wine.
A slow, almost imperceptible evolution is already taking place in the high street.
Apart from Unwins and Davisons, both independent, and Oddbins, wine arm of the giant Canadian whisky corporation Seagram, the major high-street chains are concentrated in the hands of big brewers: Whitbread (Thresher), Allied-Lyons (Victoria Wine), Grand Metropolitan/Watneys (Peter Dominic) and Bass (Augustus Barnett).
This set-up helps to explain why the high-street off-licences (bar Oddbins), with blinkered attention to their brands, missed the Eighties wine retailing boom.
The legacy is all too clear.
Staff are underpaid and know next to nothing about wine.
Worse still, the product itself is often dull and unchanging.
How can a demoralised off-licence manager work up the enthusiasm to sell what an increasingly adventurous customer has no desire to buy?
As annual consumption of wine has risen from five to 11 litres per head in the decade between 1977 and 1987, the high-street off-licence has seen a golden opportunity snatched from under its nose by the supermarkets.
According to Wine & Spirit magazine, the supermarkets overtook the specialist wine retailers (which include pubs and independent wine merchants) for the first time in 1987, increasing their slice of the table-wine market since 1984 from 47 to 53 per cent.
In the same period, off-licence chains owned by the brewers saw their share reduced to less than 25 per cent.
The brewers have at last woken up to the fact that their high-street shops have become dinosaurs slouching towards extinction.
The Uniform Business Rate, due to be implemented from 1 April 1990, is expected to land high-street shops, especially in London and the South, with a costly increase in overheads.
With the advent of the poll tax and higher interest rates, the squeeze on the customer's pocket seems likely to act as a curb on the current trend towards trading-up to more expensive, quality wines.
Even wine prices, having enjoyed a period of stability in the Eighties, are beginning to rise as an expanding band of consumers chases after a limited pot of quality wine.
‘Obviously we've taken a close look at Oddbins,’ says Ann Tonk, standing in Victoria Wine's smartly re-fitted ‘Family Group 1’store in London's Hampstead High Street.
Recruited from Tesco to oversee the transformation of Victoria Wine for the Nineties, she accepts that ‘Oddbins is the one retailer that took the 1980s very much to heart’.
Like Tim Waters at Thresher, Ann Tonks has commissioned research and used all the available data to put new meaning into the company.
Victoria Wine has divided its 1,005 shops into four ‘family groups’: the corporate family, that is.
The top two, consisting of 570 outlets targeted towards ABC1s, will carry an expanded range of 225 to 300 wines chosen by the new buying team of Marcia Waters and Mark Brunel-Cohen.
All the stores will be re-fitted with softer lighting and ash-coloured wood to ‘give them a lighter and warmer feel’.
Shelves will look more inviting.
Top of the Victoria Wine profile is its Gare du Vin shops of which there are four at present, with plans for 50 by 1991.
According to marketing director Chris Bell, ‘Gare du Vin will be much closer to the traditional wine merchant with clarets to lay down, vintage ports, a cellar ambience.
But we want them to be accessible, not stuffy.’
In the jargon of the trade, ‘segmentation’ is the name of the game.
The brittle high-street monoliths are being dismantled and reassembled bit by bit to enable them to become more adept at finding the most efficient way to the punter's pocket.
Peter Dominic is converting its Bottoms Up branches into spacious wine superstores with Hunter & Oliver, its attempt at an identikit wine merchant, about to hit the high street.
Even Augustus Barnett, moribund since Bass took it over, is making ‘forward into the Nineties’ noises.
It is no coincidence that the Oddbins' name comes up so often.
Awarded Wine magazine's Wine Merchant of the Year title for the third year running, Oddbins is generally acknowledged to have bucked the trend.
‘Wine is our strong point.
It's the product first and we move around it,’ says John Ratcliffe, Oddbins' buying manager.
‘We take interesting wines and price them at what we think they're worth.
We put on tastings for staff as well as customers.
The staff care about and enjoy their job.
They want to be involved.’
A good product, value for money, the right ambience, customer care and staff involvement.
There you have it.
Or do you?
Time will tell whether, in trying to tailor the magic formula to their own requirements, Britain's new-look high-street off-licences will sink or swim into the Nineties.
Top Ten on the Shelves: Wine
By ANTHONY ROSE
The Wine Rack Pinot Blanc d'Alsace 1987, Domaine Zind-Humbrecht, £4.95; subtly fragrant with full-bodied, lightly spicy fruit.
Rully la Chaume 1987, J Dury, £7.29; classic Cote Chalonnaise white burgundy with character and buttery texture and flavour.
Pouilly-Fume 1988, Domaine les Pres Bessons, £5.99, also at Thresher; typical ‘grassy’ bouquet with stylish, concentrated, crisp fruitiness.
Cabernet Sauvignon Reserve Oriahovitza 1983, £2.89, also at Thresher; good value Bulgarian claret-style with soft, plum and vanilla fruitiness.
Ch Haut-Bages-Averous 1986, £10.70, also at Thresher; outstanding second label of Ch Lynch-Bages, oozing class and delicious, youthful ripe Cabernet fruit.
Will improve.
Victoria Wine Victoria Wine French Dry White, £2.19; consistent, soft but crisp, appley dry white.
Victoria Wine Chablis 1987, £6.39; this too has kept its crisp, nutty, lemony character.
Riddoch Chardonnay 1987, £5.39 (fine wine selection); oaky, rich, pineappley Chardonnay in classic Australian ‘white burgundy’ style.
Sergioveto Rocca della Macie 1986, £6.39 (Group 1 stores); ripe, voluptuous super-chianti, well worth the extra price.
Food and Drink Update: Rome at the top
By ANTHONY ROSE
THE ARISTOCRACY never fails to fascinate.
The Renaissance of Italian Cooking (Pavilion, £20) lets the rest of us play Peeping Tom in the homes and kitchens of 12 of Italy's most blue-blooded families.
The photographs are wonderful, as is a dome of tuna mousse on the circular tiled marble floor of a hall in Princess Stefanina Aldobrandini's Rome palazzo.
Lots of credits to the downstairs bunch doing the cooking, whose recipes were collected by Lorenza de'Medici.
The former food editor of Vogue Italia, she now runs a cookery school.
Food and Drink Update: Edifying the soul
By ANTHONY ROSE
‘MY GRANDADDY…would gently nudge me off the sidewalk if a white person ever walked close by.’
Sheila Ferguson's US publishers wanted to excise the racial and political history that informs Soul Food (Weidenfeld paperbacks, £6.95).
But the former lead singer for the soul group The Three Degrees (remember ‘When Will I See You Again'?) stood firm in her conviction that the development of black American cookery from plantation scraps to mainstream classics merits more than just lists of ingredients.
Her book contains plenty of recipes for pork (slave rations £3 per week) but only two for beef (white folk's food).
Ms Ferguson's family, traced back to the illegitimate son of an English planter and a slave girl, is constantly present in the texts, photographs and recipes.
Food and Drink Update: Sensible eating
By ANTHONY ROSE
COPIOUS helpings of greens were available but Nescafe was off the menu on Wednesday at the first Caroline Walker awards ceremony, in memory of the campaigning nutritionist who died aged 38 last year.
The guests, who consisted mostly of green types and sensible eaters, were lectured by Jonathon Porritt, director of Friends of the Earth and very important Green Party spokesman, on his concern for the ill effects of Western food on the health of Europeans, and for the devasting results of exporting processed food to developing countries.
The actress Jane Asher, author of books on really sticky cakes, asked the audience to boycott Nescafe when she accepted the consumer section award on behalf of the Baby Milk Action Coalition, which has criticised the Swiss giant for selling milk substitutes to third world babes.
Our very own Oliver Gillie won a special award in the media category for the paper's health page, which he edited before moving on to become deputy editor of The Independent Magazine, and the overall winner was James Erlichman, The Guardian's consumer affairs correspondent.