

Autumn's conjuring trick: As leaves begin to show off their colours, Anna Pavord suggests some dazzling trees and shrubs
By ANNA PAVORD
IT IS the Keats time of year again, when inefficiently brainwashed poetasters grope about trying to remember whatever it was that came after the ‘mellow fruitfulness’ bit.
It is the time for Nature's great conjuring trick, when green leaves become crimson, gold, russet and purple.
Nobody knows when the show is going to take place.
It could be tomorrow.
It could be next month.
Or we could have missed it already.
Nothing is simpler than the question ‘Why do trees change colour?’ says John White, the Forestry Commission's dendrologist at Westonbirt Arboretum in Gloucestershire.
Nothing could be more complicated than the answer and even the answer, he says, is in question.
For instance, it is commonly supposed that trees and shrubs colour better on acid soils than they do on alkaline.
At Westonbirt, noted as the best place in England for autumn colour, they do not find this so.
At one site, where there is a particularly brilliant display, the soil is pH8, quite determinedly on the alkaline side of neutral (pH7).
White has been at the arboretum for 14 years and observes that the best autumn colour often comes after the worst summers.
There is a pleasing sense of justice about the observation, but the effect has more to do with rates of growth than fair play.
In the drought year of 1976 and in this summer, too, many trees were stressed by lack of water.
Their natural reaction to this is to shed leaves, to cut maintenance back to the essential main frame as it were, and this may happen during August or at the beginning of September, long before the frosts which generally trigger leaf fall.
When they shed leaves because of drought, trees do not usually bother with all the razzmatazz of colouring them beforehand.
Foliage just curls up and drops off.
The best autumn colour will obviously occur when maximum leaf surface is available for change.
This usually happens after damp summers, when growth has been lush and unchecked.
There are other factors to take into account.
Gales in September can tear off leaves before the display begins.
The best colour seems to happen after a warm, still Indian summer, terminated by a short, sharp frost.
These conditions do not come to order.
All we can do is plant and hope.
Only in the biggest gardens will it be worth planting trees that have nothing to say apart from their brief autumn statement.
In most gardens the show must be made up of performers that can do a spring or summer act as good as their autumn one.
It is important also to sort out those trees and shrubs that, like rhododendrons, will only thrive on acid soils.
If you have an alkaline one, forget stewartia, enkianthus, fothergilla and nyssa.
Most of the acers, including the Japanese maples are perfectly happy in un-acid soils, provided they are reasonably moist.
They like living in the dappled shade of taller trees.
Full sun is likely to shrivel the leaves and it is this, rather than the soil, that will spoil autumn display.
We used the common field maple (Acer campestre) to replace a line of dead elms that formerly marked our boundary with the lane.
The foliage is handsome and the autumn colour is relatively long lasting, yellow and gold with the odd slash of red.
It is not a fine enough tree to recommend for a star position, but good in a hedge or to bulk up planting in a relatively wild corner of the garden.
Acer palmatum ‘Heptalobum Osakazuki’ is the star of the tribe for autumn colour.
It has deeply divided mid-green leaves that flare to wild, improbable scarlet.
Even after they have dropped, they are valuable, lying in a blood-red pool under the dense thicket of branches.
The hawthorns are a greatly under-rated family and several are ideally suited for small gardens.
The local bird population will appreciate them too.
Crataegus prunifolia is particularly good at this time of the year, a tough, compact little tree, no more than 15-20ft at maturity, making a broad, spiny head furnished with glossy green leaves.
The undersides of the leaves are slightly downy.
The one I saw this week at Hillier's Arboretum, Ampfield, near Winchester, was already on the turn, with leaves orange and scarlet amidst clusters of large red haws, much bigger than those you find on wild hawthorns.
It was a delectable sight.
The thorn C lavallei is of similar build to C prunifolia.
They share a parent, who seems to have given them both the same handsome shiny leaves.
The haws on C lavallei are the orange side of red and both haws and leaves seem to hang longer on this tree than the other.
In the country, blackbirds and mistle thrushes are likely to have stripped most of the glistening haws by the end of November.
In town they will last longer.
Both thorns are tolerant of pollution and are tough enough to grow in open, exposed seaside sites regularly raked over by salt-laden winds, although these of course will do nothing for the autumn display.
Both have clusters of white flowers in early June.
The stag's-horn sumach (Rhus typhina) brings out many people in a cold sweat of hatred.
At Hillier's, however, there were two close cousins that would look splendid in any garden.
Both had superb, doubly dissected leaves, as elegant as the foliage of ferns, hanging down for 2ft or so.
One, Rhus glabra ‘Laciniata’ had scarcely begun to turn, but was decorated rather in the manner of a horse chestnut with dense conical clusters of red seeds, developed from the earlier flowers.
The second sumach, R trichocarpa, stood by the lake in the arboretum and was already ablaze in the most brilliant scarlet.
It must have been a male tree for there was no sign of the drooping clusters of yellow fruit that female trees would now be bearing.
Either of these would be ideal to use as foliage backing for earlier flower plantings, for their leaves are handsome at any season.
They would blaze into prominence just as the foreground planting was falling to pieces.
They did not look as though they were suckering in the baleful way that the ordinary stag's-horn sumach does, but as I have not grown either myself yet, I cannot vouch for their good behaviour.
Both could be kept within bounds by a severe pruning in early spring.
The most extraordinary performer in my own garden at the moment is not a leaf but a seed pod, actually 18 seed pods, belonging to the shrub Decaisnea fargesii.
They are the size and shape of chipolata sausages but the most extraordinary colour, slaty metallic blue.
I am told that the Chinese name for them (the shrub comes from China) is ‘cat droppings’.
Some cat.
Coming down to earth: Over the next four weeks Sally Tamplin looks at the problems of a small town garden.
First: sorting out soil
By SALLY TAMPLIN
OPTIMISM and patience are the basic requisites of the town gardener, food and water those of the garden.
After many years and three gardens, the optimism is going well; I still battle with my impatience, but I am finally coming to grips with giving the essentials of sustenance to the garden.
Town soil is not like country soil, and the smaller the area the worse it is.
Rain does not get near the walls, there is not enough rotting animal and vegetable matter, and the last people have always used the garden as a rubbish heap.
First you have to dig out all the junk, bag it up and probably lug it through the house.
Then it is time to make a tipping policy.
Either you tip the dustmen to take it away or you take it to the tip yourself.
As the problem will continue with the Great Autumn-Putting-to-Bed and the Great Spring-Tidy-Up and all the cutting back in between, a store of large sacks is essential.
Next it is feeding time.
What the soil needs is body, humus, bulk and nutrients.
Home-made compost is wonderful, but you will need a lot of space to make the necessary amount.
What do you get and where do you get it?
I have never found the perfect answer.
Garden centres will have horse and hop or horse and mushroom, but they are not cheap, can be full of weed seed and, if sawdust and not straw is used in the horse's stable, and can create problems of nitrogen deficiency.
Sawdust (as I, imperfectly, understand it) uses all the nitrogen to rot itself down.
I put Growmore fertiliser on at the same time as the compost and it seems to have no ill-effects.
The local garden or allotment society may have access to good cheap muck; stables sometimes let you take it free, but this will be steaming fresh and needs time, and space, to rot.
Good farmyard manure is what we all need in towns, and I am sure a farmer could make money marketing his pig, chicken and cow dung.
If you cannot do the whole garden at once, I have found it better to do a small area really well and then concentrate on another the next year.
Leaf mould is what I really lust for, but no one sells it and it would be ecologically unsound and legally unwise to go digging it out of Wimbledon Common.
I now use Dug, a decomposed poultry manure from Pelco, when planting and give an annual mulch of bark to the acid areas and spent mushroom compost to the rest; it improves the body of my sandy soil and also works magnificently as a weed suppressor if put on thick enough.
The mulch went on this year in March (together with the Growmore, as ever), and only the keenest weeds have managed to struggle through.
The mushroom compost might look a bit straw-like at first, but the plants soon grow together over it.
When I think of the hours of weeding it saves, it appears nothing but beautiful to me.
The mushrooms are good too.
In the Garden Update: Rosy delays
By SALLY TAMPLIN
COMMERCIAL rose growers are praying for rain so they can start getting bare-root plants out of the ground and away to customers.
Deliveries, they warn, are likely to be a little late this year, but rose planting can safely be done in any frost-free period between October and March.
In the Garden Update: Alpine prizes
Weekend Garden Page 43
In the Garden Update: Herbal calendar
By SALLY TAMPLIN
CAROLINE HOLMES, who has her own herb nursery at Denham End Farm, Denham, near Bury St Edmunds, will be choosing and talking about a Calendar of Herbs on Monday (7pm) at the Museum of Garden History, St Mary at Lambeth, Lambeth Palace, London SE1.
Admission £3.
Money raised will go towards the appeal to establish a permanent museum on the Lambeth site.
In the Garden Update: Weekend work
By SALLY TAMPLIN
LIKE many other plants, asparagus seems to have got a second wind.
Fresh green growths should not be cut down, but any stems that have yellowed and withered can be cleared away.
A thick mulch of mushroom compost round the crowns is beneficial.
Window boxes need clearing of summer bedding.
Fill the containers with fresh compost before replanting with winter pansies or spring bulbs.
Low-growing crocuses and irises will be easier to manage than full-size daffodils, which get beaten about by wind in exposed situations.
Ivy is an elegant gap filler for winter months.
Many apples and pears are now ready for picking.
Temperature is the most critical factor in successful storage.
It should be between 36-41F.
Somewhere dark and slightly damp will be ideal.
If you cannot find wooden boxes, use large polythene bags for storage, but leave the bag tops open.
Houseplants should be allowed to drift into semi-dormancy.
Cut down on feeding (once a month is plenty) and watering, but keep the atmosphere round the plants slightly humid by misting over leaves, or standing pots on a layer of damp pebbles.
Shading should be washed off greenhouses and insulating film fixed.