

Income support rise ‘derisory’: This week's rise takes many pensioners back to where they were 18 months ago, Sue Fieldman reports
By SUE FIELDMAN
INCOME support was increased this week for pensioners aged 75 and above, or 60 plus and disabled.
However, the increase of up to £2.50 a week for a single person, and up to £3.50 a week for a couple, is considered small by many involved with the elderly.
Furthermore, many pensioners who are struggling financially, do not qualify for income support.
Sally Greengross, director of Age Concern, said: ‘Age Concern remains very worried about the financial position of older pensioners, despite the October increases in income support and housing benefit for certain disabled pensioners and those aged 75 or over.
‘Many of those who gain in October, will be the same people whose benefits were reduced 18 months previously.
The October increases have been estimated to help around 2,000,000 pensioner claimants, yet the Department of Social Security's estimates in 1987 showed 2,090,000 pensioners likely to have decreased benefit as a result of the 1988 structural reforms, with 710,000 of these losing £3 a week or more,’ she said.
For many pensioners this week's increases will only bring them back to where they were 18 months ago, and some pensioners will still be worse off.
If you already get income support you do not need to claim the extra amount — the increase will be in your next order book.
However, if you think that you may now qualify, there is an explanatory leaflet NP1 which is available in post offices and from the DHSS.
Those who get income support, will usually also receive housing benefit.
If your income is a little higher, you can also qualify for housing benefit, but not income support.
From this week, housing benefit also goes up, although again the amounts are derisory.
Those who get housing benefit, but not income support, will find a single person's rent rebate goes up £1.63 a week.
A home-owning pensioner over 75 who does not qualify for income support gets a mere 50p a week extra rate.
A couple who get housing benefit, but no income support, will from 9 October receive £2.88 extra in rent rebate, and a 0.70p a week increase in rate rebate.
Twenty per cent of pensioners do not take up benefits that they are entitled to.
Even so, one in five pensioners rely entirely on state benefits for their income.
And for most pensioners, even those with supplementary pensions or savings, the state pension is their financial lifeline.
Pensioner's received a 5.9 per cent increase in the state pension last April.
‘Had the increase in pensions been in line with inflation in the 12 months ending April 1989, a single person with the basic state pension would have received an additional £44.20 and a couple another £72.80 during the year,’ said Mrs Greengross.
‘Of even greater importance is the need to restore the link between earnings and pensions.
Earnings have consistently risen at a higher rate than prices, widening the gulf between the incomes of working people with average wages, and those dependent on state benefits.
‘Had the Government not broken the link in 1980, the basic state pension would now be £9.70 a week higher for a single person, and £15.45 higher for a couple.
‘Age Concern believes it is essential, in order to maintain living standards after retirement, that at least one part of pensioner's income, the state pension, is raised in line with earnings.
Age Concern has written to Tony Newton, Secretary of State for Social Security, calling for state retirement pensions to be increased substantially so that the real value is maintained.
Mrs Greengross added: ‘Isn't it about time that the Government exercised some seasonal goodwill to all men — and women — of pensionable age and increased the £10 Christmas bonus?’
If the bonus had risen in line with prices since its introduction in 1972, it would have been worth £48.85 last Christmas.
A lobbying letter to Mrs Thatcher on the subject may be timely.
After all, if this week's polls are anything to go by, she may be joining the ranks of Britain's retired pensioners in 1992.
TOM and Doreen Longhurst are pensioners.
They live in London.
Tom supplements their pension by working part-time, even though he is nearly 70.
‘Pensioners are the forgotten people,’ said Tom.
‘No one cares about pensioners, as they are no longer an earning commodity.
People's pets are better fed than some old age pensioners.
Pensioners who just have their state pensions are really suffering.
They are the people I worry about.
‘My wife and I are not badly off as we have the state pension, my police pension, and a police civil staff pension.
I saved well for my retirement, but I find it swallowed up with increased living costs in London.
Pensioners should have a London allowance to cope with such increases,’ said Tom.
‘Our income is a quarter of our previous police salary, and while pension increases remain practically static, inflation pushes up the cost of living beyond our reach.
One year, we were given an increase of 40p a week on our state pension.
I sent a letter to Mrs Thatcher saying if she was so hard up as only to pay us 40p, then she could have the money back.’
Big City brokers turn their backs on small investors: Martin Baker reports on where private investors can go for advice and dealing services as shares falter
By MARTIN BAKER
THE London stock market is down by about 8 per cent from this year's peak.
Share traders remained unimpressed by Nigel Lawson's rallying speech, and the consensus among analysts was that the FT-SE 100 index of shares would end the year lower than yesterday's close.
Some estimates put the close of year figure at 2,050 — 150 points lower than the worst of last week's pessimists.
The managers of the cheap share-dealing services, aimed at small investors, report that many of their clients are telephoning to sell.
Others are asking for advice and reassurance amid fears of recession and the advent of a full- scale bear market.
‘They are certainly apprehensive,’ said a Barclayshare spokesman of the company's 19,000 clients.
The small investor might well feel cheated by the City because it has failed to provide the services necessary to buy and sell shares.
The Cheltenham & Gloucester Building Society this month withdrew its cheap share-dealing service, which it could not make profitable.
The C&G was preceded out of the market by stockbrokers Kleinwort Grieveson and Hoare Govett.
But not all the news is bad for small investors.
A new company, Raphael Zorn Helmsley, starts business with the small investor on Monday.
It offers a full discretionary management service — anything from PEPs, shares and gilts to traded options — for first-time investors with as little as £10,000.
There is also a ‘no-frills’ dealing service with a minimum commission of £30 — 1.65 per cent for the first £10,000, and 0.5 per cent thereafter.
Stockbroker Malcolm Roberts of Fleming Asset Management will take on clients with £150,000 to invest in shares.
He reports a significant increase in interest since private clients began to be deserted by some of the big City brokers.
Regional stockbrokers like Leeds-based Redmayne-Bentley have a low minimum of £10,000 for their management service and report consistent interest in their portfolio management services.
The investor who has a few privatisation shares and wants to extend a portfolio without paying for advice does have a cheap alternative to discretionary portfolio management.
The banks and building societies, together with specialist execution-only services such as Sharelink and the Debenhams share shops, now offer a range of services to the would-be investor.
Sharelink has built up a clientele of about 57,000 in two years.
The commission structure is a significant improvement on pre-Big Bang charges at a minimum of £16 and a rate of 1.25 per cent on the first £2,500 of a transaction, falling to 0.75 per cent for the next £2,500 and 0.2 per cent thereafter.
‘Our services have been very well received by the public,’ says Sharelink chief executive David Jones.
Sharelink is considering an advisory service, but ‘will not compete with the full discretionary service offered by stockbrokers.
Anything Sharelink offers will be quick and clean, like the transaction service.’
Unit trust managers Fidelity offer a good-value service for the slightly larger investor.
The Fidelity Share Service has a £25 minimum commission with a £50 maximum up to £20,000.
The service becomes cheap after the £4,000 level.
Not surprisingly, the 3,000 users of the service average £8,000 when they deal.
This compares with an average transaction level of under £1,900 at Sharelink.
The leading share service offered by the high street banks is Barclayshare, which offers both an execution-only facility and a portfolio management service.
The transaction service costs £20 a year, charged in two instalments.
On top of this there is a charge for every transaction of a minimum £16, with 1.25 per cent on the first £5,000, 0.75 per cent on the next £10,000, and 0.5 per cent applying thereafter subject to an overall maximum charge of £250.
Barclayshare's advisory service, which has £250m under management, has the same charging structure, but costs £15 quarterly.
In both cases the customer is sent quarterly statements plus a monthly bulletin of market analysis and research.
There is now plenty of choice for the investor who knows what he or she wants to invest in, but there is still something of a vacuum for investors with less than £50,000 which they want to put into shares directly.
Appeal of mortgages in foreign currencies: Malcolm Craig explains why only the financially sophisticated should take out these mortgages
By MALCOLM CRAIG
WITH UK mortgage interest rates heading towards 14.75 per cent, and the possibility of even higher rates in prospect as a result of the sterling crisis, borrowers can be forgiven for taking notice of the proliferation of newspaper advertisements extolling the virtues of foreign currency loans.
After all, if you can borrow (or exchange your existing UK mortgage where you are paying rates at the highest level in real terms for over a century) for a Swiss franc mortgage at around 9.5 per cent, a mark mortgage at just under 10 per cent , an Ecu mortgage (Ecu is the European currency unit which is made up of a ‘basket’ of 10 currencies including sterling) at about 10 per cent or a Japanese yen mortgage at just under 8 per cent , why not do so?
The saving on interest rate costs by taking out a foreign currency mortgage is obvious enough — about 5 per cent to 6 per cent.
The big pitfall is the prospect of a currency loss if sterling declines still further, which can wipe out the benefit of interest rate savings and leave the borrower owing more debt than he borrowed in the first place.
Because of this, foreign currency mortgages, which are being sold very heavily at the moment by financial intermediaries (linked to banks and other financial institutions which are providing the funds), are only for the financially sophisticated.
There are ways of hedging against the exchange rate risk.
One method is to switch the foreign currency loan back into sterling if you think that sterling will weaken significantly — more than a possibility.
This again is a strategy to be pursued only by those with considerable financial sophistication.
However, if you do take out a foreign currency loan, make certain that it is possible to switch back into sterling at least once, and at short notice without incurring heavy charges, otherwise you are very exposed.
Another is the use of currency ‘hedging insurance’ which is provided by the forward foreign exchange market or by the foreign exchange options market.
A few intermediaries offer this facility on a limited basis but forward foreign exchange markets and the currency futures options market are designed for big players and the smaller customer would neither be welcomed, nor would he, or she, easily know how to gain access to these markets.
The only real insurance, so far as foreign currency mortgages are concerned, is to cover the foreign currency mortgage with income in the same currency, and also secure the loan on the house in the same currency.
For example, someone buying a French property which is the security for a French franc mortgage, who obtains rental income in French francs to cover the cost of his borrowings can sleep reasonably easily at night.
Those who take out foreign currency mortgages secured on their UK (sterling based) properties are not likely to because of the exchange rate risk.
Similarly, if you take out a foreign currency mortgage where sterling is exchanged for foreign currency at the time of the purchase, and you subsequently want to repay the mortgage — you then have to pay over sterling to secure foreign currency with which to do so.
You can find yourself facing a much larger debt if the pound has weakened against that foreign currency in the interim.
Players in the market include a host of intermediaries.
The best known include John Charcol which has Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank, as its loan provider, and P&G Associates, part of the London & Manchester Group, which offers Ecu loans.
London & Capital, which is linked to UCB, the French-owned mortgage company, provides a comprehensive foreign currency mortgage service for UK and overseas properties.
Behind the intermediaries are British banks, and British and Scottish insurance companies.
Their rationale for entry to this flourishing new market is easy to understand.
With the UK housing market flat, and with competition high, business generated by foreign currency mortgages can generate a higher ‘turn’ for the lender than UK mortgages, and produce extra fees and commissions for the intermediary arranging the facility.
It is very much a case of caveat emptor.
Creche vs cash in the childcare debate
By MALCOLM CRAIG
WITH competition to recruit new employees likely to intensify as the shortage of school leavers grows, the issue of child care provision by employers becomes ever more important.
How much does it cost an employer to provide childcare facilities and what is the cheapest option?
According to employee benefit specialists, Mercer Fraser, the cost of providing a creche for 75 children would be £590,966 in the first year with an ongoing cost of £290,966 a year.
To provide the cash equivalent,(assuming an average of £50 per child per week) would work out at £215,377 a year.
But to provide Childcare Cheques would cost £250,200 in the first year with on-going costs of £206,200 a year.
At the end of five years the employer providing a creche will have paid £2,154,830 while employers providing equivalent cash or childcare cheques will have paid half that at £1,076,885 and £1,077,000 respectively.
Cash figures are based on the employee receiving £50 net of tax and national insurance.
‘Cost, of course, is not the only criteria,’ commented Don Allen of Mercer Fraser who developed the Chidcare Cheque scheme in conjunction with the National Childminding Association.
‘Quality of childcare and practicality are also important and although cash works out cheapest, it has a serious drawback in that the employer has no control over how the money is being used.
This is one reason why the DSS has never paid this subsidy to single parent families.
With both creches and Childcare Cheques the employer has a say in the quality of care provided.’
Maximum exposure from a new PEP
By MALCOLM CRAIG
PERSONAL Equity Plans (PEPs) are rolling relentlessly onto the market.
Save & Prosper launched a new plan on Thursday, MIM Britannia has a new plan available from next week, and the investment trust arm of Robert Fleming has recently unveiled a plan.
Until 31 December individual investors can run the last tax year's PEP maximum into this year's quota, and commit up to £7,800 into shares and unit or investment trusts tax-free.
To offer the maximum exposure to tax-free collective investment, managers must be able to provide ‘old’ PEPs (ie have started PEPs in the tax year 1988-89) plus new PEPs which run in this tax year.
And if they offer the unit or investment trust options, they must also offer shares or you will not be able to invest the maximum amount.
The most interesting new PEP is a plan from Broker Financial Services, which guarantees the initial investment by investing part of the money outside the PEP in zero dividend preference shares in investment trusts.
These shares are redeemable for an increasing amount.
The danger to an investor would be if the investment trust's net asset value fell so much that it could not afford to meet its commitments to the zero dividend preference shareholders.
BFS claims this is highly unlikely.
For an investor who has selected a 1995 maturity date, BFS says the net asset value would have to fall by 5 per cent over the six years for the investment trust to be unable to pay up.
BFS is offering two standard maturity dates of 1995 and 1999.
Fund manager Tony Reid said: ‘Provided there's stock available we will match stock for the maturity dates the client wants.
Most dates up to 2000 can be covered.’
BFS splits the £4,800 PEP investment between capital shares in the M & G Dual investment trust and a selection of blue chip shares.
Accident scheme
By MALCOLM CRAIG
MOTORISTS who are the innocent victims of accidents can now have more legal muscle to pursue uninsured losses with a low-cost legal fees scheme from DAS.
The scheme, which already covers more than a million motorists in the UK, can cost as little as £6.50 a year.
Maximum cover is £50,000 per insured incident.
The Ecology Building Society launches conservation bonds
By ANDREW BIBBY
BRITAIN'S youngest and most unusual building society, the Ecology, is hoping to raise £250,000 from savers prepared to ‘invest in the alternative’, and take out the society's fixed one-year conservation bonds.
From 1 November, the return on the bonds will be increased from 10.0 per cent payable at the end of the 12-month term to 11.5 per cent.
But only 11.0 per cent of the interest is paid to the investor: the remaining half per cent is donated to a conservation organisation of their choice.
‘In the past, these bonds have usually been oversubscribed,’ says the Ecology general manager, Bob Lowman.
‘People like to feel that they're doing something with their savings.
We've given money to organisations like the RSPB, Greenpeace, the Woodland Trust and Working Weekends on Organic Farms.’
The Ecology Building Society was established in 1981 with just £5,000, but has now seen its assets grow to almost £4m.
Savings deposited in the society's conservation bonds, in its ordinary account (6.00 per cent interest) and 90 day account (8.5 per cent) are used to finance new mortgage business.
‘We have lent over £1m this year, above our target,’ Mr Lowman says.
In line with its principles, the Ecology chooses its business carefully.
Its rules restrict it to lending on property which encourages self-sufficiency, the ecologically efficient use of land and the saving of non-renewable resources.
In practice, this means that mortgage loans may be available for small-scale workshops, derelict but sound houses which would otherwise be abandoned, houses with energy-saving features and organic smallholdings.
The Ecology also lends on terraced houses and back-to-backs in city areas, particularly in the North.
‘People think that ecology means a return to the countryside, cows and sheep and trees and that sort of thing, but the conservation of energy is just as important in the towns, and back-to-backs are by their nature more energy efficient,’ says Mr Lowman.
Borrowers pay 14.5 per cent interest, though it is due to rise to 15.5 per cent on 1 November.
Despite the premium rate, Mr Lowman claims that mortgage demand is still high at the moment.
The Ecology Building Society argues that it is recreating the original grass-roots feel of a membership-owned mutual society, and says that it involves its members closely in the development of new savings accounts.
New Amex cover for high-risk activities
By LORNA BOURKE
AMERICAN Express has introduced an accidental injury insurance plan which covers cardmembers for high-risk sports excluded from most insurances.
It covers such activities as parachuting, mountaineering, hang-gliding, sub-aqua diving and motor racing.
‘It's a simple case of supply and demand,’ said Bill West, general manager of cardmember financial services.
‘Our research shows that Amex members generally lead active social lives, regardless of whether or not they spend their weekends risking life and limb and that there is a need for this sort of cover.
This is very much what we are about in developing financial services for our cardmembers which meet their particular requirements and provide added value.’
The sports and leisure accident plan offer two levels of cover for injury during leisure time — standard or premium — with the option to include particularly hazardous sports and to provide cover for cardmembers' spouses.
The benefits include a lump sum payment for accidental injury up to £50,000 for standard cover and £100,000 for premium cover; up to £25,000 standard and £50,000 premium for a fatal accident; £25 or £50 for each day's hospitalisation for up to a year, £250 or £500 towards specialist outpatient treatment after leaving hospital and up to £500,000 on both levels to cover against third party claims for injury or damage to their property.
This includes free legal advice.
But the cover is not cheap.
The cost of standard cover is from £7.20 a month or £18 to include hazardous sports, double for premium cover.
News Round-Up: Girobank seeks mythical customer
By LORNA BOURKE
IS YOUR name JA Ashton?
If it is you could win £500.
Girobank is looking for JA Ashton, a mythical customer whose name has appears in brochures and leaflets promoting the bank's services.
Real life JA Ashtons who come forward will have their name and address entered in a draw.
The first to have his or her details drawn will be given £500 in a Girobank high interest notice account, paying 10.75 per cent net of basic rate tax.
To qualify, entrants must be over 18 and able to prove their identity if necessary.
‘JA Ashton already seems a real person to our marketing team and new services are designed with his or her needs in mind,’ said Ian Martin, Girobank's head of marketing.
‘Of course, today's JA Ashton is likely to be very different from that of our original concept when far fewer people had bank accounts, when the great majority of customers were male and when credit cards had barely hit the scene.’
News Round-Up: Pru preaches to unconverted
By LORNA BOURKE
THE Pru is jumping on the green bandwagon and as one of Britain's major motor insurers is encouraging car owners to convert their vehicles to unleaded petrol.
The Pru has half a million motorists on its books and is sending them each a booklet when their policies are renewed explaining the benefits of conversion.
David Roper, marketing executive, said: ‘Car exhaust emissions are a major source of lead pollution in the atmosphere, which can have long term effects to health, particularly young children.
‘A recent RAC survey showed that nearly six out of 10 car owners don't know if their car can run on lead-free fuel.
We hope the leaflet we are sending out to our motor policyholders will bring home to them the fact that most cars can be converted both simply and cheaply.’
But the Pru has stopped short of offering a discount to motorists who convert to lead-free petrol.
News Round-Up: Switching at Sainsbury
By LORNA BOURKE
SOME 10 per cent of the goods bought at Sainsbury's stores is now paid for by Switch debit card, accounting for a quarter of a million shoppers.
Sainsbury launched its Eftpos in November 1987 and now accepts Switch as a debit card at terminals in all 243 of its stores which operate barcode scanning, as well as at all 40 of its petrol stations.
Moreover, Sainsbury now offers a Cashback facility which allows Switchcard customers to draw up to £30 in cash as a part of the Switch transaction.
This is available at only four branches at the moment -Maidenhead, Chertsey, Archer Road Sheffield, and Purley Way, Croydon.
News Round-Up: Guide to sunny retirement
By LORNA BOURKE
RETIRING abroad is not just a fantasy but a reality for an increasing proportion of the population.
But there can be problems and it is wise to read up on the subject and take professional advice before you make the plunge.
Retiring Abroad, published by the Financial Times is a useful guide to the making the break.
It covers buying a property, arranging removals, pre-retirement savings, investments, pensions, taxation, social welfare and health.
It contains profiles of popular retirement countries such as Spain and for those who really want to get away from it all there are outlines of more exotic locations.
News Round-Up: Managing your pension
By LORNA BOURKE
THE attractions of personal pensions has been enhanced by a change in the rules allowing individuals to manage their own investments within a personal pension plan.
Peter Lilley, Financial Secretary to the Treasury, said: ‘This new investment opportunity complements other measures for widening share ownership and will encourage greater personal responsibility for pension provision.’
Individuals will only be able to take advantage of this facility if the pension providers offer this option.
But from 11 October personal pension schemes may introduce facilities allowing scheme members to direct how funds are to be invested.
There will be rules to prevent assets being acquired by the pension fund from the owner of that pension fund and vice versa.
News Round-Up: Time to make financial plans
By LORNA BOURKE
WITH interest rates going through the roof and budgets stretched now could be the time to embark upon some serious financial planning.
The latest edition of Financial Planning for the Individual includes explanations and advice on unit and investment trusts, business expansion schemes, personal equity plans, pensions, life assurance, tax planning and mortgages.
It is aimed at both the interested amateur and the professional.
Written by accountant, Alan Kelly of Grant Thornton, the book is available from business bookshops, price £11.50.
News Round-Up: Music to help Aids
By LORNA BOURKE
ALL royalties from the English Symphony Orchestra's recording of Elgar's Enigma Variations, launched this week will be donated to the National Aids Trust.
The compact disc is sponsored by the insurer Legal & General and the royalties are expected to raise at least £25,000 for the Aids charities and projects the Trust supports.
Once the sum raised passes the £25,000 mark, royalties will revert to the Orchestra and Nimbus Records, the producers, while Legal & General's will continue to go to the National Aids Trust.
News Round-Up: County court judgments fall
By LORNA BOURKE
INTEREST rates may be rising, pushing borrowers even further into debt, but the number of county court judgments against individuals in debt has fallen by 16 per cent in the first half of 1989, according to figures released by the Registry of County Court Judgments.
The registry also reports an increase in the number of searches as people verify their situation in the light of tougher credit granting procedures, says chairman, Malcolm Hurlston.
If you have owed money, you could find that the lender has obtained judgment against you without your knowledge.
Anyone wanting to find if there is a judgment against them should contact the Registry at 173-175 Cleveland Street, London W1P 5PE.
Tel: 01-380 0133.
News Round-Up: Insurer's idea for NI saving
By LORNA BOURKE
REDUCTIONS in National Insurance contributions came into effect last week.
Workers earning £115 a week or more will receive just over £3 extra in their weekly pay packets, while salaried staff will see an increase of more than £13 a month.
The Pru says that Britain is becoming a nation of spendthrifts with less than £5 in every £100 of disposable income being saved last year -the lowest level for 30 years — and is encouraging people to save the extra cash.
A 30-year-old man could use his extra £13 a month to buy £60,000 worth of 20-year term cover, says the Pru.
Interest-free loan offer for new car buyers
By LORNA BOURKE
WITH interest rates going through the roof the offer of an interest-free loan for two years for buyers of new cars should be investigated.
Anyone considering buying a new Metro 1.0L, Montego 1.6L or Rover 820 Fastback can obtain interest-free loans over two years from AA Financial Services, provided you are prepared to put down a 25 per cent deposit on the car.
For example, a G-registered Metro costs £216.42 a month over 24 months with a deposit of £1,731.25.
The purchase price includes six months road tax and delivery.
The total amount payable is £6,925.25.
Repayments can also be spread over three years at an APR of 3.9 per cent, or four years at an APR of 6.9 per cent .
However, car buyers should be aware that all kinds of discounts are available on new cars and that an interest-free loan for 75 per cent for two years might still work out more expensive than borrowing elsewhere and getting a large cash discount on the purchase price.
You will have to do your sums.
At today's overdraft rate of around 18 per cent the value of a two-year interest free loan of say, £5,000 is around £1,800.
You would therefore need to be able to buy the Metro for about £5,200 cash or less to be better off financing the deal yourself.
High interest rates are good for savers: Lorna Bourke looks at the options for investing your money at a time of soaring loan rates
By LORNA BOURKE
HOMEBUYERS now know the worst.
Halifax and Abbey National have announced their new home loan rates — up 1 per cent to 14.5 per cent from 1 November -and most other large lenders are likely to follow suit.
With demand for homeloans at a low ebb, few will want to go higher.
For the average borrower with a £30,000 home loan over 25 years, monthly repayments after income tax relief on the interest, go up from £278.70 to £294.90.
In May 1988, when the mortgage rate stood at 9.8 per cent the same borrower was paying only £221.40.
For those who want to work out what their new repayment will be, the increased cost each month per £1,000 borrowed is 54p net of basic rate tax or 76p for each £1,000 borrowed over the £30,000 limit for mortgage interest relief.
Those lenders who have announced their new rates are the Skipton which goes up from 13.4 per cent to 14.65 per cent(14.9 for higher risk lending) from Monday and Stroud and Swindon which is putting its rate up by 1 per cent to 14.5 per cent immediately for new borrowers and from 1 November for existing loans.
‘The society operates an annual repayment date system and borrowers will not have to increase their repayment until 1 February,’ commented chief executive, Richard Payne.
Town & Country Building Society is putting on 1.25 per cent to bring its mortgage rate to 14.75 per cent.
Norwich & Peterborough Building Society is moving up 0.5 per cent to 14.5 per cent, but it put on 0.5 per cent just before the base rate rise was announced.
At these levels, borrowers with savings or investments must be wondering whether it is worthwhile using some of their cash to pay off the mortgage in part or in full.
The net cost of borrowing for those with loans of £30,000 or less works out at 10.87 per cent for a basic rate taxpayer, 8.7 per cent for those paying tax at 40 per cent.
With a net return of 12 per cent easily attainable from building society and bank high interest accounts, it is still cheaper to borrow and keep your savings on deposit.
But for those with loans over £30,000 where there is no tax relief, it is certainly worth considering paying off some of the mortgage -particularly since there is no clear indication of when rates might come down.
But if it is bad news for borrowers, investors have never had it so good.
Returns of 12 per cent and more are on offer from banks and building societies while the rate of inflation — even taking into account this latest mortgage rate rise — is around 7.5 per cent.
Investors are getting a real return of 4.5 per cent on their cash.
This looks like the best return available on income bonds but investors should move fast as these offers tend to be fully subscribed very quickly.
If the Regency Life bond runs out, the next best rate is available from Aetna (Tel: 01-837 6494) which also has a one-year fixed rate bond paying between 11.6 per cent net of basic rate tax to 12.10 per cent for investments betweeen £5,000 and £1m plus.
Britannia Building Society has a fixed rate one-year bond at 11.75 per cent for sums of £25,000 or more.
Investors who should really be thinking of making a move are those in National Savings Deposit Accounts which are paying only 10.75 per cent gross (without deduction of tax).
This is well below what can be obtained from building societies.
National Savings Certificates are paying a miserable 7.5 per cent tax free and no one should be holding any certificates which have reached maturity as the rate paid under general extension terms is only 5.1 per cent.
National Savings income bonds might just be worth hanging on to at 11.75 per cent if you are a non-taxpayer.
For investors who do not want to tie up their money for a year in an income bond, Town & Country's (tel: 01-353 1476) new Classic investment account is paying 12 per cent net of basic rate tax for sums of £25,000 and over.
Nottingham (tel: 0602 481444) is offering the same return on its Anniversary Bond for investments of £5,000 or more but there are penalties on withdrawal within 12 months — 90 days' loss of interest.
Skipton is paying 11.75 per cent on its Excel Bond for sums of £5,000 or more and there is access to your money.
For those wanting monthly income, Town & Country again tops the bill offering 11.85 per cent on its Classic Account for sums of £25,000 or more.
If you want instant access to your money, some of the bank high interest accounts are offering the best terms.
Humberclyde Finance (Tel: 0256 846874) is paying 11.73 per cent net of basic rate tax on sums of £50,000 or more.
Hedge your bets with a foreign currency fund: Martin Baker reports on the best ways for investors to make the most of a falling pound
By MARTIN BAKER
IN SPITE of the rise in bank base rates and the Chancellor's tough defence of his strategy at last week's Blackpool conference, the pound has continued to decline.
From DM3.07 sterling has fallen to DM2.96.
The descent, mirrored by a similar plunge against the dollar, has taken little more than a fortnight.
Interest rates were raised to make the pound more attractive and stop its fall.
The most immediate effect of all this has been the announcement of increased mortgage rates.
More unpleasant side-effects, such as a stock market decline and spiralling credit card problems may be in store.
Although the situation is bad, investors can make the best of it.
‘It is a good time for sterling-based investors to buy a holding in a managed currency fund,’ says currency manager Philip Saunders of Guinness Mahon.
‘Sterling has moved into a major bear market.
‘You can argue that a change in rates might make a decisive turnround in the next six months or so…but recent behaviour of the foreign exchanges suggests that government control is not possible.
‘No interest rate mechanism will bribe the markets to hold sterling at an unacceptable level.’
The investment logic is simple.
By converting pounds to other currencies investors are gambling that the pound will fall.
To take an oversimplified example: if an investor buys marks at three to the pound, and the pound falls until it is valued at just two marks, every pound of the original stake will be worth £1.50 at the new rate.
Investment managers have invented various ways of making this kind of currency investment.
The two main types are the self-administered currency scheme and the managed currency fund.
Self-administered schemes are cheap to run.
The investor decides on the currency most likely to appreciate against sterling and puts money on deposit in that currency.
The manager executes the deals for a small annual fee — usually 0.5 per cent deducted from the interest earned.
Rothschild's Old Court International Reserves has the widest choice of currencies and it is easy to invest.
The evidence is that you stand as good a chance of getting the choice of currency right as the experts if the return from the managed funds is anything to go by.
With a managed fund the investor makes a deposit, and the manager decides on the spread of currencies and the contracts.
So will sterling continue to fall, bringing more gloom to homeowners but perhaps some pleasure to those who have hedged their sterling savings into foreign currencies?
Few analysts are optimistic.
‘It's already taken a very big hit,’ says Ian Amstad, an economist with Chase Manhattan.
‘But if it falls below the 2.95 level against the Deutschemark, sterling will plummet.
The markets are demanding a higher and higher premium to hold sterling and they may sell it unless and until it reaches 2.80 against the mark.’
Peter Harman, independent adviser at Berkeley St James', agrees with Mr Amstad.
His preferred currency is the dollar.
He believes that ‘managed currency funds are a good way of protecting the purchasing power of sterling-based investors.
They have to be a good thing for anyone who is content to be out of shares and keep part of their money in liquid money funds’.
Philip Saunders makes a starker contrast between the limited exposure of currency funds and holdings in shares or unit trusts: ‘With charges at 4 per cent initially and three-quarters of a point annually for a currency fund, would you pay 6 per cent to go into a plain old unit trust?’
Mr Saunders' fund has a 40 per cent exposure to the mark, with a similar commitment to the dollar.
The rest is split between yen and sterling.
Our table shows the top 10 sterling-based funds.
The statistics provided by Opal show 25 dollar-based funds over one year which outperformed those in the table.
The strength of these funds, 17 of which show a return of better than 17 per cent, lies in their re-conversion from dollars to sterling.
Most UK investors will want to invest with a sterling denominated cheque, rather than convert to dollars beforehand.
The sterling-denominated funds have recorded relatively modest gains across a narrow spread of returns.
The worst has produced 7.7 per cent over the year, while the best, Lloyds International, is more than six points better.
The average performance of all funds, both sterling and dollar-based, is just over 14 per cent.
Only one fund managed to lose money.
This underscores the paradoxical nature of these investments: while they invest in notoriously volatile markets, the returns they produce are extremely solid, as befits an investment which is also a hedge.
OTC investors left in the dark
By MARTIN BAKER
INVESTORS in Over-The-Counter (OTC) shares have been left in limbo since the market fizzled out, often unable to sell their shares or, in some cases, trace the company in which they invested.
Yesterday's edition of the Investors Chronicle contains a special report on the 158 companies traded on the OTC market.
Of the companies traced, 40 have failed, another 22 were taken over and 22 are now quoted on Stock Exchange markets.
The remaining 74 are not quoted on any recognised exchange, although many can be traded by members under rule 535(2).