

Researching the Police in Easton
INTRODUCTION
It might be claimed that studying routine policing in Northern Ireland avoids the real issue of policing in the province and that attention ought to be addressed to those sections of the RUC which are responsible for what Turk (1982) calls ‘political policing’ and Brodeur (1983)‘high policing’, such as the Special Branch, the mobile support units, which are in effect riot police, or the various surveillance units like E4A.
While there are studies of the RUC's role in security and public-order issues (Brewer et al .
1988: 47–84; Enloe 1978; Pockrass 1986; Weitzer 1985, 1986, 1987 a, b), this forms only part of RUC duties, given the special position of Northern Ireland among divided societies.
Primarily, however, an empirically based study of public order policing is impossible to undertake in the midst of the province's continuing violent conflict, and certainly could not be done with the degree of depth, empirical focus, familiarity, and, frankly, personal safety which an ethnographic study of routine policing allows.
Nor would such a study have been given permission by the RUC, for it is utopian to expect police authorities in divided societies to open up these sections of their force to scrutiny and observation by outsiders.
An analysis of routine policing at least allows the possibility of empirical research being undertaken on police forces operating in divided societies, which is itself important because studies in the sociology of policing focus almost exclusively on police forces in stable liberal democracies.
In the process of examining how routine policing is affected by social divisions, researchers may, however, obtain some direct and first-hand impression of public order policing, if only unsatisfactorily as it briefly or infrequently enters their research location.
But routine policing in a divided society also constitutes an important substantive topic in its own right, for it  provides an additional dimension to the analysis of routine policing, as well as expanding and clarifying our understanding of what divided societies are like.
As certain areas of Great Britain, for example, take on some of the characteristics of divided societies, the focus of this study also has a relevance, of increasing proportion, outside the province and beyond what many residents in Northern Ireland might see as most directly pertinent to them.
Finally, any analysis of the RUC is worth while because of its intrinsic interest and relative neglect.
The interest which the RUC has as a police force derives entirely from the social context in which it operates, but this context is both a spur and a hindrance to research on the RUC.
Policing in Northern Ireland is a very controversial topic in a sensitive environment, and this sensitivity has implications for the research (on which see Brewer 1990 b ), especially its design and location, as well as for the validity and reliability of the results.
In most situations it is unusual and unnecessary to dwell on features of the research design, except perhaps in a boring and unread appendix, but in our instance we feel it is important to spend a chapter outlining the nature of the research design and location, and the associated problems, in order for the findings to be placed in their context, and to ensure that these considerations be taken seriously.
Further, if, as Woolgar emphasizes (1988a), reflexivity on the part of authors is a vital quality in helping others understand how social-scientific knowledge is produced, these reflections are important to demonstrate some of the social processes lying behind and operating upon this study.
Above all, however, this chapter is intended to begin a debate about the methodological and theoretical influence upon research of ‘sensitivity’, whether deriving from the sensitivity of the topic, its location, or both.
Textbooks on research methods rarely mention the problems that arise when undertaking research on controversial topics or conducting it in sensitive locations.
When it is considered, sensitivity is usually approached from the perspective of ethics (for example see Rainwater and Pittman 1966), and comments range from the commonplace to the anecdotal.
In fact, our research shows that sensitivity needs to emerge from the shadows and be recognized as an important problem in research.
Researchers should therefore give more attention to its negative effects on their conduct, especially in the way it requires researchers to make a number of pragmatic  compromises which depart from the textbook portrayal of ideal research practice.
In the past, many researchers have tended to underplay the problems that arose in the process of research in case they affected the evaluation of their results, although there have been a few ex post disclosures in books intended to show social research as often a messy enterprise (Bell and Newby 1977; Bell and Roberts 1984).
The only issues to be explored systematically are those of negotiating access (for example, Fox and Lundman 1974; Holdaway 1982), and the effects of gender on practice in the field (for example , Easterday et al .
1977; Hunt 1984; Warren 1988; Warren and Rasmussen 1977).
However, until very recently, the leading ethnographers of the police made few disclosures on the difficulties they encountered, implying that their entry into the field and relations with police officers were unproblematic.
Although often studying less controversial forces than the RUC, this panglossian portrayal has to be disbelieved, especially as the authors often indicated in an occasional footnote, or in a revealing preface or aside, that they faced problems in the field similar to our own (for example, see van Maamen 1981: 479, 492; Westley 1970, p. vii), even when the research was covert (Holdaway 1982, 1983: 12).
The only exception to this is the discussion of the likely reactive effect caused by the presence of observers (McCall 1975; Policy Studies Institute 1983b: 11–15; Reiss 1971; Softley 1980; Southgate and Ekblom 1986; Steer 1980), although no serious doubt is put on the validity of observational data on the police.
However, an increasing awareness of this omission has led some specialists in the area of ethnographic work on the police to address systematically the problems they encountered in the field (Punch 1989; van Maanen 1988).
In the case of the RUC it is essential to reflect on the problems that arose in the research.
We believe that results can only be properly evaluated if the problems connected with the study are made manifest rather than concealed.
We do not wish to commit the mistake that Woolgar believes is widespread in social science: namely, of suggesting that the only knowledge which is not subject to the influence of contingent historical, cultural, and social processes is that which we ourselves have written (Woolgar 1988b).
This reflexivity, what Woolgar more accurately calls benign introspection (p. 22), is thus a virtue rather than a limitation because it provides some of the necessary contextual background to help evaluate the  study.
We will look first at problems arising during the field-work, before describing the nature of Easton and its police station.
RESEARCHING THE RUC
Many people have noted how the police are not helpful in initiating research or in welcoming sociologists (Greenhill 1981: 91; Holdaway 1979: 1, 1983: 3–4).
In part this reflects a reluctance to let outsiders interfere with the job of policing, as well as a suspicion about soci — ology, which for many policemen sounds too much like the word ‘socialist’; social work suffers from the same association.
A constable in Easton once said, ‘If anything gets me down it's bloody sociology.
I think it's the biggest load of shite, simple as that’(FN 13/9/87, pp. 5–6), although a senior officer was prepared to explain his antagonism more fully:
I think most policeman can't relate to sociology at all, because, you see, the way we're taught everything is black and white: those who do bad should be punished, those who do good should be rewarded.
Sociology just seems to turn all that on its head.
It would seem to say that all those who are right and honest are wrong.
Just say a man doesn't earn as much money as me and he has to steal to keep his family, well, sociology says that's OK.
Another thing, sociology would seem to be saying that those who have wealth and do well do so at the expense of the poor unfortunate.
(FN 24/6/87, p. 2)
But the ethos of professionalism with which police authorities are imbued has led to a recognition that social research can bring valuable results, so they have opened up their leviathan to strangers and specially commissioned specific pieces of research.
This came somewhat late to the RUC because of the added security risks its members run by admitting outsiders, and because police authorities in divided societies like Northern Ireland have to be more sensitive about public perceptions of the police and therefore more conscious of the risks they run through research.
It is as a result of fears such as this that members of the RUC are required to obtain official permission before they cam talk to outsiders, such as the Press and researchers, or face being sacked from the force.
For ethical reasons, no social researcher should expose respondents to that possibility, and others over whom this threat does not hang or by whom it is treated lightly, such as ex-policemen and women or disgruntled members of the force, are too unrepresentative to give a balanced view of policing  Therefore, it was necessary to undertake an overt study and to obtain permission for the research from the Chief Constable.
Many different kinds of research require the permission of a ‘gatekeeper’, including all overt police research, and the reliability of the data depends upon what control the gatekeeper demands (something Douglas (1972) calls ‘retrenchment from the front’) and the integrity of the researcher in withstanding such pressure.
Research on policing in divided societies is especially likely to provoke suspicion about its reliability for these reasons.
Hence it is worth explaining, in a way that elsewhere might not be necessary and would be seen as an indulgence, that in our case, once permission was granted, no limits were laid down by senior officers and no censorship role has been retained by the RUC over the final manuscript.
The field-worker was able to spend as much time in the field as the principal investigator thought necessary, and no restrictions were placed on her going out on patrol, travelling in vehicles, or going to incidents of routine police duty.
The particular section within Easton station upon which we came to focus attention was decided by us not the police management.
Visits were allowed to other stations, including, on three occasions, those in areas of high tension in West and North Belfast, and to the Women's Police Unit, dealing entirely with sex crimes.
The important step in the research was therefore in obtaining initial permission.
The key to this undoubtedly lay in the attraction to the RUC of the idea of research on how routine policing is affected by Northern Ireland's security situation, and the appeal of giving ordinary policemen and women an opportunity to express their views about policing.
The experience of other police forces who had granted researchers permission also showed that no great difficulties were created as a result, and allowing research accords with the professionalism which is the core value of senior officers in the RUC.
This topic has less attraction for ordinary policemen and women, for although they might take pleasure in thing someone is interested in their views, it is they who run the risks associated with answering questions and from being observed doing their job.
This is what Fox and Lundman (1974: 53) mean when they say that there are two ‘gates’ within police organizations which affect access — winning the support both of senior managers and of the ordinary members of the force who are the subjects of the research.
A technical problem such as this raises interesting methodological  questions, because it forces one to ask which style of research is better suited to overcoming respondents' resistance and suspicion, especially when talking about sensitive and controversial topics.
It was thought that a questionnaire which asked police officers to tick the answer which came nearest to their attitude toward Catholics, or best reflected their feelings about being targets, would be very unreliable, especially when asked by someone with whom they were unfamiliar.
Past questionnaire research on the police has suffered from a low response rate (for example, Policy Studies Institute 1983a).
Ethnographic research has special qualities suited to dealing with controversial topics in sensitive locations, for it entails a gradual and progressive contact with respondents, which is sustained over a long period, allowing a rapport to be established slowly with respondents over time, and for researchers to participate in the full range of experiences involved in the topic.
This is why a great deal of the best police research is based on the ethnographic methods of participant observation and in-depth interviewing, and why workers in several other unusual, off-beat, difficult, or demanding occupations have been studied ethnographically, such as lorry drivers (Hollowell 1968), coal-miners (Dennis et al .
1956), traffic wardens (Richman 1983), cocktail waitresses (Spradley and Mann 1975), prison warders (Jacobs and Retsky 1975), and health visitors (Dingwall 1977), among others (for a selection see Berger 1964; Hughes 1958).
Hence many books on the technique of ethnography have been written by those with a background in police research (Fielding and Fielding 1986; Punch 1987).
Although in these circumstances the ethnographic method is the best way to obtain trust, it does not ensure it will be won from every respondent in the field.
In our case, it was never a simple matter of trust, once having been won, being taken for granted, as the textbooks suggest.
Although this was true for some respondents, most policemen and women in Easton periodically sought reassurance from the researcher about the purpose of the research, what was being written down about them, who would have access to the material, what the researchers' politics, religion, allegiances, and so on were.
The field-worker's legitimacy had to be proved continually and skilfully, and trust was gained as a result of a progressive series of negotiations.
As Johnson puts it (1975), trust is not a ‘one shot agreement’ but is continually negotiated during field-work (also see Emerson 1983: 176; van Maanen 1982).
This was especially so in our  case because the field-worker was a female within a masculine occupational culture and quickly identified as Catholic by the usual means through which people in Northern Ireland ‘tell’ identity (Burton 1979).
The permission of the Chief Constable was also a disadvantage in the field because it raised doubts among respondents about the purpose of the researcher's questions over and above those that naturally arise from the political situation in Northern Ireland.
The almost inherent suspicion the police have of strangers was in the RUC's case added to by worries about whether their personal security would be compromised and concern over the intentions of the police management.
To help engender trust and familiarity, the field-worker's contact in the station was restricted at the beginning to a few hours a shift once a week, gradually being built up to a full shift, including mights, twice a week.
Time was initially divided between two sections within the station in order to broaden the range of contacts, and visits were made to other stations, but, as the time devoted to data collection lengthened and data collection itself became more intensive, the focus narrowed to one section: roughly about twenty people.
However, other constables in Easton were encountered regularly in the canteen, on guard duty, and in the neighbourhood and community policing units of the station, and the personnel in the section periodically changed as a result of transfers.
We were provided, therefore, with as broad a range of contacts as is possible within one station (although this breadth does not approach that which comes from survey research) while still becoming close to one section, as is necessary in ethnographic research.
Field-work took place over a twelve-month period between 1987 and 1988, and was sufficiently prolonged to avoid the criticism which brief ‘smash-andgrab’ ethnographies often deserve.
Data were recorded by means of notepads not tape-recorder.
Initially the field-worker's relations with respondents in the field were especially and unusually warm, which runs counter to the norm in ethnographic research.
She was seen as a light relief from the boredom or demands of the shift, and, as a female, she was treated as a pretty face in a working environment which is heavily masculine.
As contact in the field increased, and the presence of the fieldworker became routine, her treatment by respondents similarly became routine.
It was only at that point that we felt confident that the field-worker was being talked to by respondents as a person  rather than as some novel sex object, and the veracity of what they said could be treated by us with more confidence.
We therefore dispute van Maanen's view that researchers on the police have to be male (1981: 480), in order to be able to participate fully in the masculine occupational and leisure culture of the police.
What is more important than gender is the personality and skill of the fieldworker in overcoming the feelings of suspicion the police have of all outsiders, especially in the more enclosed and threatened world of the RUC, and in our case the field-worker's gender seemed no bar to her obtaining access to the masculine ‘canteen culture’ of the men or to participating in conversations on the topics which are popular in that culture, which van Maanen describes as ‘sports, cars and sex’(1981: 476).
And, given the men's views of gender roles, being female actually facilitated and encouraged the introduction of certain topics, especially topics of a more emotional kind to do with stress, death, the terrorist threat and its effect on the family, and so on, which are particularly pertinent in Northern Ireland's police force.
Moreover, it also allowed entry into the policewomen's world, which, using van Maanen's logic, would have been denied a male field-worker (for the difficulties in establishing rapport experienced by a male researcher on the police see Warren and Rasmussen 1977: 358).
It is well known that the personal characteristics of a participant observer affect their research practice (see Hunt 1984; Warren 1988; Warren and Rasmussen 1977; Wax 1979), and that being female brings its own problems in the field.
In this regard, the fieldworker's experiences with the RUC are similar to those of other young female researchers, in that she was subject to sexual hustling, fraternizing, and paternalistic attitudes from male respondents (see Easterday et al .
1977).
However, there are also advantages in being of this gender.
Young female researchers can be treated as ‘acceptable incompetents’(Lofland 1971: 100), and perceived as nonthreatening (Easterday et al .
1977: 344; Warren and Rasmussen 1977: 360–1).
As Jennifer Hunt (1984) showed in respect to her work on the police, these qualities can increase a female researcher's penetration in the field and facilitate the development of rapport.
While no researcher, irrespective of their gender, can ever be totally sure that respondents are being truthful (specially so in our case), the research design compensated for this.
It is difficult to sustain untruths and false masks over twelve months of contact in  the field, particularly when this contact involves sharing private moments with respondents, such as those provided in the canteen or during the quiet hours of the might shift, tiding in the back of a vehicle or on security duty in the sanger (guardpost).
After several months of working full eight-hour shifts, the constables frequently forgot that an outsider was present, or no longer cared, and the fieldworker experienced moments when it would have been difficult to maintain a front.
While a few policemen tried to the bitter end to avoid conversation with the field-worker, sufficient rapport was established over time for the majority to talk quite openly to her about what are highly sensitive and controversial topics in a Northern Ireland context.
It is for this reason that many of the extracts from the data which we use in the volume are accounts and nearverbatim records of spontaneous conversations in natural situations, for we thought it unreliable to ‘interview’ respondents formally (van Maanen 1982: 140 argues that most ethnographic data are conversation-based).
As one further measure of the rapport that was established, most respondents eventually became assured enough in her presence to express their feelings about being the subject of research.
Over a twelve-month period a field-worker's persistent inquisitiveness is bound to become something of an irritant, and van Maanen notes how field-workers cannot expect to be liked by all respondents (1982: 111).
But leaving aside instances of momentary irritation, of which there were many, as all field-workers must expect, most respondents became confident enough in the field-worker's presence to express what were undoubtedly widely held fears about the research.
Sometimes these concerns were expressed through humour and tibaldry.
The field-worker became known among some policemen as ‘Old Nosebag’, and there were long-running jokes about spelling people's names correctly in Sinn Fein 's Republican News .
On one occasion, they were expressed through anger.
Towards the end of a long and tiring night shift, when news was coming through of the murder of another member of the RUC, one policeman in particular decided to put the field-worker through a test of trust.
PC. 1.
Look, just hold on a wee minute.
What gives you the right to come here and start asking us these personal questions about our families and that?…
You're not going to learn anything about the police while you're here.
They're not going to tell you anything…
And you know why?
Because you're always walking around with that bloody notebook writing  everything down, and you're not getting anywhere near the truth…
Like, what use is this research you're doing anyway?
Is it going to do me or my mates any good?
What you doing it for? 'Cos let me tell you, the only people who are going to be interested in your bloody research are the authorities.
WPC.
Can't you see that.
They're just using you…
PC. 1.
And I'll tell you another thing, you're too much of a liability.
See, when I go out, I'm looking out for me and my mate, I don't want some researcher in the back who's just going to be a liability…
Nobody gives a shit about you and your research.
Like, why did you feel the need to do this research on the RUC anyway?…
The bobby is the same the world over.
They worry about: number one, the money; number two, their social life; and number three, the job.
WPC.
Number one, their family.
Years ago people might have put the job first, but not any more.
Now it's family…
People have been murdered for this job and no one gives a shit.
PC. 1.
How do we know we can trust you?
What religion are you?
How do I know I can trust you if I don't know what religion you are?
RESEARCHER.
I'm a Catholic.
PC. 1.
Are you ashamed of it?
Then what are you crying about?
You would think you were ashamed of it or something…
Like, I'm just asking things everybody wanted to know…
Has anyone ever spoken to you like this since you've been here?
What's so bad about it.
Do you know, it makes it a lot easier for us to work with you if we find these things out about you.
See, this research, as far as I'm concerned you'll learn nothing.
It's a waste of time.
To be honest, I couldn't give a monkey's fart about your research.
If you really wanted to learn something you should have started at the top.
It's them you need to be looking at.
They don't care about the family man getting shot, they don't care about the families.
The guy shot tonight will be forgotten about in another few weeks…
It's them you should be talking to.
The so-called big men up at the top don't care about us.
WPC.
But it's us who are getting shot and blown up.
PC. 1.
Like, you're apologizing for crying.
Nothing wrong with that, but if you want to learn anything about us we have to feel we can trust you.
I didn't speak to you before because I didn't know you.
[Others]don't want to know the things you want to know, see the things you want to see…
Like, I've seen my name written down about five times on that last page.
If the authorities read that they'd put me on the next bus to [name of border area]and keep me there.
PC. 2.
I'll tell you this.
See, when I come in here on a night, it's not the IRA  I'm worried about, it's them upstairs.
PC. 1.
I don't care what you're writing down, just as long as I don't see it in Republican News .
Maybe the police has made me this way, but do you not see that if you're going to come in here asking me questions about my family, if you're going to want to know all these things, I've got to be able to trust you?
Like, after this tonight, I'd let you come out in a vehicle with me.
(FN 30/8/87, pp. 33–45)
This extract is useful in order to illustrate how the field-worker, on the one policeman's own admission, both needed to be tested and was successful in passing.
Trust is an overriding consideration of all policemen and women, because it is part of the team basis by which police work gets done, whether formally in terms of managerial expectations or informally within the occupational culture (Holdaway 1983: 1 15), but it is particularly important in the RUC.
There were many different sorts of trials set for the field-worker (something noted in their field-work experience by Douglas 1972 and van Maanen 1982), and the apologies other members of the section later gave her because of this policeman's conduct is proof that these other trials, too, were successfully passed.
But this particular extract is useful for another reason, in that it shows, through the sub-plots which appear within it, the range of issues provoked by the research which respondents were sensitive about.
Some of these are worth highlighting in greater detail as a means of contextualizing the data and illustrating some of the social processes operating upon them.
One of the consequences of the RUC's dual role is that it has features typical of most police forces and qualities special to it.
This is reflected in the respondents' sensitivity towards the police management, an enduring theme in the conversation of ordinary policemen and women in any force, and towards the terrorist threat, which is not faced by others to the same degree.
The latter makes what is already an internally homogeneous organization even more enclosed and protective.
As one constable put it, ‘I don't mind you being here, I don't mind you taking notes.
I don't mind you at all, but the boys they'd be suspicious of anyone who's not a member of the police force, and that's how people will see you: you're not a member of the force’(FN 23/10/87, p. 20).
Establishing an overt research role was therefore always going to be a task of sisyphean labour, but the sensitivity of the topic and location made it more difficult than is usual in ethnographic research.
The issues about which respondents expressed concern included  the use made of the results by, variously, the police authorities and the IRA, and the associated question of whether the field-worker was a spy for the authorities or the Republican paramilitaries (on researchers as spies see Hunt 1984: 288–9; Manning 1972: 248); the obtrusiveness of the ethnographer's ubiquitous notepad; sensitivity to how the research might compromise their personal security or lead to a transfer, and worthies over the field-worker's religion; and the whole focus and topic of the investigation.
Concern about our motives in doing the research was combined with a feeling that it would do those participating in it little good, but would certainly benefit those in the police management and outside who wanted to do them harm.
Variations on the fears expressed below reappear many times in the field notes.
The way we look at it is, there's people out there want to kill me, and the authorities let you in here and give you access to more than we will probably ever get.
It's OK for the authorities because it's not them you're looking at — you won't be walking the beat with them.
It's not them you're writing about.
It mightn't be a bad idea if it was.
The way some people look at it is, why should I let you write a book that won't do me any good but might do me some harm.
Like, the men who won't talk to you think they're just protecting themselves.
Something you write could lose somebody their job…
It might be the authorities who give you permission but when it comes to the bit it's the ordinary policeman who's getting shot.
By letting you do this research they're putting a additional risk on us…
But, like, most people here accept you.
For goodness' sake, there's some peelers they never accept.
(FN 19/9/87, pp. 12, 15)
Well, like, I can remember when the word went round that someone was coming to do research on the RUC.
Like, you must think for yourself; look at the IRA's intelligence network…
I've seen how they recruit young girls.
(FN 2/3/87, pp. 9–10)
It was easy to anticipate that respondents would be sensitive about such matters, and it was our general tolerance of such fears that continually led us to try to pacify and reassure respondents.
This in large part won in return their acquiescence in the research, at least for the majority, even though this was usually a reluctant and resigned co-operation.
Their enthusiasm for the research increased after the policemen and women in Easton had reassured themselves about the field-worker's religion, sensitivity towards which was initially intensified by the common-sense view among some ordinary  constables that Queen's University is a Republican stronghold.
Some respondents knew from the beginning that she was Catholic, and those that did not soon learnt about it.
It is impossible to know the extent to which this knowledge had a reactive effect in the field, although the research was designed in such a way as to try to establish, as well as one ever could, whether there was a mask behind which respondents were concealing their true behaviour and feelings.
Ultimately, however, it is easy for readers to charge that the mask was not penetrated, and therefore that we have only scratched at the surface.
But it is our considered judgement that this knowledge did not have the reactive effect which the sensitive nature of the issue might suggest.
On one level, it did not prevent some respondents expressing disparaging remarks about Catholics, nor dissuade them from giving opinions on controversial political issues.
On a deeper level, however, as we shall see in later chapters, the identity category ‘Catholic’ is, for the majority of policemen and women, not an all-inclusive typification in which every Catholic is categorized alike.
Most members of the RUC we encountered used an interpretative process which contains a set of typifications for distinguishing between ‘good’ and ‘bad’Catholics, as for‘good’and ‘bad’people generally.
Once the field-worker was categorized as conforming to their typification of a ‘good’ Catholic (the meaning of which we will outline elsewhere), then her religion was no longer as important as it appears at first sight, although the extent to which it had a residual effect is impossible to estimate.
But it only remained of crucial importance to that small minority of bigoted constables who classify all Catholics as equally evil and nefarious.
We suspect, therefore, that this knowledge had a markedly distorting effect only among a minority of respondents.
It is this relatively more subtle classification system which explains why policemen and women were so concerned from the very beginning with the field-worker's background, schooling, area of residence, affiliations, political opinions, and so on, even those visited on only a few occasions.
These ‘search questions’ are the usual means by which one ‘tells’identity in Northern Ireland, but they were used particularly by policemen and women to tell, as they interpret it, which ‘sort’of Catholic the field-worker was.
This explains the anomaly of why these questions were asked by people who already knew she was Catholic, and why they were periodically asked in different ways throughout the year of field-work, for they  are the means for establishing and then reconfirming and testing the typification.
And, further, in areas like Easton, where there is very little crime related to the troubles, the police do not on the whole develop the attitude that law and order is a battle between the RUC and Catholics.
This encourages a balanced view of Catholics, something which, as we shall emphasize in later chapters, can be absent amongst some policemen beleaguered behind their reinforced stations in areas of high tension and conflict.
A final point worth making in defence of the data is that the observational material cannot be impugned to the same degree, because in the flow of action during an incident the exigencies of the situation usually take over, making it difficult for policemen and women to act in ways contrary to what the situation requires or their colleagues demand.
Hence many extracts from the data used in this volume are near-verbatim records of natural conversations in reallife settings.
While on the whole we feel knowledge of the field-worker's religion was not detrimental to the research, we believe it also had positive effects, in that it immediately forced respondents to confront their attitudes towards Catholics, as did the field-worker's gender in relation to sex roles in the force, placing both issues high on the research agenda.
It also facilitated access to the minority of Catholic policemen and women in the force, and, perhaps, was important in obtaining permission for the research from the police management, for it asserts their commitment to professionalism, an important part of which in Northern Ireland is religious impartiality.
Undoubtedly there were other reactive effects, for this occurs with all overt research.
Indeed, senior officers initially warned policemen and women at Easton to be careful in the field-worker's presence, with particular emphasis placed on swearing.
Once again, the intensity of contact spread over such a long time in the field makes this form of self-monitoring difficult to maintain, and there was also a general resistance from below to the management's instruction.
PC. 1.
We were told to be very careful about what we said and done when you were around, like.
But, quite frankly, what's the point?
You're here to see us acting naturally and I don't see why we should change, because then you're not getting a true picture, are you?
PC. 2.
I just fucking act myself anyway.
(FN 16/3/87, p. 16)
When a sergeant congratulated one section on the improvement in  the language in the guard room over the last few hours when the field-worker had been present, one constable shouted, ‘Fucking good job too, Sir’(FN 2/2/87, p. 6), and the occupational culture of the station soon reasserted its typical forms of expression, which are widespread in all police forces and occupational cultures that are predominantly masculine and working class.
The tendency of sergeants to follow the field-worker around and to ask what she had learnt also soon dissipated as the routine demands of their job became a more pressing priority.
Some constables initially played up to the fact that their remarks would be appearing in print, hoping to identify themselves by saying something outrageous which was then suffixed by ‘How about that for a quote for the book?’
The sheer length of time spent in the field ensured that this, too, lost its novelty.
But there must have been other reactive effects which were more subtly marked than this and were concealed from the fieldworker.
Occasionally it was suspected that the behaviour of respondents was being affected by the presence of the field-worker, to what extent it is impossible to estimate, but this is the disadvantage of all overt research techniques and is not unique to ethnography.
On the whole, therefore, researching the RUC has been more difficult than has been the case in most other studies in the sociology of policing (for an exception see Punch 1989), precisely because of the sensitivity of the topic in its social context.
However, one also suspects that other researchers have underplayed the difficulties of their field-work in order to avoid pejorative assessments of their results.
The sensitivity of our topic in Northern Ireland can only lead us to make its problems manifest to readers in order for them to be able better to assess the reliability of the data.
There is one other distinguishing feature of researching the RUC compared to other police studies.
Many studies describe a ‘retrenchment from the front’, which occurred as police management sought to control or influence the research design and practice.
What retrenchment we experienced was from below, which illustrates that working daily with the field-worker was a source of greater sensitivity to ordinary policemen and women than was the idea of research to senior officers.
The result of this sensitivity for the majority of respondents was a friendly but uneasy and measured co-operation, although there were extremes at either pole.
It is worth mentioning the techniques by which a minority of  respondents sought to impose limits from below.
There were direct refusals to answer questions ‘for security reasons’, occasional resorts to lying, and frequent use of coded conversations in which the meaning was concealed by maintaining a protective hold on the background knowledge to the conversation and the meaning of phrases.
Sometimes they would drive off in their vehicle without the fieldworker, only to be called back by the sergeant after she made a complaint.
On one occasion, they locked her in the car when they went to a call and wound up the window to prevent her overhearing.
Once, upon her getting out of the car, they manoeuvred the vehicle so as to trap the field-worker to prevent her accompanying them.
Dodges like this immediately make one suspicious about what they had to hide, and they tended to occur when they were wishing to do some ‘personal business’ while on duty, or simply to skive.
Such techniques were therefore popular amongst the work-shy, as other officers explained.
Below is an extract from the field notes, where the field-worker was talking with two plain-clothes men:
PC. 1.
You should have heard some of the stories that went round when you first came to Easton…
There was one that you were being paid by Jack Hermon to keep a eye on us all.
But then once they got to know you…
PC. 2.
Is there going to be a book?
I think it would be dead interesting.
Anyway I'd like to read it.
Like, what is it exactly you are interested in?
Everything I suppose.
RESEARCHER.
Yeh, everything.
It's on ordinary policing.
Like I was saying to one of the men in the section who hasn't been that co-operative, like, I'm only here for a year and you all know more than I will ever know about policing.
PC. 1.
Was it [name]?
RES.
I'm saying nothing.
PC. 1.
[Name]wouldn't talk to you, sure he wouldn't.
Aye, some boys will be like that.
Usually they're not the best policemen.
A good policeman will sit you down and tell it you his way.
He'll want you to know because he's nothing to hide.
These other boys, you'll usually find they're the skivers like [name].
Yer not losing out on anything by him not talking to you.
[Name]is the type of fella that if there's something to be done that might cause him paperwork, he'll do anything to avoid it.
Those boys are the type of boys, all they want to do is put in their eight hours and go home.
They've no interest in promotion, they've no interest in the job really.
You're not missing out on boys like that not talking to ya.
(FN 16/11/87, p. 25)
These were the sort of respondents who nicknamed the fieldworker ‘Tell her Nothin’ and ‘Nosebag’, and tried to assert informal checks on colleagues who were conversing with her by reminding them of the notepad and that she ‘writes everything down’.
The ethnographer's conventional notepad can be obtrusive, yet when time in the field extends to a full eight-hour shift, it is impossible to dispense with it, for without notes one is left only with general impressions recorded at the end of the day or fragmentary notes recorded surreptitiously; yet to use a tape-recorder would have been more obtrusive.
We tried to allay these fears by taking notes in as unobtrusive a manner as possible.
This was done primarily by reducing the visibility of the pad and the physical activity of notetaking, occasionally forgoing it when the situation seemed appropriate, as in the canteen or recreation and television rooms, and by emphasizing that the notebooks were not secret.
This was reiterated from time to time by showing them pages from the field notes and extracts from the data.
But in a sense we were missing out by these sorts of policemen being unco-operative (there were no policewomen like this), for those who have things to hide, even if it is only laziness, are a part of every police force.
But the majority of policemen and women we encountered were not like this and did not engage in little acts of subterfuge to limit what the field-worker saw or heard because either they had nothing to hide or, more rarely, they were not concerned to conceal it.
Their sensitivity to the research did not stem from having something to hide, hence their greater co-operation.
But even for those who had little or nothing to hide, their sensitivity to the research led, in a minority of cases, to a reluctance to engage in conversation, the resort to silence being something which Westley noted in his research in the United States (1970, p. viii).
Situations of private one-to-one contact with the field-worker were avoided by some constables, retreating into the relative security of public encounters with their characteristic form of non-intimate discourse.
Westley explains how he made sure he stayed around long enough so that his respondents had to talk, because of the difficulty people have of remaining silent for long(1970, p. viii).
Our research was designed to ensure that the field-worker was also around a great deal and was stubborn in exploiting the naturally occurring situations of privacy, where natural conversation is inevitable because it is interactionally difficult to abstain from it, such as in the back of vehicles, in the sanger while on guard duty, relaxing in many of the recreational rooms, or off duty.
Of course some policemen and women, at the other extreme, welcomed the research as an opportunity to talk about issues which are so often taken for granted among colleagues and family that they are not topics of conversation.
Over lunch in the canteen, very early on in the field-work, the conversation turned to stress and the danger members of the RUC face.
One constable said, ‘Why didn't you get a bit of discussion going like this before?
I think it's great.
I find all this dead interesting.
This is the sort of stuff you should be asking us’(FN 16/3/87, p. 18).
Many also saw it as a means of informing the authorities of their grievances.
For example, on the comment form which we gave to all respondents at the end of the field-work, one policewoman wrote, ‘The idea of research being carried out within the RUC, or indeed any police force, is a good one.
It brings points to the notice of the authorities that can well be overlooked in the dayto-day running of the force; points that can, when corrected, benefit a great many people.’
There is, however, a more fundamental reason why silence could not be used extensively as a ploy to impose limitations on the research from below.
The study of policing in Northern Ireland is benefited by the fact that conversation and social context are so interrelated.
Sensitive and controversial topics often occur naturally in the conversation, or can be introduced in what appears a casual manner, because the social context encourages this.
Events seen on the television the might before, or read about in the day's newspaper, or relayed as they happen to police stations throughout the province over the MSX machine, naturally facilitate talk on sensitive topics or cam be used as contextually related props to achieve the same end.
It should therefore be no surprise at all that we got policemen and women to talk.
EASTON AND ITS POLICE STATION
The familiar adage is that ethnographic research provides depth by sacrificing breadth but, as Finch (1986) argues, it is possible to build an element of generality into this type of research not by random sampling, which is usual in quantitative research, but by constructing individual projects in the mould of similar ones in different  settings so that comparisons can be made and a body of cumulative knowledge established.
Our project was designed deliberately to follow the pattern of ethnographic studies of routine policing, so as to add to this tradition the dimension provided by studying this kind of policing in a divided society.
In a strategy pioneered by the affluent-worker study in Luton, which one might call the optimal-case approach, a site was chosen for the research which was not representative, nor claimed to be, but was particularly germane to the topic of the investigation.
Easton was not randomly chosen for the location of this research, but purposely selected because it is an area of Belfast where routine policing is possible as a result of the virtual absence of political violence in the locale, whether Catholic or Protestant in origin (and, as later chapters will show, it is a mistake to see the RUC's relationship with Catholics only as problematic).
If we are to establish how and to what extent routine policing is affected by Northern Ireland's divisions, it would be useless to base our research where there is only militarized political policing (even though there are at least formal attempts to try to normalize policing in areas of high tension), for it is necessary to explore the extent to which policing in so-called ‘soft’ areas is contaminated by wider societal conflicts.
Given the nature of crime in Easton, the problems that Northern Ireland's divisions create for routine policing are as well studied there as anywhere.
Our choice was one which policemen and women from areas of high tension could not appreciate.
People from the stations we visited in such areas, or whom we encountered upon their being transferred to Easton, felt policing there was not typical and that we were obtaining an unrealistic view.
As one said, what Easton has, unlike many areas, is ‘ordinary civil policing’(FN 16/11/87, p. 6), so that there is a continuity with policing in Easton before the current troubles began: ‘I was in Easton years ago when it was the old station, though basically policing at Easton hasn't changed from when I was here years ago.
It's still ordinary policing, though the station and the set-up within it has changed’(FN 17/12/87, p. 1).
Thus, amongst policemen and women working in ‘hard’ areas of high tension, policing in Easton is abused as family disputes and barking dogs, a caricature which many respondents hold and is even reproduced by constables at Easton: ‘One minute you could be called out, someone's budgie has escaped and is flying around the living-room.
The next minute you could be called out to a sudden  death.
You'd never have to deal with things like that in Crossmaglen.
You know, they'd never get the type of calls we get’(FN 1/3/87, p. 2).
This influences the expectations that the public in Easton have of the police, and of their role in the community — a point which one constable made by explaining that one resident in Easton, upon finding himself locked out of his home, called at the station asking for the duplicate set of keys to his house which he thought the police would routinely possess for the residents' benefit; phone calls from the public asking for air and train information also sometimes occur.
Therefore, the opinion ordinary law-abiding residents in Easton have of the police is good, as one elderly lady without prompting told the researcher: ‘Easton police always give a very good service.
Whenever I've needed them they always get here right away’(FN 5/10/87, p. 22).
This is a picture of policing which some constables in hard-line areas dispute as typical of Northern Ireland, with one policeman m West Belfast denying that any routine policing occurs in Northern Ireland, arguing that no area could be considered ‘soft’ because policemen and women are at risk everywhere (FN 29/4/87, p. 6).
This begs a number of questions.
What form of policing is representative of the province?
What in Northern Ireland does routine policing consist of?
What are the effects of Northern Ireland's divisions upon it?
For, given that areas of relative peace and stability exist alongside those where tension is much higher, there is no reason to suppose that policing in West Belfast, for example, is any more representative of the divided society.
It is intrinsic to divided societies that both forms of policing occur simultaneously, and it is important to establish what effects one has on the other.
Easton is the fictitious name we have given to the area of Belfast in which our research was located.
We have taken every step to conceal its true identity, deleted names, places, and personal details, especially information which might identify the policemen and women with whom we worked, and even, following the example of others, employed security measures to protect the field notes (Holdaway 1983: 13).
Like Bulmer (1982), we believe that social researchers have a responsibility to the subjects of their research, but this is doubled in our case because of the additional obligation on us to protect their personal security in whatever small way, as researchers, we can.
Anonymity is not used to neutralize the moral responsibility respondents would otherwise have for their actions and opinions, but is our attempt to keep faith with the trust we earned.
Few basic facts about Easton station can be recorded without breaching this trust, and the manpower of police stations in Northern Ireland is not disclosed for security reasons.
In August 1987, the complement of the regular RUC throughout Northern Ireland was 8,500, with an additional 2,500 full-time reservists and 1,500 parttim e members of the reserve police.
For the regular force alone, this is a ratio of just over five policemen and women per thousand of population, a proportion which has grown steadily since the troubles began in 1968, when it stood at just over two (see Brewer et al .
1988: 56).
Although pro-rata extrapolations from Easton's total population give a poor estimate of its police force because the RUC is not evenly dispersed throughout the province, Easton station is large.
Thus some police newly transferred from small rural stations find Easton lonely and anomic, although those with long service at Easton comment on its friendliness.
The social structure of the district of Easton is worth noting.
In terms of what Drew (1978) calls Belfast's religious geography, Easton is almost entirely Protestant.
Police administrative districts do not neatly coincide with local-government wards, but the 1981
Census showed that in the wards which closely (but not completely) correspond to the jurisdiction of Easton's police, there is a total population of just over 50,000, a mere 2.5 per cent of which is Catholic, compared with 22.6 per cent as a whole in the two district council areas over which Easton straddles.
Easton's district is more prosperous than the norm for these two council districts, with an overall unemployment rate in 1981 of 9.2 per cent, compared with 19.5 per cent for the two district council areas.
This is explained by the fact that the unemployment rate is lower among Protestants generally and that Easton's population, besides being Protestant, is also disproportionately middle class.
Using the Registrar-General's classification of social class, the distribution of the classes in Easton compared to its immediate locale is represented in Table 1.1, which demonstrates that the class structure in Easton is not typical of the general area.
As measures of relative prosperity, the number of households with three or more cars in Easton is more than double that for the two district council areas in which it is located, and the quality of the housing stock and amenities is higher, with the proportion of households in Easton which have use of only an outside flush toilet being half that of the general area.
However, these generalizations obscure the pockets of quite marked poverty which also exist in Easton.
In addition to the palatial and leafy suburbs, there are areas of inner-city terraced housing awaiting redevelopment and large outlying council estates.
One of the wards in Easton is ranked tenth highest in the number of households with use of only outside flush toilets out of the seventy wards which comprise the two district councils.
Three of the –e wards which make up Easton have a proportion exceeding 500/0 of households with no car; one of these wards is above the average for the general area at 53.5 per cent of households.
The average for Easton is 39.8 per cent.
The level of unemployment in one of Easton's wards in 1981 was 2.5 times higher than that in another, which, at nearly 17 per cent, approached the average for the two district councils as a whole.
This social cross-section gives Easton's police a variety of crime and law-and-order situations to confront, in conjunction with which there is the ever-present danger and threat from the IRA, whose activities are not restricted to Republican areas.
In the wake of the Anglo-Irish Agreement there is now also intimidation from Protestants.
In this respect, Easton provides an excellent opportunity to establish the nature of routine policing in Northern Ireland and how it is affected by societal divisions.
Routine Police Duties
INTRODUCTION
A dominant preoccupation in the sociology of policing is the description and analysis of the routine, day-to-day police work done by low-ranking policemen and women.
Within this there are three particular concerns: the practical reasoning employed by ordinary policemen and women to help them accomplish routine duties; how they interact with various sections of the public, from ethnic minorities to road users; and how they perceive various aspects of police work, including the area within which they function and its people, what comprises ‘real’ police work, and what constitutes ‘good’or competent practice.
In pursuit of these themes most researchers discuss the occupational culture of the police, showing that on the whole ordinary policemen and women get their notions about routine police work from this collection of background beliefs, values, and attitudes.
Very few studies have challenged the generally accepted view that ‘canteen culture’ is influential in determining ordinary policemen and women's common-sense conceptions of their work (for an exception see Fielding 1988a, b).
The corollary to this is the claim that bureaucracy in police stations is chimerical.
The formal rules and regimen are not the bases for the ways in which ordinary policemen perform their tasks, for very few rankers follow even a proportion of the management's rules of conduct (for example see Bittner 1967; Cain 1973; Chatterton 1976, 1979; Eticson 1982; Holdaway 1980, 1983; Manning 1977, 1979; Punch 1979a; Rubinstein 1973; Wilson 1968).
Hence sociologists of the police (and of crime and deviance generally) were first among those researchers who led the revision of the concept of bureaucracy (beginning with Bittner 1965).
It is commonplace in the sociology of the police to emphasize how police stations are a ‘symbolic bureaucracy’, to use Jacobs's telling phrase (1969), or that they  have, in Goffman's terminology, front and backstage regions where different sets of rules apply (see Holdaway 1980).
This work relies heavily on American ethnomethodological and interactionist discussions of bureaucracy constructed by people on the basis of their social interaction, which explains why much police research in sociology has taken this theoretical shift.
This chapter and the next will address some of the above topics in order to demonstrate the parallels between routine police work in the RUC and other police forces in non-divided societies.
These two chapters are therefore intentionally derivative and familiar in their themes to allow the arguments to build upon and add to the cumulative knowledge about routine police work.
However, this will be done with a very broad sweep to permit the focus in later chapters to concentrate on what is the essential and most interesting feature of routine policing in Northern Ireland: namely, how societal divisions affect and constrain it.
But inasmuch as these two chapters show that routine policing exists in the province, they are useful as a corrective to the folk model of policing in Northern Ireland, which assumes that all policing is related to the troubles; that police officers have been brutalized as a result of their baton guns, face masks, and riot shields; and that they know or prefer no other mode of police work.
It is this folk model, epitomized by the graffito ‘SS/RUC’, seen as much in working-class Protestant districts as in Catholic ones, which makes it difficult for ‘ordinary crime’ to compete for the attention of criminologists in Ireland (as a recent publication on crime in Ireland complained; see Tomlinson et al .
1988a: 14).
Therefore, it is the very ordinariness of the RUC's policing in Easton which is surprising and provides the greatest disjuncture with public imagery rather than the fact that it contradicts, to some extent, the formal regimen of the police manual or the bureaucratic ethos of police management.
This tends to be the concern in Great Britain, as attested to by the public response to the Policy Studies Institute study of the Metropolitan Police (Policy Studies Institute 1983a, b; for a similar and earlier example, see Holdaway 1977).
FORMAL CONTROL AND THE LABOUR PROCESS IN EASTON STATION
Routine policing in Easton is the responsibility of the uniform branch, which is divided between organizational units known as sections and the neighbourhood and community relations teams, as well as the plain-clothes units like the CID and CDU (Crime Detection Unit).
Our attention was almost entirely focused on uniformed police, although some community relations work, such as juvenile liaison, is done out of uniform but was also within our brief.
Chapter 4 deals with community policing in its various forms, so that the arguments in this chapter and the next apply to routine policing by the uniformed sections.
Easton station operates four sections (what in other police forces is called a ‘relief’), each working in turn one of three shifts, with the fourth week off.
There is a great deal of competitiveness between the sections, sometimes not always friendly, with each thinking itself the most efficient and ‘best’ at policing.
Sections comprise approximately twenty policemen and women, made up mostly of regular constables, but each has attached to it a number of full-time reservists.
The number of policewomen in each section varies, although there is always a minimum of one, which is low because women constitute less than 10 per cent of the regular force (Brewer et al .
1988: 56).
Absences from work due to leave, sickness, court attendance, police business elsewhere, or transfers can seriously deplete this number on occasions, leaving the section very understaffed, which is why managers are so sensitive about constables phoning in sick, although this sensitivity is not always communicated in a heavy-handed manner.
Below is an extract of conversation at the beginning of a shift.
SERGEANT.
Where's [name]?
PC.
Oh, he's got s desperate migraine.
SERGEANT.
Aye, the auld plumbing is desperate for bringing on migraines.
What happened, did he not get it finished over the weekend or samething?
(FN 2/11/87, p. 2)
The roars of laughter told that they knew the sergeant was right to suspect moonlighting; something which is quite common to the lower ranks of the RUC because many have a background as skilled tradespeople.
Sections have their own sergeant (sometimes two) and inspector, in addition to which there is a separate station duty sergeant, responsible for the running of the station rather than the work of the section.
Above this lies the usual hierarchy found in all police bureaucracies.
Formal control is therefore immediately effected by the sergeant and inspector, and their personality and leadership style can have a great influence on the morale (if not the work rate) of a section.
This is especially evident when there is more than one sergeant and there happens to be a clash of personality and leadership style between them, although senior managers within the station are sensitive to this sort of problem and switch sergeants about when it occurs.
They also change sergeants when a section is considered to need an improvement in discipline or work rate.
Hence, senior managers recognize the pivotal role played by lowranking officers.
Work duties are assigned by the sergeant at the beginning of the shift in what is known as ‘parade’ when all members meet together, occasionally in the presence of senior officers.
This is the opportunity for senior managers to endorse warnings for vigilance or diligence, which they do occasionally, and for sergeants to review both the incidents which occurred on the last shift and the matters which need special attention on the present one.
Although it is a means of asserting authority, coming as it does at the start of the shift, parade is very relaxed and, from the point of view of the ordinary constables, serves as a way of casually reorientating themselves to the demands of work.
In this manner it continues the adjustment process begun before parade in the canteen.
It is almost titualistic that parade is turned into a celebration of the communal-like bonds of the section.
This is done by, among other things, the sharing of stories, exchange of gossip, and a friendly and very sharp banter (at which policemen are very good), during which sergeants sometimes have to struggle to rise above the one-line wit and are often themselves forced to succumb (on the use of rituals at the beginning of work in American police departments see Niederhoffer 1967).
Along with the canteen, therefore, the parade room is a key location where, at the beginning of the day's work, individuals start to immerse themselves again in the occupational culture of the station and adjust to the labour process.
Being a large station, the many senior officers who come and go at Easton act as a constant and visible reminder to constables of the  structures of power and authority in the station, and a prominent item in the conversations of ordinary policemen and women is complaints against ‘the authorities’, which is an indexical category flexible enough to include everyone above their own level.
(The substance of these complaints will be dealt with elsewhere.)
There are other reminders of where formal control lies.
Constables know that all radio messages are taped and that the time they take to arrive at calls is recorded, which is often unnecessary, given the competition to beat other stations and colleagues by getting there first, although stories were told to us of instances where people were transferred for failing to respond to a call.
Punishment transfers, known as ‘dirty moves’ and ‘big transfers’, further remind rankers of what happens when formal rules are seriously breached, as does the frequent requirement to sign registers and books concerning equipment and duties.
A further reminder is the complaints procedure which members of the public can initiate against police officers.
Some members of the public bring these so routinely that their complaints are not taken seriously by rankers, although complaints from others are (see Weitzer 1986).
But the authorities take all complaints seriously, which leads some constables to fear ‘the flippin' solicitor's letter’(FN 5/10/87, p. 16), although one middleranking officer once expressed considerable sympathy for the post — tion some police constables find themselves in as a result of being hedged (as they are in Northern Ireland's more unusual position as a divided society) between authorities who are exceedingly sensitive to complaints against the police and a public which has sections eager to complain, even in Protestant-dominated Easton.
Indicating with a thumb and forefinger positioned closely together, he said:
The police officer has about that much space to operate in.
Have you ever seen a prisoner being beaten up at Easton?
Well, I can assure you that if you were to go and look it up, you'd find complaints against policemen in Easton.
It's almost a occupational hazed.
You arrest somebody, maybe a drunk, the next day he's feeling a little disgruntled and almost inevitably he'll make a complaint…
The thing is, young officers coming into the force, doing what they've been taught is their job, the next thing they know they've got people making complaints against them.
They've got all this on top of them as well as, say, they may be in a dangerous area.
As well as that, security.
I'm really surprised more don't creak under the pressure.
(FN 6/11/87, p. 15)
Formal control, however, is only one aspect of the labour process in any work organization.
Constables have a definite view about the style of authority they prefer in officers, which is summed up well by the remark that they need to be ‘one of the boys’: that is, they should not stand on ceremony and overtly assert their authority.
Some sergeants conform to this, others do not, but the general resistance from below to the excesses of authority, coupled with a relative autonomy in the work place, affords the men and women in a section the latitude, if they so wish, to ‘ease’, using Cain's now familiar term (1973), or, to use their word, ‘bluff’.
A whole system of informal work practices is able to exist alongside those of the police management and they form a vital part of the labour process in the station.
On the whole, these informal practices are conducive to the management's organizational goals rather than a departure from them.
Moreover, control upon those members of the section who are not pulling their weight is often asserted from below, as it was in the mocking manner in which the policeman quoted above reported his colleague's absence from work due to migraine.
The comradeship so typical of the occupational culture of the police does not extend to ‘covering the ass’(a phrase made eloquent in the sociology of policing) of someone who lets the whole side down.
However, the characteristics of police occupational culture in Easton and the question of informal rules and control will be addressed in later chapters, to allow the focus here to narrow towards an outline of the nature of routine policing and its accomplishment.
REGULAR VERSUS RESERVE POLICE DUTIES
In Easton routine policing is performed only by regular constables, but the ambiguous position of reserve police within the RUC warrants a brief mention of this section of the force, if only because there are no parallels between reserve police in the RUC and those in police forces in Great Britain and the United States.
In 1987, the size of the RUC reserve was 4,000, just under two-thirds of which were full-time members.
The overwhelming majority were men (Brewer et al .
1988: 57).
The reserve force was established in 1970 to take over the policing functions of the disbanded B Specials and was designed as back-up for the regular force, freeing regulars from lowlevel security work in order to concentrate on both routine policing  and high-profile riot policing.
Reserve police in the RUC wear the same uniform, for all that an outsider can distinguish, and as a consequence face the same security risks, but most are marginalized by the restricted range of duties they perform and the short-term status of their contract.
Part-time male reservists do only sanger (guard) duty, either at the station or at other locations; female reservists are restricted in the main to the guard room inside the station, with only full-time reserve policemen carrying the responsibility for a broader range of tasks, although few are involved in the paperwork for a case file.
But the tasks of reserve police vary across sections and stations, and in some rural areas there is no difference in their responsibilities compared to regular policemen, knowledge of which makes part-time reserve police in Easton very sensitive to their lowly position within the police bureaucracy.
Full-time reserve police on the whole are people who are disqualified from entering the regular force as a result of age, height, or physical health.
A few are ‘trying out’ policing by joining the reserves first, although the common view amongst the reserve police is that it is harder for them to transfer to the regulars than it is for someone without experience to sign up straight away because of the greater number of reasons the police authorities are thereby given for turning them down.
This fact tends to make full-time reserve police very cautious in their behaviour, for they feel they have less opportunity to ease, which further means that their opinion of some regulars is not good.
But part-time reserve police are the most bitter.
Stories relating the inexperience and ineptitude of young regular recruits or their laziness are particularly common amongst the parttime reserve police.
This is because part-time members of the force have only slight contact with regular policemen and women, and experience greater status incongruity as a result of the contrast between the responsibility held in their day-time employment and the more restricted range of their police duties.
Dingwall, in another context, calls these stories ‘atrocity stories’(1977), and Richman shows how they feature prominently in the discourse of traffic wardens, in an attempt to socialize new recruits into what they can expect, as well as being a means of stressing the moral worth of traffic wardens: a concern which was high on the priorities of such a stigmatized occupational group (Richman 1983: 115).
They perform a similar role with respect to the RUC's reserve police.
These stories usually counterpoise the young, inexperienced, or work-shy regular  recruit with the wise and diligent old-timer on the reserves, although part-time reserve police quickly come to know the bounds within which they too can ‘slack off’ or ease, which are much narrower.
These stories also serve to give to the part-time reserve police a self-respect which they feel is otherwise lacking from an organization which undervalues and marginalizes them.
They see themselves as occupying a position at the bottom of an organization which places a heavy emphasis on hierarchy, making their location all the worse.
As one part-time policeman said, ‘The regulars are all right, but there's definitely a difference between them and us.
You feel almost like new boys in a school.
In fact, the whole hierarchy of the police is very much like a school, and a public school at that, and the reserve men are at the bottom of the line’(FN 7/7/87, p. 25).
Being at the bottom, they feel their contribution often goes unrecognized, at least by the authorities.
The following is part of a conversation between two part-time policemen:
PC. 1.
We get treated like shit in this job.
PC.2.
But we get killed just the same by the Provies.
That's one thing, at least the Provies give us credit for doing this job.
PC. 1.
Aye, they don't discriminate.
PC.2.
They need us to back up the regular force…but some of the police who are in a supervisory role are anti reserve police.
PC. 1.
That's true.
There used to be a woman sergeant in [place]who used to refer to the reserve men as ‘dick-head reserve men’, ‘fucking idiots’, till one day this reserve man says to her, ‘See that man over there, before he came to this job he was a aircraft technician,[name]used to be a chief mechanic.
[Name]there used to be a architect and [name]has a degree in law.’
And he says to her, ‘What did you do before you joined the police?’ and she ran off.
She used to be a check-out girl in [name of supermarket].
PC. 2.
You know who are the worst, the younger men with no experience.
PC. 1.
The young regulars come to a station and they think they can tell a reserve man what to do.
(FN 23/11/87, pp. 23–4)
Then followed a story about the ineptitude of a young policeman in handling a domestic dispute, who was only rescued from his incompetence by a wise reserve man.
The field-worker was a captive  audience for tales like these, which are told and retold by part-time reserve police in an attempt to cope with their marginality.
A feature of such stories is their selectivity, for they omit to mention the number of part-time reserve police who are unemployed or in low-status employment, or who sign up for mercenary reasons or for the power and respect that they believe accompanies the uniform.
But even those who said they joined in order to serve the community (and there are many) feel a disappointment upon entering the force as a result of the limited opportunities for this allowed by their duties.
As one complained, ‘I'm not a policeman, I'm a gatekeeper’(FN 19/9/87, p. 4): sanger duty is not considered ‘real’ police work.
It is boring, often done in locations where it is difficult to avoid ‘bosses’, it affords only a limited range of ‘bluffs’ or easing techniques, and is looked down upon by regular policemen and women, a view unintentionally reinforced by those sergeants who apologize to regulars when asking them at parade to do sanger duty.
Added to this is the perpetual insecurity reserve police suffer as a result of the management's control over the renewal of their contract: and sergeants are not averse to using this as a threat in parades.
Formal control within the police bureaucracy is therefore experienced by the RUC reserve as a tangible and omnipresent reality to a far greater extent than by regular police, which leads reserve police to have critical views of police management and some resentment towards the regulars, whom they feel ‘get away with things’.
The camaraderie so emphasized in discussions of police occupational culture is fractured in the RUC's case by some important divisions, and the regular/reserve police distinction is an example.
This is true even in West Belfast, where, as we shall see, companionship amongst work colleagues is one response to the stress of policing, for part-time reserve police still ‘moan’, as one regular described it, about the management and the regular police in the manner of Easton's reserve force.
Reserve police in this part of Belfast correctly point out that uncertainty over their contract is only one form of insecurity, and simply adds to the pressure of working in West Belfast (FN 9/10/87, p. 25).
And generally it is the case that the personal security of the part-time reserve police is most at risk of all the members of the RUC, because of the difficulties of maintaining three identities (police officer, member of family and neighbourhood network, and employee), with their associated and sometimes conflicting modes of discourse and thinking.
ROUTINE POLICING IN EASTON
Contrary to what folk models of the RUC might lead one to expect, most policemen and women at Easton have not even drawn their gun, let alone fired it.
Those that have did so while stationed elsewhere, for the district of Easton has predominantly ‘ordinary crime’.
However, ‘crime fighting’ is not the sole task of the section police in Easton, for the calls for assistance to which they respond vary considerably in nature.
Before demonstrating this variety, it is necessary to outline some minor technical details of relevance.
The calls come via three sources: personal requests made by members of the public at the station's enquiry desk; telephone calls made directly to the station; and messages relayed from BRC, the central communications network.
The last is by far the most frequent type of request for assistance.
The first type tend to be over more mundane matters, with the third being the more serious.
In answering these calls, the RUC's section police are modelled on their British counterparts, where the emphasis is placed on rapid response to logged calls.
This requires a sophisticated communications network, and efficient and fast vehicles.
Easton's section police tour the district in their vehicles awaiting such calls, although this meander does have another purpose in that‘You just never know what you could come across: maybe someone in a car that might containammunition, perhaps a stolen car, or perhaps your wife in a car with a best mate’(FN 7/3/87, p. 3).
Accordingly special attention at might-time is given to alley-ways, entrances, and shops.
The mileage accumulated in a shift cam therefore be surprisingly high: a vehicle in which the field-worker was present covered 84.7 miles in one shift, which is about the average.
As a means of formal control, station management record the mileage per shift of each vehicle.
However, the sophisticated technology required for rapidresponse policing can sometimes be found wanting in Easton.
BRC frequently relay wrong information (primarily because they receive wrong information), and wider societal divisions ensure that the main mode of transport in Easton, as elsewhere, is reinforced Land Rovers in order to afford occupants some protection from attack, although policemen and women see them as having their own vulnerabilities.
Land Rovers are cumbersome and difficult to drive, noisy, slow, sometimes mechanically unsound, and spartan.
When driving with the rear doors open, as is necessary on warm days to  provide ventilation, exhaust fumes escape into the vehicle, making the journey for those in the back even more uncomfortable; and it has been known for policemen in the back to fall out of the vehicle.
Because of the nature of crime in Easton, most Land Rovers on routine calls only contain the driver and observer, both seated in the front, making some sort of conversation between them possible.
There is no official policy of deliberately choosing partners for their compatibility, whether in terms of personality, age, experience, or religion, and long-standing partnerships do not develop informally because of the frequent transfers of staff to other duties or to new stations altogether.
The calls the section police receive constitute the bulk of their routine duties, although they also undertake the administrative tasks that might follow from them, such as preparing case files and attending court and post-mortems.
The calls can be classified under a number of headings, illustrating the range of work which routine policing comprises in Easton (for a different classification see Sykes and Brent 1983: 42).
The first type is public-service calls, which includes requests for information, such as airport flight times and advice over legal matters, and community service tasks, such as signing passports, pushing (and sometimes towing) broken-down cars, giving lifts to young children and youths late at night, and making a point of driving around areas of Easton to reassure, by their presence, worried Old Age Pensioners or other members of the public.
As the policemen and women themselves note, these tasks are really forms of public relations (FN 20/6/87, p. 13).
Under this category there are also requests for assistance which amount to acts of community welfare, such as calls to lift aged and disabled people on to and off the toilet as well as into bed, and calls from very distressed pensioners and young children concerning lost pets (on the police as a social service see Punch 1979b; Punch and Naylor 1973).
Nothing much can be done about missing pets, but the impression of diligence and earnestness they leave with the bereft alone is a comfort.
In the occupational culture of Easton station most of these incidents are rendered afterwards into humorous stories, retold to new recruits and outsiders to demonstrate the ‘funny side’ of policing; and the familiar RUC term ‘all is regular’, used to signify that a call has been attended to, has obvious humorous connotations for one of the community welfare tasks described here.
Another type is problem-solving calls, such as helping owners  with injured dogs (provoking enough interest for subsequent enquiries to be made about the dog's progress); giving impromptu lessons on road safety to young children who have narrowly avoided accidents; and dealing with arguments between neighbours (usually over noise) and family disputes.
Often the section police mop up the after-effects of problems, such as attending calls to fires, suicides, natural deaths, domestic disputes, and road traffic accidents.
The police on the British mainland do not attend many of these incidents unless a crime has been committed, but the RUC do so in order, as one said in relation to domestic disputes, to prevent crime.
With experience of service in the Metropolitan Police, the policeman remarked,
I think the public get a really good deal over here.
Like, in England we'd never have gone to a domestic dispute unless a crime had been committed.
The idea here is that you go to a domestic dispute to prevent a crime from being committed…
Also in England the police wouldn't go to a fire, but we go in the hope that perhaps we could save life.
(FN 3/3/87, pp. 8–9)
Southgate (1980: 33) has shown how British police have diffiulties in dealing with domestic disputes, but if anything the situation in Northern Ireland is easier for the police because they have a clearer knowledge of their role: to be on hand to prevent serious crime.
As another explained, ‘To most people a family row is Mummy and Daddy having a few words’, but when police are called to a domestic dispute in some areas of Belfast,
It's most likely it will involve the TV being thrown out of the window and possibly followed by the wife.
By the time we arrive the house is usually wreaked, the kids are in a terrible state, and the wife's been beaten up, and the father's lying there stoned, probably taking half-a-dozen peelers to get him out of the house.
Actually family rows are quite good sometimes.
Police work involves so much bloody paperwork these days and a lot of boring stuff that a family row can quite spice up a night.
(FN 4/12/86, pp. 2–3)
In contrast, the effect of dealing with domestic disputes can be traumatic on some policemen as they momentarily place their own children and family in the situation of emotional horror they encounter.
However, it is generally the case that violence against women provokes no strong emotion in policemen.
Faragher (1985) found that police in Great Britain downgraded the seriousness of violence  against women in the home, for although formal regulations state that it is to be treated as an arrestable offence, policemen often redefined the incident as lying outside law enforcement (emphasized by Policy Studies Institute 1983b: 64).
In the case of the RUC, domestic disputes are routinely attended for reasons other than law enforcement.
This is true irrespective of the level of violence, although the masculine occupational culture of the force contains many of the same sanitizing euphemisms for violence against women (‘giving the wife a diggin'’).
In the one instance of domestic violence we encountered during field-work, the officers arrested the man against the protestations of the wife, as is often the case (see Fielding et al .
1988), despite Faragher's argument, although primarily in our case because the man redirected his attack towards the police.
There are also ‘big crime’ calls, which refer to the ‘real’job of crime-fighting, which the section police enjoy most.
During the period of field-work the sorts of crime that occurred in Easton under this heading included murder and major robbery, possession of drugs, breaking and entering, car chases for stolen vehicles, and the occasional sex-related crime.
‘Little crime’ calls, what the Metropolitan Police call ‘beat crime’(Policy Studies Institute 1983b: 35), include a host of infringements and public nuisances, many of which do not come within what the section police define as ‘real, police work, although some none the less have an intrinsic appeal to ordinary policemen and women.
The range of ‘little crime’ calls is tremendous, and covers such things as sheep-worrying, prostitution, moving on loitering youths and courting couples (the latter being another popular subject for the humorous stories which circulate in the canteen culture of Easton's police), drunken fights, and incidents involving supporters of animal rights.
The typical shift involves most of these types of call, although ‘big crime’ calls occur more rarely.
It is possible to illustrate this by selecting at random two occasions when the field-worker accompanied policemen in their vehicles and cataloguing the calls they attended.
During a shift when the men considered that very little was happening, they responded to calls concerning a house fire and an attempted break-in, calls to check on the whereabouts of a pensioner who had not been seen by a neighbour for a few days, a request to pick up and transport a prisoner, and a call to move on some youths.
On a much busier occasion the calls before break were to attend the home of a widowed pensioner who thought she had  heard an intruder, two road accidents, a near hit-and-run accident, and to move on youths.
The normality of these tasks parallels the mundaneness of routine policing elsewhere.
This parallel is further reinforced by the similarity in the way time structures the RUC's routine policing compared to other forces in non-divided societies.
The calls Easton's section police receive vary with the time of day and the day of the week.
Like elsewhere, the busier times are Friday and Saturday, when many of the calls are drink-related, as an officer at BRC explained:
You should come here on a Friday or Saturday night.
From about 12 o'clock to three or four in the morning it's absolute madness in here.
You see,[it's]once people get drink in them.
You know, it's my opinion that in some areas of Belfast, if you haven't gone out, got drunk, had a chinkers, thrown up, and beaten the wife up, you haven't enjoyed yourself.
Like, we get literally hundreds of calls on Friday and Saturday nights and we're sending vehicles out to the same thing every time.
(FN 3/3/87, p. 8)
However, Monday morning is also busy because of the number of premises that are found broken into after the weekend.
The slack periods are night shifts during the mid-week, and the boredom compounds the general dislike of night duty, the only redeeming feature of which is that formal control in the station is relaxed because of the absence of senior managers.
While night duty therefore affords a greater opportunity to ease, as a later chapter will emphasize, for most ordinary policemen and women this is little compensation for the boredom, for there are fewer opportunities for the diligent to ‘make work’, the reverse process to easing.
Hence a ‘good’ might duty for most members of the RUC is a busy one: ‘It was a brilliant night, you know, one of those nights you're all go.
Next thing you look at your watch and it's 4 o'clock.
You could do with more nights like that’(FN 30/8/87, p. 1).
Hence the attraction, if one has to do night duty, of weekend work.
But might duty also disrupts family life, appetite, and sleeping patterns, and policewomen particularly complain of its effect on their roles as mother and housewife, although some policemen also talk sadly of how they miss seeing their children when on nights.
For some policemen and women, their family is very important indeed, and, as a later chapter on stress demonstrates, the family can function as a tension release mechanism and an escape from police work, so that ordinary policemen and women tend to protect this preserve from infringement by  outsiders, whether social researchers, senior police managers, the IRA, or the public.
ROUTINE POLICING AND GENDER DIVISIONS
One other parallel between routine policing in Easton and police forces in non-divided societies is the common way in which police work is structured by gender as well as by time.
Southgate (1980) and Jones (1987) have shown how policewomen in Great Britain are principally involved with juvenile and female offenders, and the Policy Studies Institute found widespread discrimination against policewomen in the Metropolitan force (1983a: 19, 29, 163–8).
Women were first recruited into the RUC in 1944, and were restricted to Belfast and Londonderry, where they dealt exclusively with offences against children and women.
As they broadened their location in the province, their duties were similarly extended to cover traffic control at pedestrian crossings and shoplifting.
Today senior managers in the RUC have a formal commitment to equal opportunities for women in pay and promotion and in many facets of their duties.
With respect to the latter, for example, women are no longer excluded from night duty and they perform a wider range of section duties than before.
However, ordinary policewomen tend to feel that there are constraints upon equal opportunities within the force.
Some of these are official, in that senior managers do not allow policewomen to carry arms, from which follows some restrictions on where policewomen cam be stationed, and on their involvement in high-profile political policing, such as at riots.
Most of the constraints, however, are informal.
With relatively so few policewomen, the occupational culture of the force is heavily masculine, and the wider cultural values that exist in Northern Ireland generally make men more conservative in their attitudes towards gender and sex roles.
This not only affects how the male public react to policewomen in the province, it also influences how male colleagues treat policewomen in the work environment and the sorts of duties they are assigned in practice; and the dearth of senior female officers makes it easy for male colleagues to impose such limits on the role of policewomen.
The focus here will be on the way gender structures routine police duties, with more general issues concerning women in the RUC being developed elsewhere.
The view is widespread among the senior officers we talked to, and among ordinary policemen, that policewomen, as women, have instincts and capabilities which make them better suited to specific types of police work.
One senior officer described policewomen as having an ‘instinct for tidiness’ which made them good administrators (FN 30/11/87, p. 33); frequently they were described as being suited to dealing with child and female offences because of their more compassionate natures compared to male colleagues.
The ethos of the force therefore lends itself to gender differences in police work, and so popular are beliefs about the different capabilities of policemen and women, that some policemen shy away from handling these sorts of cases on the view that they are less able than women colleagues, and many policewomen adopt these notions as self-typifications.
Hence some policewomen deliberately seek out desk jobs — secretaries with uniforms, as someone described them — or jobs as drivers, in juvenile liaison, or in units which deal with sex crimes, because they see themselves as better suited to this type of work.
The few females there are in senior management seem to endorse this.
A senior female officer explained to an assembly of policewomen who were being trained in how to operate a casualty bureau that they were better suited to operating the telephones because of their ‘good manners and compassionate nature’(FN 29/5/87, p. 2).
In talking to ordinary policewomen, we found many themselves adopt notions of gender differences in order to explain the marginalization of their duties, although others prefer this kind of work simply because it makes it easier to manage their difficult and conflicting roles as policewoman, wife, and mother.
That is, transfers are fewer for those in administrative posts and in specialist sex abuse units, and the hours of work are less disruptive to home life.
Yet others rebel against this marginalization and demand both the right to perform the full range of police work (from which follows the wish to carry guns) and that men should become more involved in dealing with child and female offences.
However, there are signs of change at some levels, because men are now being accepted on to the CARE course, which provides specialist training in how to deal with victims of sex crimes, although this might simply reflect a recognition that an increasing number of victims are young boys.
A policewoman with long experience in dealing with sexual abuse did express the opinion that policemen can sometimes be more effective than women in encouraging very young  male victims to talk about their experiences: and this policewoman was in favour of male colleagues joining her at the RUC's specialist sexual abuse unit.
But whatever change there is in the higher echelons of the RUC's bureaucracy (and some policewomen say there is little), sexist attitudes are widespread amongst ordinary policemen, and, in the day-to-day police work of a station, policewomen's routine duties continue to be structured by gender.
In Easton, there are only a few policewomen attached to each section.
Mostly they do administrative work inside the station, drive for the section inspector, or are seconded to administrative work elsewhere in the station.
However, on occasions they do patrol work in vehicles (on policewomen on patrol work in the United States see Bloch and Anderson 1974; Ehrlich 1980; Sichel 1978).
With regard to this duty, there were no instances in the observational data where policewomen were deliberately sent to deal with injuries to children, for example, or injuries to people in road traffic accidents, functions which senior managers think them very suited to.
During field-work there was only one incident related to sexual abuse, and this was dealt with by policemen, and while they showed something of a blasé attitude towards it in feeling that the victim was ‘hardly touched’ and the offender ‘didn't do anything anyway’(FN 2/11/87, pp. 5–6), they pursued the case thoroughly.
However, it was noticeable how policewomen on patrol would be sent by male colleagues to move on the younger children, while the men, being protective of policewomen, would deal with the older youths.
Policewomen on section duty are usually asked to convey emotionally disturbing news to relatives and notification of death.
They also deal with female prisoners in the station cells and with young offenders.
It was also apparent from the observational data that Easton's section police are occasionally presented with difficult encounters between public and police because of the gender differences in police work.
Policewomen sometimes had to be called from other duties in order to deal with an incident which male colleagues felt incapable of handling.
But more fundamentally, the typical deployment of policewomen affects public expectations of the police.
In Northern Ireland, where wider cultural values about gender and sex roles are reinforced by common practice, policewomen can be humiliated and face hostility and resentment from some male members of the public who expect to deal with policemen, and normally do.
On the other hand, female members of the public who are involved in incidents  other than those for which policewomen are normally assigned can find the preponderance of policemen disturbing and problematic.
For example, when out on a call one policewoman at Easton was asked by a male member of the public where the constables were.
Diplomatically, she pointed to where her male colleagues were standing.
But more frequently it arose that, in the absence of a policewoman, the female field-worker was relied upon for comfort by female members of the public, engaging her in eye contact to find what they expected would be a special ‘feminine’ understanding and reassurance.
The opinions policemen express about sex crimes are worth noting, because they reinforce the structure which gender gives to routine policing.
Generally, the policemen encountered in fieldwork disliked dealing with sex offences against children.
The compassion and sympathy which the victims of these offences naturally cause in all policemen can sometimes be complicated by the anger and emotional hatred felt toward the perpetrator, and the tough type of policeman may find it difficult to distance the one reaction from the other.
Some policemen with children of their own expressed difficulties in remaining detached.
Most find the easiest solution to the problem is to avoid it wherever possible.
Policemen also disliked dealing with rape, although obviously for different reasons.
One policewoman said that, while the men disappear when a rape victim is brought in, they all want ‘to gawp at the girl when she's being examined and read her statement’(FN 17/2/87, p. 19).
Rape does not provoke such strong emotions in policemen, and their resistance to dealing with it is expressed more in terms of the greater competence policewomen are supposed to have.
However, there might well be other reasons for this.
Compared to sex offences on children, which cause universal shock and horror to policemen, in the masculine occupational culture of the station women are sex objects and, in other circumstances, would be considered ‘fair game’.
Attitudes towards rape thus get confused with ideas about the sexual desirability of women, which can lead some policemen to see the victim as partly responsible.
For example, in the course of the only natural conversation that occurred on the topic of rape, the following account was given of how rape is evaluated:
SERGEANT.
Like, most of the rapes we get at Easton, they're not what I'd call rape at all.
You see, some girl's been out for a drink, or to a disco, met a fella, the fella invites her back, she goes, and things go a bit further than  she intended.
She turns around, comes to us, and utters the magic words ‘I've been raped’.
And once she utters those words we've to deal with it like rape, the whole procedure, medical examination, and questioning.
And we've to ask some very personal questions…
Most of the time I find it's regret on the part of the victim.
Regret because maybe her husband will find out and want to know why she was going with another man in the first place.
I've yet to see a case of what we would define as really rape.
My ides of real rape is, say, a woman walking home at night and dragged into an entry and forcefully raped.
Most if not all the cases we get in Easton, I'd honest to God say the victim was asking for it.PC.
Aye, God, aye.
SERGEANT.
Like, sometimes it might be a prostitute, she never got paid for her services and she tries to claim she's been raped.
(FN 16/3/87, pp. 14)
Therefore, one further reason why policemen dislike dealing with rape might well be that they feel uneasy about having to ask the very personal questions which are necessary in order for the victim to be taken seriously, and on the occasion quoted above the sergeant went on to say that as a result of asking for these very personal details policemen ‘have had a very bad rap over dealing with rape cases’(FN 16/3/87, p. 14).
While the men are reluctant to confront the emotions raised in dealing with sex crimes, policewomen have to, and it can be stressful.
Most serious cases of sex abuse are passed on to a unit which is designed for this purpose and has specially trained staff.
It is worth briefly discussing the work of this important unit.
That it was established reflects both an enlightened commitment on the part of senior management and a recognition that the problem is pervasive in Northern Ireland.
Although the unit has a male inspector, it is policewomen who deal with both victims and offenders.
In the station in which the unit is based (not Easton), the attitude of the policemen towards it is not positive, partly as a result of their ambivalent attitudes toward sex crimes, but mostly because it is policed by women, who therefore are said to spend their time in Boots and Marks and Spencer, making it an easy duty (FN 30/11/87, p. 18).
The unit is nicknamed ‘Charlie's Angels’ and, ironically, the men are not averse to drawing sexual graffiti on the office door.
Perhaps this reflects no more than the elevation of masculinity that permeates the canteen culture of the station, but the view that nothing busy happens in the unit and that it is an ‘easy turn’ is a sad  reflection on how the marginalization of policewomen's duties has divorced some policemen from the reality of sex crimes.
A time-budget diary completed by one of the policewomen for a week shows her time divided between welfare duties (including visits to the homes of victims and children in care, and attending children's parties), serving summonses on offenders and witnesses, paperwork and case files, liaison with other badies (such as the social services, concerning children who are missing or on the special-risk list, and the RUC's Community Relations Branch), and enquiries and interviews regarding offences.
Welfare work with victims is very important because there is no widespread communal or police campaign of prevention of sex offences, unlike other types of crime.
As one policewoman in the unit explained, ‘You're only getting at the problem left behind after the crime has been committed.’
Another said, ‘The way I look at it, it's too late now; there's nothing can be done which can put the clock back; let's see what we can do to help the victim’(FN 6/11/87, p. 35).
It is possible to cite one case to illustrate what they try to do for victims which further demonstrates the commitment of the unit to a welfare service role.
An elderly widow who was robbed, attacked, and raped by a gang of youths was moved to sheltered dwellings with the help of the police, visited by policewomen from the unit at least once a week, and taken regularly to visit the family of one of the policewomen, which adopted her as the children's granny.
But this degree of involvement takes its toll on policewomen in the unit.
Having to talk little children through the horrors which some adults inflict upon them is horrific and stressful, and emotional distancing is difficult to maintain when you are dealing only with sex abuse cases day after day.
I find I can't get away from the job.
I wake up at night and I think of maybe some kid we've been dealing with.
I think, with having children of my own, I think what it would be like, God forbid, if that happened to one of my kids.
I can't get away from it.
I think of [name]and how someone could do that to a wee woman like that.
Dealing with sex abuse all the time, it can he very depressing.
After a while you need a break from a unit like this.
Dealing with that sort of thing day in and day out does you no good…
I find kids the hardest to deal with.
Like, when they come in here I'll bring them down to the canteen and let them have Coke and sweets.
Then I bring them up here and let them draw.
You get them round that way, and eventually you ask them about themselves, and you get round to it.
We have  these anatomical dolls, but anyway, you should have seen what that [name of 4-year-old girl]went through.
Kids never recover; buggery, rape, oral sex, never leaves them.
(FN 6/11/87, pp. 23, 34–5)
Despite the disparaging views of some policemen, these women have a harder job than any of the ‘Action Men’ in the riot police units.
Of course, as we shall see, not all policemen see themselves as Rambo in police uniform, and the emotional effects of routine policing cam be as traumatic for some men.
Some policemen are both reflective and compassionate enough to realize this and admit to it.
For example, upon discussing domestic disputes with the fieldworker, one policeman said,
See, the thing about this job, outwardly you have to be unemotional and cynical, but inside it can really screw you up.
Like, I'll tell you, see, last Christmas we spent practically the whole night going to family rows.
The first row the husband stabbed the wife and she wouldn't make a complaint about it.
The kids were in the house and Daddy was up in the roof throwing bikes down.
Like, the kids were my kids' age, and, like, my kids still believe in Santa.
Those kids had nothing to look forward to.
Then the second row the father just went berserk.
Ended up we had to get her and the kids out of the house and get them somewhere to stay the night.
And, like, you go home ad see your own kids.
They say, ‘Daddy, look what I've got,’ and you try not to let what you've seen that day get to you.
I'll tell you, that really screwed me up that Christmas Day.
I couldn't sleep that night.
(FN 23/10/87, p. 22)
CONCLUSION
These quotations hint at a number of important dimensions to policing in Northern Ireland: that policemen and women in the RUC have common-sense conceptualizations of their role, with some defining it in terms of community service; that they have sets of standardized guide-lines, what Schutz (1967) calls ‘recipes’, appropriate for the situations they handle; that they make, and try to maintain, a distinction between work and leisure; and that they employ various distancing strategies to cope with the demands of their job.
All these sorts of considerations are also aspects of routine policing.
However, used in this way, and in the sociology of policing generally, the term ‘routine’ tends to have a dual meaning.
It is widely used in this tradition to describe a quality of the tasks of which policing is normally comprised — that these tasks are mostly  mundane, ordinary, and day-to-day.
This chapter has followed this usage and stressed how the RUC also discharge the same ordinary, mundane tasks which characterize routine policing elsewhere, despite the folk images of the force.
But the term takes on a specific meaning in those studies in the sociology of policing which are inspired by ethnomethodology and phenomenology, where it describes a quality of the accomplishment of these tasks — that they are produced in a taken-for-granted, commonsensical, and habitual manner.
In the one sense, the term is used to refer to the ordinary aspects of police work, in the other, it is the process by which police work is done that is described as ‘routine’.
It is this second meaning which will be addressed in the following chapter.
Doing Routine Police Work
INTRODUCTION
In ethnomethodological terms, routine policing is a practical achievement accomplished through the practices ordinary policemen and women use in ‘doing’ the tasks which comprise their job.
Hence, the quotation marks around the word ‘doing’ emphasize that it has a technical meaning in sociology, for lying behind the process is a body of common-sense and official police knowledge which informs the methods and practices according to which activities are done.
These practices range from the methods and resources used by the police in handling the various situations they encounter, to the interpretative processes or ‘cognitive map’ used in the practical reasoning which their work uniformly requires.
In order to establish how police work is accomplished, therefore, it is necessary to examine such things as the common-sense notions ordinary policemen and women have about their role, what they consider to be the essence of police work, what typifications and categorizations infuse the practical reasoning they employ to accomplish policing tasks, and what ‘recipes’ or guide-lines they adopt in undertaking the various aspects of their job.
The key to ethnomethodological and phenomenological interpretations of ‘doing’ routine (qua ordinary) police work, is that such interpretative processes and practices are employed in a routine (qua taken-for-granted) manner.
Routine policing as a set of tasks is therefore accomplished as a process of routine.
That is, these methods, typifications, and practices are employed by policemen and women as the main resource for accomplishing police work, and their relevance and applicability is taken for granted and never challenged.
The intention in this chapter is to document some of the resources Easton's policemen and women draw on in accomplishing their work, with a view to demonstrating the similarity in the way  they ‘do’ ordinary policing compared to what we know of policemen and women in societies without Northern Ireland's extreme divisions.
We will look first at some of the common-sense conceptions they have of police work and their role as policemen and women.
CONCEPTIONS OF POLICE WORK
It appears that policemen and women the world over have similar views about their job and agree on what aspects of police work they like and dislike.
Such consensus was originally explained as the product of a distinct personality which members of the police either possessed before coming to the force or quickly develop as a result of the job (for a survey of the literature on this see Adlam 1981).
However, most modern studies on the police emphasize the variety of people attracted to the force and now focus more on styles of policing (for example, see Black 1980; Broderick 1973; Brown 1981; Cain 1973; Muir 1977; Reiner 1978, 1985; Shearing 1981; Walsh 1977; Wilson 1968), although the idea that policing attracts people with distinct personality traits is still popular among some social psychologists (see Colman 1983; Colman and Gorman 1982; cf. Waddington 1982).
Manning's seminal work offers another explanation, claiming that ‘Anglo-American policing’ is a discrete entity, socially constructed on the basis of shared symbols, myths, and folklore (Manning 1977; on ‘Anglo-Saxon policing’generally, see Bayley 1982; for criticism of the term see Brewer et al .
1988: 227–37).
More recently this consensus has been attributed to similar patterns of socialization into the canteen culture of the police (for example, Brogden et al .
1987; Reiner 1985; for an earlier and related argument see van Maanen 1973, 1975), and thus to the existence of a generalized police occupational culture.
But it is not only typical patterns of informal on-the-job training which are important, for there is also a congruence in aspects of formal police training (on both aspects of training see Fielding 1984, 1988a, b).
The ubiquity of these notions also reflects that the labour process itself influences policemen and women in how they view their work, and the sociology of policing has shown how routine policing consists of similar tasks wherever it occurs.
Hence van Maanen claims that policemen and women tend to have a common ‘working code’(van Maanen  1978).
Whatever the reasons, Easton's police agree in what seem fairly general conceptualizations of police work.
The Metropolitan Police refer to work which they dislike as ‘rubbish work’(Policy Studies Institute 1983b: 64), but in the RUC work which is disliked falls into three categories.
There is boring work, such as administering the enquiry desk, guard duty in sangers, and paperwork (on boring work in American police forces see Sykes and Brent 1983: 31–50).
Despite being an important opportunity for public relations, work on the enquiry desk is unpopular because ‘nothing happens’, so probationers and inexperienced recruits tend to be left to deal with the public's enquiries.
Sanger duty is particularly boring because there is nothing else to do but look out of the window, and since it is rarely done in pairs social interaction provides no compensation.
Describing the boredom of sanger duty, one policeman said, ‘You've got to be able to read in this job.
If you can't read a book or a paper you're fucked, because there's fuck all else to do.
See, up at the likes of Paisley's there,[name of policeman]was desperate, he didn't read.
[It]nearly killed him’(FN 23/11/87, p. 27).
But paperwork is the most boring part of the work of the section police.
That this is disliked by all policemen is well known (Ericson 1982: 5–6; Holdaway 1983: 21, 52; Manning 1977: 160).
In Easton, the dislike of it made some policemen reluctant to attend certain sorts of incident where a great deal of paperwork could be expected (such as road traffic accidents), although means of formal control usually ensured they responded in the end.
Of course, paperwork is itself a form of managerial control, which adds to the dislike, especially since returning a file as incorrectly prepared is perceived as a mechanism by which management assert their ‘glory’ in the labour process.
The dislike of paperwork influences other aspects of police work.
Being the observer in the Land Rover on patrol is unpopular because observers do the paperwork on incidents; those who cannot drive are thus left with a great deal of boring work.
It also affects the evaluations of incidents and what counts as a ‘good turn’.
Incidents are categorized by the degree of paperwork involved, and the best shifts are those where ‘you're kept busy but with stuff you can clear up on the spot’(FN 26/5/87, p. 34).
Great pleasure is therefore taken when the buck is passed and the paperwork is handed to someone else.
And there were occasions when banter and humour were used by low-ranking officers to convey the impression to the section police  that they should go easy on the number of ‘skulls’(prisoners) they accrued because of the excessive paperwork it was causing.
In other words, dislike of paperwork is an important consideration in the operation of police discretion.
But it has one redeeming feature, for the claim that paperwork needs to be completed is used as an excuse to avoid other types of police work which are disliked even more.
It thus becomes a contextually specific form of easing.
Another type of work which is disliked is emotionally demanding work, a category not recognized elsewhere in the literature on the police.
This is work which requires an emotional coldness but which can on occasions be so demanding that detachment is difficult to maintain.
Good examples are crimes of sex abuse against children, and calls to natural deaths and suicides.
A few of these examples come within the category Hughes calls ‘dirty work’(see Hughes 1958, 1964) but certainly not all.
Even so, the unpleasantness of these duties arises less from contact with things which the police consider either literally or metaphorically unclean (such as decomposed bodies and the ‘dregs and scum of society’), and more from the risk the police run of displaying emotion.
It is for this reason that these sorts of incident are particularly disliked by policemen and are marginalized to policewomen, wherever staffing levels allow.
When they talk about work of this type, policemen stress the importance of remaining detached and emotionally cold.
Young probationers are instructed by older, more experienced men to follow the ‘police pattern’, what Schutz would call the ‘recipe knowledge’.
An elderly sergeant once remarked on his experience of attending a cot death for the first time, ‘You just have to say to yourself, the next time I will be better equipped to cope with this type of situation…
There's a pattern police follow in every situation.
You lay the pattern down whatever you're dealing with, and you follow it through.
You know, I always feel desperate, and I apologized to that family, but it has to be done’(FN 5/1/87, p. 2).
It is part of this recipe knowledge to remain emotionally detached and consider it as just another incident or another death, and to treat the dead body, for example, ‘as a piece of meat’: a phrase used several times by policemen and women.
If she could look at meat hanging in a butcher's, the fieldworker was told when she was accompanying policemen to a postmortem, she could look at dead bodies.
The tendency to render  horrific incidents of this sort into funny tales or ‘atrocity stories’(Dingwall 1977), told ritualistically within the occupational culture of the station, is a further attempt to strip them of their emotional hold.
And some of the most popular subjects for ‘atrocity stories’ are decomposed bodies, bloody suicides, cot deaths, and the smell at post-mortems.
The purpose of these stories, however, is conditioned by their context.
Sometimes they are told to demonstrate what new recruits (and the field-worker) can expect; on other occasions they are told to illustrate the funny or the tragic sides of policing; or are used as a vehicle for the story-teller to display some features about him or herself, such as his or her experience and skill and ability in handling all things, and that he or she is professional in being able to talk about horror in a cold and detached manner.
More rarely, such stories are told at other times to demonstrate the reverse: that policemen and women are human beings and are affected by emotionally demanding work.
The telling of atrocity stories is therefore a highly structured occasion which reveals little about the teller other than that he or she is performing a ritual for a contextually specific purpose.
Therefore, the existence of atrocity stories on subjects such as this does not of itself reveal that this work is emotionally undemanding; simply that this is one impression that the story is intended to convey.
The same applies to the impression of emotional involvement.
Outside these structured occasions, when conversations are more natural and spontaneous, policemen reveal that in specific types of emotionally demanding work their distancing and coldness is tenuous and risks being broken down.
In the midst of passing on advice to the field-worker on how to cope with her imminent attendance at a post-mortem, one policeman said, ‘You get used to them.
I don't mind them any more.’
But after a pause he went on to add, ‘Except for kids, I hate going to post-mortems for kids’(FN 26/5/87, p. 21).
Below is an extract of conversation between two policemen who are telling a third about a cot death the two of them had recently attended.
PC. 1.
Jesus, it was awful, and the worst thing about it was, when we arrived the baby was still warm, so we tried to revive it with mouth to mouth.
Now the couple had expected it was dead and we gave them false hope.
When we couldn't revive it, it made the whole thing worse for them.
Than when the ambulance men arrived they also tried to revive it.
God it was awful.
Like we have to ask these really personal questions.PC. 2.
I always feel like saying, ‘Look, it's OK, I'll come back in a couple of weeks.’
But you never do, like.
You'd get the balls chewed off you if you returned without all the details.PC. 1.
But it was awful.
God, the couple were really upset.
It was their first baby, tao.
(FN 16/3/87, pp. 31- 2)
It is not that policemen and women fail to achieve emotional detachment, even though one policeman once remarked that at postmortems he was appalled by the way pathologists treat the body simply as a lump of meat and fail to show respect (FN 17/12/87, p. 15).
Primarily what makes this type of work unpopular is the ever-present danger that work of this sort will break the veneer of coldness, exposing them as emotionally involved, which is something they dislike because it is considered unprofessional.
A third type of work which is disliked is work that risks displaying incompetence.
Although paperwork is boring, it is not difficult to do, but there are other duties where there is a risk of being shown to be incompetent, which are disliked for this reason.
This fear does not arise from a view of themselves as unskilled in formal police requirements, for no policemen or women would express that they suspect this of themselves, although some admit to suspecting it of others.
This fear derives more from a recognition that they often lack the additional personal qualities which they see as necessary for certain types of work, which is why most policemen are reluctant to deal with rape victims or to undertake community and neighbourhood policing.
This is work which the majority of section police see themselves as unsuited for and dislike when they have to do it.
Often this fear is expressed in the form of sexist remarks about the different instincts of policewomen compared to policemen, or disparaging remarks about the duties of those who work in community relations and neighbourhood policing.
This fear also arises from a recognition that in certain types of work they will not be able to match the public's expectations of competence, whether finding lost pets or settling disputes between neighbours.
This is work they are able to do little about, despite public faith, and it is unpopular because of a reluctance or inability to display that little will be done.
It is not just that dealing with Old Age Pensioners who have reported missing budgies falls outside the definition of what counts as ‘real’ police work, the work is also  disliked because it is problematic, for policemen need to display competence in the way they convey sympathy while admitting that nothing will be done.
The fear that the encounter might have been handled incompetently is concealed in dismissive remarks about this type of work, about it not bring their job, as well as critical comments on the members of the public who think it is and who therefore make unrealistic demands on them.
As one reflection of this, telephone calls about matters like this were occasionally terminated by the slamming down of the receiver, followed by the defiant expletives of ‘old bag’, ‘old cow’, or ‘bastard’, which Manning's ethnography shows is a common closing remark among disgruntled policemen (1977, p. xiv).
Where possible, therefore, this is work to be avoided because of the risk of being seen as incompetent.
The dislike of enquiry desk duty, because of its boredom, is thus compounded because it involves dealing with these sorts of incident.
Above all, this fear arises in work where the police encounter outsiders whose job it is to make them appear wrong or incompetent — mostly court duty.
Appearance in court is feared by many policemen and women, who express a worry about being humiliated by an aggressive counsel, of becoming ‘tongue-tied’, and generally of having ‘a rough time’.
Their nervousness only adds to the dislike of this type of work.
The overtime and opportunities for easing which court duty affords is often not compensation enough for the stress it involves.
However, certain situational factors can transform it into enjoyable and legitimate police work.
Given the particular disposition of the policeman or woman and the nature of the case, court duty can become an opportunity for them to have a ‘good fight’, and pleasure can be taken in ‘getting one over the solicitor’.
This also appears to be an attraction to members of British police forces.
Holdaway (1983: 72) noted how lawyers were seen by Hilton's police as a threat because they unmask police practice, and, along with doctors and social workers, they were considered ‘challengers’.
This led some policemen to enjoy the sport which the court room offered (Holdaway 1983: 74).
In the case of policemen at Easton, this sport is situationally constrained by the common-sense knowledge they build up of the court room setting and its players.
Some lawyers are typified as ‘clever’, others as ‘stupid’; the former require one to be cautious, while the latter give greater opportunity for having the wool pulled over their eyes.
The following is an extract from the field notes, describing the return from court of two policemen, one a relatively inexperienced recruit.
During the court proceedings [name]and the young con [constable]gave conflicting statements.
The barrister for the defendant picked up on this.
Eventually the judge abandoned the point as irrelevant.
[Name]and the young con were triumphant; they had won the case.
It was the young con's first time in the box.
He and [name]kept exclaiming how stupid the barrister was, yet [name]reminded him.
PC.
They won't all be as stupid as that.
All the police present were scathing of the legal system, saying that the stupid barrister was from [name of legal firm], and would probably end up a judge.
They mentioned the names of a few judges who they did not think highly of.
(FN 10/2/87, p. 3)
As this makes clear, judges are also typified.
There are those who are ‘hard’, who accept ‘no messing’, and who ‘put people away’ often for quite minor crimes.
These are judges who accept ‘no grovelling on the part of prisoners’, even those who play on having a relative in the RUC (and we did come across a policeman who believed that his brother had been treated leniently in court as a result of this connection with the force).
‘Soft’ judges are the opposite, and these might well be considered the ‘stupid’ones.
In between are the ‘fair’ judges, whose judgement is seen to be unaffected by mood or the time of the day, and whose punishment fits the crime.
Surprisingly, given the folk image of policemen, on the one occasion when the field-worker accompanied some policemen on court duty, the men expressed a preference for ‘fair’ judges and actually criticized what they thought was the excessive penalty imposed by a ‘hard’judge for the offence of throwing an empty can (FN 9/3/87, p. 10).
However, this is but the reverse side of the Janus face of justice, for in their eyes it happens more often that criminals are released or are not put in prison for long enough.
The case only confined for the policemen the inequities of the legal system: justice depends on who the prisoner gets.
There is but one type of work which police everywhere enjoy, and that is active crime-fighting on the streets (for example see Ekblom and Heal 1982; Ericson 1982; Holdaway 1983; Manning 1977; Policy Studies Institute 1983b; Punch 1979a; Reiner 1978, 1985).
This is ‘real’ police work.
The problem is that so little of police time is devoted to it.
McCabe and Sutcliffe (1978) have shown how only 6  per cent of the time of patrol police is occupied with incidents defined as ‘criminal’.
Studies into the nature of the calls which the public make to the police show that demands are consistently unrelated to crime (Comrie and Kings 1975; Hough 1980; Jones 1983; Policy Studies Institute 1983b; Punch and Naylor 1973; Southgate and Ekblom 1984, 1986), and many ethnographic studies document how the majority of contacts between public and police do not involve criminal matters (Cain 1973; Comrie and Kings 1975; Cumming et al .
1970; Ericson 1982; Holdaway 1983; Manning 1977.
Payne 1973; Punch 1979a).
Historically policing has always involved controlling the petty (Ericson 1982: 7; Ignatieff 1978).
None the less, Easton's section police believe that crime detection is their primary role, their work place thus being the streets.
In words which almost parallel one of Manning's respondents (see Manning 1977: 160), one policeman in Easton said that ‘real policing is out on the streets’(FN 23/10/86, p. 5).
Inside the station ‘nothing happens’(FN 16/2/87, p. 11), even traffic control outside in the open is preferable to administrative work inside (FN 15/5/87, p. 51).
There again, while not all street-located work is crime-fighting, not all crime work involves action.
A distinction is made between ‘big’ and ‘little’crime, with the latter often being quite trivial and offering less enjoyment and satisfaction.
The crimes that are put under these headings were identified in the last chapter, but that such distinctions are made is clear, for example, in the casual remarks the police make when responding to the respective incidents.
At one level, policemen and women claim that they pursue all crime with equal vigour, which on the whole is true, but this formal discourse conceals the evaluations they make of different crimes.
The observational data reveal that qualitative judgements are made about the seriousness of particular types of crime, evaluations which are often conveyed in casual remarks made in the real-life situations of policing ‘little crime’.
Thus, for example, when apprehending a thief with £40 of stolen money, the policemen concerned still argued they had ‘not come up with anything’(FN 31/1/87, p. 10).
Referring to their work observing a house which was suspected of being used for prostitution, the policemen remarked that it was ‘a wee tuppence ha'penny job’.
Big crime ‘puts wee jobs’ like suspected prostitution ‘in the shade here, its not like they're killing anybody, unless they've got AIDS, and then I suppose that would be suicide’(FN 30/7/87, pp. 17–18).
In contrast delight and satisfaction are shown in the excitement of pursuing crimes involving robbery, car chases, burglary, drugs, and the like.
Pride is taken in making a detection of this importance and the section police dislike CID taking any credit when the ‘skulls’ are brought in by them.
The number of prisoners a section has accumulated during a shift is used as a measure of performance and becomes one of the bases of competition between the sections.
Manning calls this conceptualization of work the ‘threat-dangerhero’ syndrome (1977: 302), which he believes is widespread amongst those who discharge ‘Anglo-American policing’, while Reiner refers to it as ‘old-fashioned machismo’, which he argues is widespread within the occupational culture of the police (1985: 99-100).
The preference for fighting ‘big crime’ fits into these characterizati ons and led policemen in Easton to continually hope that ‘big crime’would be discovered in the pursuit of the petty.
Those very rare instances where ‘little crime’ develops into ‘real’police work are recounted by policemen often and told with pleasure and delight.
As an illustration of how it can occur, the field-worker was told of an incident in which a driver was asked to stop for failing to wear a seat-belt, upon which he sped off, necessitating a car chase, which eventually ended with two cars being wrecked and a policeman injured.
It is not just the situation of the accounting which is important in stories of this sort, for, although the telling of exciting stories is often used to enliven boring work, the moral of these particular action stories is crucial to their accounting.
This type of story shows that the pursuit of ‘little crime’ can have some satisfaction and legitimacy, which explains in part why most policemen and women pursue it diligently while deprecating it.
These stories also demonstrate the need for policemen and women to be continually prepared for ‘a big one’ and to be ever vigilant, which lends further significance to some ‘little crimes’.
And when experience teaches that the chances of getting a ‘biggy’ are faint, this expectation can be offset by the telling of these sorts of stories.
The moral is that in special circumstances ‘little crime’ can be exciting, and the opportunity for ‘real’police work can be missed unless one remains prepared.
Below is an extract from the field notes which illustrates the context in which this moral was recounted:
A stolen vehicle had been stopped in the [name of place]area so we sped up there.
[Name]found a small driveway in front of some shops and we parked  there, which allowed us to speed off in either direction after the vehicle, should it appear.
[Name]muttered,
PC. 1.
Imagine if we got it.
PC. 2.
No chace.
When did you last see a stoley?
PC. 1.
Never, not like this.
PC. 2.
I did once up in Derry on the edge of the Creggan.
We were driving around and I seen these two young lads in a car and I says, ‘They look a bit young to be driving that.’
Stopped them.
‘Can I help you, Constable?’, all very nice.
Let them go, gets back to the station [there was a]description of a stolen vehicle.
Wasn't it the vehicle I'd stopped?
Couldn't believe it.
Joy-riders, I'd let them go.
(FN 27/10/87, pp. 11–12)
It is stories like these which help to protect Easton's policemen and women from the loss of morale which Manning claims is an inevitable result of the contradiction between the image the police have of themselves and their work and the low-key nature of practical policing (Manning 1977: 349; also see Holdaway 1983, 1988, who makes a similar point).
The conceptualizations of police work that are found in Easton not only fit what is known of police forces elsewhere, they parallel the portrayal of policing in the wider culture.
The image of policing gleaned from police programmes on British and American television and in films is very much how Easton's police see themselves, as others have commented with respect to police forces elsewhere (Holdaway 1983: 147; Hurd 1979; Klockars 1983; Morris and Heal 1981; Tuska 1979).
The popularity of these programmes among the section police in Easton is both cause and effect of the evaluations they make of their work.
The excitement, suspense, and danger which seems the lot of the police on celluloid feeds into the definitions many of Easton's section police give to their work experience, and the supposed similarity of this experience leads them to see police films and television programmes as an accurate portrayal, to be watched avidly because of this shared world.
Even though the portrayal of police work on celluloid is not a realistic description of policing in Easton, the conceptualizations they have of their role as fighters of ‘big crime’, which they have to be continually prepared for, encourages them to see the media portrayal of policing as accurate, thus completing the circle.
Aggressive, action-packed police programmes are popular because of their supposed realism and the congruency of their imagery, so  that features of the symbolic portrayal become adopted by Easton's police as part of their practice.
This was particularly noticeable among the younger policemen, for whom this imagery seems to be a defining characteristic of their work.
Klockars refers to this as the ‘Dirty Harry’ syndrome (1983).
It was reflected in the expressions used by some members of the RUC (‘OK, let's hit the streets and do it to them before they do it to us’, ‘This is where the law stops and I take over, sucker’, the reference to probationary police as ‘rookies’ and to bullets as ‘slugs’), their dress (mirror sunglasses, blue jeans, and white T-shirt, sometimes with the Miami-Vice parallel reinforced by the words being printed on the T-shirt), and other ephemera (the engraving of ‘San Quentin' on the keys to the cells, jumping through the enquiry room window rather than using the door).
Those policemen who have racist views are faced with problems when the hero on celluloid is black, but when discussing such an instance, one policeman expressed his dislike for blacks but still found the film ‘brilliant’(FN 9/10/87, p. 57).
More importantly, this imagery affects the demeanour of these macho men when dealing with the public.
Sensitivity to public relations is not a quality which accompanies the Rambo self-image, and sergeants sometimes avoid placing the policemen who live out this imagery in situations where their insensitivity can damage public perceptions of the police.
Various studies have shown that the public evaluate the police in terms of the attitude the police show them when they are victims in need of police help (for example, Jones 1983; Maguire 1982; Shapland 1982; Southgate and Ekblom 1984).
It is not always possible for low-ranking officers to anticipate the situations which ‘Action Men’ need to avoid, and some instances were observed where the aggressive manner of the policeman acted as a form of ‘amplification of deviance’(Young 1971), transforming a minor situation into ‘big crime’.
Moving on loitering youths is a policing situation ripe for such amplification, as other research has shown (Southgate and Ekblom 1986: 35, 37; Young 1971), and there were several occasions when policemen for whom this imagery is very important over-reacted to the presence of young people on street corners and were aggressive in the way they moved them on.
On one occasion the aggression was returned, resulting in the person being brought into the station and charged.
Of course, there are other situations when the toughness that accompanies the Rambo self-image is useful in disarming trouble-makers and preventing  further crime, as happened more than once during field-work.
The view of senior management is that policemen need to combine the qualities of compassion and toughness and know when each is appropri — ate (FN 11/11/87, pp. 7–8), although in practice it is difficult to strike this fine balance.
Where it is seen by work colleagues to be getting out of kilter, informal controls can be used to restore equilibrium.
Thus, some policemen are urged by their tough-minded colleagues to treat marginal incidents as criminal behaviour and are encouraged into action.
The reverse is equally evident, for informal controls sometimes operate to moderate the actions of those members of the RUC who see themselves as Rambo in police uniform.
The satirical phrase used to embarrass the ‘Action Men’ is that they have the ‘John Wayne syndrome’; the fact it is Wayne rather than Rambo who is used to ridicule them gives a clue that it tends to be the older members of the force who use the term to describe the exuberant younger policemen.
The ‘Action Men’ are aware that it is used as a term of abuse and often become angry when it is applied to them.
Nicknames such as‘Rambo’ and ‘Action Man’serve the same purpose of informal social control.
The symbol which the older and more experienced policemen on the sections use as their model is Dixon of Dock Green, although the avuncular figure of Dixon is ridiculed by many younger policemen as outdated and antiquarian, even for Great Britain.
Conceptualizations of police work are therefore derived from and embedded in such phenomena as the day-to-day experience of police duties, which is itself contextually related to the sorts of crime that occur in the area in which the station is located, common-sense notions about policing contained in the occupational culture, and stereotypes of policing found in the wider culture.
However, these conceptualizations also derive from the biographical situation of policemen and women, which predisposes them to define their role in a certain way.
The clash of symbols represented by Dixon and Rambo represents a more fundamental conflict between those policemen and women who emphasize their role in terms of crime-fighting, especially ‘big crime’, and those who see themselves as having a public service and community welfare role.
This contrast is a familiar one in the sociology of policing and the subject of much comment, all of which argues that only a small minority of policemen and women define their work in terms of social service.
Reiner  put it as only 1 in 20 constables (1978; also see Southgate and Ekblom 1984: 25).
The police are called upon to perform many public services (for example, see Punch 1979b; Punch and Naylor 1973), which is true even of a police force in a divided society like Northern Ireland, as the last chapter showed.
Therefore, the unwillingness of policemen to define their role in these terms does not show itself in a failure to perform these duties but as a judgement that it is ‘really’ the work of others.
This view is common to the ‘Action Men’ among Easton's section police who are called upon to do what they consider is the job of the social services.
Community relations and neighbourhood police in Easton take the opposite view, as we shall shortly show, but not all section police demean or demur from this type of work.
As one explained, ‘I get great satisfaction from the job.
I enjoy helping the public; like, that's what we're here for.
We're paid by the public, so they deserve a good service’(FN 26/5/87, p. 32).
While they might be expected to say this, most do not admit to it.
Those who do might also be thought to be insincere, but some policemen showed real regret and disappointment when they were unable to provide the service they felt they should, whether because of the nature of the call or because of unrealistic public expectations (such as finding lost budgies, preventing sheep-worrying, or reconciling warring spouses and quarrelsome neighbours).
EVALUATIONS OF COMPETENT POLICE WORK
As Fielding has shown (1988b), what counts as good police work to ordinary policemen and women is not determined by official standards of performance, but by a range of contextual factors.
Thus, criteria of competence only become evident when policemen and women give accounts of what they assess as ‘good’ police work in real-life settings (p. 45).
Considerations on which they seem to draw include: how they construe their role as members of the police, which is itself informed by their interpretation of the organizational mandate of the force, by informal organizational requirements and occupational culture, and by local community expectations; their knowledge of locale; whether constables are able to resolve the momentary demands of the situation; and their ability to handle the complex mix of law enforcement, local expectations, and the need  for good public relations.
In short, official notions of effectiveness are only one set of criteria among several contextual evaluations of competence, and often constables diverge in their assessments.
But amongst the influences upon evaluations of competence are conceptualizations of police work.
With evidence drawn from his field-work in Great Britain, Fielding showed how some constables place primacy upon providing counselling assistance, displaying forbearance in their dealings with the public, and in possessing the communication skills to process the encounter with the public smoothly and to enlist the support of members of the public.
Others, however, emphasize the importance of enforcing the law and obtaining a ‘good crime arrest’, one part of which is displaying to criminals sufficient potential for coercion as to mount arrests without further assistance.
Research on encounters between police and public has shown that from the public's view even the crime-fighters need communication skills (Dix and Layzell 1983; Southgate and Ekblom 1984, 1986; Sykes and Brent 1983), although these abilities are all too often absent.
Fielding notes how some constables subsume these negotiating skills under the category of ‘talk’, which gives meaning to their complaint that many younger policemen seem no longer to know how to talk to members of the public (1988b: 60; also see Holdaway 1983: 90; Southgate 1982: 11–12).
Other research has shown how evaluations of ‘good’ policing vary with types of police practice, with the different ‘types’of policemen conceptualizing competent practice in contrasting ways (Muir 1977; Reiner 1978; for a review of the numerous typologies of policemen that exist in the sociology of policing see Reiner 1985: 104–6).
But one point on which all policemen and women seem to agree is that competence is experiential rather than textbook in origin.
The term which gives shorthand expression to this in the sociology of policing is ‘common sense’.
Among Easton's section police ‘common sense’ subsumes all competences, being an indexical category flexible enough to include different sorts of skills, all of which are described as constituting common sense.
As Easton's section police see it, a competent member of the RUC is one who uses his or her common sense.
This skill overrides otherwise important divisions within the force, such as gender, age, religion, and background, so that policewomen, for example, are assessed as competent despite the sexist nature of the occupational culture of the station if they have ‘common sense’.
The incompetent, therefore, are the bookish, the ‘smart’ ones, those who have the theory but not the common sense, which only comes from experience and practice.
Many times the incompetent were described as being smart but lacking even an ounce of common sense.
But not only is it a way of classifying policemen and women: the term is also used to criticize those outsiders who think they know something about policing, such as lawyers, academics, researchers, and journalists; it is also a self-appellation of praise.
You get some boys join the police, they're blessed with brains but they've no common sense.
Like, you can tell people who are, like, geniuses, you can almost tell to look at them, they're on another planet.
You get a lot of professors and that.
[They]have no common sense.
I don't have that much brains, but I'd say I had good common sense.
Like, you get teachers who join the police; they're not good policemen to me, they don't eat and think like policemen.
(FN 17/12/87, p. 23)
The notion thus serves to give moral worth and competence to members of an occupational group whose level of education is often quite low.
However, as an indexical category, what counts as common sense is contextually specific.
Its meaning is influenced by the nature of the occupational task, so that it is ‘common sense’ for a member of the police to try to save lives, catch terrorists, make arrests, fulfil public expectations, do the paperwork properly, and so on.
It is also structured by the biographical situation of the person using the term and the definitions they give to their work role.
To some constables ‘common sense’ is knowing how to talk to people:
You've got to be able to talk to people on their own level, you get the best out of people if you treat them a certain way.
Like, I'd say to a young officer, maybe just out of the depot [training centre], if a old lady calls you for assistance to her, you're a police officer and she will look to you for help, ad we have to leave people with a certain level of satisfaction.
(FN 30/11/87, pp. 34–5)
It follows then that the ‘Action Men’ are often seen as incompetent and as avoiding work which calls for common sense.
As one constable stated, the ‘Action Men’ who are fitness conscious and orientated towards crime-fighting only adopt this mode ‘to get them off doing work’.
‘Bluffers.
Like, say they've been out on a run and there's a call, they say they can't go out because they're not in uniform and are all sweaty’(FN 26/5/87, p. 27).
‘Good’ work has to  be seen as More than crime-fighting: ‘Like, this is the sort of job that you come off at the end of the night and say to yourself ‘What did I do?’
But, like, you don't know what you might have prevented’(FN 20/6/87, p. 8).
Hence some of the older hands in the force complain about the younger, more exuberant policemen.
They lack the experience and practice which gives them the ability to communicate with the public: they lack common sense.
‘The thing you often see with young men is that they have had very little experience in dealing with people.
Sure, who have they talked to but their school mates?…
The police makes them streetwise within no time at all, but they're missing out on something’(FN 9/8/87, p. 3).
Yet, given the predominance of the crime-fighting conceptualization of police work, the main ingredient to common sense is local knowledge of crime and criminals.
The ‘good’ policemen and women know their area: the sites of trouble and danger, as Holdaway describes them (1983: 39–42), which need special attention, the places to avoid without having further back-up, the places where events and incidents have occurred in the past, the people on whom to focus attention, such as the ‘troublesome families’in whom crime historically runs or the VIPs in the area who get special protective care.
This knowledge is also recursive, in that the competent policeman or woman needs to know which criminals have a common-sense knowledge about the activities and deployment of the police, which requires that they have the additional common sense to confound the criminal's working knowledge of the police.
Hence ‘a policeman is only as good as his interest in his and surrounding areas’(FN 30/11/87, p. 28).
The field-worker was a captive audience to whom members of the force could display their competence when riding around Easton in a police vehicle, and conversations were punctuated by policemen pointing out significant sites and personnel.
So, too, were new recruits and staff transferred from outside the area.
However, the dissemination of this knowledge to newcomers has the additional purpose of inculcating in them the common sense that is necessary to police Easton.
One experienced constable explained the process as follows: ‘Like, whenever we get a new constable in this station, they are guided along by the rest of the men.
When they go out on patrol the other men will point out that such-and-such happened here, soand-so lives there, that's a bad area, and so on.
Eventually that constable learns who to watch’(FN 30/11/87, p. 35).
The training of  probationers encourages this transmission, because after formal training in the depot each recruit is assigned to an experienced senior constable in the station.
One such senior said the intention was to allow the probationer to learn from the experience of others (FN 4/4/87, p. 6), on the assumption that people learn ‘on the job’ rather than in the depot.
That is, policing is experiential: it is based on the common sense that is built up from doing the job, and senior constables have some influence on the meaning which new recruits give this ‘common sense’.
But irrespective of how they construe the common sense which is the policeman or woman's working knowledge, seniors are agreed that new recruits need experience of life to enable them to deal with the range of situations and people they encounter in their work.
Seniors in Easton recommend a later starting age than the current 18 years, with one even suggesting a compulsory twelvemonth work experience to broaden the range of experience of recruits.
To achieve a similar end, one was opposed to recruits restricting their social networks to other members of the force.
All were opposed to graduate entry.
University is claimed to provide too narrow a background and the ethos of academe runs counter to the experiential emphasis in police bureaucracies.
There is also opposition to the ‘specialist knowledge’ which textbook-learnt policemen and women employ, sometimes drawn from the liberal social sciences.
These boys can be all very good on paper.
Say, you have a problem with a youth, they could do you out this plan that would sound very good on paper — bring in the social workers, bring in the DHSS and juvenile liaison.
You ask a man who has a bit more experience and plenty of common sense ad he'll say to you, ‘Get the lad in, bring him home to his parents and the father will give him a clip round the ear.’
That will do him a lot better than this other guy's plan.
A clip round the ear has more chance of preventing him from doing something a second time than bringing all these other agencies in.
In my mind it's common sense that makes a good policeman, not education.
Education in this job doesn't mean an iota.
That's why I think all this rapid promotion is a load of crap.
(FN 16/11/87, p. 26)
Attempts to professionalize the police by recruiting more graduates and introducing specialist training is thus resisted by many from below.
Understood in this sense professionalization contests what ordinary policemen and women see as long-established, wellgrounded, practical experience.
This view contrasts with that of  many outsiders, and the research of Muir (1977) and Reiner (1978) describes the ‘professional’ type of policeman as the most competent, although the indexical nature of the notion of ‘common sense’enables these views to be dismissed by ordinary policemen and women because the authors lack this same quality.
Other parts of the working ‘common sense’ of the police in Easton are the typifications and recipe knowledge which they employ when doing policing, and it is to this that we now turn.
THE COGNITIVE MAP OF EASTON'S SECTION POLICE
In his account of social phenomenology, Alfred Schutz (1967) claimed that the variability and complexity of the everyday world requires members to use particular cognitive processes which reduce this ambiguity.
The means by which this is done is through the ‘schemes of experience’, such as typifications, recipes, and other idealizations which members build up over time and into which are allotted new experiences and encounters, rendering the unknown into the known, the unfamiliar into the familiar.
Apprehending the world through these types gives it a preliminary coherency and ‘standardized sameness’.
However, these ‘schemes of experience’ are not invented ex nihilo but are disseminated through the commonsense knowledge shared by members of the life-world, so that members come to learn the relevant typifications and their meaning (see Natanson 1970; for an application of these ideas see Brewer 1984a, b, 1988b).
Hence experience and type originate together: the individual cannot endow experiences with meaning without types, yet types are constituted from and through lived experience (see Rogers 1981:.
139).
Policemen and women are members of a close-knit occupational world with a discrete culture and also face a world which has great variability and confusion, and considerable attention has been focused on the cognitive processes, typifications, and recipes they employ to accomplish policing (for example, see Bittner 1967, 1980; Chatterton 1975; Holdaway 1983; Manning 1977; Policy Studies Institute 1983b; Reiner 1978; Rubinstein 1973; Skolnick 1966; for a study of police typifications in the United States which has a very odd combination of Schutz's ideas, symbolic interactionism, and quantitative and mathematical models, see Sykes and Brent 1983).
This has been one of the central preoccupations of ethnographic police research, especially that inspired by phenomenology and ethnomethodology, and so apposite is policing to this focus that many theoreticians from within phenomenology and ethnomethodology have used it for the application of their ideas (Cicourel 1968; Pollner 1987; Sacks 1972; Sudnow 1965).
These idealizations are referred to by Holdaway as the ‘mental map’ of the police (1983: 63–4), and he addressed the typifications Hilton's police had of their area (sites of ‘danger’and ‘trouble’, ‘mump holes’, and so on), and the people they encountered (‘challengers’, ‘disarmers’, ‘prisoners’).
However, most studies focus on the latter set of typifications.
The research by the Policy Studies Institute on the Metropolitan Police outlined the typifications they had of the public, contrasting the ‘slags’ and ‘ordinary people’(1983b: 180).
Manning lists numerous categories employed in a London subdivision, such as‘old boots’, ‘old dears’, ‘cows’, ‘slags’, ‘greasers’, ‘John Does’, and ‘yobs’(1977: 236–8).
There are many similar examples that could be cited.
Reiner reviews the studies on police typifications of the public and he focuses on seven which are identified in the literature —‘goad-class villains’, people so powerless that they are ‘police property’, the ‘rubbish’, ‘challengers’, ‘disarmers’, ‘do-gooders’, and ‘politicians’(1985: 94–7).
A point which these listings often miss is that typifications are not all of equal generality within the everyday world.
Schutz emphasized how typifications are related to the ‘purpose at hand’, which suggests that some typifications will be universal (‘mother’, ‘father’) and others more restricted depending upon how general is the purpose of their use.
The overriding purpose of policing as perceived by ordinary policemen and women is to uphold the law, which requires typifications of very general use and applicability which distinguish between those who keep and those who break the law.
It is for this reason that ordinary policemen and women dislike it when the typifications become confused, when decent and honest ‘victims’ of crime, for example, become ‘trouble-makers’by taking the law into their own hands.
But around these primary typifications exist a whole array which operate in more specific settings (court duty, post-mortems, the enquiry desk, and so on), whose use therefore is not only contextually related but also more restricted.
There are two ways in which these secondary typifications are less general.
Firstly, they achieve purposes less central to the main tasks of policing  because of the narrower range of settings in which they are used.
Secondly, related to this, there is a much smaller number of policemen and women for whom they are relevant, which limits their use.
Easton's section police have two sets of primary typifications: one categorizing trouble-makers, the other the abnormal.
Criminals and other trouble-makers are referred to widely as ‘gougers’: ‘there are basically two types of people.
There are the decent members of the public and the gougers’(FN 26/5/87, p. 23).
The term ‘gouger’ is flexible in that it refers to known criminals as well as others who look or act as if they have a potential for crime and trouble.
To be known to the police as having a history of crime is sufficient to be categorized a gouger, and people in Easton who are well known as gougers are always the first suspects.
For others it is sufficient to look or act like a gouger by being rough-looking and dirty or disrespectful to and disliking the police, ‘giving lip’ and swearing, coming from ‘a problem family’and being of low intelligence (‘not all there’, ‘air getting in’, ‘not right’, ‘a few bricks short of a full load’).
In short, gougers are life's losers.
Because the typification is very inclusive, covering known criminals and people who look as if they might be, it gets its meaning partly from practical experience of people who typically commit crime in Easton, but also from prejudices that derive from middleclass notions of respectability.
Local knowledge is therefore one important influence on the application of the typification.
For example, on one occasion a youth was caught urinating in the street late at might, and was very respectful and deferential when caught in the act, but, upon the policeman recalling that he had recently been one of a group which had shouted abuse at him, an act expected from gougers, he was arrested, and the incident was treated as a case of indecent exposure.
But local knowledge is not the only influence.
Middle-class notions of respectability enable policemen and women ‘to tell just by looking at someone whether there's something a bit suspicious about them’ and ‘to be able to recognize a decent member of the public’(FN 20/6/87, p. 20).
For example, a drunken woman was brought into the station one night after assaulting a policewoman and using very abusive language, something to be expected from gougers, but was allowed home uncharged after spending a night in the cells: she was even allowed to leave early enough in the morning to avoid all  but the milkman from seeing her arrive home in a police vehicle.
Talking about the woman, a policeman said, ‘She was a clean person, wasn't she?
She wasn't the usual gouger element type.
She was probably just seeking attention.’
The injured policewoman added, ‘She just needed someone to talk to, I think’(FN 25/9/87, p. 24).
Through remarks like these the police were normalizing the behaviour to distinguish it from that which cam be expected from gougers.
‘Appearance’ can relate to class, as in the following remarks:
You adapt your personality depending on who you're dealing with.
Say I was dealing with one of our gougers, I come down to [his]level.
I'd tell him to fuck up, because he understands that.
You've got to bring yourself down to their level.
There's two methods of policing, one for the decent people and one for the trouble-makers.
You wouldn't walk into [name of a middleclass suburb of Easton]and say, ‘Would you all fuck up.’
I remember once a sergeant explaining to a constable.
The sergeant had just told a group of kids to fuck away off.
We went to another call and like these were upper class and this young constable got out and told them to fuck away off.
I seen the sergeant rolling his eyes.
Like there was a gap, if you see what I mean.
One group was working class and one was upper class.
You get a bit more respect from those.
(FN 25/6/87, p. 23)
It is in the initial anticipation that the middle class will show respect that the bias lies, for where this deference is lacking, even from someone who appears middle class, a variant of the gouger typification comes into force.
A subcategory of gougers are ‘mouths’: young people who ‘give lip’, primarily as a result of drink.
Middleclass youths are often ‘mouths’ but rarely become gougers because the latter require an element of ‘pure badness’, which from the view of the police tends to exclude the middle classes, for ‘pure badness’derives from being (or appearing to be) educationally subnormal, coming from ‘bad homes’, or having a history of crime.
But some ‘mouths’ can have their ‘deviance amplified’(Young 1971) in order for it to come within the conduct expected of gougers.
The incident described in the following extract from the field notes, provides a good illustration of this:
A crowd of about seven or eight youths on their way out of a Chinese carryout were in high spirits.
As soon as they saw the car, which had a police sign on the roof, they quietened down.
We stopped beside a autobank, which was out of order.
Referring to the crowd, one constable said,
PC. 1.
I bet ya it was one of them that put that out of order.
I think I saw one of them over at it.
[Name of another policeman]got out.
He had been incensed by the guy on the comer [who had said ‘Fucking bastards’ as they drove past]and I felt wanted to take it out on somebody.
He said,
PC. 2.
Drive down past these boys again.
As we turned the comer, passing the guy [who had earlier sworn at the police],[PC. 2.]said,
PC. 2.
Look at that piss artist.
Did you see what he did when we passed him first?
PC. 1.
He said ‘Fuck off’ or something.
PC. 2.
But he gave us that there.
[PC. 2.]made the sign that the man thought the police were wankers.
PC. 2. just drive slowly past this guy.
[PC. 2.]leered intimidatingly at the guy, who had no comment to make.
So we drove after the youths, who had begun singing again.
[PC. 2.]got on the radio to ask for assistance even though nothing had happened.
He said,
PC. 2.
We'll drive past them and once we get past them they'll probably start shouting.
If you could try and pinpoint one of them that's doing the shouting.
We drove past slowly.
The singing and shouting ceased as we did this.
As soon as we passed, loud shouts went up.
We pulled in a driveway.
By this time there was a Land Rover and an unmarked escort [car]at the scene…
One of the youths was arrested.
Referring to the arrested youth, a third policeman new to the scene said,
PC. 3.
I've seen worse.
Maybe just throw him out down the road here.
[PC. 3.]didn't think the guy was that bad.
However, he was not thrown out, he was taken back to the station and locked up for the night.
The youths were neither causing damage nor harm.
They were from their appearance obviously working class.
[PC. 2.]commented as we left the scene,
PC. 2.
[Name of working-class council estate]boys.
(FN 7/11/87, p. 2)
The deviance of ‘mouths’ was in this instance amplified by direct provocation by the police, in part because one member of the force wanted some ‘skulls’, but also because they were elevated into ‘gougers’: the ‘lip’was typical of that of gougers and they fitted the social class from which gougers come.
The other primary typification used by Easton's section police is for the purpose of categorizing the abnormal.
The ‘purpose at hand’, to distinguish between criminals and decent people, requires also  that policemen and women be able to sense that something unusual and abnormal is occurring.
The two sets of categorizations are closely related, for this sense of the abnormal is based in part on typifications of people, but also in part on typifications of place and of people in (or out of) place.
Although specific assessments are heavily contextualized and influenced by such things as the time of day and fashion (Rubinstein 1973: 249), the evaluations are standardized into discrete types of abnormal situation.
Ericson notes how the patrol police he studied in Canada considered the following situations to be abnormal: individuals considered to be out of place; individuals in places of special significance; particular types of people regardless of place; and unusual circumstances regarding property (Ericson 1982: 86).
This is a useful typology for understanding the sense of abnormality which Easton's section police operate.
Thus, for example, gougers are gougers and need to be watched wherever they are.
Also in need of special attention are key locations where crime can be expected, especially at might, such at commercial properties and residential areas in the suburbs.
People of any description become suspicious persons when found at these sites.
The first category has the greatest potential for ambiguity, for it requires more interpretative work, in that it associates places with types of people.
Thus, for the police, it is unusual for youths to be driving ‘up-market motors’ in ‘poor areas’(for similar typifications see Dix and Layzell 1983: 107–8).
However, there is another type of abnormal situation to those identified by Ericson, which concerns objects out of context.
For example, Easton's section police consider it abnormal if cars are out of context, such as expensive cars being driven in ‘poor areas’ and old bangers in the exclusive suburbs.
People of all types with unusual objects upon their person are also considered suspicious, whether this be holdalls or pocketfuls of 2p pieces (suspected of being used to entice children).
Identifying the typifications of abnormality used by Easton's section police in this way should not be taken to suggest that there is universal agreement on the abnormality of each specific incident.
Considerable ambiguity arises when the appearances of the incident are such that it is uncertain whether or not it fits one of these types of abnormal situation.
This occurred frequently during field-work, and in these circumstances the police concerned negotiated the appearances of the case in order to decide whether or not something  abnormal was taking place.
The resources on which they call in making this decision include the above typifications, as well as local knowledge of the area and its crime, and contextual and time variables.
But in addition to these primary typifications there are a large number of more contextually specific typifications whose use has a less general purpose.
This might be because the people to whom they apply are encountered only infrequently in the course of police work.
Examples here are typifications of judges (‘hard’, ‘soft’, ‘fair’), solicitors (‘clever’, ‘stupid’), rape victims (‘pure’, ‘asking for it’, ‘good-time girls’), the typification ‘common-law job’ for children born out of wedlock, and ‘old dear’for friendly female pensioners.
Another reason for the more restricted use of these sorts of typification is that the situations in which they become operative are infrequent, such as the typifications ‘old biddies’ or ‘old dolls’for pensioners who make petty complaints, ‘Easton funny’for strange and odd events, and ‘loopers’for odd and strange people.
Again local knowledge is used, for example, to classify specific pensioners as either ‘old dears’ or ‘old biddies/dolls’, and the categorization is often negotiated between the police concerned on this basis.
Part of the cognitive map of Easton's section police is their recipe knowledge.
As understood by Schutz, ‘recipes’ are standardized guide-lines for behaviour which are adopted as a matter of course, and vary depending upon the type of situation.
They have a dual purpose, for on the one hand they teach how to act in specific situations, but, conversely, the guide-lines also function as a means of typification for classifying incidents.
The adoption of a particular recipe therefore avoids any ambiguity and uncertainty by allowing a situation to be typified so that the appropriate behaviour is known.
Easton's section police call such recipes ‘patterns’.
Some of these ‘patterns’ are formalized in the police manual, so that the procedure is laid down for dealing with rape cases, domestic disputes, medical examinations, road traffic accidents, and so on.
However, the experiential nature of police training usually ensures that a commonsense knowledge about these patterns is also built up.
The procedures adopted for each category of incident are of less interest than the issue of how these patterns are able to coexist with the unexpected nature of much police work.
Quite often things will not go to plan because of the variability of people's behaviour in situations of stress or the unusual and horrific nature of some of the  calls the police have to attend.
In such circumstances one particular recipe takes over, which Easton's section police call ‘bluff’: ‘Even though you mightn't have a clue, you bluff your way through.’
‘Bluff’ is a recipe which consists of giving the impression to the public that the police know what they are doing when they do not.
Verbal and non-verbal behaviour is used to bluff, so it is necessary to issue advice in an authoritative and calm voice, and appear to be busy and active, if only in seeking the assistance of others.
‘Bluffing’ is thus an indexical term used in different ways by Easton's section police.
Used in one context it is an essential skill for handling difficult situations, in another it is used as an equivalent for laziness.
DISCRETION
One important role which typifications play, along with other factors, is in structuring the operation of police discretion.
We have already noted how deviance is amplified upon the application of the gouger typification, so that the failure to apply it can result in a dissipation of deviance and an attempt to normalize the behaviour.
Discretion such as this, what Klockars (1985) calls ‘selective enforcement’, has provoked considerable interest right from the beginning of sociology's concern with policing (for example Goldstein 1960, 1963; La Favre 1965).
Within this literature, discretion tends to be interpreted in purely legalistic terms — being a decision about which rule is appropriate and whether or not to apply it (see Ericson 1982: 11–12).
A broader conception of discretion should include a knowledge about the interactional skills appropriate to the different types of encounter between police and public.
These skills are particularly important following the introduction of community policing, as the next chapter will document.
But within the first interpretation of the term, many authors have emphasized how the increase in the number of legal statutes makes the law impractical to apply in every case, so that Sheehe has calculated that only one offence in every 7,600 is detected (see Dix and Layzell 1983: 7).
It is organizationally impractical because of the lack of capacity and resource in the police to deal with the resulting offenders.
Nor could the courts cope, and there would be a deterioration in the public's perception of the police as a result of the disjuncture with lay conceptions of legality.
As a constable at Easton  explained, ‘I could stand at that comer there and catch a hundred people breaking some law or other in one shift, no bother.
But you just couldn't book everyone you saw infringing some minor law or other.
Not only would you not have the time to deal with them all, but you'd be harassing the public and getting the police a bad name’(FN 23/4/87, p. 2).
This lends further significance to the distinction Easton's section police make between ‘big’ and ‘little’crime.
However, this strength is also a weakness.
While discretion filters out from the legal process all minor and inconsequential infringements of the law, what counts as minor can rest on the whims and prejudices of individual officers and lead to inconsistent and unequal practice.
Yet studies of police discretion also emphasize how its operation is structured, so that to a great extent its use becomes standardized, although individual whim cannot be ignored entirely.
While there are formal rules by which discretion is effected, research shows that the primary means for standardizing its operation is the set of informal on-the-job rules of thumb developed within the occupational culture of the police.
Hence it can be determined by practical considerations arising from the organization of police work, such as the time of the shift, the approach of shift change-over, the time of the year, considerations about overtime, and the dislike of paperwork (Gardner 1969: 132; Holdaway 1980: 59, 1983: 57).
But there also appears to be what Phillipson, drawing on Cicourel, would call ‘basic interpretative rules’(Phillipson 1972: 148), which the police employ when making practical decisions of this sort: the reasonableness of the offender's excuse (Ericson 1982: 147), and whether or not offenders display deference (Black 1970: 1101; Dix and Layzell 1983: 73; Sykes and Clark 1975).
This is what Smith and Vischer (1981) have in mind when they emphasize the ‘situational determinants’ of ‘street-level justice’.
These factors are also important to Easton's section police.
For example, it was noticeable how infringements were treated more leniently at times of ritual celebration, such as at Christmas, New Year, and on ‘11th Night’, when Protestants in working-class districts light bonfires on the eve of the Orange Order parades on 12 July.
Notions of ritual celebration can also be invoked to override the effect of a person's lack of respect towards the police.
When the motivation of younger constables leads to offences being treated seriously, older or more dominant constables often use the celebration as a reason for discretion, especially in relation to drink-related  offences.
For example, on 11th Night a vehicle was called to some youths at a bonfire near to a middle-class suburban area, and a young recruit was keen to act, but an older constable urged against it:
PC. 1.
Let them stay.
They're not doing any harm.
PC. 2.
You're going to end up going back up there, you know.
PC. 1.
If we move them on to the street, there'll be more trouble.
You're better off leaving them there, for Christ's sake.
It's the 11th Night.
PC. 2.
Aye, you try telling that to these people round here.
PC. 1.
What's wrong with these people?
Do they know about the 11th Night, New Year's Eve, and things like that?
(FN 11/7/87, p. 7)
The youths were not moved on.
This is an example of what Cain (1973) calls the ‘instructional attitude’ which senior constables adopt in relation to probationers, passing on not just a knowledge of law but of the situations in which to apply it.
However, the time of year is less important than the time of the shift.
Towards the shift's close, ordinary policemen and women are generally reluctant to become involved in work which requires them to extend their duty, unless they need the overtime money, in which case it is a spur.
The extra money earned from attending court on a day off can be attractive, but it is more often the case that reminders about the approaching end of the shift are given to those constables who suggest work which involves ‘going over’.
As a consequence, they dislike having to attend incidents at this time which are so serious that action cannot be avoided.
One of the most important variables which structures the operation of discretion is whether the offender shows ‘the right attitude’.
This is described as the factor which ‘means everything’ to the decision about whether or not to proceed.
So standardized is it that it is widely called ‘the attitude test’(a phrase also used by American police, see van Maanen 1978), and when stopping members of the public constables are routinely instructed by colleagues to give the potential offender ‘the attitude test’.
To pass it one has to be ‘dead on’: polite, deferential, and avoid the use of foul language.
One policeman from an area outside Easton once stated that he had ‘sort of fixed it’ for a lorry driver who had run over a lady's leg because ‘the lady wasn't very nice but the lorry driver was dead on’(FN 22/2/87, p. 1).
What the ‘fixing’ amounted to we can only guess.
However, there were occasional instances where the ‘right attitude’ was undercut by two other interpretative processes which  are crucial to the operation of discretion: the typifications used to classify the potential offender and the ‘reasonableness of the excuse’.
For example, a woman who over the phone sounded to one policeman as ‘dead on’ still had a complaint against her noisy dogs investigated because the complainant appeared to another policeman not to be ‘spinning a yarn’(FN 19/9/87, p. 29).
Similarly, having the wrong attitude is a constituent part of being a ‘gouger’, but there were a few situations when the subsequent application of the gouger typification late into the encounter undercut the effect of the politeness of the offender, and the deference displayed was less important than the knowledge that later led to the use of the typification.
The gouger typification is important to discretion in another way.
To know someone to be a gouger gives some policemen and women cause to believe that they have the excuse to ignore the minor requests for assistance that the person may make, and for his or her minor infringements of the law to be taken seriously.
As one policeman remarked after a gouger had been treated leniently by a judge, ‘Right, we'll get him for every wrong move he makes’(FN 9/3/87, p. 8).
More frequently, the decision to take no action over an individual's request for assistance is influenced by whether or not the individual acts in ways typical of a gouger, in part by showing the wrong attitude.
For example, one night a youth with distinct working-class dress and accent walked into the station:
PC. 1.
We called on you earlier tonight, didn't we?
MAN.
Aye, you did, but you see, there's this girl in my house and she won't leave and I'm asking you if you'll come down and shift her.
PC. 1.
You told us earlier that she was your girlfriend.
Now you want us to throw her out.
MAN.
Yes, that's correct.
Are you saying that you're refusing to do that?…
Could I have your number?
PC. 1.
Take yourself away off.
Have you been drinking?
Did you drive here?
MAN.No.
PC. 1.
You better not be driving.
MAN.
Are you refusing to come round and remove this girl?
PC. 1.
Didn't we call earlier and you told us she was your girlfriend?
MAN.
Could you give me your number there?
You're refusing to come round, is that right?
PC. 1.
Yes…
The door's that way.
PC. 2.
Don't you be getting into a car, now.
WPC.
Did you see her earlier?
PC. 1.
Aye, some wee slut.
PC. 2.
He's probably give her one and now he wants rid of her.
(FN 6/6/87, pp. 15–16)
The reasonableness of the individual's excuse is also important in structuring the operation of discretion.
There is considerable sympathy for members of the public who commit some minor infringement under circumstances which are considered justifiable and understandable.
This not only involves a mutual understanding of the common-sense notions in everyday life about what counts as an excuse, it requires that constables put themselves in the position of the offender to test whether they would have done the same.
Sympathy with the person involved is often mentioned as the reason for cautioning someone rather than charging them.
For example, emotional problems are often presented as justification for a person's drunkenness, especially if they are female, and on one occasion a youth who had been involved in an accident but who had only just passed his driving test was let off with a caution by a policewoman in sympathy for his inexperience.
Sensitive leniency is not the only principle operating, however, for constables also need to avoid being ‘taken for a ride’ by an unrealistic excuse which makes them look foolish.
For example, a car was stopped for speeding or ‘flying low’, and upon returning to the police vehicle the constable related the following considerations which influenced his assessment:
Wait till ya hear this one.
The guy says he was in a hurry to get home because he has to get up at six tomorrow morning because he's donating some of his bone marrow so that his sister can have a bone marrow transplant…
Like, I didn't know whether to believe him or not, but you'd feel wick if he wasn't spoofing, so I let him off with a caution.
D'ya think the City Hospital would do bone marrow transplant?
I'm going to check it out anyway and if he's lying I'm going to do him.
(FN 28/3/87, p. 14)
The constable did investigate the incident and proudly told colleagues later how his discretion and instinct had proved correct: the man was telling the truth.
Assessments of what is reasonable are therefore contextually specific to the incident and the people involved, the contents of the  excuse, and the particular constables concerned.
These assessments are what ethnomethodologists call ‘situationally justified action’, and they have a reflexive character, for the contextually justified nature of the person's action provides the situational justification for the conduct of the police (also see Smith and Vischer 1981).
Thus, for example, it was excusable for a pretty young girl to avoid wearing a seat-belt because she had been topping up her tan on the sun bed and got burnt, for two middle-class school children to ride their bikes without lights late at night because they were trying to stay up on their last might of the summer holidays, and for lads to urinate in the street because they had three miles to walk home.
Certain types of individual tend to get treated more leniently, such as part-time members of the security forces, firemen, and members of the Territorial Army, although pulling status does not always work.
It needs to be done subtly, for flashing a TA card or immediately mentioning membership of the police reserve, for example, incenses some regular police.
Other factors also seem relevant.
Their infringement should not be serious, and some considerations can undercut the status, such as managerial instructions warning against this form of discretion, or knowledge about past contact with the police.
At one time during field-work the traffic police became more unpopular than usual because they were under instruction not to let police colleagues off minor traffic violations.
Quite often all these sorts of considerations interact to influence the operation of discretion, as illustrated by the following incident, which concerned a road traffic accident (an RTA) towards the end of a shift.
A call came over the radio for us to go to a RTA.
PC. 1.
Yo, it's too late to be going to a accident.
It took us a good while to get to the location.
There was a group of four youths.
The car was bashed in [but]there were no injuries.
[PC. 1.]
was very sympathetic.
He turned to [name of another policeman].
PC. 1.
You couldn't really call this an accident, could ya.
PC. 2.
Na, no damage except to his vehicle.
[PC. 1.]
turned to the youth.
PC. 1.
Is this your car?
YOUTH.
No, my dad owns it.
[PC. 1.]
pursed his lips and shook his head sympathetically.
He then came  over to [a WPC]to tell her it wasn't really an accident.
He then explained to the youth,
PC. 1.
Technically speaking as long as nobody was hurt, no injuries, no damage to the other vehicle, this is not an accident.
The insurance should fix it, though.
[PC. 1.]
then went over to [the wpc]again.
He shrugged as he said,
PC. 1.
Because there's no damage to property here, there's no reason to act under the Road Traffic Act.
Technically this isn't an accident, so its not reportable.
WPC.
Yeh, you're right…
That's easy enough done on s narrow bend like that one.
I've nearly had an accident there myself rushing to get to work on earlies.
(FN 19/9/87, pp. 44–6)
The constables were keen to display to the field-worker that they knew the appropriate law to apply and that the law gave formal justification to their decisions, but there were a variety of other factors which facilitated this sensitive interpretation of the law.
It is clear from the conversation that there was sympathy for the person involved because it was easy for them to place themselves in that position, allowing the event to be normalized.
This made the accident appear reasonable, something which even they could have done.
This reasonableness was further reinforced by the absence of any hint of the person adopting ‘the wrong attitude’.
It was also close to the end of the shift and this legal reduction prevented them having to ‘go over’, as well as getting them out of considerable paperwork later, and road traffic accidents are particularly disliked because of the amount of paperwork they involve.
There was also no possibility of come-back from other parties: only one vehicle was involved, and the occupants could be satisfied because the insurance would take care of the damage.
As the saying goes in the sociology of policing, they had ‘covered their ass’.
Moreover, in terms of formal managerial rules, the incident could be shown to have been dealt with in terms of the letter of the law.
So the situationally justified actions of the constables had the same effect as the rules of the formal bureaucracy, although this outcome was reproduced in informal and symbolic ways (on the notion of bureaucracy as symbol see Jacobs 1969; for other examples of ethnomethodological and phenomenological accounts of organization and rule-following see Bittner 1965; Johnson 1972; Manning 1982; Zimmerman 1970, 1971).
CONCLUSION
The thrust of the last two chapters has been to demonstrate the ordinariness of policing in Easton.
Ordinariness is meant in several senses.
The research design was not intended to display how ordinary Easton's police are as people, although the topics about which they talk show a concern with the same mundane things as other people — family, sport and leisure, television, sex, work, overtime and the bosses, the in-laws, friends, the cost of living, holidays, pregnancies, the house and DIY, politics, and so on.
But their ordinariness as policemen and women is indisputable.
The previous arguments have pointed to two ways in which policing in Easton is ordinary.
Police duties in Easton are similar to those in non-divided societies, and the manner in which these tasks are viewed and accomplished parallels that elsewhere.
The routineness of police work in Easton is thus reinforced by the interpretative processes and practical reasoning that Easton's police share with policemen and women in other societies when doing routine police work.
However, these claims suggest a third way in which policing in Easton is ordinary.
It is clear from the nature of police work in the district that the relations the police have with the public in this largely Protestant area parallel those that police forces have in societies where religion is not a social marker.
There are the honest and decent people of Easton, and then the ‘gougers’, ‘mouths’, and other trouble-makers, with whom the police have as problematic a relationship as do all police forces with miscreants.
The social divisions within Northern Ireland society have little direct effect on the nature of crime in Easton, which influences the nature of routine police work in the area, enabling the police to pursue Easton's crime and criminals without recourse to religion.
These social divisions have other effects, as we shall emphasize later, but they have very little influence on the duties which comprise routine police work, so that routine policing is largely unaffected by religion.
Hence the attitudes that section police have towards Easton's ‘gougers’, virtually all of whom are Protestant, are typical of those that policemen and women everywhere have towards criminals.
The reverse equally applies, for the remarks which some of Easton's Protestant residents express about the police reveal attitudes towards them which are typical of many working-class groups in urban areas in non-divided societies.
They are frequently  referred to as ‘black bastards’, or some variant thereof, by young Protestant children.
As one policeman complained,
See, the other week there, I was on beat duty and this wee nipper, couldn't have been more than 6 or 7, came round the corner and says to me, ‘Fuck off, ya black bastard.’
Like, a kid of that age.
Next thing his sister, about 13 or so, came round.
I says to her what he [her brother]said, and you know what she said?
‘So what, nothing wrong with that, that's what ya are, isn't it?’
Like, what do you do?
I remember when I was a kid, you daren't say ‘boo’ to a peeler.
See, kids nowadays.
(FN 30/3/87, p. 17)
Like policemen and women everywhere Easton's section police bemoan the deterioration in the attitude to authority shown by some youngsters.
Referring to his upbringing in the Protestant Shankill area, another said, ‘I remember when I was a kid, if you seen a policeman you'd run, nowadays kids are more likely to tell you to fuck off’(FN 23/10/87, p. 18).
Reflecting considerable animosity toward the police, a 12-year-old once attacked one of Easton's policewomen with a chair.
It is not just children who have this animosity.
Some adults use very foul language to describe the police.
On one occasion during field-work a father who needed to be present while his young son was being questioned at the station instructed his child to ‘Tell these f'ing black bastards nothin'’, and when told that that was a lovely way to bring up his son replied, ‘Aye, and I'll keep bringing him up that way’(FN 11/7/87, p. 9).
Whatever attitudes Protestants in Easton might have towards the police because of Northern Ireland's social and political divisions, these are undercut by the police's pursuit of crime and its perpetrators, so that some Protestant in Easton encounter the police in situations which encourage negative views as a result of the ordinary criminal activity they engage in.
The police are aware of how problematic their relationship is with certain sections of Easton's population, irrespective of religion.
Thus, offenders who invoke their Protestant religion as a means of justifying some action get short shrift, although we came across only one instance where this was done.
A man gave the police a two-fingered gesture and upon being stopped exclaimed, ‘I'm a Prod, I'm on your side.’
He received an official caution, being described as ‘your typical gouger’(FN 26/5/87, p. 2).
Because these negative views are rooted in the ordinary nature of crime in Easton, they pre-date the deterioration in the relationship  between Protestants and the RUC following the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
Upon being asked about this, one policeman explained, ‘To tell you the truth I didn't notice much of a difference.
Like, this estate here, the people here have always been hostile towards the police as long as I can remember.
Its always been the same’(FN 30/11/87, p. 16).
Hence, the folk model of policing in Northern Ireland, which reduces policing to the political containment of Catholics, does not apply in Easton.
Because of this, community policing is an important part of the work of Easton's police, and the next chapter focuses on this mode of routine policing.
Community and Neighbourhood Policing
INTRODUCTION
Community policing was once the normal form of policing in the United Kingdom, but the increasingly bureaucratic and professional nature of policing unintentionally yet progressively separated the police from the community, leading to more anonymous and impersonal contacts between them (see Ericson 1982: 24).
A study of crime in London's inner cities in the 1980s painted a gloomy picture of how ‘ordinary policing’, as it was termed, was fast diminishing, with the police becoming alienated and marginalized from the community and increasingly reliant on high-profile strategies of crime control which destroyed the principle of consensus policing (Kinsey et al .
1986).
It is in this general climate that community policing has been reintroduced in recent years in many forces in Great Britain with the expressed intention of improving both crime prevention and relations between the police and the community (cf. Gordon 1987).
It is also now widely practised in Sweden (see Knutsson and Partanen 1986), Camada, New Zealand, and the United States of America (Trojanowicz and Harden 1985).
In the United States there is an extensive research programme on neighbourhood policing based at the University of Michigan, and considerable interest is shown by the federal and central governments.
Trojanowicz, Director of the National Neighbourhood Foot Patrol Centre in Michigan, is so enthusiastic that he has claimed that community policing can help in the policing of international terrorism (Trojamowicz 1988).
Community policing is a preventive rather than a crime control made of policing and in the United Kingdom it has become associated in the popular image particularly with those inner-city areas where crime rates have risen sharply and where police relations with  ethnic minorities have deteriorated, although it is also a response to the police's loss of contact with other sections of the community, especially young people (Schaffer 1980).
Similar experiences motivated its reintroduction in the United States (Trojanowicz et al .
1987: 30).
The interest which this shift in police policy provoked was considerable.
The Policy Studies Institute devoted a volume in their study of London's police to area police officers (1983b), and in 1981 the Home Office began a research initiative on beat policemen (for some of the results see Brown and Iles 1985; Grimshaw and Jefferson 1987; Morris and Heal 1981).
In addition, the ESRC has funded studies of liaison committees established upon a recommendation from the Scarman Report into the Brixton disturbances as forums for consultation between the police and representatives of the local community, and also funded Fielding's study of community policing in South London.
John Alderson made a case for the reintroduction of community policing in 1982 (Alderson 1982, also see 1979), but its advantages were recognized much earlier when the House of Commons Select Committee on Race Relations examined relations between the police and ethnic minorities in 1972, and in 1976 a report from the National Police College placed a central emphasis upon it (Pope 1976).
But, as Weatheritt noted, amid all this, there is considerable confusion over what analysts mean by the concept ‘community policing’(Weatheritt 1983; also see Hartmann et al .
1988; Trojamowicz and Moore 1988).
It has been loosely referred to as any mode of policing other than the rapid-response crime control type; an alternative which specifically seeks to make constables part of the community by making them responsible for a geographical area, known as ‘permanent’ or ‘home’beats; a means of developing communication between the police and the local community; and a process by which responsibility for crime control and prevention is shared with the community, both also known as ‘community relations’(Weatheritt 1983: 4–5).
We take community policing to be a style which emphasizes the development of good relations between police and community, normally via active police involvement in, and contact with, the local community, and by deploying manpower in such a way that officers patrol a ‘beat’ on foot in order to build up familiarity with the local area.
In the RUC the former is known as community relations and the latter neighbourhood policing  although in many other forces both go under the rubric of community policing.
The societal divisions and problems of relations between the police and the community which this style of policing is called upon to ameliorate in Northern Ireland are more severe than is normally the case, which makes the RUC's implementation and operation of community policing of special interest and previous neglect of this aspect of policing in the province a significant oversight.
In the context of the folk model of policing in Northern Ireland, the RUC's commitment to, and implementation of, community policing becomes an important test of the reality lying behind the commonsense image.
In fact, so committed is RUC management to the principle of community policing that, in addition to specialist units, the new code of professional ethics specifies that it is the duty of all policemen and women to understand ‘those particular community needs and problems which can cause concern and friction’, and be sensitive to ‘the various public viewpoints, including historical and cultural backgrounds’.
The code states that the RUC
must be responsive to the needs and problems of the community it serves.
Good relations with the community are one of the most important prerequisites to the successful discharge of a policeman's duty and it is incumbent upon all members to avail of every opportunity to help reconcile and heal the visions in the community.
Read in this way, community policing in Northern Ireland seems designed exclusively to improve relations between the police and Catholics, but it is much wider than this for it is also employed in Protestant t areas like Easton, where the existence of ‘ordinary crime’ ensures that the police are keen to improve crime prevention by better relations with the public generally.
This latter intent is evidenced by the number of constables responsible for crime control in Protestant areas who see their role as also having social-welfare and community service dimensions, as illustrated in the last chapter, and, more significantly, by the fact that there are units in Easton specifically responsible for community policing in this largely Protestant district.
In Northern Ireland's divided society therefore, community policing has both a specific and a general meaning, for in one sense it focuses narrowly on overcoming Catholic hostility to the police, while in another the ‘community’ which is addressed is defined more broadly to encompass all residents in the province, although often these two aspects intermingle.
However, previous studies in the sociology of policing stress that, irrespective of the management's goals in introducing some innovation, there is often a disjuncture between official organizational policy and its implementation by ordinary constables.
For example, Manning (1977) showed how policemen and women in the ranks have an ability to bypass or undermine innovations introduced by police managers, some even doing so while appearing to endorse the policy change (Chatterton 1979).
Holdaway (1977) documented the difficulties police managers in Hilton had in overcoming wellaccepted practices in order to introduce more professional police practice in the form of unit beat policing.
While advocates of community policing express confidence in its ability to effect improvements (Alderson 1979, 1982; Scarman 1981), research contradicts this by pointing to resistance from those constables who are responsible for it or to organizational constraints (Fielding et al .
1988; Grimshaw and Jefferson 1987; Trojanowicz and Harden 1985), although there are a number of other studies which emphasize its success in overcoming public hostility to the police (Brown and Iles 1985; McKane 1980; cf. Cumberbatch 1983, Taylor-Griffiths 1988).
Nor is the idea of community policing popular amongst ordinary constables in other sections of the police, often because it contradicts their views of what constitutes ‘real’ police work, but also because they have misguided notions about what community policing is, as well as a practical awareness of the unrealistic expectations held of it by enthusiasts.
In the RUC, for example, a group of policemen and women taking a police studies degree were asked their opinions on community policing, and the following remarks are typical:
What gets me about this guy Alderson is that he served in the country area of Cornwall, and he makes all these proposals about inner-city policing; now how the hell would he know anything about the inner city?
All this community policing stuff is all very well, but has it worked?
I don't think these guys know what they're talking about.
I've been involved in community projects and I can say I enjoy going into schools, but at the end of the day there will always need to be the regulated type of policing of crime and violence.
You talking about going out on the streets, it doesn't get them anywhere half the time.
If you go into a youth club, they don't want you.
Although you may be at some bar or club with the community interest at heart, people don't look at you like that.
People think you could be there waiting to arrest them for drinking and driving in the car park.
(FN 20/11/86, pp. 1–3)
This chapter is intended to illustrate the operation of community policing in Easton, and in the process to assess the commitment given it by the ordinary policemen and women who carry it out, looking separately at the units responsible for community relations and neighbourhood policing.
Some comparisons will then be made with community policing in West Belfast.
SOME ORGANIZATIONAL ASPECTS OF COMMUNITY POLICING IN EASTON
One of the problems Brown and Iles discovered in their study of community constables (what, in the RUC, would be called neighbourhood constables), which was based on 300 officers in five police forces in England, was the relatively small proportion of working time devoted to activities the primary purpose of which was improvement in relations between the police and the public through direct involvement of constables in the community (Brown and Iles 1985: 29).
Only 14 per cent of their time was directed to ‘community relations’, the bulk of which amounted to ‘informal contacts’ with members of the public (p. 19).
General administrative duties and time withdrawn from the beat together accounted for over half of the working day (p. 17).
In another study, however, the time given to ‘community contact’ by community constables in one area each of Surrey and inner London was estimated at 45 per cent, compared to 4 per cent for regular officers, although even here more time was devoted to dealing with offences than community relations (Fielding et al .
1988).
Crime prevention and control therefore assumed greater importance for community constables than contact with the local community.
In the RUC these two aspects of community policing are separated operationally and administratively.
Hence neighbourhood police cam deal with offences and develop a familiarity with their local area, knowing that the formal aspects of community relations, such as involvement with youth clubs, schools, and community groups, is being shared with people whose special responsibility this is.
Nor does the RUC consider these aspects of community policing to be scarce resources, thus there is no restriction on their deployment to those limited number of areas where there are particular problems, as often happens in Great Britain (Brown and Iles 1985: 10).
The RUC also affords community and neighbourhood policemen and women the optimal organizational conditions necessary for effective policing, identified by Fielding et al .
(1988) as autonomy in such things as decision-making, the formulation of priorities and office accommodation, separate low-level officers, and managerial support.
Thus the Community Relations and Neighbourhood Units in Easton each have their own offices and their own sergeants (but not inspector), are free from the obligation of responding to logged calls from central control, and can decide for themselves their priorities and programmes.
There is a chief superintendent in RUC Headquarters whose sole responsibility is community relations, and no complaints were made about the level of managerial support given them by Easton's senior officers, something unusual for ordinary policemen and women in the RUC, and particularly so compared to community policing sections in other forces (Grimshaw and Jefferson 1987).
EASTON'S COMMUNITY RELATIONS UNIT
Community relations in Easton is divided into two parts.
There are the more restricted duties of juvenile liaison, which deals with young offenders and their families, and the general community relations work amongst juveniles and community groups connected with the young, such as schools and youth clubs (with the exception of the ubiquitous Christmas party for old folks).
It is therefore orientated towards the young and is not intended to provide adults with channels of communication with the police or forums for joint consultation.
This conditions how those responsible for community relations in Easton perceive its primary purposes and the time-scales they operate within.
Short-term benefits derive from crime prevention amongst the young and an improvement in their perception of the police, which it is hoped will have residual effects in the long term when they are adults, but the wider community in Easton is only addressed secondarily as parents or guardians, which limits the short-term effects the programme might have on improving its perception of the police.
Much of the criticism community relations attracts, especially from colleagues in the police, derives from a misunderstanding of these goals and time-scales and a consequent  failure to see that even its practitioners have clearly circumscribed expectations.
One of the traditional areas reserved for policewomen is work with juvenile and female offenders (Jones 1987; Southgate 1980), and juvenile liaison police in Easton are female, although other community relations police are male.
Two policemen are responsible for community relations and two policewomen for juvenile liaison, one each of whom is a sergeant.
The juvenile liaison policewomen, however, also carry out general community relations work, although the reverse is not the case, maintaining young offenders as a policewoman's preserve.
The fact that some policewomen carry out both sets of duties allows them to contrast the two types of community relations, with general community relations work being seen as ‘fun’ and juvenile liaison as more demanding and difficult.
This is a dichotomy which other police in Easton recognize, for a senior officer, with an obvious orientation towards crime control, once described the work with young offenders as ‘the real community work’(FN 10/2/87, p. 11).
However, ‘fun’ does not translate for the community relations policemen as something opposite to work: the ‘fun’is taken as a serious job of work.
As one explained in a conversation with the field-worker;
PC. 1.
I was talking to the boys [members of the RUC]and one says to me, ‘When do you start work, later on?’
I says, ‘No, I'm on duty now.’
Its funny you know, sometimes when I'm out at schools the kids will come up to me and say, ‘Do you have to go to work now?’
I say, ‘This is work.’
RESEARCHER.
Yes, it really is a pleasant job.
PC. 1.
Aye, but it's not very popular within the police, would you believe it?
RESEARCHER.
I suppose a lot of people think that's not what they joined the police for.
PC. 1.
Oh, but it is, that is what they joined the police for, to serve the community.
You see, all policemen have a community relations role.
Our job, of course, is a specialist one.
(FN 11/7/87, p. 2)
It would have been more accurate to say that all policemen and women ‘should have’ such a role, for unfortunately many do not (see Trojanowicz and Pollard 1986).
It was an attitude like this which made the individual transfer to community relations in the first place, as all those in Easton's Community Relations Unit did, one even from the Traffic Branch.
This self-selection process ensures that the Community Relations Branch  attracts people with enthusiasm and the necessary personal qualities which make them enjoy work with youngsters, and not one member of the Community Relations Branch we encountered in Easton and elsewhere expressed anything other than pleasure and enjoyment from working with youngsters.
Such enthusiasm makes them appear eccentric compared to policemen and women on the sections.
The marginality they experience within the force might lead them to exaggerate their job satisfaction, but this cuts both ways, for the unpopularity of community relations among many ordinary members of the RUC guarantees it will not appeal to any but the committed, and section duties already afford the work-shy many opportunities to hide.
Observed in operation on visits to schools, Easton's community relations police were quickly able to establish a rapport with the children and revelled in the joking and informal banter, although Easton is fortunate in having very experienced constables with long service in community relations, which is vital because a three-week course hardly qualifies as sufficient training.
The range of community relations programmes is impressively wide and is a further demonstration of imaginative commitment on the part of community relations police.
Annual holiday camps are held for boys and girls from poorer families who otherwise would not get away, with costs paid by the RUC; these are so popular that parents ring requesting that their children be allowed to go again.
Usually these are children from one-parent families, children in local-authority care, or youngsters who need a respite from the household chores they assume as surrogate adults because their parents are ill, and even, in some cases, children with a parent in prison, and are selected for inclusion in the scheme not by the police but by schools and other caring agencies.
Work is also done among the handicapped, and special camps are sometimes held for handicapped children.
The holiday camps are held separately for the different sexes, mirroring the gender segregation that occurs in the majority of Northern Ireland's schools, but another form of segregation in schooling which is not reproduced is that of religion, for the few Catholic schools that exist in the Easton area nominate participants.
This gives the scheme the additional bonus of crossing, no matter how fleetingly, the sectarian divide, so that the broad and narrow notions of community relations within the RUC coincide.
The same is time for visits to schools and for the school quiz, where Catholic  schools are always paired on the same side as Protestant ones in order to facilitate, again momentarily, some intercommunal co-operation.
The few Catholic schools in the area frequently draw on the services offered by Easton's Community Relations Branch, as do most of the Protestant secondary schools.
Which schools the police visit depends entirely upon the head teachers, and little work is done with grammar schools.
This reflects the view of head teachers that what the police have to offer does not apply to their children rather than any unwillingness among the police to deal with middle-class children, or, even more preposterously, a belief that grammar school children present no problems in terms of juvenile crime.
The services on offer from the Community Relations Branch include the ‘blue lamp disco’, a title evocative of George Dixon and consensus policing; the organization of disco-dancing competitions and football tournaments with children from other police divisions in Belfast; nature rambles; access to outward-bound centres, some in Great Britain, the cost of attendance being borne by the RUC; swimming lessons, including swimming for visually handicapped children; and the provision in schools of classes on first aid, safety, and law, and of other general campaigns aimed at children, like the ‘Say No To Strangers’ campaign.
These are taken very seriously by the community relations police, with children being required to write projects and do homework.
Considerable indignation was expressed by one constable when recalling an incident at which a colleague was assigned by a headmaster to merely the non-examination classes, feeling that their work in schools should not be marginalized in this way.
Community relations in Easton thus amounts to a programme of youth work, but juvenile liaison is altogether different, for it is basically probation work.
It involves visits to the homes of children who are either convicted offenders, children at special risk, or who have recently been involved in trouble and have come to the attention of the police.
In the latter case the policewoman has to write a report on the child for the superintendent to determine whether or not prosecution should follow.
But the overall commitment in community relations to crime prevention means that the main intention is to resolve problems to prevent further incidents and keep youngsters from court.
As one explained, ‘Well, what we try to do is basically to stop young people from getting into trouble, or prevent them, in other words we keep them out of court.
Well, that's what  we try to do, but you know you will get the perpetual troublemakers’(FN 8/7/87, p. 9).
So, characteristic of the ‘style’ of community policing generally (see Fielding et al .
1988), the emphasis is placed upon defusing and resolving situations and avoiding arrest.
The preference is to end with an official caution or the less serious warning, but this depends upon ‘whether it is a first-time offender; the seriousness of the crime involved; the attitudes of both parents and juvenile; has reparation been made?
If a theft was involved were the goods given back?
Did the juvenile apologize?
And so on.
All this is taken into account’(FN 9/2/87, p. 7).
Thus the operation of discretion by juvenile liaison officers is structured by much the same variables as with the section police: ‘It all depends upon their attitude.’
Mostly it is successful in its aim, for the juvenile liaison police estimate that very few youngsters reappear before them.
But there are what they refer to as the ‘problem families’.
Again, they operate with similar typifications of who constitute the troublesome clients, based partly on experience but also heavily influenced by stereotypes of the educationally subnormal, one-parent families, families in whom historically crime runs, and so on.
As Furlong noted with respect to teachers (1977: 163), their typifications of problem pupils were also heavily conditioned by specialist sociological knowledge (‘from socially deprived families’) or common-sense notions of psychoanalysis (‘never had a father’).
These stereotypes can become deployed to explain persistent offending among the young even when there is little evidence that they are appropriate.
Backgrounds can therefore be reconstructed for the ‘problem child’ in which their persistent offending becomes understandable.
The following is an extract from the field notes where the field-worker describes a conversation in which a juvenile liaison officer is explaining who typically is encountered in her work:
RESEARCHER.
Do you find that it is a particular type of child who tends to come up in front of you?
WPC.
Oh no.
All across the board, we get kids from every walk of life.
However, later on in the conversation she said they very rarely encountered juvenile offenders from grammar school, most would be educationally subnormal or at least well below average.
Citing the case of one of the juveniles whom I had encountered the previous week:
WPC.
See, that family, big thick file.
He's been in trouble since he was six, and his older brother, he's ESN too, he's worse.
RESEARCHER.
Have their parents got any sort of criminal record?
WPC.
I don't know, now the mother…
[The WPC]didn't commit herself, but added,
WPC.
I wouldn't be surprised about the mother.
See, this little fella here [points to another file]comes from a one-parent family.
Once he reached adolescence, just couldn't control him.
He's been at glue-sniffing, underage drinking.
He is s problem child.
(FN 9/2/87, p. 8)
Indeed, these stereotypes can be used to render obvious to outsiders the motivation and blame for particular incidents.
Referring to a case where grammar school children got drunk one night and began damaging cars and property, one of the juvenile liaison police said, ‘It was the old drink, like, that did it, but there was one from a local children's home.
He was the instigator.
I don't know how these boys got in with him but it was him who put them up to all this.
Anyway, the parents had to pay up’(FN 9/2/87, p. 11).
Therefore, despite their separation from the section police in terms of office accommodation, duties, and self-conceptions of marginality, the interpretative processes that juvenile liaison use to accomplish their routine policing parallel the typifications and stereotypes common in the occupational culture of Easton station and among police forces in America and Great Britain.
NEIGHBOURHOOD POLICING IN EASTON
The RUC's positive commitment to returning policemen and women to the streets in order to overcome their distance from the community is revealed in three ways in Easton.
Occasionally, when manpower allows, men from the sections are assigned to beat duty and can walk anywhere within the Easton district in order to show a presence and look for minor crime.
Part-time reserve policemen and women also patrol the Easton area on foot, with no particular intention other than, as one policewoman described, ‘being seen on the streets…usually we just walk around’(FN 7/9/87, p. 23).
With full-time day employment in an office, this part-time female reservist actually enjoyed outdoor beat work compared to those occasions when she did guard duty in the station.
Although the reservists come under the authority of the neighbourhood police sergeant, both forms of beat work involve little active community policing, save that which their presence alone ensures, and both require constables to respond to logged calls from central control when necessary.
The  main contribution to community policing comes in the form of the Neighbourhood Police Unit.
There are nine neighbourhood police in Easton, with their own sergeant, and they operate as two shifts.
Following the pattern of community constables in England, where the overwhelming majority are male (Brown and Iles 1985: 9), there are no females among Easton's neighbourhood constables, although for a short period the sergeant was female.
The shift times are designed to place policemen on the streets at times when they will encounter the maximum number of members of the public, even though this public thus tends to comprise shoppers and tradespeople.
With no might duty neighbourhood police usually avoid loitering youths, drunks, and other might people, something which at least one complained about, leaving these categories to the section or reserve police who possess in less proportion the skills required for effective community policing.
Each of these constables has his own separate patch, so that Easton's built-up areas are divided into nine beats.
The intention is for the policeman concerned to develop a local knowledge of his area, to show a presence and develop friendly and informal contact with members of the public, although one was adamant that his role remained primarily one of crime detection rather than prevention, this being the responsibility of community relations.
This view was not widely held, nor does it accord with the observational data on the men's practice while doing beat duty.
The neighbourhood police also provide extra manpower for the Community Relations Unit at special events in youth clubs or at camps.
One of the reasons why it might have been felt necessary in the field-worker's presence to define the neighbourhood role as primarily crime control is because, like community relations, the Neighbourhood Unit is aware that the section police see them as having an easy duty.
Neighbourhood men are often the butt of jokes among section police about their laziness, because what the neighbourhood police do does not seem to them like work, and certainly not ‘real’ police work.
Towards the end of field-work a constable newly transferred to the Neighbourhood Unit from one of the sections expressed his difficulties in adjusting to the new round of duties, stating that it was more difficult to pass the time because nothing seemed to happen (FN 17/12/87, p. 16): establishing informal contact with the public was not yet itself seen as doing police work and boredom was unappealing.
In contrast, by  accompanying experienced officers on their beat we saw how seriously they took neighbourhood policing and the range of duties which it comprised: job satisfaction is high among neighbourhood policemen (Trojamowicz and Banas 1985).
Neighbourhood police are supposed to spend as much time as possible per shift walking their beat, even taking tea-breaks at some appropriate place on the round, returning to the station only for their main meal break and when a criminal, such as a shoplifter, is apprehended, although this is rare.
There is the inevitable paperwork, but this is much less than for section police although, given the antipathy to paperwork in all police forces, it is surprising how the neighbourhood men welcome it on cold, wintry mornings.
Other stalling techniques are also deployed to detain them in the station on such days (prolonging station business, extended conversations in parts of the station where they are less visible to management, carrying messages, and so on).
But, as a general principle, Northern Ireland's social divisions ensure that police management prefer neighbourhood police to be on the street, as is their purpose, and in practice about three-quarters of the normal shift is taken up with beat duty, which is much higher than in Great Britain.
But there is a reverse to this, for wider security concerns require that neighbourhood men accomplish community policing equipped with at least a side-arm, sometimes more, flak jacket and baton, as well as personal radio.
For some calls they wear plain clothes, but mostly work is done in uniform, as it must be if neighbourhood policing is to work.
Moreover, each patch has to be walked by two men: one providing cover for the other while he polices his beat, so that each spends only half of the shift on their particular area.
While doing this the men are supposed to be separated by some distance in order to be able to call for radio assistance and to allow fire to be returned should one of them be attacked, and for the constable whose patch it is to become solely identified as the area's neighbourhood policeman.
However, where they feel safe from the management's glare and there is a low risk of being attacked, the men often walk the beat together, although this risk ensures they never call at premises together.
Towards the end of field-work, after a neighbourhood policeman had been murdered in another area, which up until then had been considered ‘soft’, with no threat from terrorists, Easton's neighbourhood men began going out in threes, with two men providing cover, so that only a third of beat time was devoted to each neighbourhood  patch.
The observational data was collected at a time when the men went in pairs, but they expressed concern over how this latest development worked against effective community policing:
You never get talking to people, it's ridiculous.
If you go around in threes it's useless.
You never spend enough time on your own patch to get to know anyone.
And, like, one policeman going into a shop, you've a bit of a chace that on your own people will talk to you.
Two policemen, you've even less chance, but three…
(FN 16/11/87, p. 2)
This is indicative of how the development of local knowledge is seen by the neighbourhood men as a key measure of their competence and effectiveness, as it was with the section police.
As another said, ‘Being a neighbourhood man, you get to know all the people in the area to chat to them, and they know you to talk to and that’(FN 28/4/87 p. 5).
Asked whether they feel they have developed this, all reply in the affirmative, so in order to evaluate neighbourhood policing in Easton it is necessary to consider observational data to assess how true this appears from their practice.
The busy periods for the neighbourhood unit reflect those of all policing — Thursdays to Saturdays — and accompanying them on beat duty on these days further illustrates the range of duties which comprise neighbourhood policing and some of the factors which structure it.
DOING BEAT DUTY
It is up to the discretion of the neighbourhood policemen whether or not they respond to incidents reported over the personal radio, although major occurrences such as bomb alerts and fights, tend to attract them, as well as incidents that are nearby.
There is also a formal element of crime detection, although in the normal course of events all they encounter is shoplifting and parking offences.
In order to deal with the latter, all carry with them a book of fixedpenalty tickets.
One neighbourhood policeman was known among colleagues (and some members of the public) for his proclivity for dispensing parking tickets.
This was something about which he was continually teased, as a means of exerting informal pressure on him to desist.
This was not always successful because of the autonomy neighbourhood police have while on the beat, and he told us, with some regret, that as a final resort he was instructed by the sergeant  not to take his book of fixed-penalty tickets with him when he was accompanied by the field-worker.
There is no insistence from management that a certain proportion of tickets be given every shift, so his behaviour was more a result of the way that he defined the role of neighbourhood policemen as having crime control responsibilities.
From observing the conduct of others on their beat, this appears not to be the majority view.
Most neighbourhood police place the emphasis upon community service and informal contact, giving out few parking tickets: developing friendly relations with the local residents is their greatest priority.
There are two sorts of contact with the public, and how those neighbourhood police who see themselves as having a service role attempt to engender friendly and informal relations depends upon the type of contact.
The first type is casual encounters along the beat, so that neighbourhood police pass friendly comments with whoever they happen to meet, such as people working in front gardens, the unemployed, customers in shops, old folks trying to cross busy roads, mothers with young children in push-chairs and prams, young children being especially appealing to the older family men who seem to predominate in the Neighbourhood Unit, only one of whom is not married.
They also feel obligated to deal as effectively as possible with whatever problems these casual encounters throw up, such as people asking advice about a summons or other aspects of the law, or about some official form which they are having difficulty in completing, how to get rid of obstructions on the pavement outside their house, or traffic obstructions.
There are also conspired encounters, where the neighbourhood police make a special point of visiting certain people, such as shopkeepers, and especially those new to the area, security guards in shopping centres, pensioners, especially those without the security of living in old-people's homes, youngsters in children's homes, and RUC widows in the vicinity.
This type of contact requires local knowledge and that the neighbourhood policeman take an interest in people in his area.
Witness the following extract from the field notes:
Turning down a street off [place],[neighbourhood policeman's name]decided to call on another Old Age Pensioner.
Approaching the door he said to [name of another neighbourhood policeman], who was about to knack,
PC. 1.
No, she's not up yet.
PC. 2.
How do you know that?
PC. 1.
'Cos once she's up she opens the porch door and leaves it open.
Sometimes she'll lie in until the afternoon.
Like, she's old, don't knock.
(FN 28/4/1987, p. 22)
Some of these contacts are conspired in order to facilitate crime prevention, this being particularly evident in visiting young offenders in local authority homes or shopping centres to ward off shoplifters.
These conspired contacts also provide excellent ‘mump holes’(see Cain 1973: 37; Holdaway 1983: 43) or ‘brew houses’ in the men's own terms, where it is possible to take a tea-break, have a relaxing chat, hang about on a cold day, or simply ‘ease’in other ways.
Visiting them at Christmas was particularly rewarding for the field-worker in order to see conspired contacts demonstrate the regard in which they held the neighbourhood police; of course, it was equally rewarding for the police.
But this type of contact also demonstrates that the neighbourhood police see themselves as having a welfare function.
For example, they call on the widows of policemen to check that the RUC Welfare Branch has visited, as well as trying themselves in more informal ways to help the grieving process, check that pensioners who are alone are safe, as well as take an interest in the youngsters new to children's homes.
This sympathetic, welfare-orientated role was illustrated well when the fieldworker accompanied two neighbourhood men to a local children's home.
The field notes describe the encounter thus:
A little boy appeared in the doorway.
The neighbourhood policeman attempted to speak to him but the child ran away.
PC. 1.
He's new, haven't seen him before.
ATTENDANT.
He only came in last week.
PC. 1.
What age is he?…
God, he's big for three.
ATTENDANT.
He's in here with his sister and another brother.
They were sexually abused.
PC. 2.
How could anyone abuse a wee child like that, I ask you.
PC. 1.
Isn't that terrible.
Subsequently a little girl appeared in the doorway with the little boy.
She spoke to [the neighbourhood policeman].
GIRL.
Who are you?
PC. 1.
We're your friends.
GIRL.
No you're not.
You're not our friends.
PC. 1.
Yes we are, we come here and play games and watch TV and all.
What's your favourite TV programme?
The little girl answered and the conversation flowed between them for a while; the little boy didn't say anything.
Eventually the girl opened up and was very chatty, laughing at [the neighbourhood policeman]'s voice, as he was a comical sort, making his hat wobble on his head.
We were just about to leave when [the girl]called to [the neighbourhood policemen].
GIRL.
You came to my house to see my Daddy, didn't you?
I remember.
We left shortly after this.
I mentioned to [the neighbourhood policeman]what [the girl]had said, who obviously associated them with the police who arrested her father.
PC. 1.
Aye, when she said that, I thought it was best to get off the subject.
Like, I'm sure that child's seen enough policemen in the past few weeks, you don't know what goes through kids' minds.
(FN 28/4/87, pp. 15–16)
The abrupt ending of the contact, therefore, seems to have reflected the policeman's sensitivity to the girl's feelings and a general sympathy towards her welfare, even though beforehand he had very competently overcome her initial resistance by showing a warm and friendly disposition.
The style of policing exemplified by this extract derives not only from the personal qualities of the people in the Neighbourhood Unit but also from the whole organizational climate in which they work.
It is the management's commitment to the principle of neighbourhood policing which affords Easton's unit the autonomy and time to devote themselves to work other than crime control.
Being free from the constraint of responding to logged calls and from the need to react quickly to one call after another gives the neighbourhood police the opportunity to engage in prolonged contact with the public.
In this way, the organizational climate interacts with the men's personal qualities to predispose the majority of them to define their role as one of community service.
But at the same time this form of contact can seem to other policemen and women as skiving, as even one member of the public described it to the field-worker (FN 17/12/87), p. 6), although such a caricature obscures the fact that the contact often has a more meaningful purpose.
Therefore ‘easing’, which is normally presented as the opposite to work, can for the neighbourhood men (and also the community relations police) be construed as  official police work, and quite often much of the best community work is done by neighbourhood men when they seem to be relaxing.
In this context ‘easing’ has to be seen as a means to accomplishing routine community police work, not as an alternative to it.
This autonomy is jealously defended by neighbourhood policemen in Easton, who see it as an essential part of their job, as one was ruefully reminded after being transferred to the Traffic Branch.
‘You were more your own boss in neighbourhood.
As a motor-cyclist you have to do all the jobs for everyone, deliver this, pick up that.’
And holding up his pad of fixed-penalty tickets he went on, ‘You're also under pressure to give out a certain amount of these things’(FN 17/12/87, p. 25).
The accompaniment to this autonomy is discretion.
As we saw in the last chapter, the operation of discretion by the police is a particular fascination in the sociology of policing, but discretion is often viewed narrowly in terms of law: whether the police apply or omit the letter of the law.
But it is also a more general process describing the interactive skills of policemen and women: the knowledge of when and in what situations it is appropriate to show sympathy, tolerance, and understanding rather than aggression and force.
It is not just because of their greater autonomy that discretion in both senses is very important to neighbourhood police.
Their responsibility for improving relations between police and public makes them sensitive to the disastrous effect that wrongly exercised discretion can have on the public's perception of the RUC.
Therefore, another essential quality in effective neighbourhood policing is using experienced officers who have familiarity on the beat.
As one described it, neighbourhood policing requires constables who know that ‘All you learn in the classroom is what your powers are’, and that ‘You don't learn about the real facts of police work until you're out actually doing it’, and that you cannot afford to be ‘heavy-handed’.
The following is an extract of conversation in which an experienced neighbourhood constable is talking while out on his beat about discretion, in which its exercise is linked to both the development of local knowledge and the possession of interactive skills:
RESEARCHER.
You know all the people?
PC. 1.
You'd nearly know them all in your particular patch.
RESEARCHER.
I suppose you'd know the trouble-makers as well?
PC. 1.
Aye, you do that, you get to know the trouble-makers and especially  how to deal with them…
Policing differs from town to town, from country to country.
When you're a policeman, if something comes up you deal with it yourself.
Like, if you came across some boys drinking in that driveway [pointing to a small car park], like, first of all you'd just say, ‘Come on boys, you'll have to move on, built-up area and all that.’
And, like, most of them will move on and that's the end of it, but, like, you can get the real bad ones.
RESEARCHER.
And how do you deal with them?
PC. 1.
Well, they're the ones who give you the backchat.
They give you any backchat, you take them in.
The thing about being a neighbourhood policeman is the way you police your beat.
Not everyone is suited to neighbourhood policing.
You get these boys in the sections and they're over-exuberant, heavy-handed boys.
(FN 28/4/87, pp. 5–6)
To echo the themes of the last chapter, a part of a policeman's discretion is, in Schutzian terminology, knowing which ‘recipes’ to apply to which members of the public in what situations.
As the constable quoted above makes clear, it is not that all neighbourhood policemen defuse every situation by the display of patience, sympathy, tolerance, and understanding, it is more that this is their first choice and they use other recipes, by becoming ‘heavy-handed’ and resorting to arrests, only when this one fails.
The skill, then, is in knowing which situations to handle with ‘kid gloves’, as another put it.
Unfortunately no situations arose during field-work where the neighbourhood police were required to use these secondary recipes, although one did state how sympathetic he felt towards adolescents in parts of Easton because ‘they don't stand a chance’ there, a feeling which easily translates into sympathetic handling of situations in which youths are involved.
Another important component of the competence of neighbourhood police is knowing the answer to the conundrum of what to do when nothing cam be done.
That is, how to convey to members of the public that their request or complaint is taken seriously even though it is impossible to act upon it.
Many of these situations arose in the course of field-work.
In casual encounters with neighbourhood police while on the beat, members of the public complained of such things as the life-style of next-door neighbours, noisy traffic, and parked lorries.
While this demonstrates the public's faith that the police can resolve any situation, the neighbourhood police are thereby presented with a dilemma: they either criminalize formally legal behaviour or disappoint public expectations.
The observational  data show that Easton's neighbourhood police have two recipes for resolving this dilemma and its associated conundrum.
The first is deflexion, where the problem is diplomatically passed on to someone else, sometimes neighbouring police stations, for neighbourhood men dislike straying into other patches, but also the DHSS and, most frequently, the council.
However, the more popular recipe is empathy, achieved by having the patience to allow the complainant sufficient time to air the problem (reinforcing the importance of allowing neighbourhood police autonomy to manage their own time), coupled with displays of sympathy, understanding, and even agreement.
This defuses the immediate intensity of the problem even though the law cannot act to correct it.
The phrase that the law is an ass, because it falls to cover the circumstance, is a common pairing lime on the part of the neighbourhood men in situations like this.
On one occasion two neighbourhood men were asked to account for their handling of a complaint about parked lorries, at which the field-worker was present, and they described the substance of this recipe as follows:
PC. 1.
See, like, you can understand it too, that woman gets no peace.
There's lorries out there the whole day, like.
But, see, that woman, she's a frequent complainer, complains about everything.
She hasn't stopped complaining since that shopping centre went up, but, like, with people like that all you can do is listen and sympathize.
There's not much else you can do, like, if a law's not being broken you can't do anything.
PC. 2.
Some people think that the police can do everything under the sun like, but of course you can't.
Half the time you're just a ear to listen to them.
It takes a certain type of man to do a neighbourhood beat.
(FN 28/4/87, p. 11)
A process of practical reasoning amongst neighbourhood men such as this is, therefore, also vital to the accomplishment of effective community policing.
COMMUNITY AND NEIGHBOURHOOD POLICING IN WEST BELFAST
The management's dilemma with respect to neighbourhood policing in Northern Ireland is that, while communal divisions make it a particularly important style of policing, the people who carry it out on the streets are more identifiable and softer targets for terrorists.
This translates as a real problem for neighbourhood policemen, even in Easton, for the ever likely prospect of attack has to be adjusted to and lived with if the day-to-day tasks of neighbourhood policing are to be accomplished.
A subsequent chapter will address the question of how this threat is routinized by members of the RUC generally, but at this juncture it is worth considering how the management's dilemma leads them to organize community and neighbourhood policing in an area like West Belfast, where attack is imminent.
We were given some opportunity to explore this when making three visits to police stations in West Belfast, although the data on community policing are unsatisfactory because of the limited number of these contacts and the absence of supportive observational material.
But it is none the less interesting as a conclusion to this chapter to draw contrasts, albeit impressionistically, with community policing in West Belfast, for this puts Easton's community policing into sharp relief.
The primary emphasis in community policing in West Belfast is on neighbourhood policing.
In this area it is entirely focused on the specific question of improving police relations with Catholics, rather than community relations, although the latter is not absent altogether.
The main constraint operating on the community relations police in West Belfast is in establishing contact with youth groups and schools in the area because of either a general resistance to the police or fear of intimidation from Republican paramilitary organizations as a result of involvement in a community relations programme.
Some Catholic schools in the area have no contact with the RUC's Community Relations Branch, others do so when the police are in plain clothes and bring no uniformed neighbourhood police with them, while yet others restrict the lecture topics which the community relations police cam address.
But there remains a commitment on the part of the police to the principle of improving police relations with the Catholic community, and they try in several ways to overcome the practical difficulties schools are presented with when they associate with the community relations police.
For example, they transport schoolchildren to events in unmarked buses, or pick them up from locations outside West Belfast.
And while some parents complain to the head teacher about their children becoming involved with the RUC, at least one headmistress was reported as being committed to the community relations programme, telling parents that she was responsible for their education and that they  could move their child if they objected to the way this was done (FN 10/2/87, p. 7).
Indeed, a popular view amongst community relations police in the area is that many more schools would welcome them but for intimidation, a factor which the community relations police have to be very sensitive towards if they are not to threaten the safety of children and teachers.
One officer was describing a school quiz organized among schoolchildren of all denominations, and said:
I know schools up the [place in West Belfast]who would welcome us, but what happened one time, a school up there won the trophy and the next day some boys [i.e. from the IRA]came demanding the shield and threatening what they would do to certain teachers if it wasn't handed over.
So you see, in schools like that we would never go uniformed and we would have to discontinue visiting those schools as we would be jeopardizing the children and teachers.
(FN 10/2/87, p. 7)
Sensitivity to the physical security of the public in West Belfast thus becomes another constraint against introducing the sort of community relations programme that exists in Easton.
This leads directly on to an issue which will only be noted here, leaving further discussion until the next chapter.
It is widespread to policemen and women in ‘sandbag’ areas like West Belfast that their typifications of Catholics draw a distinction between the majority who are decent and honest and who would have friendly contact with the police but for fear of the paramilitaries, and the small number of ‘gangsters and criminals’who support or undertake attacks on the police.
As we shall see, this typification is a resource used by policemen and women in several situations and for many different purposes, and it has clear relevance in explaining why community relations police in West Belfast retain their commitment despite the difficulties of their task and the restricted nature of their duties.
All would be different, they believe, if the majority of decent and honest Catholics could escape the grip of fear, and they define the role of community relations police in West Belfast as attempting, in a small way, to loosen the Catholic community from the stranglehold of the paramilitaries, as the commentary on a police promotional video stated: ‘The effort of trying to win the people's minds and hearts away from terrorism is personified in the Community Relations Branch, whose members regularly attend meetings involving civilian bodies, public representatives, and discuss problems such as vandalism.’
The reality, of course, does not accord with this gloss, but the commitment if not the viable programme exists.
One of the more usual benefits of a Community Relations Unit in West Belfast is its discouragement of police misconceptions about Catholics.
Here the normal flow of influence is reversed, with the unintended consequence being an improvement in police views of Catholics.
Community relations and neighbourhood policing reverses the process of depersonalization, and with regard to the police this encourages them to develop a more subtle set of typifications which categorize the majority of residents in West Belfast as decent, honest, and, at root, friendly.
As an experienced community policeman in the area said, the attitude of the police changes because policemen and women can see that the community ‘is not all yobbos’(FN 15/5/87, p. 4):
You get a different view of the people here when you're in neighbourhood, like, it's different.
The vast majority of people here are decent people, friendly, and they'll be civil enough to you.
Like, we're in the position where we can differentiate between them and gangsters in the community, and, like, we have to show the decent people that the Provies might scare them, but they don't scare us, even if they do.
(FN 15/5/87, p. 12)
Neighbourhood policing in sandbag areas like West Belfast is even more difficult than community relations work.
Sympathetic typifications of Catholics do little to lessen the obvious problem of being attacked while walking the beat.
As explained by a senior officer in the neighbourhood unit for the whole of B Division, which includes dangerous areas in West and North Belfast, ‘men risk their lives for community policing’ in this area.
Neighbourhood police are all too aware of the risk:
We are identifiable by our uniform.
This means for the neighbourhood man, the man on the beat, that it is difficult for him to keep a low profile.
He might feel he's a easy target…
He doesn't know anybody, but everybody knows him (FN 29/4/87, p. 16).
Like, I know I've been lucky.
It's a desperate way to look at it but when you go out there's 16 soldiers to every 2 policemen and you work out the odds, and that's 8 to 1 against you being hit.
It's awful, but that's the way your mind works…
Like, I know guys who lost arms and legs…
See, now I deliberately sit, when I'm out in a Land Rover, with one arm up a bit higher than the other and one leg a bit higher.
Like, I suppose that way if I was hit I might stand a chance of only losing one arm or one leg.
(FN 15/5/1987, p. 15–16)
As intimated, the danger of attack means that two neighbourhood men walking their beat are accompanied by at least sixteen soldiers, sometimes also by another squad of soldiers providing cover for those who are protecting the police, by two or more Land Rovers from the British Army and the RUC, and an Army helicopter.
A neighbourhood patrol can thus assume the proportions of an armed convoy.
Irrespective of its formal purpose to introduce community policing, the appearance of a neighbourhood patrol restricts its effects to simply the demonstration of a police presence on the streets.
While this contributes to crime prevention, especially with respect to joy-riders who steal and drive cars at speed at might (which requires neighbourhood men in West Belfast to work might duty), it has none of the wider community service functions evident in Easton.
Casual encounters on the beat are kept to a minimum by the public, primarily, the police claim, as a result of intimidation, and constables get few opportunities to display the interactive skills that might foster good community relations, although the rare occasions when this happens are seized upon by the men and recalled with pleasure thereafter.
Moreover, neighbourhood police expressed a sensitivity to the effect which these casual encounters might have on the safety of those they talked to ‘for you don't know who's watching’.
Therefore, they try to conceal the fact that they are talking to people, sometimes by giving the impression through non-verbal behaviour that they are issuing directions, or by calling at their homes.
However, casual or conspired encounters with the public are infrequent and a primary duty is to deliver court summonses and warrants.
Even senior officers admit that to call this neighbourhood policing is a misnomer (FN 15/5/87, p. 2), but, however dangerous and selfdefeating they appear, neighbourhood patrols are seen by police management as an essential and necessary feature of the role of the police in Catholic areas.
Hence, in the three stations visited in B Division there were twenty-seven neighbourhood policemen and three sergeants; a staffing level much higher than in Easton, where the range of duties is more extensive.
This reflects the management's recognition that the style of policing that occurs in areas like West Belfast heavily influences the public's perception of the police.
This creates problems for the neighbourhood police when events in the area force other sections of the force to adopt the more aggressive and repressive mode of public order policing, and the success the  neighbourhood men have in overcoming communal suspicion depends almost entirely on wider social and political circumstances rather than any feature of their own conduct.
This is not so in Easton.
In sandbag areas like West Belfast, months of patient hard work on the part of the neighbourhood police cam be destroyed as a single event inside or outside the locale increases Catholic distrust of or disaffection from the police.
Therefore, the assessments which the neighbourhood police give of how much support they obtain from the Catholic community (or, more accurately, how much support they see the majority of Catholics as feeling able safely to show), vary depending on wider circumstances and the time-scale used.
Compared to the situation just after the introduction of internment in the early 1970s, community relations are said to have improved considerably, which is true even for the period since neighbourhood foot patrols were first introduced following the hunger strikes of 1981.
See now, there's a lot of people who will speak to you friendly out on the street and there's a lot more of them who'll speak to you inside their own homes.
But recently since the big IRA push, things have changed.
Like, it used to be that [place]station might be attacked once or twice a year, like it was hit five times in one night this year…
If you got left behind by the Army you'd be lucky to come back alive, and that's no exaggeration.
There's no way any of us could walk out of this station in uniform.
(FN 15/5/87, p. 6)
This remark neatly summarizes the paradox of neighbourhood policing in areas like West Belfast.
Societal divisions are such that neighbourhood patrols are dangerous and have to take on the appearance of armed convoys, but it is the style of policing which comes nearest to breaching the divide between the police and the community, so that the RUC is required to be persistent in utilizing it even though there are few obvious signs of success and despite the cost in human life.
This paradox will.
remain while police management retain their commitment to improving community relations, which the British government will ensure they do.
Hence it should be no surprise that ordinary policemen and women come to feel that the police management and the government do not care that the risks associated with routine policing in a divided society are borne primarily by them: that the ordinary policeman and woman can be sacrificed for the sake of wider goals, the purpose of which they often have difficulty in comprehending.
This view is pervasive amongst  ordinary members of the RUC and leads us directly to the issue of how Northern Ireland's divisions affect policemen and women, which the following chapters begin to address.