

I must have dropped off to sleep; next thing, someone was prodding me in the ribs with a rifle butt, and a voice was saying, ‘Come on, Piper.
Your turn to keep watch!’
At first light the mortaring and sniping started.
The only difference was that the mortar bursts were further away than yesterday, some were even landing in the village.
The sniping was still fairly accurate and still concentrated in and around the orchard.
Someone brought me a mess tin half full of very hot tea; it tasted good.
Looking down towards the Orne I could see a thick mist over the water and patches of mist hanging over the cornfields.
Commandos were now moving about the road in front of the farmhouse.
This was a new day, D-Day 2, early in the morning.
I pulled out my grubby little diary from my hip pocket and entered the date, 7th June 1944.
Later, I made my way into the farmyard and joined a group having something to eat.
The porridge tasted very good (48-hour ration pack style) and hard tack biscuits ground down into the tea, not too bad.
Hoped to have something better by the evening.
The wounded were still in the barn as I entered to get my rucksack.
I looked inside it.
The bagpipes were still there, they had not played a note since yesterday afternoon.
Preparations were being made to evacuate the farm as I picked up my rucksack, slung it over my shoulder, and joined the others outside on the road.
We moved off in the direction of the crossroads, the scene of yesterday's action.
On reaching the crossroads, we moved quickly to the right, and up the very dusty road leading to  the village.
This was the road where the bagpipes had been hit by a piece of shrapnel.
About a hundred yards from the village we came under automatic fire from somewhere on our left, and continued the rest of the way walking in the ditch.
As we entered the village and turned right there were two dead German soldiers lying in the middle of the road.
They had no boots on.
At the entrance to the village and immediately on the right-hand side was a large house with a high wall round it.
At the entrance to the driveway were large iron gates.
A Commando opened the gates and Lovat entered, followed closely by about a dozen Commandos.
I looked round at the two dead Germans lying in the middle of the road.
they were being picked up by two Commandos and dumped on the grass verge.
It seemed strange to me that many dead Germans we had come across in the built-up areas after leaving the landing beaches yesterday morning had no boots on, some were even minus socks.
‘What's happened to their boots and socks?’
I asked one of the Commandos lifting the dead Germans.
‘Bloody obvious, piper.’
he replied, ‘There are bastards around just waiting for someone to cop it, then they dash out and pinch his bloody boots.’
‘That's right,’ replied the other Commando, ‘If we had been screwed down by these Nazi bastards for four years, we would be doing more than pinching their boots.’
I caught up with the others as they were entering the front door of the house.
Suddenly there was a long burst of machine gun fire.
It appeared to be coming from somewhere to the right, the bullets were hitting the house high up and smashing through the windows of one of the bedrooms.
I ducked down behind the garden wall until the firing ceased.
Then, after a couple of minutes, I entered the house in time to see Lovat and a few Commandos dashing upstairs.
They were in a bedroom at the left side of the house when I joined them.
A Corporal was indicating to Lovat where he thought the firing was coming from.
As we looked out of the shattered window and across the field opposite to where the Corporal was pointing, another burst of fire hit the house.
‘There he is, Sir, in the corner of the field, close to the hedgerow.’
The Corporal placed his Bren  gun on the window-sill and fired a long burst at the sniper's position.
There were a few cows in the field and they were wandering in the direction of the sniper's position.
Something was obviously attracting their attention.
The Corporal fired another burst and then he went off with two Commandos to find out the result.
After a few minutes we watched them crossing the field, alongside the hedgerow.
They returned a short while later stating that the sniper was dead.
The Corporal was carrying the dead German's Spandau, and the two other Commandos had a scruffy and shifty-eyed civilian by the scruff of the neck.
‘This bastard was removing the sniper's boots when we arrived on the scene,’ stated the Corporal.
The shifty character was getting extremely agitated, waving his arms about and almost bursting into tears.
‘What do you think we should do with him, Piper?’ asked the Corporal.
‘Give him a packet of fags and tell him to piss off!’
I replied.
Shifty-eyes had probably made up his mind that we were going to shoot him!
When he was handed the fags he could hardly believe his luck, he smiled broadly, revealing rows of black and yellow teeth, repeating over and over, ‘Merci, merci .’
We were escorting him to the door when there was a loud explosion at the side of the house.
This was followed by two more, with the sound of shattering glass and lumps of plaster falling off the walls.
As we all dropped to the floor the shifty-eyed character bolted out of the front door and into a cloud of dust and pieces of masonry, caused by the explosions.
The mortaring stopped just as suddenly as it had started, and it was quiet again.
This house was to be Lovat's Brigade H.Q and it appeared that we were going to be there on high ground for some time.
The way things were going I thought it was time I had a slit trench to dive into.
I went outside and walked round the side of the house and into the orchard.
Commandos were digging in all over the place.
There was the usual sniping, but no one seemed to be bothering too much.
Yesterday when a shot was fired, everybody instinctively ducked and looked to where they thought the shot had come from.
In that sort of countryside  of hedgerows, orchards and narrow lanes, it was very difficult to assess where the shots were coming from.
Was it from somewhere close by, or from far off?
This was our second day in Normandy and I believed we were getting used to it.
‘Hello there, Piper, you can dig in with me if you like.’
I looked round.
It was Sid, the Commando with the Cockney accent who had worked in the Kent coalfields.
We had several conversations at the Concentration area at Southampton waiting for the invasion to get under way.
This was the first time I had seen him since the landings.
Sid had chosen a spot at the top of the orchard a few yards from the wall surrounding Brigade H.Q ‘We can have two trenches with one entrance,’ he said, ‘Your trench there, and my trench here,’drawing a diagram with the point of his bayonet.
‘What do you think, Piper?’
‘Suits me,’ I said, ‘but is it a good place to dig your trench under a tree?’
He looked up at the apple tree and replied, ‘It makes no fucking difference, Piper, where you dig it.
If your name is on a mortar bomb and you get a direct hit, you have had it, no matter where you are!’
The orchard was about two-hundred yards long by about three-hundred yards broad.
Thick hedgerows surrounded it on three sides.
On the right side the hedgerow ran parallel with the road as it sloped away down to the crossroads where we had had so much trouble yesterday.
The apple trees covered the whole orchard and were very close together, most of their branches touching each other.
The orchard thinned out at the top of the slope where we had started to dig our slit trenches.
A dirt track entered the orchard from the village road and ran down the side of the large house (Brigade H.Q).
A small cottage was on the left side of the track, opposite Brigade H.Q
The sniping continued all afternoon with occasional and sudden mortar explosions, mainly at the lower end of the orchard, resulting in the usual casualties.
The casualties were carried past our position on their way to the First Aid post.
This sight encouraged Sid and I to increase our efforts to finish off our double trench.
It was in the shape of a V with the entrance at the point of the V. We covered both trenches with large pieces of wood scrounged from the back garden of Brigade H.Q On top of the wood were placed thick pieces of turf which acted as very good camouflage.
It appeared that we were going to be there for some time.
I hoped this trench was deep enough, and the roof strong enough to give us some protection from the increasing mortar fire that was now coming our way.
We had our first main meal about 7 p.m. that evening.
Porridge, hard biscuits, a mug of tea, followed by very hard chocolate.
Not as good as yesterday evening when I dined on roast chicken, not very well cooked, but certainly much better than this homely fare.
I must have a look round later, maybe look in at the big house, and see what Shimi Lovat and his officers were having for dinner.
Sid had finished checking the Bren gun and the ammunition.
He placed the Bren on the turf at the entrance to the orchard from the village road.
The evening was fairly light at 10 p.m.
So Sid and I sat  just outside the trench discussing the events of the day, and swatting mosquitoes.
These Normandy mosquitoes were the largest and most persistent that I had ever encountered.
The air was thick with them, and lumps were beginning to appear on my hands and face as they thrust their needle-like heads into my skin.
‘Christ!’ remarked Sid ‘These fuckin' mauses are worse then the mortars and the sniping.
Good job you are not wearing your kilt, Piper.
You would soon have lumps on your most tender spot.
Not that it would make much difference in this bloody place.
Fat chance of us running into any crumpet out here!’
‘You never know, Sid,’ I replied as I swatted a mosquito that had landed on my wrist, and watched the blood splatter from it.
Christ, I shall have no blood left if these little bastards continue to have a go at me!
We wrapped camouflage squares round our heads and faces as some protection and jumped into the trench.
At 11 p.m. a terrific barrage commenced.
At first I thought it was the naval guns out in the Channel.
Their shells had been passing over our positions from time to time all day, with a loud rush that sometimes appeared to shake the trees.
This barrage was much closer and more concentrated, the shells passing over appeared lower than the shells from the Naval guns, and the noise more intense, the guns appeared to be firing from the bottom of the orchard.
‘Those bloody guns are close,’ I remarked to Sid.
‘They are about half a mile or so away,’ he replied, ‘and, most important, they are our guns.
The more shit they throw over at the Jerries the better.
There is only one problem, Piper, with so many guns firing over our heads.
there is always one or two shells drop short and some poor bastards are going to stop a lump of shrapnel.’
‘You're a cheerful bastard!’
I remarked, as we both ducked down into the trench.
For the next few minutes I had to put up with Sid's reminiscences about how much worse it had been during the campaign in North Africa.
The shelling continued until about midnight, then suddenly it stopped.
The German guns then opened up but not to the same extent.
They seemed further away, their shells passing over very high up and crashing into the area of the Orne  canal.
The German shelling lasted about twenty minutes, one gun continued to fire, starting with a clear crack, then the sound of the shell passing over, followed by the explosion as it hit the ground.
I was somewhat fascinated by this German gun.
I found myself listening for the distinct crack, then gazing up at the clear starry sky trying to follow the flight of the shell.
‘Piper,’ Sid's voice from the back of his trench sounded agitated, ‘I'm knackered, and these bloody mauses are eating me alive!
Do you mind if I have a fag?
The smoke may help to keep them away, then I'll go first on the gun.’
I'm knackered myself, I thought, as I sniffed the smoke from Sid's fag.
It's going to take more than one fag to get rid of these mosquitoes.
Sid finished his cigarette and took his place at the Bren gun.
I crawled into my trench, adjusted the camouflage square over my face and head, curled myself into a ball and tried to get some sleep.
There was very little sleep last night, our first hours ashore in Normandy, maybe tonight we could have some rest.
I hoped so.
I must have dropped off to sleep but was awakened by Sid kicking my boots.
‘For Christ's sake, Sid, I've just got my head down.
What the bloody hell's going on?’
‘Listen, Piper, first, you have been sleeping for the past hour, and second, I think the Germans are counter attacking.
There's a lot of shelling and mortaring going on at the other end of the village.’
But it's only 2.15 a.m!
I exclaimed.
‘Surely they won't attack at this bloody hour?’
I crawled out and joined Sid at the Bren gun.
Suddenly two shells landed in the orchard.
The explosions seemed just a few yards away.
We both dived back into our trenches, pulling the Bren and ammunition behind us.
The noise was ear-splitting as more shells landed in the orchard.
I braced myself against the sides of the trench and listened to the explosions and the debris landing on the roof.
It seemed like my last day had come.
This was the end this time.
My heart was pounding in my chest, the mosquitoes and everything else forgotten.
After about half-an-hour the shelling ceased and the mortar attack took over, continuing until about 4 a.m., just as dawn was breaking.
During the shelling and mortaring I  had heard nothing from Sid's trench.
He was probably just as shit scared as I was.
As soon as the mortaring finished we crawled out to the entrance to the trench, and manned the Bren gun.
The sky was now getting fairly light, and it would soon be stand-to, so there would be no going back into the trench to get the head down again.
We hadn't spoken to each other since Sid woke me up, just before the shelling started.
As we both stood staring through the slight mist wondering what would happen next, Sid broke the silence.
‘You know, Piper, I was so shit scared during the bombardment that I lay on the floor of that trench and prayed.
We certainly don't want any more of that fuckin' lot,’ he continued.
‘Anyway, Piper, you lucky bastard, you had an hour's kip, I've had nothing yet.’
The Duty Officer appeared out of the mist.
‘You lot in there OK?’
‘We're OK, Sir,’ Sid replied.
‘How are the others around the orchard?’
‘We have had a few casualties,’ the Officer replied.
‘Also one or two direct hits on slit trenches.’
As he was moving away, he paused, and looking round at us with a smile on his face, he said, ‘Oh yes, and a direct hit on the newly-dug shithouse…shit everywhere!’
He was gone before we could reply to his last remark.
‘Why don't you get your head down now, Sid?
There'll be no one round for some time, I'll stay with your gun.’
‘OK, Piper, think I will,’ Sid replied, as he crawled into his trench.
He poked his head out almost immediately and exclaimed, ‘direct hit on the shithouse — shit all over the place…that's all we need!’
From 6 a.m. the morning was fairly quiet, except for the occasional sniping.
Sid was awake at 7 a.m., still complaining of feeling tired.
It had just crossed my mind that I had not had my boots off since the evening of the 4th June and it was now 8th June.
I would have liked to take them off but the situation was still uncertain, and everyone still believed that the German forces were determined to push us off this high ground east of the Orne.
Two Commandos had taken their boots off yesterday evening and found after a couple of hours standing to they were unable to get them on again, both feet had swollen badly.
It would be too bad if the Panzers overran our positions and we were found to be  in our stocking feet.
I went along to Brigade H.Q The Officers and other ranks were looking just as knackered as the rest of us out in the orchard.
Reports from the Commando units around the village told of determined German counter attacks during the night with many casualties.
While in the big house, I had a look at my bagpipes.
The large drone was beyond repair, but the two tenor drones were in good working order and, most important of all, the chanter was OK.
I repaired the large drone as best I could, using a piece of sticking plaster from the First Aid kit, and then decided to try them out.
But where?
Certainly not there in Brigade H.Q
In the centre of the village was a fairly large building that looked like a church.
The very place for a little bagpipe practice, I thought.
My tiredness had now almost disappeared as I made my way along the drive of Brigade H.Q and out into the village.
The village green was oval shaped, with the road entering at one end and houses along one side, with a large chateau, a farm and a row of houses on the other side.
The church-like building was on its own in the centre of the green.
As I entered the building I could see that it was damaged, probably by mortars, or shellfire.
At the far end was a small hall with tables and chairs piled up along the walls.
I started up the bagpipes and was soon under way, marching up and down the church hall.
The pipes were going well considering the damage inflicted on them during and after the landings.
I was very pleased, not only with the pipes, but also that I was now playing them again.
I had been playing for about five minutes when there was a very loud explosion very close at hand.
I stopped playing just as the church door burst open and a very irate Officer came charging along the pews in my direction, his eyes bulging out of their sockets.
Obviously he was not very pleased about something.
‘Something wrong, Sir?’
I asked.
‘Something wrong!’ he exploded.
‘Don't you fucking well know that the enemy have been mortaring the village green for the past four or five minutes while you have been playing those fucking bagpipes?’
‘But, Sir…
’ I replied.
‘Don't you but me, and stand to attention when  you address an Officer.
I am going straight from here to report this matter to the Brigadier,’ he bellowed, as he charged along the pews and out of the door.
Placing the bagpipes in my rucksack I made my way back across the green to the orchard, expecting a summons at any moment to appear before Shimi Lovat.
The mortaring had ceased.
Maybe the Officer had a point, that this was no place to play bagpipes.
From now on I would only play on special invitation.
Several hours later I had not heard anything of the incident, so it seemed likely that the Officer had not reported the matter, or Lovat had just shrugged it off.
Anyway, I would stay away from Brigade H.Q for the time being.
Sid was sitting under the apple tree next to our slit trench as I approached.
He had a Jerry can in front of him, and a large grin on his face as he remarked, ‘Piper, I have the answer to those bloody mosquitoes!’
He paused, then pointing to the Jerry can, he said ‘Petrol!
We shall soak the walls of the two trenches with this stuff, also soak the camouflage squares before wrapping them round our heads, then we can settle down tonight free of mosquitoes.’
‘But where did you get the petrol, Sid?’
I enquired.
‘Never mind where it came from, just give me a hand to splash it around.’
We gave the walls of both trenches a good soaking, saving some petrol for later.
I did not like the idea very much as Sid was a smoker, and if he lit up during the night it was possible that we both could end up with a Blighty, or worse!
‘Right, Piper, what we want now is something to eat.
I scrounged the petrol, now you can use your influence in the big house.
I'm sure those fucking Officers are not eating the same crap as we are.’
‘It's rather difficult for me to show my face at Brigade H.Q at the moment,’ I replied.
‘I suppose it is, Piper.
I heard you playing your bagpipes in the church and when the Germans started to throw shit all over the village green, I knew that some bastard would be having a word with you.
Trouble is, Piper, some people do not appreciate good music, especially when they are dodging flying shrapnel.
Promise me, Piper,’ Sid continued ‘You will not play those pipes in this orchard!’
‘Not without an invitation to play them,’ I replied.
‘You're not fucking likely to get that! were Sid's last words as he walked off in the direction of the latrine.
About 2 o'clock that afternoon, three Allied planes came over the coast and started to drop supplies by parachute.
The canisters were landing in a cornfield about half-a-mile away.
A Sergeant dashed up and shouted, ‘Come on, Piper!
Let's get down there and see if we can get some of those supplies.’
He had a Corporal with him and we doubled to the front of Brigade H.Q and clambered aboard a jeep that had a trailer attached.
We roared off down the road from the village in the direction of the River Orne.
The aircraft were still dropping the canisters as we came near to the dropping zone.
The Germans had also noticed the canisters and were directing fairly accurate mortar and shell fire in and around the dropping zone, to prevent the Commandos, or anyone else, picking them up.
‘Jesus Christ!’ remarked the Sergeant, who was driving the jeep, ‘Just our bloody luck.’
He stopped the jeep at the edge of the cornfield, and we observed that the mortar and shell fire were following the canisters as they were landing, leaving a few canisters lying on the ground not far off from where we were.
the Sergeant started up the jeep and we entered the cornfield at speed, heading in the direction of the first three canisters.
We loaded the first two into the trailer, and were heading a few yards further on to pick up a third canister when we noticed that the enemy fire was now being directed at our part of the cornfield.
The Germans could probably see us now and had the jeep as a target.
We decided to forget about the third canister and made off across the cornfield at speed, the jeep bouncing up and down on the very uneven surface.
The Corporal and I shouted at the Sergeant to step on it, as the explosions were getting closer.
We finally made it to the road and sped along towards the village in a cloud of dust, the three of us crouching low in the jeep.
We reached Brigade H.Q a few minutes later and drove the jeep round to the back of the house where we unloaded the canisters.
One canister was filled with weapons and ammunition, the other full of tinned food, cigarettes, and several bars of thick chocolate.
We danced a little jig around the food, hardly believing our luck.
The tinned food  was of the self-heating variety and contained a full and varied menu.
That evening Sid and I dined off piping hot oxtail soup, steak and kidney pie, followed by a very rich plum duff, all washed down with a bottle of French cider, given to us by the old Frenchman who lived in the cottage near the entrance to the orchard.
The old man was delighted with the packet of cigarettes Sid had given him in exchange for the cider.
The time was just after 9.30 p.m. and beginning to get dusk.
There was an unusual quietness in the air, except for the sound of artillery in the distance and the occasional whine of a sniper's bullet through the orchard.
I was sitting under a tree opposite our trench, chatting to a Scottish friend.
Duncan was dug in at the bottom of the orchard and had called in for a chat on his way from Brigade H.Q He was very interested in bagpipe music, having served with the Gordon Highlanders before joining the Commandos.
Sid was sitting on the roof of his trench soaking his camouflage square with petrol from the jerry can.
He wrapped the square around his head and face, securing it with a knot under his chin.
He gave me the thumbs up sign then disappeared into his trench.
Duncan and I had been talking for about ten minutes or more and swatting the increasing number of mosquitoes that always arrived in force at this time of the evening.
Duncan looked at his wrist watch, and rising to his feet said, ‘I had better be going now, Piper.
Don't want to be caught out in the open when Jerry starts up.
The best place is in your own wee dug out.’
He had hardly got to his feet when there was a muffled explosion from Sid's trench, followed by Sid catapulting out from the entrance, his head a mass of flames.
He ran screaming down through the orchard somehow missing collision with the trees, and clutching at the burning camouflage square.
‘That silly bastard has forgotten about the petrol and has tried to light a fag!’ exclaimed Duncan.
Someone shouted from a slit trench near at hand, ‘Great — what some bastards will do to get a Blighty.’
When I reached Sid, someone had brought him down and extinguished the flames.
The knot under his chin was still firmly fastened and he had extensive burns on his head and face.
Two medics  arrived and carried him off to the First Aid Post.
I made my way back up the orchard.
It was almost dark now and everyone had settled into their dugouts, prepared for another night of shelling and mortaring.
The Sid incident was probably forgotten as soon as he was carried away.
He was just another casualty.
Things had certainly changed since those days back in England.
This was the third night in Normandy.
It was midnight and the mortaring and shelling had started about 11 p.m.
I had pulled the two heavy pieces and wood across the entrance to the trench.
It seemed strange without Sid next door, and the barrage seemed much worse than yesterday evening.
About 3.30 a.m. there was a noise like a low-flying aircraft zooming very fast overhead followed by something very heavy hitting the ground.
‘It's a bomb,’ I thought, as I braced myself against the walls of the trench waiting for the inevitable explosion.
The only sounds were the mortar explosions and the unmistakable noise of a shell passing overhead, followed by the characteristic thump as it hit the ground.
I soon forgot about the heavy object as I was finding it very difficult to keep awake.
How many more nights were we to do without sleep?
There had been several German counter attacks on the Commando positions around the village during the past three days.
The way things were going the enemy seemed very determined to push the Brigade off this high ground.
I moved closer to the entrance to the trench, pushed aside one of the heavy pieces of wood, and looked up at the sky.
It was getting light.
The German barrage seemed to be slackening off a bit, though the Allied guns were still firing over our positions, their shells shaking the trees as they headed toward the German trenches with a loud swish as they passed overhead.
This was the start of a new day.
Friday, day four.
‘I could certainly go a mug of hot tea,’ I thought, as I examined my lumps and bumps caused by the ever-persistent mosquitoes.
Sid's petrolsplashing around the walls of the trench had, I believe encouraged the little bastards, they seemed to like the smell of petrol.
All the mosquitoes in the orchard were in my trench last night, or so it seemed!
About 8 a.m.
The orchard was fairly quiet.
The shelling and the mortaring had ceased except for the occasional  explosion near at hand.
I brewed a mug of tea using the small block of tea, milk and sugar, crushed into a mess tin of water and brought to the boil.
It tasted good, but the only resemblance to tea was in the tealeaves floating on the top of the liquid.
I was nursing my mug of tea with both hands and taking short sips of the very hot liquid when a Commando arrived at the trench, stating that he had come to take Sid's place on the Bren gun.
He was a seriouslooking Welshman whom I had met several times back in England and around the orchard.
‘How's it going, Boyo?
Too bad about Sid.
Just call me Taff.’
Taff continued talking in his very strong Welsh accent as he inspected the Bren, asking questions and giving himself the answers before I could get a word in.
When I finally got through to Taff to enquire about what sort of night he had had, and if there had been many casualties during the barrage, his reply was rather matter of fact.
‘A bad night, Boyo, and a few wounded here and there.’
He continued, ‘That friend of yours, the Scotsman, Duncan something or other, he was called out during the night to deliver something to 45 Royal Marine Commando.
He went by jeep and on his way back to Brigade H.Q he ran over a German mine and was killed.’
Taff kept on talking, but I did not hear what he was on about.
The news about Duncan's death was quite a shock to me.
I could hardly believe what Taff had just said.
Taff prodded me with the butt of the Bren gun.
‘You're not listening to me, Boyo,’ he exclaimed, a look of annoyance on his face.
‘What were you saying, Taff?’
I enquired.
‘I was saying — any more of that fucking horrible tea?’
He was smiling.
I hadn't seen him smiling before.
‘Don't take it too bad, Piper,’ he continued.
‘The way things are going we shall lose more of our friends, or it could be us next time round.
Don't you think I'm a cheerful bastard, Boyo?’
‘You're a cheerful bastard right enough,’ I replied, as I climbed out of the trench.
‘Think I'll make my way over to the big house and see how things are going.’
‘OK, Boyo, see you later,’ Taff replied.
About twenty feet from the trench, in the centre of the dirt track leading to  the road two Commandos were standing peering into a large hole in the ground.
‘What's in the hole?’
I enquired as I approached.
‘Look's like the base of a large shell or bomb,’ replied one of the Commandos.
I looked down into the hole.
It must have been about fifteen to twenty feet deep and a few feet across.
At the bottom of the hole were two figures hammering at the base of the object.
I immediately recognised one of the Officers.
It was the Officer who had turfed me out of the church yesterday when I was playing the bagpipes.
‘What is it, Sir?’
I shouted to the Officer.
He looked up and stopped his hammering for a moment.
‘It's an unexploded bomb, Piper, and if it had gone off last night a lot of you silly buggers would have gone with it.’
‘Probably you as well, Sir,’ I replied, ‘Your own trench is just over the wall in Brigade H.Q’He glared up at me and before he could say anything I beat a hasty retreat.
What a way to spend the morning, hammering away at the base of a bomb that is likely to go off at any moment.
As I quickened my pace in the direction of Brigade H.Q I was thinking: ‘That is the Officer who said that I was mad!’
At the rear of the big house I met Mick, the Irishman, who invited me to share his meal.
‘Not bloody steak and kidney pudding again!’
I remarked.
‘You had better take your time eating this lot, as it's the last of the tinned food you helped to get out yesterday.’
He thrust a mess tin full of steak and kidney into my hand, and with a scowl on his face he remarked, ‘After this lot, Piper, we are back to the usual shit, unless something special turns up, like cooks and normal rations!’
We sat chatting for a few minutes after finishing our meal.
I could hardly keep my eyes open.
I was exhausted, no sleep last night, and very little the previous nights.
‘For Christ's sake, Piper, get into that slit trench and get your head down.
I'll give you a shout in two hours’ time.’
Mick picked up his rifle and the mess tins and made his way towards the house.
I clambered into the trench and was asleep before my head hit the ground.
It seemed that I was asleep for just a few minutes when I was awakened by some noisy bastard shouting into the trench.
‘Come on, come on, Piper.
Are you going to lie there all day?
You have been asleep for the past two hours.’
I opened my eyes and looked up at Mick's grinning face, leaning into the entrance to the trench.
‘For Christ's sake, Mick.
What time is it?’
I enquired.
‘Never mind the bloody time, Piper.
I have a message for you, and when you get out of the trench don't forget to keep your head down.’
It appeared that a German S.P. gun had joined the snipers and was lobbing the occasional shell into the vicinity of the orchard.
Mick's head disappeared from the entrance to the trench as I sat up and listened to a shell burst close by.
Later, over a mug of tea, I asked Mick about the message he had for me.
‘Oh yes, Piper.
No. 45 Royal Marine Commando have been enquiring about you and would you pay them a visit either this evening or tomorrow evening.’
I knew a few of the Marines.
I had joined them on their route marches out of the concentration area at Southampton.
Others I had met at the Commando Training Centre in the Scottish Highlands.
‘Do you think they want me to bring along the bagpipes?’
I asked Mick.
Mick looked at me for a couple of moments and, scratching his head, he replied If the Marines want you to play your bagpipes in their area, and you agree to do it, then you are all bloody mad.
Don't you know, Piper, that they are closer to the Germans than we are?
Not much closer mind you, but certainly closer.’
Mick was right.
The Brigade positions had been under attack for the past four days and Nos. 3, 4, 6, and 45 Royal Marine Commando had been having their share of casualties.
I decided to visit the Marines that evening and, after thanking Mick for his hospitality, made my way back to the orchard, thinking that as I had visited each Commando unit each day when we were in England, why not now that we were in France?
About 8 p.m. that evening Taff and I sat at the side of our slit trench eating what I thought was a rather dubious lump of meat.
Taff said it was lamb.
‘Where the bloody hell would you get lamb out here?’
I questioned.
‘Well, Boyo.
You see that field over there, plenty of it?’
The field Taff was referring to certainly had animals in it, but they were all lying on their backs, their legs in the air, dead for at least three or four days.
Some had been killed outright by flying shrapnel, others had been badly wounded and had died slowly.
It is always sad to see the wounded animals.
Three days ago on our way up here we passed a field with two horses standing at a five-bar gate.
Both animals had huge shrapnel wounds on their hindquarters.
The blood had dried on the wounds leaving gaping holes showing the bones.
The horses gazed at us as we passed by.
I looked back, they were still standing there showing no signs of pain.
I felt sad, and a little guilty.
I put the piece of meat back into the mess tin.
‘Not hungry, Boyo?’
Don't worry, we have plenty left for later.’
Taff carried on eating his large piece of lamb.
For the next half-hour we watched hundreds of Allied planes bombing the town of Caen a few miles away from our positions.
The Germans were certainly getting a pasting.
Clusters of fire bombs falling from the planes, followed by tons of high explosives.
The bomb-bursts could be seen through the huge pall of smoke and dust that hung over the city.
just after 9 p.m.
I left the orchard to visit the Marine Commandos.
Taff was chatting to the 3 mortar team that had moved into the orchard that afternoon.
They had set up their mortar about twenty yards from our trench, and periodically fired off a couple of bombs in the direction of the German positions.
A thick cloud of mosquitoes had arrived on time and soon settled on everything and everybody.
On my way through the village I met a member of the French Commando.
He was escorting three German prisoners in the direction of Brigade H.Q The Germans were doubling along, their hands held high in the air, a look of apprehension on their faces.
As the Frenchman doubled past behind the prisoners he shouted a greeting.
‘Ow are you, Beel?
‘Ow are you bagpipes?
Come an’ veezeet us, but not your bagpipe!’
‘See you tomorrow,’ I shouted after him.
The Marine Commandos were well dug in in a wooded area just off the road and close to the village.
The other Commando units were spread around the village in a very tight perimeter, and in places very close to the German positions.
Brigade H.Q was just at the entrance to the village with everyone within walking distance of each other.
The Marine position was very similar to where I was dug in.
The same mosquitoes, the same sniping and mortaring going on.
‘Hello, piper.
Nice to see you.
Sorry about the noise and the mosquitoes.’
The voice was Tony's.
He was walking towards me, his hand outstretched.
As we shook hands and started to walk along a narrow path in the direction of a few slit trenches, Tony remarked, ‘Big change out here from the South Coast of England, or the wilds of Achnacarry!
Or maybe you prefer the cold and the rain of the Commando Training Centre?’
‘Oh, Achnacarry is not so bad once you get used to it,’ I replied.
‘Well, Piper, here we are.
This is our forward area and the Germans are not far off.’
Tony stopped at a slit trench.
‘I think it would be safer if we continued our conversation in the trench.
Things are beginning to hot up a little.’
We dropped down in to the trench and Tony produced a couple of tins of Compo rations.
As we ate, I asked him about 45 Marine Commando casualties since the landing.
‘You probably heard, Piper, that our C.O., Lieut. -Colonel Reis, was wounded early on, and Lieut.
Colonel Gray is now in command.
You will meet him if you decide to stay here tonight.
there have been other casualties, killed and wounded.
You remember ‘Egg and chips twice,’ the Biblethumper who used to come into that little café with his girlfriend every evening when we were in billets on the South Coast?
He was killed about an hour and a half ago during a German counter attack on our positions.
His body is still here in the woods with three others killed in the same action.’
I cast my mind back to the South Coast of England.
Les was a bit of a lay preacher, but did not push his views on anyone.
He got the name Egg and chips twice' because, each time he came through the door of the café with his girlfriend, he would shout to the café owner, ‘Bert, egg and chips twice.’
I could never understand why he did it as there was nothing else on the menu but egg and chips!
He and his girlfriend would organise meetings in the local  Baptist hall and his girlfriend would play classical music on the piano.
Occasionally, two other musicians would accompany her, playing violin and flute.
After the music, Les would preach a short sermon, say a prayer, then he and his girlfriend would serve tea and biscuits.
No one could understand why he volunteered for the Commandos.
He did not seem the type, yet he passed his course at Achnacarry with flying colours.
Les was popular with everyone and I felt very sad about this news of his death.
The time was now 11.30 p.m., the Germans were putting up their flares.
The eerie lights would hang in the air for quite some time then the mortars came over to burst at the edge of the wood.
‘Don't you think it's about time you pushed off, Piper?
They will be wondering what has happened to you.
This mortaring is going to continue for some time.’
I clambered out of the trench and Tony escorted me back to the road.
We met one of the Medics who informed me that the bodies of Les and the other three Commandos had been taken through the village and laid out with the other dead in front of the Chateau.
‘Goodnight, Piper,’ Tony shouted after me, ‘Hope to see you again sometime, when these German bastards have pissed off home.
Bring your pipes and give us a tune.’
The night sky was still fairly light as I walked through the village, passing close to No. 6 Commando positions.
At the entrance to the grounds of the Chateau I could see a few Commandos.
As I approached I recognised one of them as a Medic from Brigade H.Q As we chatted together, I could see a number of dead Commandos lying on the lawn in front of the Chateau.
They were in rows, and each body was covered by an Army blanket.
‘Where are the four Marine Commandos who were killed this evening?’
I asked the Medic.
He pointed to the four bodies at the end of the row.
‘That's them, Piper, over there.’
I went over to the body nearest to me, the rubber soled Commando boots sticking out from under the blanket.
I drew back the blanket and uncovered the head of the body.
It was Les, he had a large wound in his chest, caused by a piece of shrapnel.
I replaced the blanket over his head and stood for a few  moments looking at the bodies in their neat little rows.
The sky was getting darker and the silhouette of the Chateau was casting a long shadow of gloom over the scene.
I made my way back to the orchard at Brigade H.Q, the time about 12.30 a.m.
The Allied guns had just started up as I entered the orchard.
Taff was with the 3″ mortar team as they continued to send over the occasional mortar bomb, their target a crossroads at the other end of the village.
‘How's things with the Marines?’
Taff enquired as we walked in the direction of our trench.
I was quite surprised at his reaction when I informed him of the death of ‘Egg and chips twice’.
He turned away for a few moments and I could see that he was upset by the news.
‘Jesus Christ, Piper.
He should have been the last person to be killed.
Look at all these blasphemous bastards that are still walking around this orchard.’
He indicated who he was talking about by drawing his arm in a wide sweep around the orchard.
The guns firing from the direction of the River Orne were making it difficult for me to hear what Taff was now saying.
We got into the trench and listened to the swish as the salvoes passed overhead.
The four Commandos on the 3″ mortar were still firing their bombs, each as it left the muzzle of the mortar making a distinctive musical sound like someone blowing down a length of drainpipe.
‘Right, piper.
I'll get my head down first, you stand by the gun and give me a shout in two hours’ time.
By the way, Piper,’ he continued, ‘why don't you sleep over at the big house?
I'm sure it must be more comfortable there.’
‘No, Taff, It's just the same at the big house, slit trenches and mosquitoes.
Anyway, I prefer to be with all you scruffy bastards out here.’
Taff disappeared to the back of his trench, cursing the mosquitoes and muttering a Goodnight, Boyo.
The shelling from the Allied guns seemed to be much more intense this evening.
The time was now just after 1.30 a.m.
An enemy flare was lighting up the sky at the other end of the village, probably over No. 6 Commando positions.
I wondered how they were getting on.
I would pay them a visit this evening, our fifth day in Normandy.
The Marine Commandos looked exhausted, some of them appeared to be about to  drop off to sleep on their feet.
I had been very lucky, so far.
I had been able to have a couple of hours' sleep here and there since the landings and, most important, I was able to move around more or less as I wanted to.
No doubt No. 6 Commando were having a rough time in their area.
At 3 a.m.
Taff joined me at the gun.
‘Had a good sleep, Taff?’
I enquired.
‘Not a fucking wink, Boyo.
Between the noise of the bloody guns and clouds of bloody mosquitoes buzzing around my head, all I've had for my two hours is more mosquito lumps on my face, and I'm more tired than ever., Taff and I chatted while he sat on the floor of the trench smoking his cigarette.
‘You know, Boyo, this is the start of our fifth day here in Normandy and we have been stuck in these bloody slit trenches having all kinds of shit thrown at us.
Well, Piper,…
’ Taff continued, dragging on his cigarette, ‘…something must happen very soon.
Either we attack the enemy positions, or they are going to attack us in strength.
We just cannot sit it out here all the time or we'll all go mad.’
‘No’ matter what happens, Taff, first, I am going to get my head down.’
I glanced up at the sky, ‘It's going to be light pretty soon.’
I moved to the back of my trench as Taff stood up to man the gun.
I made myself as comfortable as possible on the floor of the trench, wrapping the camouflage square round my head and face in a vain attempt at protection against the mosquitoes.
Fiona's face seemed very real as I closed my eyes and scenes of the Highlands passed before me.
This was the first time she had come into my thoughts since I left England.
I opened my eyes, she was still there, just looking at me, no smile on her face.
‘For Christ's sake, Piper.
Are you going to lie there all fucking day?
Don't you know that there is a fucking war on?
Come on, now…
Wakey, wakey!’
I sat up, removed the camouflage square from around my head and crawled to the entrance to the trench.
Taff thrust a mug of very hot tea into my hands.
He appeared to be in a very good mood about something.
‘Morning, Taff, thanks for the tea.’
‘Look, Piper, if those German bastards had overrun this  position, you would be a dead bloody duck by now!’
Taff continued talking as I sipped at my tea.
‘You know, Boyo, it's going to happen very soon, whatever it is.
I would say this morning, or tomorrow evening, the 11th.
All that shelling last night, the activity on the road this morning, things seem to be moving.’
‘Looks like it, Taff,’ I agreed.
As I gazed around the orchard the sun was coming up and there was that peculiar smell of the Normandy countryside.
Everything was peaceful except for the whine of a sniper's bullet through the trees and the sound of the mortar crew sending the occasional bomb to explode at the distant crossroads.
‘Maybe this lot will know what's happening, Taff.’
A jeep entered the orchard and stopped a few yards away.
‘Christ, Piper, that's all we need, the bloody Navy!’ burst out Taff as two sailors got down from the jeep and started to unload their gear.
Taff and I watched fascinated as they set up their equipment, then started to dig a slit trench.
From the way they were digging it was obvious that they had no idea what it was all about.
The sailors stopped digging when the trench was about one foot deep, then they sat down and lit up their cigarettes, gazing around the orchard, taking not the slightest notice of the mortar team just a few yards from them.
They both soon scattered when a mortar bomb burst at the entrance to the orchard, sending shrapnel whistling through the trees and thudding into the walls of the little cottage just a few yards away.
As we emerged from our holes in the ground, the two sailors looked a bit sheepish.
Taff approached them with the remark, ‘You will have to do better than that, Boyos.
You have to get right down as far as you can.
That was just one near miss, you both may not be so lucky next time!’
With that, Taff started digging while I searched around for timber to place over the trench.
The sailors rewarded Taff for his efforts with several packets of cigarettes.
I accepted a tin of pipe tobacco and two boxes of scented soap to trade with the old man in the nearby cottage.
Half-a-dozen fresh eggs would go down very well with Taff and I this evening.
The old Frenchman was delighted with the tobacco and soap and he insisted that I join him in a drink.
I  clambered over the wall separating his garden from the orchard and followed him into the cottage.
The interior was just as I expected from the books I had seen at school.
The flagstone floor, the long, bare wooden table, the low roof with the open fire and a large pot hanging from a heavy chain secured somewhere up the chimney.
A woman and three children got up from the table as I entered the room.
They all stared at me wide-eyed and continued to stand and stare even after I had sat down at the table.
The old Frenchman motioned for them to sit down and continue with their meal as he opened a cupboard and took out a bottle and two glasses.
He joined me at the table and poured out two generous measures of the clear liquid from the bottle.
The Frenchman lifted his glass and, holding it out in front of him, spoke one word Churchill.
I was so surprised I immediately responded with ‘de Gaulle.’
He emptied his glass in one gulp and I followed suit, only to end up spluttering over the table, coughing, with eyes watering, gasping for breath.
As I regained my composure I could see a wide grin on the Frenchman's face.
He spoke one more word, ‘Calvados.’
I had never heard of it before, but it was certainly something that I would look out for in the future with much apprehension.
The woman and three children were now laughing and I was pleased about that, as they had looked scared stiff when I entered their house a few moments before.
The Frenchman shook my hand and as I looked at him and his family I thought slowly to myself, ‘What a bloody chance he is taking.
Here I am, a British soldier, and he and his family are being friendly towards me.
The sea can still be seen from the orchard and it is possible at this stage that the German Army could push the Commando Brigade back into the sea.
And if that happened?
This family would probably end up in a concentration camp somewhere in Germany.
The Frenchman interrupted my thoughts by offering me another glass of the deadly Calvados.
I quickly declined his offer by shaking my head and putting my hands above my head in mock surrender.
The woman and children burst out laughing again, getting up from the table and crowding round me.
The family could not speak English and my  schoolboy French was almost exhausted so I bade them good afternoon but managed to make them understand that I would have dinner with them one evening soon —‘An English dinner.’
They all shook hands with me, and the Frenchman gave me a bag containing one dozen eggs before I clambered over the wall and into the orchard.
Taff was sitting on the grass just outside the trench, cleaning the Bren gun as I approached.
He nodded his head in the direction of the Orne river and remarked, ‘Those guns have started early, Boyo.
Hear all that shit going over?
Next thing Jerry is going to start up!’
I could hear the salvoes going over as Taff got into his trench and indicated that I should get into mine.
As I crouched down in the trench I thought of the French family just a short distance away from us.
They would probably be down in their cellar.
They seemed to take everything so calmly, the shelling, the dead animals lying around, British soldiers all over the place.
I wondered how they would take to steak and kidney pudding, oxtail soup, and plum duff.
My mind had suddenly switched to my dinner date with the French family.
If the Brigade was still around the village and things got a bit quieter I would keep that date, and treat them to British steak and kidney, etc.
As expected, the Germans replied to the shelling with a heavy mortar attack on the area around the orchard.
When the shelling and mortaring ceased, Taff and I got out of the trenches.
As Taff started to cook the first half-dozen eggs I went along the road that ran around the village and passed near to the orchard.
As I expected, the jeeps were now arriving with the Commando dead and wounded from the areas around the village.
A jeep stopped just outside Brigade H.Q The two stretchers it carried contained two bodies, each wrapped tightly in an Army blanket.
I walked over and spoke to the driver.
‘These are Airborne blokes,’ he said, ‘and there are plenty more just outside the village.
It appears that the Airborne and Commandos got caught up in the shelling and suffered casualties, dead and wounded.’
The next jeep had two French Commando wounded aboard.
One was lying on his back on the stretcher and  appeared to be badly wounded.
The other, whom I recognised at once from the camp at Southampton and from the training centre at Achnacarry was sitting u– on the stretcher cursing his bad luck in getting a piece of shrapnel in his leg.
The two Frenchmen had one thing in common.
They both had that deathly pallor that showed on every soldier who had been wounded.
The Frenchman waved to me as the jeep sped away down the road.
As I gazed after the jeep, I thought ‘Those two, I suppose, are lucky in a way, they are alive and have a Blighty!
The two Airborne lads in the first jeep are dead — their war is over.’
I remained at the roadside for a few minutes, sitting on the grass with my back to a low wall.
The occasional jeep was still passing by with its dead or wounded aboard, raising a cloud of dust as it turned out of the village and sped down the slight hill toward the Orne bridges.
The heavy mortar in the orchard was sounding its usual musical note as the high explosive left its barrel to fall in the enemy positions a short distance away, no doubt causing casualties, just as their mortars did when the high explosive landed in the Commando positions.
I got up from the grass and made my way back to the orchard as Jerry started to drop his shells in the dust cloud left in the wake of the speeding jeeps.
As Taff and I crouched in our trenches eating our afternoon meal and trying very hard to ignore the clouds of mosquitoes that were buzzing all around us, I looked at Taff.
He was eating his food, and, I thought to myself, ‘Christ, how he has changed his appearance after five days living in a hole in the ground!’
He looked tired, his eyes seemed to be open wider than usual.
Of course, everyone I had met today had this wide-eyed look; the wounded, the jeep drivers, and the Commandos occupying the weapon pits.
Five days and four nights subjected to shelling and mortaring and the ever-present sniping.
Lack of proper sleep had affected everyone, in one way or another.
I continued to look at Taff as he cleaned around the inside of the mess tin with his forefinger and drawing the finger across his lips with a slow gesture.
He must have sensed that I was looking at him, he suddenly glanced at me out of the corner of his eyes and, still cleaning the mess tin with his finger, he said quietly, ‘Why are you staring at me like that, Piper?
Have you never seen a Welshman eating his dinner, or do you think that I am going bomb-happy?’
Before I could reply a shell burst a short distance away sending a hail of shrapnel tearing through the branches of the trees above us.
As Taff and I ducked down into the trench I upset the remains of my meal over the floor.
Taff raised his head and grinned at me and, shouting above the din, remarked, ‘don't worry about me, Piper, I'm all right.
Just a bit down today.’
The grin left his face as he mentioned that he had been informed about an hour ago that his brother-in-law, who was a member of No. 4 Commando, had been killed during a German counter attack on the Commando positions.
It was most unusual to see Taff down like this and as I gave him my condolences I was thinking that the sadness was beginning to reach almost everyone.
The shelling had stopped now and it was certain that someone had been killed or wounded, maybe the chap in the next slit trench a few feet away.
As I clambered out of the trench and made my way across to Brigade H.Q I could see the jeep with the stretchers on top waiting at the entrance to the orchard.
A body wrapped in an Army blanket was being placed on one of the stretchers and a Commando with a bad face wound was being helped into the seat next to the driver.
As I reached the road the jeep roared off with its dead and wounded, leaving in its wake the usual cloud of dust.
I hurried along keeping close to a wall and waiting for the inevitable mortar burst that would follow in the path of the jeep.
A few seconds later there was a loud explosion in a hedgerow just off the road, a short distance away.
Yesterday morning at the crossroads leading to the village a jeep carrying wounded Airborne troops received a direct hit by a mortar bomb killing everyone on board.
At Brigade H.Q the Brigade Major was just leaving as I arrived and there was no sign of Shimi Lovat.
He was probably visiting one of the forward units at the village perimeter.
Mick informed me that the Brigade Major had gone to pay No. 4 Commando a visit, so I decided to make my own way there and keep out of the Brigade Major's path as much as possible.
No. 4 Commando positions were being heavily mortared  when I arrived, and Jock, my friend of many years ago, took me off to find some shelter in a dug-out, giving at least some protection from the flying shrapnel.
A short distance through the woods the Brigade Major was keeping his head down.
Jock laughingly informed me that when he had arrived in the area there had been a short quiet spell.
The German mortaring had suddenly stopped and the Brigade Major was standing out in the open talking to an Officer when, just as suddenly, the mortars started up again, sending their bombs swishing through the trees and sending the Brigade Major diving for cover.
‘You've picked a fucking good time to pay people a visit!’
Jock remarked.
‘This had been going on almost all the time since yesterday, with two German counter attacks on our positions.’
Jock seemed out on his feet, his head kept jerking forward and his eyes were continually closing.
I'm sure if it wasn't for the explosions close at hand he would have dropped off to sleep.
‘Well, now that I am here it looks like I shall stay until things quieten down.
Let's hope the Germans don't decide to counter attack this evening.’
‘How is Lovat?’
Jock enquired.
‘He's OK,’ I replied, ‘Don't see much of him.
These days are very worrying for him, I suppose.
I'll tell you one thing, Jock, with Lovat in command there will be no retreat from these positions.
If the Panzers come through here before we have sufficient equipment ashore, you and I and every bastard in this Brigade have had it, including Lovat.’
Jock was on his feet and leaning on the parapet of the trench.
He had picked up the Bren gun and was gazing to the left of the wood and pointing the gun in the same direction.
The mortaring had eased off a bit.
Now the German barrage seemed to be concentrating on the edge of the wood about a hundred and fifty yards to our left.
The concentrated explosions were throwing lumps of dirt and large pieces of wood in all directions.
‘As you were saying, Piper, if Jerry breaks through the Brigade's positions, every bastard has had it,…maybe this is it coming up?’
The light was fading and it was getting difficult to distinguish what was happening.
‘What do you think is happening, Jock?’
I enquired.
‘It could be another attack on our positions, Jock replied.
‘They usually mortar the area first, then come across the fields.
This morning they attacked the Marine positions and partly overran them, Piper,’ Jock continued, ‘You certainly picked a fucking good time to pay No. 4 Commando a visit.
It's quite possible you won't be leaving here tonight!’
He had hardly finished his remark when there was a terrifying roar overhead as a salvo of shells crashed into the area near to where the Germans had been mortaring.
I his was followed by another salvo crashing nearer to the German positions.
Jock exploded with a mouthful of oaths.
‘The silly bastards have landed that first salvo in our positions.
Jesus Christ!
Things are bad enough without our own guns shelling us!’
It appeared that the naval guns, about five or six miles back in the English Channel, were either trying to break another German attack or were just shelling the enemy positions!
Whatever the Navy's intentions, their shells were landing in the Commando positions and causing some havoc.
There were loud cries of protest from around the wood as the Commandos were forced to keep well below ground.
‘Are you staying here for the remainder of the night?’
Jock enquired.
‘I don't know,’ I replied, ‘It's just as bad back at Brigade H.Q We also have the Navy dug in with us in the orchard.
Up until now the naval salvoes are landing in the German positions somewhere in front of No. 6 Commando, at the other end of the village.
So, for the moment, our problem is not with the Navy observers who are directing the naval guns, it's with the increasing number of guns firing over our positions from the direction of the River Orne.
From time to time a shell or two falls short and we have several casualties.’
‘Talking about fucking casualties, there's not very many left of No. 4 since we landed at La Breche on Tuesday!’
Jock's voice was raised as he continued to describe the events over the past five days:— The attack on the Casino at Ouistreham and the eventual capture of the town by the British and French of No. 4 Commando.
The noise of the exploding mortars in the wood and the accompanying rattle of small arms fire drowned the rest of Jock's words.
As I  looked at him sitting opposite me on the floor of the trench, I was fascinated by his resemblance to the other Commandos I had met over the past five days.
The same indescribable appearance of the eyes, probably caused by the constant lack of sleep and the strain of being on the alert all the time.
‘Do I look like him?’
My thoughts were interrupted by Jock saying very quietly, ‘If you are thinking of getting back to H.Q, Piper, I advise you to piss off as soon as you can.’
The evening was now getting dark, but light enough to see my way.
As a last attempt at conversation, I asked Jock, ‘Tell me, why do they call you Jock?
You have an English accent, why the Jock?’
‘Well, you silly bastard,’ he replied, ‘My father was born on the Scottish side of the Border and my mother on the English side.
I was born on the English side, but prefer to be Scottish.
Now fuck off Piper while the going is good for you.’
He had a smile on his face as we shook hands.
The German mortars were exploding on the other side of the wood as I clambered out of the trench and made my way through the trees in the direction of the road.
Two explosions in quick succession made me throw myself to the ground.
They seemed so close, just behind me!
A voice from a slit trench close by shouted, You all right, Piper?
‘Yes, I'm all right,’ I shouted back.
I lay on the ground for a few moments; there were no further explosions.
As I warily got to my feet I felt a compulsion to retrace my steps in the direction of Jock's trench.
He lay on the grass, a large open wound on the back of his head and one of his legs was missing.
His green beret lay close by.
A piece of shrapnel had hit his cap badge and had penetrated the front of his skull.
The cap badge with its St Andrew's Cross split in two brought a lump to my throat as I stood rooted to the spot.
Stretcher bearers were quickly on the scene, taking two wounded Commandos away and leaving Jock lying on the grass.
There was nothing they could do for him.
No doubt they would return and place him with the other Commando dead in neat rows in front of the Chateau to await burial.
German flares were lighting up the sky behind me as I hurried along the road, keeping close to the houses and in  their shadows as much as possible.
Away to the left across the fields, and probably in the area of No. 3 Commando, flares were going up, followed by very rapid rifle and machine gun fire.
The German Spandaus with their very fast bursts made them easily distinguishable from the British automatic weapons.
‘How are things at No 4 Commando?’
Taff enquired as I jumped down into the trench beside him.
‘Not too good,’ I replied, ‘Anything to eat or drink?
I'm starving!’
As Taff poured me a good measure of cider and handed me a boiled egg and a chunk of meat I described the situation at No. 4.
‘Jesus Christ, Piper!’
Taff exclaimed, ‘It's a wonder there's anyone left out there!’
‘Not many of the original lot that landed at La Breche five days ago,’ I replied, ‘There have been a lot of casualties since the landing, many of them caused by mortar fire over the past few days.
This, combined with very determined German counter attacks, is keeping everyone on their toes all the time, plus the lack of proper sleep is beginning to take its toll.’
Taff had a couple of mouthfuls of his cider and, placing the empty mug on the floor of the trench, he remarked, ‘At least one thing, Piper.
We are all in the same boat out here.
You can be just as dead in this orchard as in any other around the village.
Furthermore, Piper, I won't be in this trench tonight,’ continued Taff, rising to his feet and climbing out of the trench.
‘I shall be manning a weapon pit on the left side of the village.
You can come along if you want to, Piper.
It won't be as comfortable as this, but the fucking Mausers are the same, and the shelling and the mortaring, so we should feel at home.’
I agreed to accompany Taff.
He picked up the Bren gun, I collected the ammunition and we made our way out of the orchard.
I was still chewing on the chunk of meat Taff had given me.
‘What kind of meat is this?’
I said, holding it out on the palm of my hand.
‘Look, Boyo, it's the best Normandy lamb, it just dropped dead in the field over there this morning.’
‘The same lamb you put a rope round the neck of and then chased into the German minefield?’
‘That's right, Boyo.
You know as well as I do that you cannot take an animal unless it's dead and that animal died in the minefield.’
We arrived at the weapon pit at the side of the road and close to a low wall.
This is going to be great, I said to Taff as we settled ourselves in the trench and set up the Bren gun.
The mosquitoes had already arrived in force and made us feel as if one trench was very much like another.
The view from this weapon pit was very different from the one in the orchard.
In the semi-darkness the houses around the village and the church in the centre of the green stood out like monuments with their shadows changing their shapes from time to time as a cloud obscured part of the moon.
The Allied guns behind us sent a few shells rushing over our heads from time to time.
The Commando mortar team over in the orchard made its presence known by dispatching a single H.E.
bomb every few minutes, their target the German-occupied village about three-hundred yards along the road.
The musical sound as the bomb left the barrel of the mortar still fascinated me.
‘Don't you think the sound of that mortar appears musical in some way, Taff?’
‘Maybe to you, Piper, but I'm bloody sure the unfortunate bastards at the receiving end of the high explosive do not appreciate its musical talents.
Now, Piper, you try to get some sleep.
No use two of us standing here by the Bren.’
As I wrapped myself in my gas cape and crouched down in a corner of the trench, I gazed up at the sky.
The night was calm and warm with just a slight rustle of a breeze in the trees.
The mosquitoes were hanging like a cloud over us.
They seemed to be everywhere.
Taff was standing by the gun swatting the mosquitoes that were landing on his face.
The shelling had increased and it was difficult to sleep because of the noise and, above all, the persistence of the mosquitoes.
I got to my feet and stood by Taff at the gun, both of us staring out into the night.
For the few brief minutes when the shelling ceased the scene before us looked  very peaceful.
‘Are you married, Piper?’
Taff suddenly asked, turning to look at me.
‘No,’ I replied, ‘haven't found the right one yet.
Are you married, Taff?’
Taff turned away and, staring straight ahead, answered, ‘Yes, piper.
I have a wife and a year-old son back in Cardiff.
I was married when I was twenty.
I am now twenty-five years old.
Christ knows if and when I will see them again.’
I looked at Taff.
His face was half-hidden by the shadow of the tree behind us.
Before I could say anything he continued with, ‘You must have a girlfriend somewhere, Piper, a smart-looking bloke like you.’
This was more like the usual Taff.
He could slip out of his depressed moods very quickly.
‘Yes,’ I replied, ‘I have one here and there.
Nothing serious.,
‘What about the one up in the Highlands, Piper?
Isn't she something special?
I've heard that you and her were more than friendly when you were on the staff at the C.B.T.C.’
I tried to change the subject by commenting on the lack of activity in front of our position.
Anyway, it was good that Taff was back to his old self.
‘It's no good trying to change the subject, Piper, I know all about your activities with the crumpet.
You are a right crafty bastard as far as women are concerned.’
We both started to laugh as I had the last few words on the subject.
‘I should be so lucky!’
The shelling had started again.
One or two shells were dropping short.
It was my turn to be concerned.
‘We won't stand much of a chance if a shell lands near or on this trench,’ I remarked apprehensively.
‘Jesus Christ, Piper.
You are a right cheerful bastard tonight.
Look at those flares going up over No. 6 Commando positions.’
Taff was pointing at two bright flares hanging in the sky over the farm a short distance away.
There followed a lot of automatic fire and the usual crump of mortars.
‘Seems like there is something special going on over there tonight, Taff.
All the shelling has probably got Jerry worried and he anticipates an attack.’
‘Look, Piper.
As I mentioned to you yesterday, those  bastards are going to attack us, or we shall be attacking them tomorrow, certainly on the following day.’
All this increased activity, the shelling and mortaring, with the German counter attacks on the Brigade's positions increasing.
As Taff was talking he was looking around in front of our position.
He suddenly stopped talking and, gazing intently through the semi-darkness to our left, he said excitedly., ‘Piper, do you see anything moving about in that field over there?’
About a hundred and fifty yards away I could just make out three figures crossing at the corner of the field and approaching the road in our direction.
‘They can't be our lot,’ Taff whispered, ‘That's Jerry's positions over there.’
He swung the Bren gun round and putting the butt to his shoulder, he whispered, ‘Right, Piper.
Get your rifle sights on that lot.’
The three figures were now almost at the road and out in the open when Taff opened fire with a long burst.
I opened fire on the leading figure.
The first two fell to the ground and the third figure disappeared into the hedgerow, followed by a long burst of fire from Taff's Bren.
We continued to stare at the corner of the field for some time, expecting to see some movement.
‘We got the first two!
Taff said excitedly, ‘The other bastard seems to have got away.’
‘It will be light in about another hour,’ I said, ‘Then we can see the results.’
The shelling and mortaring had almost died away, except for the occasional round from the mortar team back in the orchard.
We were both fairly tired, having had no sleep all night.
‘You try to get some sleep, Taff.
You have at least an hour.
I can always catch up with my sleep later on this morning.
Anyway, you will be allowed some rest after spending all night out here.’
OK, Piper.
I think I will.
Taff lay down on his back on the floor of the trench, oblivious to the mosquitoes and everything else and was soon snoring loudly.
One very important thing that I had noticed since we landed in Normandy five days ago was  that no one had any problem with insomnia. quite the reverse.
I found myself talking to someone and watching him go to sleep on his feet.
I awakened Taff at first light (for stand-to) as the early morning Normandy mist was gathering over the fields and hedgerows.
A slight breeze was blowing from the left, bringing with it the stench of a dead bloated cow that was lying against the five-bar gate leading to a field.
There must have been dozens of dead animals lying around, most of them killed by shrapnel or having wandered into a minefield.
‘How's it going, Piper?’
Taff said sleepily as he stood up, then leaned over the side of the trench, his head resting on the grass.
Before I could answer his questions he remarked slowly, ‘You know, Boyo, I had a bloody good dream.
I dreamt that I was in Cardiff and in bed with the wife.
I was away from this fucking place for a while.’
Looking at his watch, he stood up, ‘Great what you can do in an hour, Piper.
That dream was as good as my last leave.’
‘Glad you enjoyed it, Taff,’ I answered as we both climbed out of the trench, picked up the Bren and the ammunition and made our way along the road in the direction of the orchard.
I glanced back in the direction of the field where we saw the figures crossing.
The dead and bloated cow was still lying at the entrance to the field.
The two bodies were lying face down on the grass a few yards apart.
Even from where Taff and I were on the road it was obvious that the dead soldiers were German.
I wondered if the third soldier had made it back to his own lines.
The field they were in had British as well as German mines sown all over the place.
As Taff reported to Brigade H.Q I made my way into the orchard, made a mug of tea, had something to eat, got into my trench and immediately fell asleep.
‘You bloody Pipers can certainly sleep.
Are you going to sleep in that pit all fucking day?’
The voice belonged to the ‘Trog’, a short, thick-set man who resembled a character of the Stone Age and was as strong as an ox.
I was rubbing my eyes as I clambered out of the trench.
‘What's up, Trog?’
I asked.
‘What's up you say, Piper?
Jesus Christ, you have been in that pit for the past three hours.
We thought you were dead!’
The Trog was a member of the 3″ Mortar team.
His face was not a pleasant sight to behold on awakening.
He had a large head with his hair cut right into the wood, piggy eyes and a broad flat nose that looked like it had been well punched in its day.
He had one redeeming feature — his very good nature, except when he was in the boxing ring or after a few whiskies, when everyone gave him a wide berth.
‘Come on.
Follow me, Piper.’
The Trog said, leading the way over to where the mortar team were sitting with their backs to the wall, having something to eat.
I was offered a choice of steak and kidney pudding or a couple of chunks of local pig.
I chose the steak and kidney pudding.
‘I think I will be a vegetarian after the war.
At the moment it's difficult to tell the difference between beef, mutton or pig.
Or is it just the way it's cooked?’
‘One of the Officers over at H.Q was looking for you earlier on.
We told him that you had been out all night and that you were catching up on some sleep.
Nothing important, Piper the Trog said, handing me a full mug of cider.
‘I think he said he was taking a trip down to the Orne bridges round about mid-day, and would like you to accompany him.
You have plenty of time yet, Piper.
Finish your meal first.’
From time to time one of the team got to his feet, went over to a neat pile of mortar bombs, picked one up and slid it gently down the muzzle of the mortar.
The bomb shot out with its characteristic sound on its way to the enemy positions.
‘Keeps the bastards on the alert,’ remarked the Trog, ‘Nothing like a load of exploding mortar shit to keep their fucking heads down!’
The Commando who had sent the bomb on its way was looking at his watch as he sat down to finish his meal.
‘In about three minutes we shall have one or two bombs from the German mortars falling near here,’ he remarked, as he started again on his steak and kidney.
The Commando sitting next to him looking at me  remarked, ‘The bombs never land on this mortar, Piper, They always burst among the squaddies somewhere else.’
My thoughts went back to yesterday evening and Jock at No. 4 Commando, the damage done to him by a German mortar bomb, his head almost split in two and a leg blown off.
‘Penny for your thoughts, Piper,’ the Trog said.
‘I know what you're thinking!
You're looking at that meat there and you're wondering what nationality it is!’
The Commando who had put the bomb into the mortar looked across at the Trog, shook his head and said slowly, ‘It's ‘species'’ you silly bastard.
We know the nationality of the meat.
It's French!’
‘OK, OK,’ the Trog replied, ‘makes no bloody difference, it tastes good, doesn't it, Piper?’
I nodded my head in agreement.
At the big house I met the Officer who had been looking for me earlier on.
He was sitting in his jeep as I turned into the driveway.
‘Come on, Piper!’ he exclaimed impatiently, For Christ's sake!
We can't sit here all day!’
I got into the seat next to him and he quickly drove off, heading out of the village and down the road towards the Orne bridges, leaving a cloud of dust following close behind, no doubt attracting the attention of the German gunners and mortars a short distance away across the fields.
I was glad of the break to get away from the monotony of the orchard with the constant sniping and mortaring.
Not that this bothered me so much now.
As we reached the crossroads I looked back.
Sure enough, the enemy mortars were bursting in the fields on both sides of the road.
Some people back there would be cursing us for raising so much dust.
The jeep reached the River Orne and we turned off the road on to a narrow path just wide enough for the jeep.
About a hundred yards along the path I could see guns that were dug in fairly close together.
They looked like 15 pounders.
The guns were all along the river bank as far as I could see.
The jeep stopped at a caravan that was situated just off the path and under two trees.
The caravan was heavily camouflaged with netting and branches from trees.
An Officer came out of the caravan as we drew up.
His words to the Commando Officer in the jeep were  drowned by the crack of the 15 pounders as a few of them opened fire, the guns lurching forward as the shells sped off towards their target.
The two Officers shook hands, then they both went into the caravan after informing me that they would be attending a meeting for the next two hours.
I parked the jeep under a tree and then, looking at my watch, I decided that as I had a couple of hours to spare I would take a walk across to the other bridge where I had noticed a café on our first day into Normandy.
It was quite possible that it would be still open for business.
Troops and supplies were crossing the Benouville bridge as I approached the café.
Some of the troops were waving and seemed very cheerful.
Obviously they had no idea what lay ahead after they had crossed the bridges and got close to the enemy positions.
The odd German shell was bursting in the field about two hundred yards away from the bridge, far enough not to do any harm, except possibly to the cattle.
The café looked deserted as I approached the front door.
There was no answer to my knock so I went round to the side door facing the canal.
After two loud knocks the door was opened by a woman.
Immediately behind her was a man, probably her husband.
They looked at me apprehensively when I asked for a drink of cider or wine.
The woman was getting quite agitated, looking along the banks of the canal and exclaiming, ‘Fermé, fermé.’
The man standing behind her spoke as I was turning to walk away.
‘You are Scottish?’ he said, ‘You were playing the cornemuse on the approach to the bridge six days ago.’
‘Yes,’ I replied, ‘You speak good English.’
He shrugged his shoulders, ‘At times I like to speak English, but not for a long time.
Come in and have a drink.’
They stood to the side as I entered then the woman showed me to a chair as the man brought two glasses and placed them on the table in front of me, then said very seriously, ‘This is my wife.
What is your name?’
I stood up and shook hands with both of them saying slowly, ‘My name is Bill Millin.’
The offer of a glass of Calvados was politely refused and I accepted a large glass of red wine that really tasted good.
After about twenty minutes I got up and prepared to leave, thanking both of them for their hospitality.
The woman in particular was rather nervous of my presence in her house and I didn't blame her.
After all, the Germans were still not far off.
As I reached the door the woman smiled and said something in French which I did not understand.
Her husband said, ‘Wait one moment, Monsieur, my wife has something for you.’
She disappeared back into the kitchen and returned a few minutes later carrying a very dirty and dusty bottle of wine.
Addressing the husband, I said, ‘Thank your wife very much for the bottle of wine.
Tell her that I shall keep it until I am an old man.
That is, if I survive the war.’
I slung my rifle over my shoulder and clutching the bottle of wine I crossed the bridge for the second time, heading east, turning to wave to the couple at the door of the café.
I wondered as I waved, ‘Shall I ever see them again?
I suppose not!’
The guns along the banks of the Orne were still firing as I arrived back at the jeep.
The Officer was talking to two gunners who appeared to be Polish judging by their accents.
The Commando Officer shook hands with the gunners and we waved our farewells as we drove along the narrow path and on to the road.
There was a lot of activity around the orchard as we arrived back at H.Q The sniping had increased and a mortar attack seemed to be under way.
It was difficult to determine whether the explosions were from the German shells or from the Allied shells passing over, with the usual one or two dropping short.
We both got out of the jeep as fast as we could and sprinted in the direction of the slit trenches.
I decided to make for the orchard and the safety of my own trench.
The Officer had gone a few yards when he suddenly fell to the ground.
I turned back to see what was wrong.
He was clutching his foot and was obviously in a lot of pain.
I think I have a piece of shrapnel in my foot, Piper.
See if you can get hold of the medic at the back of the house.’
Before I could do anything, two medics came sprinting along the path from the direction of the big house.
The Officer was put on to a stretcher.
The blood was oozing out  from the tip of his boot and his face had turned the usual grey colour of the soldier who had been wounded.
I decided to stay where I was at the moment until things quietened down.
As I lay flat on the grass close to a tree the blood from the Officer's wound had stained the grass a dull red colour.
I pulled up a few tufts of grass and covered the blood.
It made me feel uneasy.
My eyes were drawn to it as if the Officer had left part of himself here on the grass.
The shelling had ceased.
The explosion in the orchard seemed to be coming from further away, from the other side of the orchard.
They were probably mortar bursts.
Taff was in a foul mood as I jumped down into the trench.
He was briskly preparing a meal of compo rations.
‘You know this, Piper?
Those bastards, I don't mean the squareheaded bastards across the fields, I mean the bastards who are sending all this shit over our heads all the time.’
Taff's face was really mean looking as he continued to curse the gunners along the River Orne.
I decided to delay informing him of my visit to the Orne and speaking to the Artillerymen who were sending the shells over our heads.
‘Not steak and kidney again.’
I said, as Taff scraped out two tins of self-heating steak and kidney.
‘Well, Boyo, it's either this or that,’ said Taff, pointing to the alternative — a large piece of meat that had been roasted over a fire and looked most unappetising.
‘Think we'll stick to the good old British steak and kidney,’ I said.
Half way through the meal Taff produced a bottle of red wine scrounged from H.Q It certainly tasted good and set off the meal.
‘Where is the mortar team, Taff?’
I enquired as we clambered out of the trench after draining the last of the French wine.
‘That's what I was on about, Boyo,’ Taff answered, pointing to the spot a few yards away where the mortar team had been this morning.
‘A British shell dropped short during the bombardment earlier on and the explosion knocked out the mortar team.
They were all badly wounded!
Jesus Christ, Piper, our guns are better at inflicting casualties on us than the Germans.’
The time was now late afternoon.
I decided to have a rest, then visit No. 6 Commando.
They were dug in at the other end of the village in an orchard very close to the enemy positions.
At about 7.30 p.m., after two and a half hours' sleep curled up on the floor of the trench, I made my way out of the orchard and on to the road.
The Allied guns were still shelling the German positions and there was a lot of activity going on.
There were minor explosions in the centre and at the far end of the village green.
Troops were marching through on either side of the road.
I walked alongside the men at the head of the column and soon learned they were the Black Watch, a well-known Scottish regiment.
The regiment had come ashore that morning and were going into action that evening, attacking the village just along the road, about two hundred yards from the edge of our village and close to No. 6 Commando positions.
They all looked so young, but were about my age, between eighteen and twenty-five years.
Their clothing and equipment were dusty but they appeared clean in comparison with the Commandos.
No doubt after six days of living in a trench, the dirt would have had time to grime itself in.
They all appeared cheerful as they marched away.
I left them as I approached No. 6 Commando positions and stood at the side of the road and watched them all pass by.
I had a very deep feeling that the attack on the village by the Black Watch was not going to be successful due to the fact that the enemy were well dug in and were determined to hold on to this position.
It was a tough nut to crack.
The Commandos and the Airborne had launched several attacks without success.
In fact, the Germans made several counter attacks on the Commando positions, also without success, so we both, over the past six days, had got to know each other very well.
The attacking column disappeared along the road, some of them entering the fields in the area of the No. 6 Commando.
From the road, No. 6 Commando positions could be approached by passing through the farm.
The front of the farm had received several hits by shrapnel.
All the windows in the farmhouse had been shattered, the whole scene resembling something from the Blitz.
As I entered through an archway into the cobbled  farmyard the shelling had increased, most of the shells passing over in support of the attack party going in just along the road.
I entered the barn at the corner of the farmyard.
Lying around on bales of hay were about a dozen Commandos.
They sat up as I came in, then relaxed when they recognised me.
There were faces among them that I recognised from England, and from the training centre at Achnacarry.
Christ, they had changed.
They looked older, certainly different.
‘It's all right, I haven't brought the bagpipes,’ I jokingly remarked.
The response was nil.
They all looked too tired to be bothered with any joking.
‘Changed days, Piper!’ remarked Jimmy, as I sat down beside him on a bale of hay.
‘We have been under enemy attack since we arrived here six days ago, with practically no sleep.
This lot have been brought into the barn for a rest,’ indicating with his hand the others who had by this time fallen asleep, oblivious to the noise of the guns and the explosions very close to the barn.
‘Not much of a rest for them in here,’ I remarked, as a mortar bomb burst close by in the orchard, causing the barn to shake a load of debris from the rafters, covering everyone below in pigeon and probably hen shit.
‘There's nowhere else to go, Piper, You know that!
All the units are in the same situation.
The only fairly quick exit from here is feet first.
That is if the medics can get to you!’
Jim lay back on the bale of hay and immediately fell asleep, still grasping the barrel of his rifle.
The barn shook again as I got to my feet and made my way to the door with the feeling that the barn had been very lucky so far in not receiving a direct hit from one of the frequent mortar bombs that were exploding in and around the farm.
Outside in the cobbled farmyard I glanced at the side of the barn.
It was covered in scars caused by shrapnel.
Here and there lumps of metal were sticking out of the masonry.
Across the farmyard the door of the farmhouse lay open.
There was no sign of the occupants.
No doubt they were down in the cellar sheltering from the bombardment.
The curtains were hanging outside the smashed windows, the whole scene one  of desolation.
At the far end of the yard, the metal five-bar gate was wide open.
As I entered the orchard, a few yards from the entrance the farmer was tending to two badly wounded cows.
The cows were standing at the entrance to a small byre, while the farmer poured a purple fluid from a bucket into their wounds.
Both cows had large gaping wounds caused by shrapnel in their hindquarters.
As the farmer poured the fluid into the wounds they would bellow loudly and kick out at him.
He turned to look at me as I approached, then carried on tending to the cows.
His hands and clothing were covered in the animals blood.
He was a medium-sized man, thick-set with a rough weatherbeaten face covered in grey stubble.
He was completely oblivious to the noise of the shells passing overhead, or the rattle of automatic fire echoing through the orchard.
As I stood watching him for a few seconds and looking at the damage to his farm buildings and the dead and wounded cattle around the orchard, I thought to myself.
How can these people ever forgive us for all this damage?’
The farmer must have read my thoughts.
He stopped what he was doing and, placing the bucket on the ground, he turned to face me, holding out his right hand.
As we shook hands the Frenchman said very slowly in French, ‘Monsieur, we are very pleased to see you here in Normandy.
All this damage can be repaired when we have beaten the Boche.’
He went back to tending his cows, and, looking at me as he bent down to pick up his bucket, he said, ‘I am Monsieur Saulnier.
You must come and visit me after the war and bring your Cornemuse .’
As Monsieur Saulnier mentioned the bagpipes, he smiled and turned his head away.
I left the farm as it was getting late.
There was a strong smell of burning in the air.
A cottage across from the farm had been hit by a shell and was burning fiercely.
The smoke was drifting slowly across the farm buildings in the still air.
On the way back from No. 6 Commando positions to Brigade H.Q the road was busy with Jeeps ferrying the wounded from the area where the Black Watch had been attacking the German positions.
Some of the wounded were  being placed on the grass in front of the Chateau.
‘How is the attack going?’
I asked one of the medics who was unloading the wounded.
‘Not very well, Piper.
The Germans have counter attacked and inflicted a hell of a lot of casualties on the Black Watch.’
As the wounded were being unloaded from the jeeps I could see the wounds were mainly inflicted by shrapnel.
Large ragged tears similar to those suffered by the cattle in Monsieur Saulnier's farm.
The wounded who seemed to have a chance of recovery were left on the jeeps and were sped off down through the village to the dressing stations on the other side of the River Orne.
The less fortunate were the severely wounded who were being placed on the grass with two medics to attend to their wounds.
Clouds of mosquitoes were beginning to arrive and settle on the wounded.
‘Jesus Christ!
as if things were not bad enough without those little bastards turning up to torment us,’ remarked one of the medics as he tried to pack a shell dressing into a large abdominal wound.
Darkness had suddenly settled as I entered the orchard at Brigade H.Q Taff was in the trench, standing by his Bren swatting the mosquitoes and cursing loudly to himself.
It struck me that Taff no longer used his favourite cuss words, like the four-letter variety, and was sticking strictly to the bloodys with the very often repeated ‘Jesus Christ.’
As I approached the trench he remarked, ‘Jesus Christ, Piper!
You bloody well get around!
And you always seem to arrive back in time for supper.’
He placed two tins of self heating soup on the grass in front of him.
‘How are things at 6 Commando area, Piper?’ he enquired, ‘The attack by the Black Watch has not gone too well judging by the number of wounded passing through here!’
A flare lit up the sky as Taff was talking, casting eerie shadows among the trees.
I got into the trench and opened my tin of soup, pouring the piping hot liquid into a mess tin.
‘You're right, Taff.
The attacking troops are certainly not getting it all their own way and the shelling from both sides is causing casualties in the Commando positions.’
The  flare had drifted slowly down behind the church on the village green and was followed quickly by a long burst of automatic fire.
There were two mortar explosions over by the road, then all was fairly quiet except for the sound of firing away in the distance at the other end of the village, where I had been earlier on in the evening.
We finished our soup and swilled out the mess tins with water from the jerry-can.
Taff produced a couple of pieces of meat and offered me one.
I accepted straight away.
I was getting used to these burnt offerings and, strangely enough, was finding them, on occasion, very tasty.
‘Now, Piper, every good meal should be accompanied by a bottle of best French wine!’
With that, Taff produced a very dirty and dusty bottle of Bordeaux.
For a moment I thought he had come across the bottle of wine given to me by the couple at Benouville bridge café.
‘The thieving bastard!’
I muttered under my breath as Taff pulled out the cork and commenced pouring the wine into the two mugs.
‘Down the hatch, Piper!’ said Taff, raising his mug.
‘Same to you, Taff,’ I replied, picking up my mug with one hand and the bottle with the other.
Straight away it was obvious it was not my bottle.
Before I could say anything, Taff remarked, ‘Come on, Boyo.
Drink up, there's another mugful each.
It's not often you come across a good Bordeaux!’
We finished our meal.
Taff decided to do the first two and a half hours on the gun so I crawled to the back of the trench, curled up and immediately dropped off to sleep.
The mosquitoes and the noise of the guns were not as important as they seemed several days ago.
‘Right, Boyo,’ Taff's voice seemed miles away in my half awake state.
It was very much closer when he accompanied his ‘Right, Boyo’ with a jab in my ribs with his rifle butt.
I crawled out of the trench and joined Taff at the Bren gun.
He thrust a mug of tea into my hands, with the remark, ‘Get that down you, Piper, and keep your head down.’
We crouched down in the trench and drank our tea, listening to the crump, crump as two mortar shells exploded close by.
It  was still dark.
I gazed upwards and could see a few stars twinkling in the sky, one seemed much brighter than the others.
‘You see that star, Taff’ See how much brighter it is.’
I looked at Taff sitting opposite me in the gloom, his hands wrapped around his hot mug of tea, his shoulders hunched forward.
He was silent for a few moments, then he raised his head, took a couple of gulps of tea and remarked very slowly, Jesus Christ, Piper, you must be bloody bomb happy!
We are all living in holes in the ground having all kinds of shit thrown at us and all you can talk about is one star being brighter than the others.’
Taff drained his mug of tea, turned on his side and crawled into his trench muttering to himself, ‘He's cracking up.
He's bloody bomb happy,’ then silence as Taff quickly fell asleep.
I stood up and gazed along the barrel of the Bren gun and couldn't help smiling to myself and thinking that Taff was at his funniest when he was annoyed about something, even though our circumstances at the moment were anything but funny.
The activity on the road on the other side of the orchard had increased, there were troops and the occasional vehicle moving up and through the village followed by the usual German mortaring of the road and orchard.
At first light I gave Taff a shake and presented him with a mug of tea.
He crawled out of the trench and joined me at the gun.
It was suddenly quiet in the orchard as the mist floated through the trees.
Taff's first remark was ‘I wonder how many copped it last night, Piper?’
After breakfast I decided to visit Brigade H.Q Taff was sitting on the grass just outside the trench cleaning his Bren gun.
He seemed to be a lot more cheerful and appeared to have recovered from his bout of depression of the previous evening.
‘See you later, Boyo,’ he shouted after me as I set off, rifle over my shoulder, through the trees in the direction of Brigade H.Q
I turned and gave him a wave, ‘Don't wait up for me, I may be late.’
I didn't quite catch his reply.
No doubt it was something rude!
As I entered the big house by the back door I noticed a lot of activity, people dashing here and there.
This was not the usual scene.
I recognised Officers from the Commando units around the village.
I met up  with Pat in a small room at the front of the house tucking into a breakfast of fried eggs and an obscure piece of meat that took up about half of his mess-tin.
As I entered the room he got up from the floor, drawing his sleeve across his mouth.
‘Hello, Piper, you are a little bit late for a bit of breakfast but sit down and have a mug of tea.’
‘What's that you're eating with the fried eggs?’
I enquired, as I sat down on the floor beside him.
‘Oh that, me boy, that is the rabbit that was in the cage when we arrived here last Wednesday morning.’
I looked at the mess-tin containing the eggs and the meat.
‘For Christ's sake, Pat, not the big fat rabbit that was in the hutch hanging on the wall at the back of the house?’
‘That's the one, me boy, and it has this morning presented itself in four mess-tins.
Those of three Officers and, of course, meself.
It was a lovely looking rabbit but it was wasting its time all cooped up in that cage!’
Pat proceeded to polish off the remainder of his breakfast, with grease from the remains of the rabbit trickling down the sides of his mouth.
He placed the empty mess-tins on the floor, lit a cigarette, and, leaning back against the wall, remarked ‘i don't think the Frenchman who owned the rabbit would object.
After all, Piper, it's all in a good cause.’
At the rear of many French houses I had noticed several rabbit-hutches containing the largest rabbits I had ever seen, certainly larger than anything in Britain.
These rabbits were probably fattened up for some special occasion.
Many of them must have ended up in a British soldier's mess-tin.
Pat finished his cigarette and, looking at me as he rose to his feet, said, ‘Piper, I believe it is all going to happen today.
There is a counter attack going on, and the target is the next village just along the road there,’ indicating with his forefinger in the direction of No. 6 Commando positions in and around the Saulnier farm at the other end of the village.
As he spoke I could hear the rush of shells passing over heading in the direction of the German positions.
The German gunners reply crashing in a couple of minutes later caused pat and I to get on the floor fast.
When the explosions eased off a bit, I bade farewell to Pat and got out of the big house as quickly as possible.
I always felt slightly  uneasy away from the slit trench in the orchard.
As I was leaving the house Pat shouted after me, ‘Piper, your friend Taff who shares the trench with you in the orchard has been transferred to one of the Commando units around the village.
Something to do with the number of casualties they are having.’
As I was leaving the front of the house two jeeps arrived with wounded aboard, one of whom I recognised straight away.
He was sitting up on his stretcher cursing away in French and then in English at the top of his voice.
He was one of my friends of the French Commando who were attached to No. 4 Commando.
As I approached the jeep he recognised me.
‘Ah, Bill, all the bloody bad luck, fucking wound in my leg.’
He looked really fierce with his black beard and long black hair.
His wound was covered lightly with a shell dressing, and I moved it to one side to have a look.
There was a ragged hole just above the knee on his left leg caused by a small piece of shrapnel.
I hurriedly replaced the dressing and looked at him.
He was still cursing in French and English.
I thought ‘how can he possibly behave like that with a wound that would lay low any other soldier?’
As the jeep moved away at speed I could still hear him shouting, then it was gone in a cloud of dust, road leading to the beaches to join the other wounded waiting to be shipped back to England.
I returned to the orchard to say goodbye to Taff before he left to join one of the Commando units around the village.
I found him in his trench enjoying a mug of tea and in deep conversation with a Commando friend of his.
As I helped myself to a drop of Taff's tea the guns down by the River Orne opened up again, the shells all heading in the direction of the German positions.
I just got into the trench in time as a few explosions were occuring in several parts of the orchard.
The German gunners were certainly not sitting about doing nothing.
Taff did not seem to mind going to one of the forward units.
In fact, he seemed quite cheerful and was looking forward to meeting some of his old mates at 6 Commando.
‘Day seven today, Piper, 12th June,’ Taff remarked as he tried to move around the cramped area of his trench collecting his bits of equipment.
We were still confined to our trenches due to the bombardment which  continued for some time.
‘The German shelling is very accurate Taff, don't you think?
See how there are shells exploding almost on the same spot in that field over there.’
I indicated with my forefinger in the direction of the bursting shells.
Taff's answer was his usual ‘Not German shells, Boyo, its those bastards down by the Orne who are dropping their shells about.
Let's hope they keep to the field over there, at least until we leave the orchard.’
Later in the day the shelling ceased so Taff and I were able to get his kit together and make our way through the village to the farm and No. 6 Commando positions.
I left Taff at the entrance to the farm and watched him as he continued along the road then, as he clambered up the grass bank and disappeared among the trees, I turned into the farm.
There was a lot of activity in the area of the farm buildings, people dashing about even though the farm was being heavily mortared.
Wounded were being brought out from the orchard at the back of the farm which was being subjected to unusually heavy mortaring from the German positions just a short distance across the fields.
I made my way through the orchard and into a slit trench.
The shells from the Allied guns were passing very low overhead and bursting at the edge of the wood in the German positions.
‘You see that lot, Piper.
The bastards are getting a taste of their own medicine.’
The voice came from my right.
I turned round to see who it was and immediately recognised Jim.
We used to chat a lot as we rested during the frequent route marches out of camp at Southampton.
I shouted above the din, ‘Big change in the scenery now, not like the peace and quiet of the waterworks at Southampton.’
I don't think he heard me — due to a very loud explosion a short distance away forcing everyone to duck low into their trenches as lumps of earth and other debris accompanied the flying shrapnel through the trees.
Someone cried out ‘Where's the medic?’
The voice sounded faint and was soon drowned out by the rush and moan of the shells passing over.
At least the German infantry won't be attacking us from across the field in front of our positions, as long as this barrage keeps up.
Wounded were being carried through the trees to the shelter of the farm buildings, the medics stopping from time to time to rest, then continued quickly on their way.
After about an hour the shelling stopped and was followed by sporadic mortar and machine gun fire, the latter cutting up the ground along the front of the orchard facing the enemy positions.
Two medics arrived on the scene carrying a wounded Commando on a stretcher.
I scrambled out of the trench and accompanied them through the trees to the farm.
At the farm I met Pat from Brigade H.Q He was delivering a message to the C.O. of 6 Commando.
‘Hello, Piper, bloody rough in this area, isn't it?’
‘What's it like at Brigade H.Q?’
I enquired.
‘Just the same, Piper, makes no difference where you are this evening.’
As we were talking the guns started up again, making conversation very difficult.
The wounded were being laid out against the wall of the barn.
I spoke to one of the medics, he informed me that the attack on the village just along the road was under way and already there were many casualties, particularly among 6 Commando, due to the heavy shelling from the Allied and German guns.
‘Lovat was enquiring about you earlier on, Piper,’ shouted one of the medics who had come out of the barn to tend to the wounded.
‘Where is he now?’
I enquired.
As it was impossible to hear what he was saying above the din of the bombardment, he pointed to the area outside the farm indicating that Lovat was somewhere there.
Outside the farm, I could see the unmistakable figure of Lord Lovat standing on the grass talking to two other senior Officers.
Troops were moving through the village heading in the direction of the attack area and the artillery fire had increased in support of the attack, the usual odd shell or two dropping short causing casualties among the troops moving along the road.
As I approached Lovat and the two Officers, a shell burst a short distance away.
Everyone got down very quickly as another shell exploded in the front garden of a cottage across the road.
From my position lying flat on the ground, I looked up, Lovat and the two Officers were still talking.
They appeared completely unconcerned about the shelling going on around them.
I scrambled to my feet a little sheepishly as one of the Officers had turned round and was observing me as I approached.
I stood on the fringe of the little group  for a few moments waiting for a chance to speak to Lovat.
One of the Officers turned to me and indicated that I should push off.
I saluted him and then made my way back to the farmyard and the comparative safety of the farm buildings.
I had gone a few paces when there was a loud crashing explosion behind me.
I could feel the blast on my back as I was pitched forward, landing face down on the ground unable to move and gasping for breath.
I lay there for what seemed like an eternity and feeling in a sort of panic.
Was I wounded?
Had I lost an arm or leg?
I was now able to breathe properly and started to feel over my body with both hands.
I was all right.
The only injury was a bleeding nose sustained when I crashed down onto my face, following the blast.
I crawled over the grass and sat with my back against the farmhouse and stared at the blood pouring down the front of my battledress.
Where was Lovat?
He and the other Officers must have been very close to the shell burst!
As I struggled to my feet and started to search around in the grass for my rifle, two medics were coming towards me.
‘Is Lovat all right?’
I enquired.
‘No, Piper, he is badly wounded.
Lump of shrapnel in his back.’
The shelling and mortaring was still intense as I followed behind the medics.
When I came across Lovat he was lying on the ground.
As I looked down at him lying there it was difficult to believe that this was Shimi Lovat.
His battledress was soaked with blood on one side, his face was a ghastly grey colour with the mouth hanging open, his head was turned to one side with the eyes closed.
I just stood and stared for a few moments amid all the activity that was going on around the wounded Lovat.
One of the medics attending him looked up at me.
‘For Christs sake, Piper.
It's no good standing there, there's nothing you can do to help.’
As I turned away someone was shouting for the M.O.
and another voice was asking for a priest.
After a few paces I stopped and looked around.
Lovat had gone, probably tied to a stretcher, placed on a jeep and taken at full speed to the First Aid post.
The attack on the village along the road was still going on, wounded and dead Commandos were being placed against the walls of the cobbled farmyard, waiting their turn as the jeeps ferried to and fro through the village.
About twelve midnight the German positions in the village were over-run, and for about an hour the enemy mortaring in the farm area ceased.
I had time to enquire about Taff.
It appeared that the slit trench he was in during the bombardment had received a direct hit.
He had been killed instantly along with two other Commandos who were close by at the time, their remains scattered through the trees.
The remaining part of the night was spent lying in a trench near the centre of the orchard reflecting on the happenings of the day.
Lovat badly wounded, probably dead by this time!
Certainly, judging by his appearance as he lay on the ground, I did not give much for his chances.
As I stared up at the clear sky from the bottom of the trench, my mind drifted back to Achnacarry and Fiona.
I could see her face very clearly in the wisp of cloud that was now making its way across the sky.
A few seconds later her face had gone, as the cloud changed shape then disappeared.
Her words came back to me as I pictured her sitting by the fire in her tiny croft.
‘Millin, you will be leaving here and going away with the tall man, Lovat.
He will be badly injured but will return to the Highlands and live for many years.’
My thoughts were interrupted by several loud bangs from very close by, then two flares lit the sky, hanging eerily just above the trees, then drifting out of sight a short distance away, followed by a long burst of machine gun fire.
I moved further into the trench, lay on my back and tried to sleep, which was very difficult due to the mosquitoes and the uncertainty of the situation.
Taff was blown to pieces in his trench earlier this evening, probably thinking he was safe a couple of feet or so below ground.
Poor old Taff.
How could it possibly happen to him?
He seemed so different from anyone else.
His depressions, then his elations, his cursing, and his generosity.
I am certainly going to miss him, I have only really known him for the past seven days, but it seems like years.
I don't know how long I have been asleep!
I awoke feeling cold and crawled out to the front of the trench.
Dawn was beginning to appear through the trees.
Looking around I could see the duty Officer approaching from the direction of the farm.
He passed me by, probably more concerned about his own men of 6 Commando and the  large number of casualties inflicted on the Commandos during the attack on the enemy positions in the village just along the road.
The German defenders had pulled out and, from their new positions, they had lost no time in setting up their mortars.
The explosions were now occurring in the area they had just evacuated, probably inflicting casualties on the British troops who had taken over the German trenches.
I made my way through the trees to the farmyard, four Commandos were stacking ammunition against the farmhouse wall.
As I approached, a Corporal remarked ‘Too bad about Lovat, Piper.
He will be sadly missed by everyone in the Brigade.’
As I entered the barn someone handed me a mess-tin full of hot tea.
I sat down on the straw and looked around.
A few feet away two medics were lying stretched out on the floor of the barn, one lying face down, his arms by his sides, he appeared to be dead.
‘No, they are not dead, Piper.
The poor bastards are exhausted!’
I turned round to see who was speaking, it was the Corporal who had mentioned Lovat being wounded.
‘Yes, Piper.
When you and I were in our slit trenches sheltering from the shit that's flying about, these two here were running around the orchard picking up the dead and wounded.’
The Corporal glanced sympathetically at the two figures on the floor and then he moved to the other end of the barn.
I drained my mess-tin, got to my feet and went out across the cobbled farmyard, under the arch, and out along the road leading to Brigade H.Q hoping that I would not be requiring the special services offered by the medics.
After a few hours' rest I had something to eat.
As I sat just outside the entrance to the trench it was very difficult to accept that Taff was dead.
I glanced round a couple of times expecting him to appear through the trees with a mouthful of oaths and a loud ‘Come on, Boyo!
Where is the bloody tea.’
Later in the day a notice was hammered to a tree at the entrance to the orchard.
A few Commandos had gathered to read the notice.
As I approached someone remarked ‘at least he is still alive.’
The few words posted to the tree informed everyone that Lovat had been badly wounded and was now in hospital somewhere in England.
He wished us the best of luck and advised us that the  Brigade was here to stay.
‘There shall not be one step back.
The ground taken by the Brigade since the landing will be held at all costs.’
The new Brigadier was the C.O. of 6 Commando, Derek Mills Roberts.
As I made my way back to my slit trench I wondered what would be my role now that Lovat had gone?
Would Mills Roberts wish to retain my services as the Brigade Piper or would he send me back to Achnacarry?
At least the new Brigadier served in the Irish Guards and they had Pipers.
I would just have to wait and see.
The capture of the village yesterday evening did not make much difference to our situation in and around the village.
The enemy, it appears, have withdrawn a short distance from the area in front of 6 Commando, the front being just the same in front of the other Commando units.
Another mortar team has moved into the orchard this evening, 13th June, and got down to work straight away by sending off several rounds of high explosives in quick succession in the direction of the enemy positions.
Later that evening I joined them for dinner, sharing a few tins of Compo and three bottles of French cider.
I don't like the cider very much, much too dry, but drink it just the same.
The clouds of mosquitoes are beginning to arrive and are hovering in strength over the slit trenches.
Monsieur Saulnier informed me the other day that it was not usual in this part of Normandy to have so many mosquitoes.
I believe the reason they are attracted here is the dead cattle lying around the fields.
Also the dead German soldiers lying in front of the Commando positions on the left of the village.
As I settled into my trench for the night Allied bombers were passing overhead to drop their bombs on Caen.
‘Can't be much left of that bloody town,’ shouted one of the 3″ mortar team as we watched the bombs falling from the aircraft.
The sky was soon dark and the sound of heavy bombs exploding died away, to be replaced by shells passing over the orchard from the British guns down by the river Orne.
During the night a couple of German shells crashed into the far end of the orchard near the road.
I am beginning to count the days since the landing and to reflect on all that has happened.
It is 5 a.m., 14th June.
There is a slight drizzle falling through the trees and most of the  mosquitoes have gone, except one or two persistent little bastards buzzing about inside the trench.
One lands on the back of my hand and thrusts its needle-like head into my skin.
I wait until it fills itself and then I swat it, the blood splashing over my hand.
The mortar team have started up again, sending their shells through the drizzle.
One of the team replaces the cap on the mouth of the barrel then they sit down, backs against the orchard wall and eat their breakfast.
I enter the day and date in my diary and look again at the entry of the 12th June.
‘Lovat badly wounded.’
Taff killed during the intense shelling and mortaring of the Commando positions.
As I close the diary I notice that it's getting a bit grubby.
At least it survived the sea water during the landing and has come this far.
‘What are you writing, Piper?’
The voice came from one of the mortar team over by the orchard wall.
‘Nothing,’ I replied as I scrambled out of the trench, replacing the diary quickly in my hip pocket.
After breakfasting with the mortar team I made my way over to Brigade H.Q As I passed along the wall of the orchard I suddenly thought about the Frenchman and his family who lived in the cottage on the other side of the wall.
I clambered over the wall and dropped on the other side and made my way quickly across the field in the direction of the cottage.
As I drew nearer I noticed that half of the roof had gone and there was a large gaping hole in the wall at the side of the cottage.
Surely the old Frenchman and his family haven't been killed!
The place was deserted, there was no sign of the family, smashed furniture and household goods were strewn all over the place.
It appears that the shelling of yesterday evening was responsible for all this damage.
As I turned away and headed back the way I had come I passed two dead cows lying on the grass, large shrapnel wounds on their bodies.
A short distance away another cow was grazing, apparently unconcerned about some of its intestines trailing in the grass from under its belly.
I clambered back over the wall, crossed the orchard and, as usual, entered H.Q by the back door.
‘Piper.’
I turned round, there was no mistaking that voice.
It was the new Brigadier, Mills Roberts.
I sprang to attention and gave him a smart salute.
‘Sorry about Shimi  Lovat being wounded,’ he said, in his clipped manner.
‘At least he is still alive and that's what is important.’
‘Now, Piper, no doubt you are wondering about your future with the Brigade?
Well, you can stay with the Brigade as Piper until we return to England at the close of the Normandy campaign.’
‘By the way, Piper,’ he continued, ‘can you play Wearin' o’the Green ?’
‘Yes, Sir,’ I replied.
‘Well then, carry on!’
I saluted then watched him as he barged along the corridor and out of the front door.
Pat emerged from the kitchen ‘You know why he was askin' you if you could play Wearin' o’ the Green ?
Well.
he served with the Irish Guards before he volunteered for the Commandos, and you can be sure that he will have you playing that tune as often as possible, as long as you don't play it around this H.Q, I don't mind.’
As we entered the kitchen Pat looked up at the roof and the large gaping hole caused by a shell that had passed through two floors then smashed through the kitchen door, ending up in the garden.
‘We don't want any more of that lot around here, Piper, so we will forget about bagpipes and shells through the roof.’
Crossing over to the sink he bent down, lifted up two floorboards and produced a small wooden barrel, exclaiming, ‘Now, Piper, you must try this, it's almost as good as your best Highland whisky.’
He poured a small quantity into two mugs and handed one to me.
Pat's crater was a very good French brandy that he had probably scrounged from somewhere local, most likely the Chateau just along the road.
‘Cheers, Pat,’ I said raising my mug of brandy.
‘For the Officers, me boy,’ Pat replied with a wink.
‘And sure, there is no harm in the other ranks having a wee drop before it is served up to the new Brigadier.’
Pat recharged the mugs from the barrel.
I declined his offer of another brandy, made my excuses, and thanking him for his hospitality I left by the back door.
The sniping in the orchard has cased off since yesterday, the constant whine of a bullet passing through the trees is not so noticeable.
This has been replaced by an increase in the number of mortar shells exploding in the part of the orchard nearest to the road.
No doubt the Germans are  aware of the increased activity this side of the Orne, particularly on the road leading to the village.
Every cloud of dust on the road has an immediate response from the German mortars.
There are now obvious signs that we are here to stay.
The latrine situated near to the road at the far end of the orchard has been moved to the other side, as far as possible from the road, due to the increasing mortaring.
The new latrine now situated in a quiet corner of the orchard has been given a permanent status; a shithouse clerk has been appointed.
This appointment has convinced everyone that no matter what the enemy does now, or in the near future, we are here to stay.
The new shithouse clerk, a small, wiry Liverpudlian, was taking his new appointment very seriously when I arrived at his canvasstructured place of work.
‘Two minutes, no more, Piper, he remarked from his comfortable armchair at the entrance to the latrine.
Three Commandos were perched side by side on a length of wood stretching the length of the latrine.
‘Come on, Scouse, what's the grif?
When are we going home to Blighty?’
One of the Commandos on the perch was addressing the newly appointed clerk.
‘Next week some time,’ answered the Scouse, ‘This is a fact, he continued One of the staff at the big house overheard the Brigade Major talking to the Medical Officer.’
The new latrine in its fairly protected situation, and the newly appointed shithouse clerk was to be a great boost to Commando morale during the days ahead.
After all, almost everyone would visit the latrine at some time or other, bringing with them a load of information concerning the course of the war.
The new latrine was now the source of a new cry, What's the grif, Scouse? as one took one's place on the length of wood, ‘When is the Brigade going home?’
Scouse would give you time and date according to information supplied to him by his previous customers.
The next two days had settled into a daily routine of cleaning weapons and trying to catch up on lost sleep as every night was disturbed by the constant shelling.
Yesterday evening I went through the village and along the road leading to the village that had been attacked on the evening of the 12th June.
The village was a scene of  devastation with most of the villagers' houses flattened by mainly British shellfire.
German S.P. guns and other motorised equipment were lying about the approach road in grotesque twisted shapes, victims of direct hits from the British guns.
Several German bodies were sprawled about the road; they were beginning to swell.
Clouds of flies were crawling over the faces of the dead Germans.
One dead soldier was in a sitting position, his back against a wall, his head leaning backwards with the eyes staring and mouth hanging open, his blonde hair matted and covered with blood.
As I turned away there were several mortar explosions behind me, about a hundred yards back along the road.
A jeep trailing a cloud of dust was speeding in my direction.
The driver slowed as he drew level with me and shouted, ‘Get into the ditch!’
The jeep sped on towards the crossroads.
I threw myself into the ditch as two further explosions occurred, this time at the crossroads just ahead of the jeep.
The jeep was gone and the dust had settled, surely the driver realised that dust-raising meant instant reaction from the Germans with shelling and heavy mortaring of the area and the inevitable casualties.
As I lay in the ditch I was suddenly conscious of a very strong indescribably sickly smell.
Raising myself on one hand to peer over the ditch before clambering out onto the road, my hand and forearm suddenly went through the soft earth up to the elbow.
As I pulled my arm out there was a rush of foul-smelling air; my hand and arm covered with a green and black substance.
I felt a strong feeling of nausea as I realised that I had put my hand through the chest of a dead British soldier that could have been lying in the ditch for several days.
The body had been covered by a thin layer of soil as was the practice when a soldier was killed in action and there was no time to move him to the rear.
Before the dead soldier was placed in the ditch his pay books, personal possessions, his equipment, and one of his identity discs were removed, leaving one disc on the body for identification purposes.
A light layer of soil was put over the body and the spot marked.
If there was time, a roughly made cross was placed at the head of the dead soldier holding his beret or steel helmet.
Later, people would come  along, dig him up and remove him to a more permanent resting place where the vicar would say a few words and it would all be over, except for those who remembered him.
As I made my way back along the road I noticed that the ditches on both sides of the road contained dead British and German soldiers.
The constant mortaring and shelling of the area had dislodged a few of the corpses and the flies and mosquitoes were everywhere.
The dead German sitting with his back to the wall that I had passed earlier on had slipped from his position, and was now lying with his blond head in the ditch.
At the Saulnier farm (6 Commando area) I washed my arm in the cattle trough but could not get rid of the smell.
Looking around the cobbled farmyard and at the farm buildings, the shelling and mortaring that went on during the attack on Breville had taken its toll.
There was a gaping hole in the roof of the barn.
Over by the entrance to the orchard, two smaller buildings had been demolished.
There were a few Commandos resting in the barn, they looked up as I entered but showed no recognition.
Their eyes were red through lack of sleep and exhaustion.
I turned and left the farm and made my way through the village to Brigade H.Q
Seventeenth June, it's 4 a.m.
‘Stand-to’, and a steady drizzle has been falling since 3 a.m.
The mosquitoes don't seem to like the rain either, they all seem to be at the back of the trench.
During the night a German 88 was intermittently shelling the road, making sleep impossible.
In my half awake state I heard a shell coming over very low and exploding close by.
There was a cry, followed shortly by a pounding of feet past the trench and down through the orchard, then silence, except for a rumble of artillery somewhere in the distance.
At 6 a.m. the mortar team started to drum up for breakfast.
I waited until the tea was ready then joined them for a warming meal of steak and kidney pudding, followed by a very hot mug of tea into which was placed a measure of Navy rum.
Yesterday the spirits and beer ration had reached us; rum for the Officers and beer for the other ranks, but as we were all involved in the war, everything was shared.
As I crouched against the wall which offered some  protection against the rain, the mortar team Corporal got up from the grass where he had been sitting and, crossing over to the small pile of H.E.
bombs beside the 3″ mortar, he picked one up and slid it down the barrel of the mortar.
As the bomb shot off over the trees in the direction of the German positions the Corporal returned to his seat, with the remarks.
‘Have that for breakfast you bastards.’
The team laughed and nodded their approval, continuing with their meal as the rain dripped steadily into the mess-tins and the mugs of tea.
Nursing my mug of tea in both hands and feeling the warmth of the rum through my body, the thought crossed my mind as I watched the mortar team sitting on the grass in front of me, ‘What if the Germans discovered where we were, and got our range?
No doubt they would send over a few H.E.
bombs in time for our breakfast tomorrow morning?’
I recollect that it had happened before to the team's predecessors, practically on the same spot.
‘Penny for your thoughts, Piper,’ the Corporal remarked.
‘Just enjoying the taste of the rum, Corporal,’ I replied, getting to my feet and swilling out the mess-tins and empty mug as I made my way through the drizzle to my now very muddy slit trench.
By noon the rain had stopped and already the trees and grass in the orchard were almost dry as the hot sun shone through the leaves.
Hello there, Piper.
Fancy a run down to the river Orne to collect some water?’
I looked up from cleaning my rifle.
It was ‘Gunga’ the driver of the water truck, he hated the nickname, Gunga Din of cinema fame, and everyone was careful to avoid addressing him as anything other than just ‘George’.
George was a Sheffield man, and proud of it, accent and all, although everyone agreed that if George was dressed in a loincloth and turban he would make a very impressive hillman of the Khyber Pass, with his dark hair and very tanned skin.
I slung my rifle over my shoulder and walked across to join him as he was preparing to leave.
We called at Brigade H.Q where I picked up my bagpipes.
George stared at the bagpipes as I clambered into the passenger seat beside him and sat with the pipes on my lap.
‘Right, George.
Let's go!’
I said, closing the door.
‘For Christ's sake, Piper.
What the bloody hell are you  going to do with those bloody bagpipes?’
‘Play them, of course,’ I replied.
‘When you are sucking up all that filthy water from the River Orne into your tank, I shall be further along the river bank playing the bagpipes.’
George reluctantly accepted the situation and with a mouthful of curses we drove off down the now dusty road towards the Orne.
As we approached the bridge he stopped the truck.
‘Right, Piper, you get off here and blow your fucking pipes all you want to.
I'll pick you up on the way back.’
Gunga drove off over the bridge as I looked around for a suitable spot to get some practice in.
The guns a short distance away along the river bank were shelling the German positions as I started up the bagpipes in a fairly secluded thicket, the sound of the drones and the pipe reed easily drowning the noise of the guns.
From the thicket I could see the bridge and to my amazement I could see Commandos marching in file across the bridge and coming slowly towards me, a few of them looking and pointing in my direction.
Stopping the pipes and stepping out on the footpath at the side of the river I walked towards the Green Berets.
Someone in the column seemed to recognise me; he was shouting and waving his arms.
‘You are a long way from Achnacarry, Piper!
Have you come to march us in?’
He was referring to the times at Achnacarry when I would on occasion meet the trainees returning from a speed march and pipe them the last two miles back to the camp.
I could see now that they were Royal Marine Commandos, No. 46 Commando of 4th Commando Brigade.
After a few pleasantries and the shaking of many hands, I accompanied the column for a short distance along the road.
The Sergeant informed me that No. 46 Royal Marine Commando had come ashore in Normandy on D-Day + 1 and had gone into action almost straight away at a spot further along the coast from here, against a crack German S.S. Unit (Hitler Youth).
During this and other actions in the area, the Commandos had lost many men, killed, wounded and missing.
They were now on their way to join 1st Commando Brigade on the ridge this side of the River Orne, on our left nearest to the coast and probably next to No. 3 Commando.
I missed seeing their C.O. Colonel Campbell Hardy.
It seemed that he was further along the road.
As we said our goodbyes and hoped to meet up again soon, I couldn't help thinking as I watched the column disappear in the distance that the Marines were not going to find the situation any easier than their last venue.
‘Come on, Piper, don't stand there dozing, let's get away from here as quickly as possible!’
The voice belonged to George, he had drawn up on the other side of the road, and as I walked towards him his voice was getting impatient.
‘With all these Commandos walking about and you playing your bagpipes, the whole German Army will be disturbed.
Let's get going, Piper, before they start throwing the shit about.’
I got into the truck and George sped away along the road, the water slurping heavily to and fro in the tank immediately behind our seats.
The orchard as it is today.
Lovat's headquarters's on the left
Twentieth June — visited No. 4 Commando (French Troop) and was saddened by the number of casualties they have had since the landing at La Breche on the morning of 6th June.
Their positions were under constant sniper fire during the day so I had to keep as close to the ground as possible.
My friend of the South coast of England days, a Corporal Chauvet, informed me in his usual quiet manner that the two Troops of French Commandos, numbering almost two-hundred men, who had landed on 6th June were now, due to casualties, down to about sixty-seven men.
Their Commanding Officer, Philip Keifer, was wounded early on and was now back in England.
Many Frenchmen whom I met on several occasions at the Training Centre at Achnacarry and on the South Coast of England had also gone, either killed or wounded.
Colonel Dawson, Officer commanding No. 4 Commando, had become a casualty and had been evacuated to England.
As I spoke to Chauvet and several other Commandos scattered around the orchard, I was impressed by their determination to stay here in France, no matter what.
It was sad to think that they had waited so long in England for this invasion of their homeland and after a few hours ashore so many of them had been killed or wounded, the dead now lying in a temporary grave in the corner of a Normandy orchard.
I had a meal as a guest of the French Padre and two other Commandos, in a fairly large dug-out.
The meal was excellent.
I had no idea what it was, but it certainly tasted good, all being washed down with a very good red wine.
I have learned very quickly since landing in Normandy to eat  and drink what is offered, with no questions asked.
The Padre sitting opposite me had a rifle across his knees, the rifle not in keeping with his rather mild manner and angelic face.
He had a good knowledge of Scotland, particularly the bagpipes, and I am sure if I had offered to go along to Brigade HQ to fetch my bagpipes he would have had me marching up and down the orchard playing his favourite tunes, much to the consternation of the other Commandos, and possibly the annoyance of the Germans just a short distance away.
The other two Commandos were Bretons and had served in the French Navy.
They had to make their way from North Africa to England to join the Free French forces and then volunteered for the Commandos.
The time has passed quickly and it is now getting dusk, the mosquitoes have arrived and the German mortaring of the orchard has started, the first salvo exploding a short distance away causing pieces of earth to fall from the logs covering the roof of the trench, the earth and other bits of debris falling onto the now empty mess-tins.
I decided to leave before it got dark, first thanking the Padre and his two Breton friends for their very kind hospitality.
As I shook hands with the Padre, I said.
‘Tell me, Padre, is it usual for a priest to carry a rifle?’
The Padre and the two Commandos laughed, one of the Bretons pointing at the Padre with his forefinger, exclaimed, ‘He is a bloody good shot, Beel!’
With that remark I took my leave and made my way through the orchard and onto the road leading to Brigade H.Q That evening as I lay in my trench I thought about the events of the first seven days in Normandy.
The heavy attacks on the Commando positions around the village and the counter attacks that followed have now faded away since the attack on Breville on the night of 12th June.
The first seven days of heavy fighting and shelling have caused a large number of casualties; the Commando units in some instances are down to less than half strength.
The German infantry facing us appear to have lost the initiative.
Or they may just be building up their forces to start another attack.
If they do attack again in strength I don't see how we can possibly hold them, due to our large number of casualties and the very few reinforcements that seem to be joining us.
A new type of warfare seems to have developed, constant sniping during the day by both sides, and increased mortaring and shelling at night.
The British guns behind us seem to have the edge on the German artillery.
More shells are passing over our heads on their way to blast the enemy positions, than are coming our way.
Of course, we are still receiving the odd British shell dropping in the orchard.
The big house (Brigade H.Q) received another hit this evening, it could have been a German or British shell.
The wall surrounding the house next to the road was demolished, with large chunks of masonry and shell splinters whistling through the trees.
The days passed with the jeeps carrying the dead and wounded from the forward areas stopping briefly at Brigade H.Q on their way to the beaches.
Twenty-sixth June — I accompanied an officer to a meeting at airborne H.Q near the River Orne.
Troops and tanks were coming over the bridge, the soldiers appeared very pleased to be here, waving and smiling at everyone.
As I stood and watched them pass by I wondered how many of them would be killed or seriously wounded by this time tomorrow afternoon.
On the 24th June a small number of reinforcements had reached us and were immediately deployed to the Commando units facing the enemy.
I recognised one of the Commandos as someone I knew before the war.
My parents had moved to the outskirts of Glasgow and I joined the local pipe band and met Duncan McIntyre.
He was a side drummer and very keen to join the Cameron Highlanders Pipe Band.
Meantime, he was employed at the local grocery store as a delivery boy delivering groceries to the local customers on his bike.
He had very red hair and a pale complexion with masses of freckles all over his face, he was very popular with everyone and lived for the day when he could join the Army, particularly the Camerons.
Eventually, we both arrived at Inverness as Privates in the Cameron Highlanders.
Duncan, by his keeness, was soon sporting three stripes and had got himself married.
We parted, I joined the Commandos, he stayed on with the Cameron Pipe Band as Sergeant.
We next met briefly at Achnacarry.
He had given up his three stripes to join the Commandos and was now the father of  two children, a boy and a girl, his wife living with her parents in Perth.
As we shook hands, I said, ‘For Christ's sake, Duncan, you have a wife and two kids.
You have given up your rank of Sergeant to run all over these hills.
‘Oh, I shall soon get my stripes back and I shall enjoy the excitement of the Commandos; anyway my Piper friend, I shall enjoy running all over these hills.
I left for the South Coast to join Lord Lovat and the invasion that was to come.’
Duncan stayed on at Achnacarry to complete his Commando training.
We next met the day he arrived in Normandy.
I was standing outside Brigade H.Q when the reinforcements marched through the village.
I recognised his shock of red hair and freckled face straightaway.
I walked alongside the column for a short distance.
He was desperately keen to be in action and was excited about being here in France.
That same evening, two hours later, he was killed by a German mortar bomb that had exploded directly on his slit trench.
He was lying on the ground covered with a blanket when I arrived, the medics were preparing to place the body on a jeep.
As they lifted him on to a stretcher and then on to the jeep the blanket slipped away from his shoulders revealing his red hair and a very white arm covered in freckles.
I stood staring at the jeep as it bumped and swayed over the uneven ground of the orchard until it reached the road and then disappeared in a cloud of dust.
‘Friend of yours, Piper?’ remarked a Commando as he passed by.
‘He didn't last very long in Normandy!
Just joined us this evening from England.’
The tanks and troops were still crossing the river as the Officer I had accompanied drew up beside me with the jeep.
‘Jump aboard, Piper,’ he said, ‘and let's get ahead of that lot,’indicating with his arm the direction of the tanks grinding along the road.
‘Some of these poor bastards won't be alive this time tomorrow, Piper.’
As we overtook the tanks and troops the Officer turned to me and remarked, ‘Sorry about your friend copping a packet the other day.
Most unfortunate, had been in action only a couple of hours.
Well, that's the way it goes, Piper,’ and in the same breath, ‘look in that canvas bag on the back seat  and help yourself to what you want.’
I looked in the bag, it was full of fish.
‘Yes, Piper, fish, freshly caught, or should I say blown out of the water!’
It appeared that the officer had been admiring the fish swimming about in the water of the Orne when a Royal Marine Commando asked him if he would like some for his supper.
‘Of course,’ the Officer replied.
The Marine said, ‘Get down behind that grass bank, Sir,’ and he immediately lobbed a Mills grenade into the river.
The resulting explosion had the dead and stunned fish floating on the surface of the water, a procedure I had practised a few times in the Highlands, lobbing a grenade into a salmon pool, a dangerous procedure if caught by someone in authority.
Seems that the practice is quite legal this side of the English Channel, at least for hungry British troops passing through.
The mortar team in the orchard were delighted when I turned up with ten fresh fish which were cooked immediately.
We ate the fish and polished off some cider while we watched the bombers blasting Caen, the British guns along the Orne joining in for good measure.
Twenty-eighth June — this evening I joined the Marine Commandos to take part in a night standing patrol.
These patrols had to be very careful owing to the close proximity of the German positions and the difficult countryside of high hedges and tall earth banks with trees on top.
The heavily wooded area was criss-crossed with tracks, some leading to farm buildings, others leading to a barn in a clearing of corn, the whole scene, particularly at night, required vigilance as the enemy had mined the well-worn tracks.
Many of the German mines were most unusual.
One in particular was a small wooden box, something like a shoe box and was filled with explosives.
If stepped on, it could blow a foot off.
This particular mine could not be detected by the ordinary mine detector.
The Germans placed this box usually in the gaps in hedges and the approaches to farm buildings, and the rest of a wide area they covered with ingenious booby-traps and other very strange devices, many of these being set off by wandering cattle and horses, as usually happened when the Commando mines and booby-traps were set out in the hedgerows and orchards  in front of our positions.
After being briefed by a Sergeant, the three Marine Commandos and myself, faces blackened and carrying weapons, set off through the orchard and out into the thickly wooded area in front of the German positions.
It was dusk and we would be out all night, returning at dawn next morning when we would be relieved by another patrol.
As we moved along I couldn't help feeling apprehensive as I looked for newly disturbed ground that could contain a box mine, or glancing at the trees and hedges for signs of booby-traps.
It was dark when we took up a position among thick briars and long grass.
A few yards through the gloom I could make out the shape of a hedge and what appeared to be the entrance to a sunken road.
We took up all-round observation with our boots touching in the centre.
My eyes had become accustomed to the now semi-darkness, so I could pick out shapes about seventy-five yards away.
We had a good field of fire all round in case the enemy came out of the sunken road or over the hedge.
The Sergeant had arranged signals with us if we happened to see anything to our front, by moving our feet and so prevent talking.
In the near distance to our rear the guns had started shelling the German positions, the shells uncomfortably low as they rushed overhead and crashed into an area a short distance away.
The shelling went on for about an hour then almost complete silence descended on the area as I continued to stare to my front.
After a couple of hours of observing in these conditions, shapes and objects in front of me appeared to move, if I stared at them for too long.
About one o'clock in the morning I was fighting to keep awake.
With the strain of listening for the slightest sound a desperate tiredness had set in and I was having to force myself to stay awake.
I felt a slight tap on my right foot, it was the Commando lying next to me.
I turned my head in his direction.
He had his fingers to his lips and was pointing to his right.
I listened and could hear the sound of voices, German voices, getting louder, or closer.
The talking went on for a few moments then the sudden, all too familiar, sound of a mortar bomb leaving the barrel.
‘Christ, do they know that we are here and decided to blast us out?’
All kinds of thoughts raced through my mind as I waited for the explosion in our midst.
I was suddenly very much  awake as the Germans sent off another two bombs, The first had exploded some distance away, followed by the two others; the German mortar team were dropping their bombs on the Commando positions to our rear.
They seemed about thirty or forty yards away from us as they now talked in lower tones with the occasional laugh, obviously unaware of our presence.
The German mortar team reminded me of the Commando mortar team back in the orchard at Brigade H.Q when they were mortaring the German positions.
Up until now I have been fascinated by the sound of a bomb leaving the barrel; this evening and the closeness to the enemy mortar had changed all that.
There was no more talking from the Germans, and no more mortaring, the remaining part of the night passed fairly quickly with no further signs of tiredness as we lay and listened.
As dawn came up in the sky we made preparations to move back to our own lines, covering our withdrawal and keeping careful watch for any signs of the enemy.
After a hot mess-tin full of oxtail soup, I was more than ready to get into any old slit trench to have some desperately needed sleep.
As I curled up.
in the rear of the trench, wrapped myself in an old Army blanket, I could hear the sound of the German sniping starting up for the day.
At least I shall miss all that for a couple of hours or so.
I was awakened around noon by the Sergeant who was in command of yesterday evening's patrol.
As I clambered out of the trench and sat on the grass with my back to a tree he handed me a mess-tin full of very tasty Machonachie stew which I soon polished off.
Looking at my arms I could see that the mosquitoes appeared to have had a field day.
There were lumps and bumps all over the place, accompanied by intense itching.
‘Jesus Christ, Piper, the mauses have had a bloody good go at you last night.
Have you seen your face?’
I drew my fingers over my face, tenderly rubbing at the swellings and could well imagine what the scene looked like.
‘Piper, it's a bloody good job you were not wearing your kilt last night during the patrol.’
‘I agree, Sarge, the Bocage is no place for wearing the kilt!
If it were so, I would now be scratching the lumps and bumps on a very delicate area.’
We both laughed as we  got to our feet and cleaned out our mess-tins.
‘Must be getting back to Brigade H.Q, Sarge,’ I remarked as I picked up my rifle and prepared to leave.
‘By the way, Piper, the patrol that relieved us this morning, one of their number had his leg blown off and has other serious injuries.’
It appears that he stepped on one of those box mines placed in a gap in a hedgerow.
As I made my way through the trees in the direction of the village and Brigade H.Q there were several loud explosions a short distance away to my right, followed by a loud burst of automatic fire.
By the time I reached the road the medics were bringing the casualties to the First Aid post.
I thought about the Commando losing his leg this morning and the two wounded being loaded on to the jeep.
Their plight made me feel rather guilty about my concern over the mosquito bites on my face.
First of July — there is a lot of activity on the road leading to the village but still no sign of a German attack or, more important, an Allied breakout.
The daily bombing of Caen appears to have increased.
How can anyone still be alive in that city after the days and nights of bombing since the 6th June?
The whole place must be flattened by this time.
Scouse (the latrine clerk) was asked this morning by two Commandos, ‘What's the latest Griff, Scouse?’
His reply was as confident as usual, ‘We shall be going back to England most certainly some time next week.
That's official!’
‘You lying bastard,’ chorused the two Commandos sitting precariously on their perch.
‘I don't know where the Scouse gets his information,’ continued one.
‘He swears that the Brigadier and the Brigade Major use his establishment and supply him with this vital information.
If what he says is true, which is highly unlikely, they must visit his latrine during the hours of darkness.
A most precarious operation to say the least.’
The Scouse always had the last word.
‘If you bastards don't believe me, you can find yourselves another shithouse!,
With that final remark he would go into a huff and that would be the end of the conversation.
The days passed slowly, this static type of warfare was not too popular with the units in 1st Commando Brigade.
The training at Achnacarry did not include living for weeks on  end in a hole in the ground subjected to constant mortaring and sniper fire.
At least the enemy are in a similar situation probably much worse off then we are judging by the amount of shells passing over our heads to fall in their positions.
The aggressive patrols directed at the German lines have increased since the 12th June, no doubt to keep them on their toes.
It's strange that the Germans have not attacked us with tanks.
It has been very rare to see German aircraft in the sky.
Now and again one zooms over about tree-top height but soon disappears, followed a few seconds later by Allied fighters.
Most of the Brigade casualties so far have been caused mainly by mortar and shellfire and, of course, the constant sniping.
Judging by the number of dead Germans in front of the Commando positions around the village, it's not surprising that they had stopped their frontal attacks.
Ninth July — having supper with the mortar team, the menu pretty good.
Self-heating tins of oxtail soup, steak and kidney pudding, followed by plum duff and, of course, the usual battle with the mosquitoes.
This was a sort of celebration meal, as word had reached us of the successful British attack on Caen.
The German army had pulled out leaving the entire city in ruins and, according to the information at Brigade H.Q, the devastation was unbelievable.
It was now D-Day+33 as we discussed the possibility of an advance by the Brigade from these positions along the ridge.
Later this evening, about 11 p.m., the Germans mounted a bombardment of our positions which convinced us sheltering in the slit trenches that the enemy were still in front of us in strength and were telling us that they intended to stay there.
Next morning at ‘stand-to'’ there were the usual reports of wounded which were backed up by the increased activity of the jeeps carrying the casualties to the rear, among them several Airborne troops.
Nothing much has been seen of the civilian population since we entered the village on the 6th June.
The first evening we arrived, after digging in, a few of us from Brigade H.Q took a walk through the village and found the local café.
Here we were joined by a small group of French Commandos, no doubt with the same views in mind; something to drink and eye up the local crumpet!
We  were lucky in finding something to drink but unfortunate as far as the crumpet was concerned.
The young lady behind the bar was scared stiff by our presence.
She was quite attractive except for a very nasty skin condition, her face and arms were covered with a large number of pustules and it was obvious that she had been scratching them; the scratch-marks were bleeding slightly.
As I stared at her wondering what had caused the condition, I decided that it must be some kind of vitamin deficiency.
She handed me a glass of cider, others accepted a small glass of a clear liquid that made them wince as they swallowed it.
The gathering was suddenly brought to an end as a cluster of mortar bombs exploded on the village green shattering the windows of the café and dislodging bottles from the shelves.
Everybody scattered, including the scared young lady with the serious skin condition; she just vanished out of the back of the café leaving us with smashed bottles and glasses.
The mortaring continued for about ten minutes, then it was back to the orchard and comparative safety of the slit trench.
Our first evening out in France had gone off with several bangs and broken glass.
Now that Caen had fallen, some of the villagers, were beginning to drift back to their homes.
Once again I met up with the old Frenchman who had invited me into his home.
One evening as I was walking through the village, I heard a voice coming from the gable end of a cottage, ‘Bonsoir, Monsieur.
Comment allez-vous ?’
The voice repeated the greeting, then, ‘Cornemuse, Cornemuse ’.
I turned round; it was the old Frenchman.
We shook hands warmly; I noticed that he had his old clay pipe in his mouth but there was no tobacco in it as he sucked at it and repeatedly removed the pipe from his mouth.
I made him understand that he was to stay where he was and I would return in a few minutes with a tin of tobacco.
I managed to scrounge some tobacco at Brigade H.Q and was soon handing it over to the Frenchman.
I thought for one moment he was about to perform a Highland Fling.
He jumped into the air several times then shook my hand, ‘Merci, merci, Cornemuse,; venez manger avec mois ce soir .’
‘OK,’ I replied, ‘but tomorrow evening at 9 p.m.,c'est moi qui j'apporterai provisions !
(I will supply the provisions)’.
By the look on his face he obviously  understood what I was on about.
He filled his pipe with tobacco, lit it and, puffing clouds of smoke, he walked away, turning round to shout, ‘Demain ,’ and pointing to the cottage.
Next evening I arrived at the cottage with the rucksack half-full of tinned food, bully beef, steak and kidney and, of course, the tinned plum duff; chocolate (the hard stuff from the 48-hour ration pack, but still very tasty); tobacco and some cigarettes — in all, quite a collection of foodstuffs.
I felt like Father Christmas as I entered the front door of the cottage to be welcomed like a long-lost son.
It was good to be sitting down with a family for dinner even though I didn't understand everything the Frenchman and his wife were talking about.
The atmosphere in the almost semidarkness of the cottage was very homely; the food was good, a typical French meal of roast chicken, vegetables and roast potatoes.
The Frenchman had produced a bottle of champagne and a couple of bottles of burgundy 1924; with the help of a my little black book of French/English, I understood that he had buried the champagne and the wine in his garden just before the Germans entered the village shortly after the collapse in 1940.
The wine was very heady but extremely enjoyable.
The Frenchman sat opposite me at the large farmhouse table chatting away for all he was worth and after the meal he puffed away at his pipe as if he hadn't a care in the world.
During the evening his wife was very nervous and became extremely agitated when the British guns started up, the shells passing over the village with a loud roar.
After a few words with her husband she shook hands with me, kissed him on both cheeks, and then quickly disappeared down the cellar, leaving the two of us to finish off the champagne and burgundy.
About 11.30 p.m.
I left the old Frenchman still puffing away at his pipe and returned through the village to the orchard next to Brigade H.Q I had a feeling that I would not see the French family again.
They both appeared sad throughout the evening and I suspected that there was something wrong; possibly the two children had been injured when their previous home had been damaged by shellfire.
It started to rain about 4 a.m.
Soon the floor of the trench was covered in water — soaking into everything.
Fortunately the shelling had ceased with just the occasional mortar burst close at hand when the Duty Officer made his rounds at ‘stand-to'’.
As the days dragged on the strain of continually living in front-line positions began to show in the faces of some of the Commandos.
Most of the Brigade, including Officers, were still living in slit trenches, fully clothed, with almost every night disturbed by enemy shelling and mortaring.
To ease the pressure, a truckload of Commandos were taken to the rear where they could relax for a couple of days.
Seventeenth July — I joined about 20 Commandos from the various units around the village on a trip to a quiet part of the beach a few miles from our front-line positions.
I put on my kilt, picked up my bagpipes, clambered aboard the truck, and we were off to the beach.
About one hour later we sat on the sands staring at the cool sea in front of us, thinking how long it was since we had had a bath.
My last bath had been on the evening of 4th June; it was now 17th July.
Surrounding us on the beach were a large number of French civilians who had come down to the beach to look at the British Tommies.
As we continued to stare at the sea, racking our brains about how to go for a swim without a costume, our thoughts were answered by a voice from just behind us.
It was Geordie, he was muttering out loud to himself in his strong Geordie accent.
‘Well, ah don't know aboot you lot but I'm gangin' into the watter.’
We knew that he had started to undress; the smell from his feet and his socks was almost overpowering.
I looked round.
He was naked, and obviously he was not called the biggest chopper in the Brigade for nothing.
He wound his way through us as we sat fascinated at the sight as Geordie tiptoed down the beach towards the sea, his top part a deep tan, from the waist down a dirty white colour.
About two yards from the sea he suddenly stopped and jumped round to face us, legs apart and arms above his head, ‘Right, you bloody lot, last man to Brighton beach is a sissy’.
With that, Geordie ran splashing into the sea.
There was a hush for a few seconds then a roar from the French civilians, men, women and children, ‘Encore, encore, encore , Tommy.’
As we all hastily undressed, Geordie was happily  acknowledging the cheers from his newly acquired fans who, judging by their enthusiasm, appreciated Geordie's special features.
We were soon splashing about in the surf washing off weeks of dirt accumulated in the slit trenches.
The feeling was exhilarating; the war and the fighting were miles away, and for the next four hours we lay stretched out on the sand drying off, and then into the sea again.
Just before we packed up and got aboard the truck, I piped up and down the beach for a few moments.
This raised a cheer from the French, but I must admit the day belonged to Geordie and his special attributes, so much appreciated by the French.
As we journeyed back across the Orne bridges, I looked around at the happy faces in the truck; up until now, there hadn't been much to laugh about.
I also wondered how many in this truck would survive the Normandy campaign and return to England.
Eighteenth July — it appears that a large attack by more than 1,300 British tanks on the enemy positions on the Caen front has been successful in tying down the German Panzer divisions.
Yesterday evening, 17th July, just after dusk, Allied bombers blasted the German positions in front of the Commando positions.
This was followed by an intense artillery bombardment lasting about two hours, forcing everyone in the orchard to keep well below ground.
Our day out to the beach now seemed like a dream.
As I crouched in the slit trench in the semi-darkness I could hear the odd British shell that had been intended for the Germans but had dropped short in the orchard explode with a terrific roar close at hand, causing a shower of dirt to fall from the roof of the trench.
‘Jesus Christ, how long is this going to last?’
I stretched out, forcing my legs against the side of the trench.
I found that if I did this, I felt much better and had the feeling that everything would be all right.
Next morning, 19th July, all is quiet, and after breakfast I decided to pay a visit to the other Commando units; 4 Commando and 3 Commando, lots of new faces, not many of those who landed on the 6th June are left.
The reinforcements in these units were trained after I left
Achnacarry and have probably done a shortened course.
It seems very strange to meet people who have passed through  the C.B.T.C. who have never seen me before, or marched behind me from Spean Bridge railway station to start their training.
I spoke to as many reinforcements as I possibly could, especially those who had just arrived from Achnacarry.
‘How is Charlie Vaughan?’
‘Is it still pissing down?’
Most of the reinforcements could not inform me of the health of Colonel Vaughan, but they all had vivid recollections of the most unusual weather conditions in the Highlands, and at the moment regarded their situation here in Normandy as an improvement on Achnacarry.
I thought a lot about Fiona; no point in making enquiries to these people.
Their busy day-to-day activities at the Commando Training Centre would not allow them time to get to know the locals.
The mail from home is now arriving fairly frequently and I look forward to each day hoping that a letter will arrive from Fiona.
Last week I received three letters from her all addressed to the Commando area in the South of England and forwarded to Normandy.
I enjoy reading her letters, and the way she describes the scenes, the weather, and the local gossip in Lochaber, especially after her very rare visits to Spean Bridge.
My cousin Kate, from near Fort William, also keeps me informed as to what is happening in and around Achnacarry.
Although I have mentioned to Kate of my association with Fiona, the two have never met.
That is according to Kate.
I mentioned in my last letter to Fiona that Lord Lovat had been badly wounded during an attack on the enemy positions on the evening of 12th June.
I also reminded her of her predictions concerning Lord Lovat and herself, and that I hoped very much to see the end of the campaign in Normandy and looked forward to meeting her again in the Highlands.
No doubt the person who censors the letters before they leave the Front has deleted all of my remarks concerning Lovat.
The censor at the moment happens to be the Medical Officer attached to Brigade H.Q How can one possibly write a love letter to someone when someone else reads it first, and draws at random a blue pencil through your choicest lines?
Come to think of it, that bloody M.O.
gives me some very strange looks when we happen to meet.
He probably thinks that my letters are a load of rubbish, but still helpful to the enemy.
I would be interested to read what he writes to his wife or girlfriend.
This week NO. 4 Commando have moved from the positions they have occupied at Hauger since the 6th june and moved to new positions in the village of Breville, a short distance from here.
The Germans who have been facing us all these weeks have pulled out and are now dug in in a thickly wooded area about three-hundred yards from No. 4 Commando.
The enemy have lost no time settling in and are now busy mortaring their former positions, causing the usual casualties.
Visited No. 4 Commando this morning in their new positions in the Breville area.
The village is almost completely destroyed, which is not surprising, due to the bombardments that it has been subjected to since 6th June by British artillery and naval guns.
The German infantry were very determined in their defence of this area and have repulsed several attacks by Commandos and Airborne troops.
By the number of enemy dead lying about the fields and approaches to the village, the British attacks have finally forced them to move out, taking shelter in a slit trench during a German mortar attack, everyone keeping their heads down.
After the mortaring had ceased I decided to get back to Brigade H.Q, probably it would be much quieter there.
As I climbed out of the trench I glanced to right and left; other Commandos were now scrambling out of their trenches.
All was silent except for the automatic fire fairly close at hand, somewhere down by the crossroads.
I exchanged a greeting with a Frenchman of No. 4 Commando as he walked towards me.
Suddenly there was the unmistakable swish of a mortar bomb, then the explosion a few yards away.
I stood frozen to the spot unable to do anything; I could see soldiers diving for cover; the Frenchman who was coming towards me with a smile on his bearded face was now lying on the ground.
It must have been all over in a few seconds.
They were now tending to the Frenchman as he lay on the ground.
His face was the usual grey colour, his mouth was open and his eyes were staring upwards.
As the medics were carrying him away I could see blood oozing out of the eye-holes of his boots and dripping on the ground.
As I walked through the rubble in  the direction of the road leading back to Amfreville and Brigade H.Q I passed a few slit trenches manned by No. 4 Commando.
One of the Commandos shouted a greeting.
Someone else shouted ‘Won't be long now, Piper!
Get your pipes ready!
We have got the bastards on the run!’
I looked across and gave them a wave and wondered if they would still be alive next time I visited Breville.
I believe we have settled down to accept the situation.
A comrade is talking to you one moment and is gone the next, either blasted beyond recognition or seriously wounded.
Even those with the socalled minor wounds are taken out of the situation as their appearance can affect the morale of the others.
Twenty-third July — sitting under a tree a few yards from my slit trench writing a letter to my parents in Glasgow.
The weather seems to be changing, very misty and cold first thing in the morning, first time I have really felt miserable at 4 a.m. during ‘stand-to'’.
By noon the sun has come up and it's getting very warm; the orchard appears peaceful, the sound of guns seem a long distance away.
I have finished my letter and sit staring down through the orchard thinking about those who have occupied the slit trenches since 6th June: Taff, the mortar team, the others who have gone and have been replaced by new faces.
My thoughts are interrupted by Mick from the big house.
‘Come on, Piper.
Get off your arse and get over to H.Q The Brigadier wants to see you straight away!’
‘Jesus Christ, Mick, what does Mills Roberts want to see me about?’
‘Never mind, Piper, get your kilt on and get over there fast, or you will soon hear him bellowing throughout the area.,
I hurriedly changed, all the time thinking ‘what have I done?’
‘Why does he want to see me ?.
I am over at the big house within a couple of minutes, kilt on, best sporran and carrying the bagpipes, and prepared for anything.
A sternfaced Sergeant meets me at the entrance to the big house.
‘Right, Piper, follow me.’
I get into step with him and we stop at a door at the end of the corridor.
‘Right, Piper, we'll forget the bloody left, right, left, right, routine,’ snarls the Sergeant, ‘When I knock on this door and you hear someone say ‘come in'’, you go in, turn right, and salute.
OK Piper?’
‘OK, Sergeant!’
I replied.
He knocked on the door, a voice rasped ‘Come in,’ the Sergeant opened the door, I stepped into the room, turned right and gave one of my best salutes.
In the dim light and seated behind a desk was the unmistakable smiling face of Colonel Charlie Vaughan.
There was a figure on either side of him but I could only see Charlie Vaughan.
It was only when he remarked, ‘You know Brigadier Mills Roberts and the Brigade Major, Piper?’
I glanced at the faces on either side of the Colonel, but I was still fascinated by Charlie Vaughan.
‘Stand at ease, Piper,’ remarked Charlie, a big grin on his face, then he went serious and remarked slowly, ‘You have done what you came here to do, Piper; you piped Lovat's brigade ashore and now I would like you to return to Achnacarry with me this evening.
There is still a lot of work to do at the Training Centre.’
I looked at Charlie, then at Mills Roberts, and the Brigade Major.
I wanted very much to say to Colonel Vaughan.
Right, Sir, let's go.
Brigadier Mills Roberts was staring at me — he made me feel guilty.
Suddenly, I blurted out ‘I'm sorry, Sir.
I would prefer to stay here in Normandy and return to England with the Brigade at the end of the Normandy campaign’.
I could hardly believe what I was saying.
I could be in London this evening with Colonel Vaughan having a good piss-up, then probably on leave for a couple of weeks.
Christ, have I gone mad?
Why do I want to stay here in this bloody place?
I thought I detected a smirk on the face of Mills Roberts.
I know for sure if he hadn't been on the scene and it was only Colonel Vaughan and myself, I would most likely have said.
Right, Sir, let's go.
Colonel Vaughan, as benevolent as ever, remarked ‘All right, Piper, see you at Achnacarry at the end of the Normandy campaign.
Best of luck to you’.
The Brigade Major got up and opened the door.
I saluted, had a last look at Charlie Vaughan, turned about and marched out of the room, along the corridor, out of the front door and back to the orchard and the mosquitoinfested slit trench.
That evening is I crouched at the back of the slit trench, swatting the mauses and listening to the sound of shells passing over and the rain dripping steadily in through the entrance to the trench, I stared at the pool of water getting larger and hoped that the rain would soon stop, if it doesn't I'm in for an uncomfortable night.
Colonel Vaughan will be in London by this time.
Oh well, I've stuck it out so far.
I may as well stick it out to the end.
One point that I must be very careful about.
That is, under no circumstances must I mention to anyone that I have turned down an invitation to return to Blighty.
They would really believe that I had gone completely mad.
Others, I suppose, would remark ‘You lying bastard, Piper.
Who would invite you to return to England?’
About 2.30 a.m. the shelling increased and lasted until 3.30 a.m.
Luckily, the rain had stopped and I spent a few minutes baling out, thinking once again that I must do something about drainage, but never seem to get round to it as the weather clears up and everything dries out very quickly.
Ten a.m., 24th July; just finished breakfast with the mortar team and relaxing for a few minutes over a mug of hot tea discussing the number of casualties after the heavy shelling last night.
It appears that Geordie, the Newcastle chap who cheered things up during the trip to the beach last week, by being the first to run naked into the sea, was badly wounded when his jeep ran over a mine and the driver was killed.
The peace and quiet of the morning was shattered by someone bellowing something from the direction of Brigade H.Q Suddenly into view comes the Brigadier, Derek Mills Roberts.
He catches sight of the mortar team and myself sitting on the grass drinking our tea.
We spring to attention and salute as the Brigadier approaches.
‘Noisy night, noisy night, but quiet now,’ he bellows, then suddenly stops in his tracks, raises his right arm and points with his forefinger down the orchard, shouting at the top of his voice.
‘You there, you dozy man, don't you salute an Officer when you see one?’
We turned our heads in the direction the Brigadier is pointing and see a Commando about a hundred-and-fifty yards away towards the end of the orchard and almost obscured by the trees, making his  way slowly in the direction of Scouse's latrine.
As we watch, the Commando stops, springs to attention facing the direction of the  the Brigadier and gives a very smart salute; he obviously recognised the one and only Mills Roberts' commanding voice.
Turning in our direction, the Brigadier, in a much quieter voice, said ‘Piper, this afternoon there will be a parade and march past to be held on the village green.
You will lead the march, I shall be taking the salute.
Any questions?’
Before anyone could say a word he had turned on his heel and strode off looking to left and right as he went.
We stood and stared after him for a few seconds, then one of the mortar team behind me remarked.
‘Now, lads, there goes a mad bastard if ever there was one.’
Mills Roberts was a stickler for discipline but everyone recognised him as a good soldier and therefore, for all his shouting, he was a popular figure.
After a few enquiries at Brigade H.Q I presented myself outside the big house at 2 p.m. wearing kilt, polished boots (which took some doing) and, of course, carrying the bagpipes.
Already assembled there were representatives from the Commando units in the Brigade, Nos. 3, 4, 6, 45 RM Commando and the French Troop of 4 Commando.
The Brigadier appeared and, after much foot stamping and saluting, everyone got lined up and ready to move off, but not before the Brigadier insisted that there should be a bodyguard of four Commandos to protect the Piper.
This was something new for me.
Lovat had never mentioned anything about bodyguards, he just said, ‘Get out in front there, Piper, and keep playing your pipes.’
This had been the routine during the landing at La Breche and the advance to the Orne bridges.
‘Sir, I prefer not to have a bodyguard.
I would just rather march at the head of the unit as I have done on many other occasions.’
I fully expected to be instantly bawled out.
The Brigadier glared at me for a few seconds and replied rather quietly.
‘You know that the enemy are just a short distance along the road?’
‘Yes, Sir,’ I replied.
‘All right, forget the bloody bodyguards,’ he snapped, and strode off with the Brigade Major and two other Officers in the direction of the proposed saluting base, which lay about half-way along our route.
I took up my place a short distance in front of the Officer in Command of the parade.
The RSM brought everyone to attention, ‘By the right, quick march,’ barked the Officer and we were off to a jaunty 6–8 time,Blue Bonnets Over the Border , as I got under way.
A little apprehensive at the turn just past the Saulnier farm, the spot referred to by the Brigadier that was within earshot of the enemy.
As we swung past the farm, the farmer, no doubt attracted by the sound of bagpipes, was standing at the entrance to his farm, a bewildered look on his face.
He doffed his cap as we marched past, and a few paces further on we negotiated the turn and were heading back along the road on the other side of the village green towards the saluting base.
I turned off the road when I drew level with the Brigadier and his Officers, and placed myself on the right of Mills Roberts as the Brigade swept past to the tune Highland Laddie .
As I looked at the faces marching past with a smart eyes right, I couldn't help thinking of those who would have liked to have been on this parade; those still manning the trenches, and all those buried in a shallow grave in the orchards around the village.
The parade was over and, judging by the expression on the Brigadier's face, a success.
‘Very well played, Piper,’ remarked Mills Roberts as he and his Officers left the saluting base and made their way across the village green in the direction of Brigade H.Q I remained at attention until they disappeared through the gates of the big house.
I felt it was prudent to remain silent and then keep out of the Brigadier's way until he had forgotten the incident of the bodyguards.
The parade dispersed, the Commandos returning to their respective units, and soon the village green was quiet, except for the murmur of French voices as the civilians read the newsheet pinned to a tree.
Whatever the newsheet was telling them they all seemed excited about it; there was waving of arms and pointing in the direction of Caen.
The newsheet had started to appear over the past few days as the villagers began to return to their homes.
As the military situation changed, particularly after the fall of Caen, the military would pin the recent news to the large tree on the village green.
The reason for all the excitement  over this newsheet was the information it contained ‘The Allied armies are advancing on all Fronts’.
This evening I visited Scouse's latrine, the mosquitoes and all the flies were having a fieldday; there were clouds of them hanging over the latrine in the still evening air.
Scouse was seated in his armchair reading a paperback — a Western — oblivious to the flies and mosquitoes, and as I approached it was obvious he was not bothered in any way about the smell.
There were three Commandos in the latrine, one was addressing Scouse with the usual, ‘Come on, Scouse, when are we going home?’
‘It's no use telling you disbelieving bastards anything, but I will tell you this: The Brigade is moving out of this place tomorrow.’
The Scouse flicked over a page of his cowboy book and continued reading as the three Commandos chorused, ‘You lying bastard’.
I thought I detected a knowing smile on the face of the Scouse as he ignored his critics, the flies, the mosquitoes, the smells, and settled into his armchair at the entrance to the latrine.
There had been a lot of activity in and around Brigade H.Q It appears that the enemy in front of the Commando positions has started to pull out, possibly due to the Allied advance in the Caen area about ten miles from here.
Twenty-sixth July — the Brigade advanced, No. 4 Commando has already gone.
I visited their positions this morning as a passenger in a jeep.
‘Christ, they were quick off the mark, Piper,’ remarked the driver, swinging the jeep round and heading back along the road to Brigade H.Q. Nos. 3 and 6 Commando were pulling out as we entered the village; no sign of 45 Royal Marine Commando.
The transport attached to Brigade H.Q were lined up and ready to leave.
I placed my pipes and rucksack on the back seat of the jeep and informed the driver that I was going into the orchard for a last look round.
‘That's OK, Piper.
I shall still be here; you and I shall follow on later.’
As I entered the orchard it looked completely deserted.
Everyone had gone.
Even Scouse's latrine had disappeared as if it had never been there.
As I stood and gazed at the now empty slit trenches, I couldn't help a sinking feeling in my stomach as I pictured in my mind those who had occupied the trenches in this orchard, those who had been killed or seriously  wounded.
Taff, the mortar team, and all the others who were present one day and gone the next, some to hospital in England, and others to a shallow grave here in Normandy.
The big house (Brigade H.Q) was also deserted, the transport and the staff had just left, except the jeep still standing in the driveway.
I entered the house through the front door.
It seemed like a very long time ago when I and others followed Lovat into this house.
A lot of water had certainly gone down the burn since 6th of June.
Lovat wounded and back in England, Mills Roberts now Brigadier.
There has certainly been a lot of comings and goings in this Brigade H.Q
The village was quiet with only a couple of old men sitting on a bench outside the church as we drove through the gates of the big house and along the road through the village, passing the Chateau where the Commando dead had been placed on the front lawn shortly after we had entered the village, and during the bitter fighting of the first ten days.
The driver stopped the jeep outside the Saulnier farm for a few moments to say goodbye to the farmer, a very good friend to the Commandos, especially No. 6 Commando.
There were tears in the eyes of the farmer as he shook us warmly by the hand.
I was hoping he would not offer us a glass of his very potent drink that I now know as Calvados.
Luckily for us he was too overcome to offer us refreshment, so we said our farewells and got back into the jeep and drove off along the road leading to the village of Breville.
I looked round, the farmer was still standing in the middle of the road;.
I gave him a final wave just before we turned into the approach road leading to the village.
I was pleased to be on the move again.
It had been a long time living in a hole in the ground, let's hope things get better.
At least, I hope that the next slit trench is more comfortable, with fewer mosquitoes, and a minimum of mortaring.
The advance was a distance of about five or six miles, passing through Bavant, a small village now occupied by No. 6 Commando.
We drove on through the village and turned into a clearing surrounded by a thickly wooded area.
First things first, we dug in.
I chose a situation close to a hedgerow and was soon scouting around for logs or pieces of  wood to cover the trench and to give some sort of protection against shrapnel.
The time is now 7.30 p.m. and I have just finished a very good meal of my favourite steak and kidney out of, of course , the self-heating tin.
This was all washed down with a bottle of red wine.
There is no label on the bottle, it tastes a wee bit vinegary.
I suppose I cannot complain, the wine was scrounged from the Officers quarters at Brigade H.Q just before we left that area.
Before dusk I had a look around and was surprised to come across several graves of British soldiers, here and there in the undergrowth.
How did they manage to get this far into German-held territory?
The first two graves were one behind the other in a ditch, with a rough cross stuck into the ground at the head of each grave.
On top of the crosses were a soldier's Balmoral and the badge of the Gordon Highlanders.
The other graves contained soldiers of the Airborne, on each cross was a Red Beret.
These soldiers appeared to have been hurriedly buried by the retreating Germans, they had probably died of their wounds.
I felt a lump in my throat as I looked down at the first grave, the Balmoral on the cross was torn at the front as if a piece of shrapnel had smashed its way through the badge and into the soldier's head.
At least the enemy had taken time to bury the soldiers, but what a way to go; dead and buried in a ditch hundreds of miles from home.
The soldiers' families have probably received by this time a letter containing the words ‘missing in action'’.
The first few days in Bavant were fairly quiet as far as the enemy activity was concerned, with a few mortar bombs coming over from time to time.
It was difficult to determine from which direction they were coming due to the thickly wooded area that we were dug-in.
Will we ever get rid of these mosquitoes?
Day and night they are hanging in swarms above the trench making it extremely difficult to rest.
Sleep is impossible yet the Commando in the next trench when I looked in on him was sleeping soundly, his face and arms uncovered and the mosquitoes completely ignoring him.
It appears to me that I have collected his and everyone else's quota of the annoying little bastards, so I return to my trench, wrap myself up, and sleep fitfully until  I am awakened to take my turn on guard.
First August — a very welcome trip with the driver of the jeep to the bridges over the Orne.
Passing through Amfreville we meet part of 4 Commando Brigade marching through the village to take up new positions near the village of Troarn, a short distance from 1st Commando Brigade area.
We stop the jeep for a few words with the Marines, some I recognise from a few weeks ago when they were on their way to take up positions on the coast, on the left of 1st Commando Brigade.
It appears that the German Infantry facing the Marines has surrendered, and now No. 4 Commando Brigade are following up the retreating Germans.
We sat in the jeep for a few moments watching the column as it disappeared along the very dusty road, and was soon out of sight, after passing Sulnier's farm.
‘Don't fancy marching in this heat,’ remarked the driver as he started up the engine and we sped off in the direction of the Orne bridges.
Very cold, misty morning, 5th August I think.
I am beginning to get mixed up with the days of the month.
Surprise this morning.
‘Piper,’ bellowed a voice.
I looked up — it was the Sergeant, he was walking towards me.
‘There is a bloody madman over there and he requests the pleasure of your company, Piper.
His name is Colonel Young, CO of No. 3 Commando.’
I stood up as the Sergeant approached.
‘Yes, Piper, he wants you to get yourself, and your bagpipes, over there as soon as possible and play him a tune.
Christ knows, as if we hadn't enough problems with the bloody Germans without Peter Young stirring them up., The Sergeant marched off muttering loudly to himself, something about ‘fucking bagpipes'’ and ‘‘crazy colonels'’.
I collected up the pipes and made my way through the trees in the direction of NO. 3 Commando.
Colonel Peter Young was a popular officer, well liked by everyone, always seemed to be of the same temperament, in action, or sitting at the bar in a country inn.
Last time I visited No. 3 Commando they were being heavily mortared.
Peter Young was strolling about directing the defence of his area against a German counter attack.
It's strange as I look back; friendships shall never be the same; or opinions of Officers, especially Officers.
All ranks  when in action look at, and study, the facial expression of the Officer in Command.
If he is cool and relaxed, all ranks can cope with the situation.
I was impressed by Lovat's manner during the landing, on the beach under fire, and especially at the crossroads as he stood and directed the attack on the village of Amfreville.
No doubt there are those who have seen fear on my face in certain circumstances in this campaign, just as I have seen the same fear on their faces in the same circumstances.
After a few minutes' walk I arrived at the edge of the wooded area; in front of me was about two hundred yards of grass, rising to the high ground covered by thick gorse and ferns.
On the high ground a figure was waving to me.
Even from this distance it was obviously Peter Young.
I returned his wave, and started to walk towards him.
After a few minutes we were shaking hands.
During my short conversation with the Colonel, I was being observed rather suspiciously by three of his Officers a few feet away, sitting on top of their slit trenches performing their ablutions.
One Officer, his face covered with shaving cream, looked in my direction and remarked, ‘I hope, Piper, that you do not intend to play those bagpipes here?’
‘Certainly, Sir,’ I replied, ‘that's why I am here, to cheer things up a bit!’
My answer did not go down well with the Officer with the lather on his face.
‘Don't you realise that the enemy are only a few yards from these positions?
You walking about playing bagpipes is bound to attract enemy fire on to us!’
The other two Officers nodded in agreement.
Peter Young whispered into my ear, ‘Never mind, Piper.
The silly sods’.
Not wishing to antagonise the Colonel or his Officers, I suggested a compromise.
‘I shall start the bagpipes here and walk back down the hill towards the woods, playing as I go.’
The Colonel smiled, the three Officers glared, as I placed the pipes on my shoulder.
‘What tune are you going to play?’ remarked the Colonel.
‘Well, Sir, I shall play a well-known bagpipe tune called Ahm No Awa’ Tae Bide Awa', Ahm No Awa' Tae Leave Ye, Ahm No Awa' Tae Bide Awa', I'll Aye Come Back Tae See Ye .
‘Now what's that in English?’ enquired Peter Young, with a larger smile on his face.
‘It means, Sir ‘I am not away to stay away, I am not away to leave you, I am not away to stay away, I shall always come back to see you.’
‘Very appropriate to the situation, Piper.
Good luck.’
I struck up and walked slowly down the hill.
The pipes are sounding well, I thought.
As I reached the edge of the woods and stopped playing, I turned round and waved to Colonel Young.
He waved back.
I entered the woods just as three mortar explosions occurred in quick succession, somewhere in the trees a short distance away.
I immediately got down.
There was one more explosion among the trees, then silence.
I lay on the ground for a few more moments, then continued on my way through the trees in the direction of Brigade Headquarters, pondering on the likely thoughts of Colonel Peter Young and his three Officers back there on the hill.
The days spent in the woods close to the village of Bavent are passing slowly.
The enemy has not been very active since the 10th August and I somehow miss the occasional mortar burst in the area, or the odd German shell passing over.
The Allied artillery appeared to have moved to the south of Bavent and are concentrating their barrages during the hours of darkness, and the early morning, between three and four o'clock.
Judging by the sound of the guns, they must be of a heavier calibre, and their target many miles away.
It's raining heavily as I wrap myself in my gascape and move further to the back of the trench.
At least the rain keeps the mosquitoes away, and the flashes from the guns lighting up the sky appear somewhat comforting as I doze off, conscious of the rain dripping on to my boots.
Pleasant break in the daily routine on 16th August.
During a visit to Brigade Headquarters I overheard Officers discussing the situation in our area.
Someone mentioned the 51st Highland Division and the part of the Front they were dug in, which appeared to be fairly close to our area, probably about seven or eight miles from here.
Given permission by the Brigade Major to pay a visit to the Highland Division to obtain new reeds for the bagpipes.
The jeep driver was pleased at the opportunity to get away for a few hours and we set off about 3 p.m., arriving in the area of the Highland Division a short time later, after  following their divisional signs along the country lanes.
Crossing Benouville bridge we noticed the Highland Division (HD) sign in bold letters on the bridge.
Someone with a sense of humour had painted beneath the HD ‘D+?’
Meaning of course that the 51st had landed in Normandy several days after D-Day morning.
The Highlanders were very generous, not only with their bagpipe reeds but also with their wee drams.
The hospitality extended to a good meal, and before leaving we were given the facilities of a nearby chateau, where the jeep driver and I had the luxury of a hot bath, laid on by the local Mayor.
There was also a touch of home — one of the Highlanders produced a few newspaper cuttings from the British Press.
I was particularly interested in the Scottish papers, the Oban Times and the Glasgow Daily Mail .
Both these newspapers carried accounts of the landings and the important part played by Lovat's 1st Commando Brigade.
He would certainly be pleased to read all this about his Brigade.
I wonder how he is getting on!
Did he survive his wounds?
Haven't heard anything for quite some time now.
It was dark when we finally left the area of the 51st Highland Division, arriving back at the clearing in the woods near to Bavent, very much refreshed, outwardly and inwardly, not forgetting the gift of a bottle of best malt whisky.
Seventeenth August — visited No. 4 Commando (French Troop) and decided to remain with them for a few days, due mainly to their hospitality and the change of scene.
Returned that same evening to Brigade Headquarters to collect my rucksack containing all my worldly possessions and, of course, the bagpipes.
Rumours at H.Q about the Brigade advancing in pursuit of the German forces, who have now, it appears, pulled back towards the Seine taking all their equipment with them.
Nineteenth August — the 1st Commando Brigade left the area south of Bavent and set off in pursuit of the enemy.
It appears that No. 4 Commando is leading, with the French Troop to the forefront of the advance.
Earlier that evening we were visited by Brigadier Mills Roberts, accompanied by several senior Officers, whom I had seen on occasion at Petworth in Sussex (Commando Group Headquarters).
The  advance was to have been made during the hours of darkness and across country, keeping away from the roads and lanes.
I was excited about the prospect of leaving this area and the boredom of living in a hole in the ground since 6th June; at last we shall be able to stretch our legs.
I swung the rucksack containing the bagpipes, and my kit, on to my shoulders.
Then, picking up a rifle that had been give to me by the French Commandos, I joined the others, lining up in the darkness at the edge of the wood preparing to move off.
We set off in file moving along a narrow gauge railway in pitch darkness I was trying desperately to keep in contact with the Frenchman in front of me and cursing him when he stopped suddenly, causing me to bang my face on his rucksack.
We have now moved off the railway and appear to be moving across country, stopping and starting as someone scouts out ahead.
We have now been marching for more than four hours, it's still very dark.
A burst of automatic fire up front and to our left brings the column to a halt as we then squat on the wet ground and watch the tracers shoot off across the night sky.
We're off again, now wading almost waist-deep in water, stopping, starting, bumping into the man in front.
What appears to be a mortar explosion close by causes the column to get down on the flooded ground.
A few muffled voices a short distance ahead appear to be cursing in French, then silence as the advance continues.
At least the French soldier can get annoyed just like his British counterpart.
The Frenchman behind me on this march curses under his breath each time I stop suddenly and he bundled into my rucksack.
(Wish I knew what he is saying!)
As dawn appears in the sky our progress quickens; after crossing a few fields and climbing several hedgerows we are suddenly on a road with farm buildings a short distance away.
It's good to feel the firm ground underfoot after hours of trudging through flooded fields and over hedgerows in the darkness.
As we squelched along the road and into the farmyard I felt a feeling of utter exhaustion.
The rucksack and the rifle I had been carrying since yesterday evening seemed like a ton weight.
As my section settled into the straw-filled barn, I dumped the rucksack, and slinging  the rifle over my shoulder, went off in search of something to eat, coffee or whatever was going.
A few French Commandos were making their way across the farmyard in the direction of a large barn where it appeared that someone was attempting to prepare breakfast.
I joined the others with great anticipation, of, possibly, hot coffee, French bread, maybe fried eggs awaited us in the barn.
I could certainly smell coffee brewing.
All thoughts of tiredness had now gone as I prepared myself for breakfast and quickened my pace towards the barn.
Suddenly, as we were about fifty yards from that lovely smell of coffee, there was an almighty roar as the barn blew up, scattering burning straw and all kinds of debris all over the farm area.
I gazed at the devastation from behind a stone horsetrough, lying flat on my face as another explosion sent lumps of metal and cobblestones clattering on to the roofs of the farm buildings.
As the smoke cleared and the dust settled, two fighter planes came in over the fields and circled the remains of the barn.
Not wishing to remain in this part of the farm one moment longer, I picked up my rifle and dashed back the war I had come, taking advantage of the cover offered by the farm buildings.
As I settled down in the straw-filled barn that I had left a few moments ago in search of food, I looked around at the now sleeping Frenchman, stretched out in the straw.
‘Jesus Christ,’ I thought, ‘to have marched all night, then someone blows up the kitchen!’
I was awakened by a French Commando nudging me in the ribs with the toe of his boot.
As I looked up at him he placed a steaming hot mess-tin full of what looked like Machonachie stew on the floor of the barn beside me.
‘'Ere you are, Piper.
This is your breakfast,’ he said with a large grin on his bearded face.
‘We are leaving here in half-anhour so you must be quick with your food.’
As I enjoyed the stew I looked at my watch, it was just after mid-day; I had been asleep for nearly four hours.
After mopping up the mess-tin with a large piece of French bread that had accompanied the stew, I got to my feet and looked around the barn.
Everybody had gone and, judging by the French voices outside in the farmyard, they were preparing to move off.
Picking up the rucksack and  the rifle I dashed down the wooden steps amid laughter from the French Commandos.
A voice from the front of the column shouted, ‘Piper, at Achnacarry and in England you wake us up with your bagpipes; here in France we wake you up with a hot dinner at the last minute.’
As we marched out of the farm the Commando behind me thrust a mug full of very tasty wine into my hand.
‘A votre santé , Piper.’
He smiled as I replied, ‘And the same to you!’
We marched for several hours then rested in a thickly wooded area until darkness fell.
There seemed to be plenty to eat, the French are masters at rustling up something to eat at very short notice.
‘'Ere you are, Scottish, have this.’
I looked up from my sitting position under a tree.
The voice belonged to Jake, the French Algerian.
He had suddenly appeared through the trees and was thrusting what looked like half a chicken into my now outstretched hand.
As he walked away he looked back at me, ‘Better eat it, Scottish,’ he said, with a serious look on his face.
‘Tomorrow morning we attack the German positions and it is possible that we have nothing more to eat after this evening.’
I looked at the chicken.
By its appearance it had been cooked several days ago.
Nevertheless it tasted excellent, or it may have been the dry French cider from my waterbottle that improved the taste.
The night was dark as we set off in file through the trees after checking our weapons.
I had a look at the bagpipes before pulling the rucksack onto my back, they seemed to be all right— wonder when I'll play them again?
Certainly not in this situation, not in the middle of the Bocage .
I could see the outline of the soldier in front of me, at least that is an improvement on yesterday evening's march.
There is no bumping into the man in front as we cross the fields and move along the narrow Normandy lanes.
Some time in the early hours of the morning we cross over what seems to me to be a pontoon bridge, then suddenly we are up to our thighs in water.
Crossing a muddy field in semi-darkness I am surprised to hear voices, sounding like Canadian voices.
‘Who are you guys?’
The voice was just beside me.
I could make out two soldiers standing in a slit trench, they look like Airborne  troops judging by the type of steel helmet they are wearing.
‘We are Commandos,’ I replied.
It appears that the Airborne are puzzled by the French voices as we move through their positions.
They are still more puzzled as I wish them good evening and they recognise my Scots accent, As I quickly follow behind the French Commandos I hear one Canadian say to the other.
‘Jesus Christ, a load of frogs and a fucking Scotsman’.
It's getting light as we scramble down one side of a blown bridge across a river, then scramble up the other side, slipping down, and pulling each other up again until we are all assembled on a grassy bank.
A French Officer is speaking to a small group of NCOs as a thick mist is forming all around.
I have just sat down on the wet grass when everyone around me starts to move swiftly in the direction of the wooded area just visible through the mist and gloom.
I joined the Frenchmen as we double across the grass.
As we enter the trees a few shots ring out.
I suddenly realise that we are attacking the enemy positions and we are now running through the trees.
Everyone around me seems to be firing their weapons.
Suddenly the mist clears and we are now in a clearing.
I can see several yards in front of me.
Figures are now running in front of us, shots are fired from automatic weapons, the running figures fall down.
We are now level with the fallen figures; they are German soldiers.
We have overrun the enemy positions — we have surprised them!
The excitement carries everyone forward.
Suddenly it's light, clear as day; we stop in front of a German 3″ mortar with a neat pile of HE bombs beside it.
The French Commandos have the heavy baseplate out of the ground and the mortar assembled and in action in what seems like a few seconds.
The bombs from the mortar are now exploding in what we believed to be German positions in the wooded area to our front.
We are in an orchard with a sunken road leading into it from the main road.
There are three fairly large dug-outs covered with heavy logs and camouflaged.
Looks like a Company Headquarters, its occupants having pulled out very quickly.
The dead Germans lying around had obviously not been quick enough.
The enemy have recovered from our sudden appearance in their midst.
There is now very active sniping, followed by a couple of Moaning Minnies exploding close by, forcing us to take cover from the flying shrapnel.
I joined a group of five Frenchmen as they got onto the sunken road leading to the orchard.
The mortar team are still lobbing their bombs into the enemy positions as we dash across the road and over a five-bar gate, then double along the hedgerow that runs alongside the road.
We stopped at a gap in the hedge as the road swung round to the left.
About fifty or sixty yards away on the right-band side of the road a mortar bomb burst in the hedgerow, followed a few seconds later by four German soldiers carrying automatic weapons jumping from the hedgerow and scampering along the road.
From the gap in the hedgerow we opened fire on the running Germans, toppling them over one after the other.
We lay still for what seemed like ages, my eyes were riveted to the figures lying in the road.
The mortaring had ceased.
The French Commandos firing their captured German mortar had probably run out of bombs.
From the spot in the hedgerow where the four German soldiers had come from a white flag tied to a long piece of wood had suddenly appeared.
As we watched a German soldier — his hands above his head — one hand holding the white flag, was now in the centre of the road, facing in our direction; he beckoned us to approach.
As I stared at the German with the white flag, I remembered (as no doubt the five Frenchmen lying beside me also remembered) a short time ago in Amfreville a small party of Germans had surrendered and, as the Commando patrol approached, one of the Germans had lobbed a grenade, killing and wounding several members of the patrol.
All the surrendering Germans in this instance had been shot dead by the Commandos.
I moved slightly and beckoned the German to come to us.
He disappeared into the hedgerow, and soon reappeared with four others, two of them were carrying a wounded Officer between them.
They stood in the middle of the road as we approached cautiously.
The German soldier was holding the white flag above his head.
Several shots rang out.
The surrendering German soldiers fell flat on their faces, including the one carrying the white flag.
The two soldiers carrying the wounded Officer dropped him and got  down flat, leaving the Officer bleeding and moaning loudly in the middle of the road.
I quickly looked round.
One of the French Commandos had been wounded; he was lying close to the ditch at the side of the road, obviously in pain, his face the characteristic colour of the soldier who has been hit.
Judging by the position he was lying in, he probably has a leg wound.
His eyes are wide as he gazes around in a kind of apprehension.
The firing has ceased as we get to our feet, the Germans stand up, their hands above their heads leaving the wounded Officer on the ground.
The German soldiers look afraid; I believe they think we are going to shoot them.
The wounded Commando on the ground, obviously in great pain, is an incentive for us to kill them.
I looked up at the French NCO, he steps forward and orders two Germans to pick up their Officer and the other two to pick up and carry the wounded Commando.
The French Commando has been wounded in the thigh, the bullet passing in one side and out the other.
The German Officer appears to be seriously wounded, the clothing on his back is saturated with blood; the size of the wound indicates a fairly large piece of shrapnel has entered his back close to the spine.
We make our way back along the road to the orchard.
I feel sorry for the French Commando being carried by the two German soldiers.
Each time firing occurs close at hand, we all get down into the ditch — this adds to the pain and discomfort of the wounded.
Two French Commandos take over and carry their wounded comrade the remaining part of the way; he manages a smile as they pick him up.
No doubt he feels safer in their presence.
The sunken road leading into the orchard was full of wounded, mainly German, with a few British and French Commandos being attended to by a French medic.
The wounded German Officer was carried up the grassy bank and placed against a tree.
He was still conscious and was moaning loudly, his head moving from side to side.
I tried to make him as comfortable as possible and with the assistance of a French Commando placed a shell dressing into the large wound in his back.
The German stopped moving his head from side to side and looked at me.
‘You are English?’ he said.
‘I was in England before the war, at Cambridge to study law.’
The  Officer's English was perfect.
‘We did not want the war, he continued, his voice getting weaker.
The sniping was increasing and I had to move away to help guard some German prisoners we had collected in the action.
They were sitting in a hollow in the centre of the orchard, their hands on their heads.
As I sat facing the prisoners with an automatic weapon across my knees, I could still see the wounded German Officer a few yards away.
He had started moaning again and moving his head from side to side.
As I stared across at him his white face seemed to fascinate me.
‘I thought for Christ's sake why doesn't he shut up?
How can he possibly be still alive with that large hole in his back?’
My thoughts were suddenly interrupted by a terrific roar.
The trees shook, even the ground beneath me shook, as I suddenly realised that a salvo of heavy shells was passing over at tree height, and everyone — including the prisoners — scattered in the direction of the dug-outs; the salvo hit the ground a short distance away with an almighty roar, the explosions throwing debris over a wide area.
I was crouched in the entrance to a large German dug-out shaped like a frying pan as a second salvo roared overhead shaking the ground violently, the explosion causing parts of trees and other heavy objects to fall onto the roof of the dug-out.
There were about twelve or more German prisoners, all of them staring at me from the gloom of the interior.
The thought passed through my mind, ‘Do they intend to rush me and escape?’
I realised that they were all as shit-scared as I was and were content to stay where they were.
The shelling stopped and all appeared to be quiet; even the sniping had ceased.
From my position at the entrance to the dug-out I could see the wounded in the sunken road in the same positions they were in before the shelling started.
The German Officer was now obviously dead.
There was blood pouring down his face from a head wound, he had slipped from his sitting position and was now lying on his side, his knees drawn up.
A French medic was climbing the grassy bank from the sunken road to look at the Officer as I got the prisoners out of the dug-out and back to their previous positions in the hollow.
I was not surprised to learn that the shelling of our positions was not the German guns but the British guns (the bastards).
I assisted the Frenchman who was tending the wounded before they were carried away.
There seemed to be a shortage of shell dressings.
The Frenchman handed me an aluminium tin, similar to the one my mother used when she was baking scones and shaking flour onto her baking board.
I cut the clothing away from the wound and shook a quantity of powder from the tin on to the wound, then on to the next one.
We moved from the orchard taking the prisoners with us and leaving the wounded to be taken to the rear.
The fighting in our immediate area seemed to have quietened down as we handed over the prisoners to join, I would think, about a couple of hundred, all gathered together in a field close to the orchard.
As a few of us stand and look at the Germans, Mills Roberts appears with a few of his Officers.
‘Stand back from those bloody prisoners,’ he roars and points to a little group of French Commandos.
We move away from the Germans as the Brigadier is now pointing at some other unfortunate bastards.
About half a mile away an attack is going in on a hill, I can see Commandos advancing up the slopes, shells burst a short distance in front of the forward troops, probably covering fire from the British Artillery.
We are on the move again, advancing along the winding country road with high hedges on either side.
We meet up with other units of the Brigade and leave the road to continue the advance through the trees in the direction of small arms and automatic fire ahead.
The action has lasted most of the day and it is now early evening but still light as we have a short sharp skirmish with the enemy rearguard.
We enter the area that they had been defending and everything shows that the Germans have pulled out in a hurry.
The now deserted slit trenches still have equipment and items of clothing, and tins of food similar to our corned beef.
On opening one of these small tins and tasting its contents, I am pleased that we can still rely on good old Machonachie's stew, at least its edible.
The German soldiers' equivalent is just a mass of fat.
No wonder they are retreating.
It is now getting dark as we settle for the night in the German slit trenches and I share a trench with three  French Commandos.
Before we can settle down, the enemy launch a heavy mortar attack on their former positions, now occupied by the French, using the now familiar multibarrelled mortar, ‘Moaning Minnie'’, or Nebelwerfer .
This weapon has a terrific killing power as well as being very effective against the morale of the troops in the vicinity of the explosions.
The three Frenchmen have just settled into the trench as I contemplated the hordes of mosquitoes that were now descending on the area.
As I squatted on the grass at the entrance to the trench, the stillness of the evening was shattered by the most awesome sound.
Several violent explosions close by, followed by clouds of black smoke rising in columns above the trees, shrapnel hissing along the ground and through the trees as I dived head-first into the trench to join the three Frenchmen.
The bombs of the Nebelwerfer are fitted with a device that causes a moaning sound as the bomb descends, similar to the sound created by a German dive bomber.
The mortaring lasted about twenty minutes.
The Commandos in the trench with me did not seem to be put out by the noise and the explosions caused by the Moaning Minnies; no doubt they had heard it all before.
Darkness has descended and the mosquitoes have taken over from the enemy mortars.
In the darkness the three Frenchmen are sleeping soundly, oblivious to the sound and the attacks of the clouds of mosquitoes.
I pull my battledress jacket over my head in a forlorn attempt to escape from the tiny tormentors; sleep is impossible.
At first light the Commandos are on the move again in an attempt to keep up with the retreating enemy.
We march all day, stopping from time to time at the sound of automatic fire somewhere just ahead.
As I lie in a ditch during the short rest and watch Jake the Algerian move along the road just ahead of me exclaiming ‘A la attack’, a voice from somewhere along the road shouts, ‘Oh, piss off’.
The voice probably comes from one of the two English radio operators attached to the French Commando.
The French Officer gets us all out of the ditch and the march continues for about four or five hours, then, during a rest in the wood, I fall asleep, my face among the leaves reminding me of my home in Scotland.
It's dark, the  Commandos are forming up and preparing to move off.
I join the column as it leaves the wooded area and the Commandos continue the advance in file on both sides of a narrow road.
It's good to feel the tarmac underfoot; we are moving fairly fast, it's a lovely night and I feel great.
Up ahead there is the sound of automatic fire, but it does not seem to effect us.
I have a mouthful of cider from my waterbottle and eat the remains of a chicken, or is it a piece of lamb?
Whatever it is, it tastes good.
I have a feeling we must be just a few miles from the River Seine.
The German Army by this time must be across the Seine.
The opposition in front of us is getting less and less as we advance.
It is now daylight and another new day, as we continue to trudge along the road; there is no conversation, it's just heads down and continue to look at the boots of the man in front.
The sun is up and everything is peaceful.
We turn a bend in the road and there in front of us is an entrance to a town.
The group of houses are now just a few yards away and at the sight of the French civilians lining the route, all tiredness is now forgotten and a spring has appeared in our step.
‘'Ow about a tune on your bagpipes?’ remarks the Commando in front of me.
I drop out to the side of the road and pull off my rucksack containing the bagpipes.
A few seconds later the pipes are assembled and I enter the town playing Highland Laddie , not at the front of the column, but bringing up the rear.
I don't think Lovat would have approved.
He would probably have halted the advance and ordered me up the front.
It appears that the whole town has turned out to welcome us; men, women and children are lining the main route through the town, shaking hands with the French Commandos and offering glasses of wine as they walk alongside the column.
I stop playing the pipes before we leave the town as I appear to be missing out as far as the wine is concerned!
About three miles beyond the town we turn into a leafy lane leading to a farm.
An Officer is standing at the entrance and directing the units to certain parts of the farm; he has a strong Scottish accent.
As we approach he points  to his left and with some aggression in his voice.
‘Right, you bloody lot, in there’.
In there happened to be a very comfortable-looking barn.
The Officer's face had a puzzled expression as he recognised Lochiel's Tartan on my green beret and on my shoulder flashes.
On looking around he was staring at us, no doubt wondering what I was doing marching along with the French Commandos.
Last time we met was at the Training Centre at Achnacarry.
The war was now a long distance away; everything was quiet, except for a very faint rumble of artillery in the distance, in the direction of the River Seine.
It's another day, I have slept for more than ten hours and am now famished as I follow the smell of cooking to a spot behind the barn.
The French Commandos are tucking into a meal.
‘Help yourself, Piper,’ shouts a Frenchman who was busy placing a heap of straw under a pig hanging by its hind legs from the branch of a tree.
I fill a mess-tin with meat, potatoes, and various vegetables, and for the first time in many months, I pour a very delicious gravy over the lot.
As I eat I cannot help but notice the Frenchman attending to the pig; he has now cut the animal's throat and has set alight to the straw, the flames and smoke engulfing the unfortunate pig.
Between mouthfuls of food I enquire from the Commando sitting beside me on the grass ‘What is he up to with that pig?’
‘Ah, Beel, he is a very good chef and he is now preparing the menu for tomorrow; you like the food?’
‘I like the food,’ I agreed.
In no way could I possibly say otherwise, and I looked forward to tomorrow's pig.
I must try to keep away from the area of preparation.
At the moment I am too hungry to feel sorry for the pig.
The Brigadier has an appointment for dinner in a restaurant in the town that we passed through yesterday.
He requests that I accompany him and pipe him into the restaurant.
I report to H.Q at the appointed time.
‘How are the pipes, Piper?
I hear that you piped the French through the town yesterday.
Very good,’ he snapped.
‘Now, what are you going to play today?’
‘Whatever you like, sir,’ I replied, knowing very well that he always requested something Irish.
He certainly made a  great entrance: I played a slow air, a favourite of mine,Cuaist Nam Fir-Cun Og (The Flight of the Eaglets).
Very good Piper,’ responded the Brigadier, ‘but let's have something a little more lively next time round.’
The Brigade Major informed me that the Brigadier's party would be in the restaurant for at least one-and-a-half hours, which gives me time to look around the town.
Outside on the street a crowd had gathered, no doubt attracted by the sound of bagpipes.
As I emerged and joined up with two French Commandos, there was a short round of applause.
The civilians appeared to be very interested in the kilt that I am wearing and, of course, the pipes seem to fascinate them.
As we walked around the town I witnessed several incidents as girls who had been known to have collaborated with the German forces were seized by members of the Resistance and had their hair chopped off, to the jeers and cat-calls of those standing around.
The two French Commandos accompanying me steered me away from these scenes.
‘It is best that we do not interfere, Piper, remarked one of the Commandos.
‘The Resistance knows best how to deal with known collaborators.’
I arrived back in time to pipe out the Brigadier, and judging by his jovial manner he must have enjoyed his meal.
We all stepped out to a lively tune,Mrs MacDonald of Dunach .
Last time I played this Strathspey was at a ceilidh held in the village hall at Spean Bridge, attended by villagers and staff from the training centre at Achnacarry.
The Brigadier beamed and the Brigade Major returned the salutes of the local dignitaries who had gathered on the pavement just outside the restaurant.
I continued playing as the Brigadier sped away in his jeep, to the cheers of the fairly large crowd.
Our time at the farm passes very quickly; the days are sunny and the warm evenings are free of mosquitoes.
We eat well and sleep in the very comfortable barn; the war has gone on — over the horizon.
Twenty-fifth August — a lot of excitement around the farm.
The French Commandos are climbing aboard a couple of jeeps in the farmyard.
They are on the bonnets of the jeeps, some are clinging precariously onto the sides as  both vehicles speed away through the farmyard and out into the road.
It appears that Paris has been liberated and the French Commandos want to be there to join in the celebrations with the citizens of Paris.
I doubled across the cobbled yard and stood in the middle of the road to watch the jeeps disappear in the distance in a cloud of dust.
Twenty-ninth August — the German Army has managed to get itself across the Seine and, according to the news at the Brigade H.Q, 4th Commando Brigade has joined in the pursuit.
It appears that the enemy has suffered a major defeat in Normandy with a large amount of casualties and loss of heavy equipment.
All this exciting news is soon forgotten by the announcement of a dance to be held in the local town hall in honour of the Commandos.
The farmer's wife has kindly pressed my kilt and I set off into town with a small group of Commandos, all of us determined to enjoy ourselves, and, of course, to sort out the local French girls.
It seems very strange as I enter the town hall.
The dance band is playing, sounds like a military tune, certainly not like the local dances back home.
The dancers are jumping up and down, no comparison to our foxtrots or waltzes.
Everyone seems to be enjoying themselves.
I stop staring at the dancers as a French girl approaches.
She smiles, ‘You dance with me, Scottish?’
Before waiting for an answer she takes me by the hand and leads me on to the dance floor.
We join all the other dancers jumping up and down, round and round the dance floor, stopping momentarily as I place my rifle in a corner near the band, then on again keeping time to the music.
As the girl dances close to me I can smell her perfume and all that has gone before is completely forgotten; the slit trenches, the mosquitoes, the wounded and my dead comrades.
As we dance I find myself staring at the French girl — she has a very pretty face with long, dark hair on to her shoulders, slim build and about 5′ 2″ in height.
I stop staring at her as she repeats several times, ‘You are Scottish?
You are Scottish?’ and each time she touches my kilt with her hand, throwing her head back and laughing as we spin around the dance floor.
The evening came to an end after about three hours' dancing, the final speeches being made by the local  dignitaries, this being followed by a round of applause for the French people, led by a British Officer.
As I look around at the happy faces it is difficult to realise that the German Army is only a few miles away across the River Seine where they are defending Le Havre.
Just a short time ago the German soldiers were retreating through this town, hotly pursued by 1st Commando Brigade.
It is midnight and after great difficulty I managed with my little bit of French to convey to my dancing partner of the evening that I would like to see her home.
She has a quick word with two of her female friends and returned to me with the words, ‘Right, Scottish, we go.’
She slipped her arm through mine, I picked up my rifle from the corner near to the band, who were now packing up their instruments.
We stepped outside the hall into the dark cool, evening.
All the lights in the town were out as we made our way through the almost empty streets.
Half-anhour later we turned into a gateway leading to a small cottage.
The front door was open, as we approached, a light came on, probably from an oil lamp.
I could now smell the very strong aroma of frying onions as we entered the cottage.
The scene before me reminded me of the very similar scenes in the Highland crofts, the only difference being the now almost overpowering smell of onions.
In the dim light of the oil lamp hanging from a chain attached to a very black beam above the fireplace, and the glow from the log fire.
I could see that the room was very sparsely furnished.
The elderly couple sitting in chairs on either side of the fireplace rose to their feet as we entered.
The man moved towards us, a look of surprise on his face.
The woman stirred the onions around a bit with a long black fork and then settled the large frying pan more firmly on top of the blazing logs.
She then stood and stared at me, her eyes opening wide with disbelief.
‘Mama, Papa, this is Scottish!
Scottish, this is Mama and Papa!’
Her father produced a bottle of Calvados and four glasses.
The Calvados I quickly, but politely, declined and accepted a large glass of cider.
I joined the family for a meal of fried onions and what tasted like chicken.
Very enjoyable indeed, after the very rough fare that I had become used to living in the slit trench.
It was 4.30 a.m. when I finally said my farewell to the French family and their very charming daughter.
Her kiss at the cottage gate left my mind occupied during the long walk back to the farm.
‘Just as well that the Germans are on the other side of Seine: I can sleep late today.’
Fourth September — news at Brigade H.Q that the Brigade would be returning to England on the 6th September to reorganise and prepare to be sent to the Far East and continue the war against the Japanese.
The 4th and 5th of September were spent saying goodbye to our French friends.
As the Brigade assembled in a field near the farm buildings awaiting transport, many civilians from the nearby town gathered to see us off.
My dancing partner and her parents turned up, a little bit embarrassing for me as my French was very limited as far as conversation was concerned.
One of the French Commandos seeing my predicament involved the parents in conversation, while I found no difficulty in communicating with Francoise, their daughter.
We climbed aboard the transport and as we moved away in convoy I gazed at Francoise from the back of the truck.
She was waving to us, her face very serious; we turned into the road and she was gone from view.
I must have appeared sad.
I certainly felt sad, as I pictured the French girl standing in the middle of the field waving goodbye.
‘It's all right, Piper, there are plenty of pretty girls in France.
It is possible that one day you will come back to Normandy.’
I looked around to my right, Chauvet, one of my friends of French Commando, was leaning against the side of the truck, a large smile on his face.
‘Yes, Piper, one day you will return here!’
Darkness had fallen when we reached the beaches, having travelled over ground in places very familiar.
Large areas of the beach contained hundreds of German prisoners behind makeshift barbed wire compounds, waiting to go aboard the tank-landing craft, their destination prisoner-of-war camps in England.
They all looked completely dejected as they stared blankly through the wire as our convoy trucks approached.
Some of the Commandos could not resist the temptation and burst into the Horst Wessel song, rounding it all off with three hearty cheers, much to the amazement of  the German prisoners.
I was beginning to become impatient as we lay about on the sand for several hours waiting our turn to go aboard one of the tank-landing craft, after it had discharged its cargo.
The Brigade has been in Normandy since the 6th June in constant contact with the enemy until we reached the Seine.
It is now the 6th September and my visits round the Commando units 3, 4, 6 and 45 Royal Commando, not forgetting French Commando, have made it clear to me the large number of casualties in this campaign.
Many of the Officers and other ranks who landed on D-Day have been replaced by faces I have never seen before.
At last we are going aboard a tank-landing craft: I slip off my rucksack, assemble the bagpipes, a couple of minutes to tune up, then on with the rucksack and we march on to the craft to the tune Highland Laddie .
Later, I gaze from the stern of the landing craft at the coast of Normandy, as it slowly slips from view, leaving me with the memory of those of the Brigade lying in shallow graves in the orchards and ditches of this part of France.
As the tank-landing craft heads out into the English Channel I play a slow Highland air,Loch Monar , a tune I have played many times at Achnacarry, and possibly recognised by many of those Commandos who had passed through the Training Centre.
After a good meal, served by the Royal Navy, then a few hours' sleep, I joined the others on deck as the South Coast of England came into view through the clearing mist.
What a sight!
The whole Brigade seemed to be on deck admiring the coastline in front of us.
‘Piper,’ I turned round.
It was the Sergeant Major.
He roared once again, ‘Piper, over here at the double.’
I doubled to the other side of the deck and joined the Sergeant Major and Brigadier Mills Roberts.
After giving the Brigadier a smart salute, he addresses me in his usual gruff manner, ‘Piper, I want you to play your bagpipes as we disembark’.
‘Certainly, sir,’ I replied.
‘Do you wish a special tune?’
‘Yes, Piper, I would like a special tune played as we go ashore.’
He looked at me, and in a rather quiet voice, which was most unusual for him, be enquired, ‘Do you know the  March Past of the Irish Guards?’
‘Yes, sir,’ I replied.
‘Right Piper that is what I want you to play as the Brigade is going ashore.’
He paused for a moment, ‘Not as exciting as the landing on the morning of 6th June?’
Before I could answer, he barked, ‘Right, fall out.’
I saluted smartly and then doubled across the deck to join the others as the landing craft was preparing to tie up.
I felt a strange sensation in my stomach as I made my way down the sloping gangway and on to the tarmac, If I had felt like this on the morning of the 6th June, Lord Lovat would probably been going ashore without his bagpipe music.
Brigadier Mills Roberts and his Officers and the men of the 1st Commando Brigade disembarked to the March Past of the Irish Guards, followed by the March Past of the Scots Guards,Highland Laddie , the bagpipe tune I played going ashore at La Breche with Lord Lovat.
As I marched up and down the quay, the pipes sounded well.
The civilians and dockworkers were staring at me, the Commandos coming ashore don't seem to notice my piping.
They probably have other things on their minds.
It's exciting being back in England.
The people look different from any other people.
I shall miss the kind and generous people of Normandy, the farmer Saulnier, the Monsieur and Madame of the Café at Benouville bridge, and all the other French civilians, not forgetting my dancing partner and her very hospitable parents.
It may be possible that I shall meet them all again one day.
Much as I admire the French, nothing can compare with being back home in good old Blighty.
At this staging camp I picked up some mail.
My parents have moved to near Glasgow; there is plenty of work and my father and mother are happy in the big city.
Most of the time since we arrived back in England my mind has been full of thoughts about Fiona.
Her letters, three of them, contain no mention as to her health, or how she is feeling.
Just the usual talk about the weather and her occasional shopping trip to Fort William.
No doubt she has heard about Lovat being badly wounded during the early days of the fighting in Normandy and remembers her words to me as I left Achnacarry to join Lovat in Sussex.
The first two parts of her prediction have  come true; Lovat being wounded, and my safe return to England.
She has also predicted her own death a week before my return to Achnacarry.
These thoughts occupied my mind, even at night as I tried to sleep.
The Sergeant came barging into the Nissen hut, bawling out, ‘Right, you bloody lot, if you have any homes to go to, get out of those pits and down to the orderly room, sharpish, or you won't get a bloody pass.’
I looked at my watch.
The time was 6.30 a.m., the bunks on either side of the hut were now showing signs of life and the Sergeant made his noisy way towards the door at the far end of the hut, banging on each bed with his stick as he went.
‘Why didn't someone shoot that bastard when we were in Normandy?’ remarked the occupant of the bunk below me.
‘Oh, piss off,’ shouted someone at the other end of the hut, as a boot bounced off the door just as the Sergeant made his exit.
I could hear him bawling and banging his way through the Nissen hut across the way.
After a quick wash and shave, dressed in a freshly pressed kilt and battledress blouse, polished boots and all, I presented myself with the other Commandos at the orderly room to get my hands on that very important rail pass.
Twenty minutes later I was at the head of the queue.
The clerk behind the desk looked up at me, ‘For Christ's sake, Piper, surely you have a home to go to?
Where do you want this pass made out to?’
‘Fort William,’ I quickly replied, not wishing to upset him.
The clerk lowered his head and commenced scribbling on a piece of paper, muttering loudly to himself, or anyone else within listening distance.
‘You bastards have been over in France for the past three months, sitting in the sunshine and screwing all those French bints.’
‘That's right, Corporal,’ I replied as I snatched my very important pass.
‘You don't seem to be getting your ration, judging by your nasty temper.’
The Corporal stood and glared at me as I very swiftly made my exit through the door, pausing briefly to pick up my rucksack and bagpipe box.
Several hours later I was in London making my way to another railway station to catch the train going North.
The  London-Glasgow train was packed to capacity as I struggled aboard and managed to find a small space opposite the toilet; the corridor and compartments being jampacked with a seething mass of Service people.
Even the luggage racks contained their quota of sailors, soldiers, or airmen.
The train shunted and jolted its way north with the occasional burst of speed to break the monotony of the sudden stops and starts.
At 6.30 a.m. next morning the train pulled into Central Station, Glasgow.
After a very uncomfortable night being on the hard floor of the corridor with all the accompanying smells, the sight of the drab factory buildings and the tall grey tenements passing slowly past the carriage window was a most welcome sight.
Even the washing hanging from the tenement windows seemed to be fluttering a welcome as we all struggled to our feet, pushing and shoving, as we attempted to get our packs on our backs, at the same time trying to get a clear view of the platform and the hundreds of people watching the train pull in.
After two days at home with my parents, I was again at the railway station, this time catching the early evening train to Fort William.
As the train left the suburbs of Glasgow I settled into my very comfortable corner seat to enjoy the views as the hills and lochs passed slowly by, and the train chugged steadily along the West Highland Line.
I must have dropped off to sleep.
When I awoke the train had just passed Rannoch Moor.
As I gazed out of the window I could see several groups of red deer in the distance, and in the foreground the brown ferns with clumps of heather here and there; it was a wonderful sight.
The train stopped at Spean Bridge for a few moments, the platform was almost deserted.
My mind cast back to the winter of last November when I stood on this same platform awaiting the arrival of a new intake.
The snow was falling steadily and it was bitterly cold as I covered my bagpipes and rubbed my almost frozen fingers in an attempt to keep the circulation going.
How I managed to pipe the intake seven-and-a-half miles to the Commando Camp at Achnacarry I shall never know.
Maybe the wee dram given to me by one of the Sergeant instructors kept out the cold.
It most  certainly lightened my step and made my fingers more nimble as we marched through the thick snow.
The train jerked and we were off again, next stop Fort William.
My thoughts changed as the now familiar landscape passed by; how was my cousin Kate?
She had no idea that I would be in this area.
My thoughts kept turning to Fiona.
I feel my heart pounding as I think of her, and I cannot push from my mind a strong feeling that something has happened to her.
Fiona's letters gave no indication that anything was wrong.
Certainly the last letter was dated the beginning of August, that's over a month ago.
The train pulled into Fort William.
A strong wind was blowing across the platform in the direction of the loch, accompanied by a cold, driving rain.
I pulled up my coat collar and sprinted along the platform and into the shelter of the waiting room.
The fire was warm as I sat down to contemplate whether to stay overnight with my relatives just outside Fort William, or start walking to Achnacarry some ten miles or so away.
‘Hello, Piper Millin.
I looked up, the voice belonged to the local Police Sergeant.
He was standing in the doorway, a big grin on his face.
‘What brings you to Fort William dressed in Locheil's tartan?
I would think that you should be wearing Lovat s tartan by this time?’
‘Hello, Sergeant.
I am just trying to make up my mind whether to stay overnight with my cousin Katy McKay or walk to Achnacarry.’
‘Well, Piper, if you cannot make up your mind, you are welcome to spend the night at the Police Station; I have two empty cells at the moment.
It should not be too difficult for you.
As you know, Piper, the staff at the Commando Camp have been accepting free board and lodgings at my Police Station for some time now, especially when they miss the last transport back to camp.’
I looked at my watch, the time was just after 11 p.m. and I could see through the doorway the rain was still driving hard.
Not a night to attempt the long walk to Achnacarry.
‘OK, Sergeant, I accept your very kind offer of hospitality,’ getting to my feet and following the Sergeant outside.
Twenty minutes later the Sergeant was showing me  my accommodation for the night: a bare cell except for a wooden bunk in one corner and two blankets.
‘What do you think, Piper?’ enquired the Police Sergeant.
‘Very good,’ I replied, placing my pack on the bed.
‘Now follow me, Piper, and you can join me in a bit of supper.’
I followed the Sergeant out to the office; we both sat at a small table, and after a very enjoyable supper of cheese rolls we played the chanters until 1 a.m., pausing from time to time to drink a mug of tea.
The Sergeant was a very good piper and would have gone on all night.
I rose from the table, went into the cell and flopped down on the hard wooden bed and was asleep almost immediately.
The last words that I heard were, ‘Good night, Piper, I shall leave the door open.’
Six-thirty a.m. next morning the Sergeant woke me with a very loud, ‘Good morning, Piper,’ and, placing a mug of cocoa on the floor beside me, he went back to his office.
After a wash and shave, then breakfast — a roll containing a fried egg washed down with one more mug of cocoa — I wondered what had happened to his tea rations.
Or do policemen in the Highlands now drink cocoa at breakfast?
At 7.30 I am walking out through the town in the direction of Lochy bridge then across Blarmhor.
I think I am going to have a pleasant walk, all the rain of yesterday evening has gone and a very fresh smell hangs in the air.
I cross the moor to Banavie then turn right to Gairlochy along the line of the Caledonian Canal.
There is still snow on the top of Ben Nevis.
The mountain looks great at this time in the early morning, with the sun now shining on one side and casting shadows and colours across the lower slopes.
By 12.30 p.m.
I am not far from Achnacarry.
After a brief stop at Gairlochy, I decide to make straight for Fiona's croft.
I leave the road at the first sight of Loch Arkaig and go across country, keeping to the paths through the bracken.
One hour later I cross over the burn and see the croft on the side of the hill about two hundred yards away.
I quicken my step, keeping my eyes fixed ahead, hoping for a sign of life about the croft.
I have a strong feeling that she is not there; there is no smoke from the chimney.
She  always has a log fire in the hearth, summer and winter.
The curtains are drawn and the place looks neglected.
The door is locked and the windows are covered with grime; in the silence the whole place looks as if it has not been occupied for several weeks.
As I walk round the croft I can feel a strange sensation in my stomach, a feeling not unlike fear, and I now know that she is dead.
Returning to the front of the croft I batter once more on the door, knowing full well that I shall never see her again.
After all, she said so herself almost five months ago, as she stood in the doorway and bade me goodbye.
‘I will not be here when you return from the invasion of France.
Goodbye, Millin Tha gradh ogam ort (I love you).
I picked up my pack, slung it over my shoulder and crossed the little bridge over the burn.
There was no looking back; I wanted to remember Fiona as she was the last time we met, standing in the doorway of the croft, her black hair blowing in the breeze as she waved me goodbye.
Later that day I was the guest of Locheil's gamekeeper, Donald Cameron, who informed me that Fiona had died three days after her admission to hospital in Inverness, ten days ago.
As long as warm blood flows in my body and I am fit to remember, my experience of Fiona will never be lost.
In the words of Scotland's poet, Robert Burns:
Had we never loved sae kindly
Had we never loved sae blindly
Never met or never parted
We had ne'er been broken-hearted.
As for the Normandy campaign, I wouldn't have missed it for the world.
I was proud and delighted when Shimi Lovat invited me to join him as piper, and later, on the morning of 6th June, to pipe his 1st Commando Brigade through the surf and on to the Normandy beaches, where so many men were killed or seriously wounded.
It is sad about Lovat being so badly wounded during the fighting.
At times I feel a wee bit guilty having returned home to Scotland all in one piece, when so many of my friends have died or were badly injured.
Piper Bill Millin