

National Insurance Statutory Sick Pay Statutory Maternity Pay from 6 April 1991 for employers Quick Guide New Easier to use For information or help, please call the Social Security Advice Line for Employers,free,on 0800 393 539.
NI 268 from April 1991 Social Security 
Contents
4
What should I use the Quick Guide for?
5
National Insurance
9
How do I make out contributions?
11
Any other questions?
14
Statutory Sick Pay
15
How do I prepare for SSP?
15
What should I do if an employee is off sick?
15
When do I not pay SSP?
16
What about the actual business of paying SSP?
17
How do I get my money back?
17
What SSP records must I keep?
17
Any other questions?
19
Statutory Maternity Pay
19
How do I prepare for SMP?
20
Who's eligible for SMP?
21
How do I get our money back?
22
What records are necessary?
22
Any other questions?
What should I use the Quick Guide for?
This guide tells you what you need to know and do about:
Class 1 National Insurance (NI) contributions 
Statutory Sick Pay (SSP)
Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP).
It replaces the April 1990 Quick Guide (NI 268).
You have been sent, with this guide, the following tables, to help you calculate NI contributions and benefits:
Not contracted-out Tables (CF 391 from April 1991)
SSP Tables (SSP 55 from April 1991)
SMP Tables (SMP 55 from April 1991)
If you have any problems, or would like fuller information and examples, please consult:
NI Manual (NI 269 from April 1991).
A copy was sent to you with this guide.
SSP Manual (NI 270 from April 1989).
SMP Manual (NI 257 from April 1990).
If you do not have these, or need further copies, please call your local Social Security office.
i
shows you where further information is available, should you need it.
NEW
This symbol indicates new or amended information.
For further help, call the Social Security Advice Line for Employers,free,on 0800 393 539.
This publication is intended only as general guidance.
It is not a complete description of the law.
National Insurance
At a glance
National Insurance (NI) contributions are payments that go towards contributory benefits (such as Retirement Pensions) and the National Health Service.
Once you have started working with the Not contracted-out Tables, coupled with this Quick Guide, you'll find that, in the majority of cases, the business of working out Class 1 National Insurance (NI) contributions is straightforward.
In essence the system works like this:
•
When you, as an employer, first take on an employee, you must tell the Inspector of Taxes, who then sets a Pay As You Earn (PAYE) scheme and sends you an ‘Employers' Starter Pack’.
This contains all the necessary forms and information relating to PAYE tax and NI contributions.
•
If employees are aged 16 or over and earn £52 a week or more,you and your employee will need to pay NI contributions.
•
The Not contracted-out Tables show you how much to pay and what NI contribution information to record on the employee's Deduction Working Sheet (P11).
•
If you pay your employees weekly, you use the weekly tables.
If you pay your employees monthly, you use the monthly tables.
•
You must record personal details and NI numbers on each employee's P11.
You must also note on it the NI contributions and tax details each time an employee gets paid.
•
Every month, you must complete and send a payslip from your payslip booklet P30 (AZ)(CL).
This goes to the Inland Revenue Accounts Office along with the NI contributions and tax deducted in the previous month.
•
At the end of the tax year, you must complete an End-of-Year Return (P14) for each employee showing that employee's details and the total NI contribution and tax paid.
•
You send P14s together with a completed Employer's Declaration (P35) to the Inspector of Taxes.
The final remittance of the tax year should be sent to the Inland Revenue Accounts Office together with a payslip.
•
The calculations are, as you will see from the examples in this guide, simple to make and should not take much time.
If you have any problems, contact your Social Security office, or ring the Social Security Advice Line for Employers,free , on 0800 393 539.
NB If you're more used to working with computers, you'll find that there's a wide choice of basic payroll software available.
New information can be incorporated as and when changes are made.
Contact your dealer for more information.
As an employer, you need to pay NI contributions for those employees aged 16 or over, who earn at or above what is known as the lower earnings limit, which stands at £52 a week from 6th April 1991.
Class 1 NI are made up of the employer's share, which you pay, and the employee's share, which you can deduct from your employee's pay.
Employees' NI contributions are paid on earnings up to and including what is known as the upper earnings limit, which is £390 a week from 6th April 1991.
There is, however, no upper earnings limit for your share.
NI contributions are calculated on a payment-by-payment basis according to the earnings period.
NI contributions are worked out on the gross pay, before all deductions.
The gross pay includes wages, overtime pay, arrears of pay, even superannuation.
i NI Manual, section 15.
Forms you'll need to use
P11
Deductions Working Sheet (see example, page 8).
For keeping weekly or monthly records.
P30
(AZ)(CL) Payslips.
Sent to you by the Inland Revenue and filled in by you monthly.
P35
Employer's Annual Statement, Declaration and Certificate.
Both this and the P14 must be returned at the end of the tax year (5th April 1992).
P14
End-of-Year Return (see example, page 10).
Make sure you use the latest version.
P60
Employee's Certificate of Pay, Income Tax and National Insurance contributions (this is part 3 of the P14).
This is given to every one of your employees on 5th April.
What is an earnings period?
This is the period for which your employee is paid.
For example, if you pay weekly, the earnings period is weekly, and so on .
Earnings periods for National Insurance match tax periods (this tax year is 6th April 1991 to 5th April 1992).
Sometimes, because your employee is paid at intervals which are not exact multiples of a week or a month, the earnings period may not match exactly with tax weeks or months.
Nevertheless, the first earnings period still starts on 6th April and the last period still ends on 5th April.
i NI Manual, section 2.
Does everyone have to have an NI number?
Yes, definitely.
So, before you can go any further you must ensure that, if NI contributions are due and your employees do not have a number, they obtain one.
The DSS gives NI numbers to all employees so that their NI contributions can be recorded on their personal NI accounts.
It is essential, therefore, that you show these numbers on all documents on which you record NI contributions.
NI numbers consist of two letters, six numbers and one letter.
For example, AQ 123456A.
Do not confuse the last letter of the NI number (which might be A, B, C or D) with an NI contribution table letter.
How do I get a number for my employee?
Employees must give you their NI number when you ask for it.
If they cannot, keep a separate record of their surname, forenames, date of birth, and address so that, if they leave before you get the number, you can give this information to your local Social Security office.
If an employee has forgotten his or her number, they should phone the Contributions Unit at the nearest local Social Security office for an application form.
If they have never had a number they must go personally with proof of identity.
i NI Manual, paragraph 36.
Who pays?
Earnings below the lower earnings limit (£52 a week from 6th April 1991):
•The employee pays NI contributions on earnings up to and including the upper earnings limit.
There is no upper earnings limit for employers, so you pay NI contributions on all your employee's earnings.
Earnings between the lower and upper earnings limits:
•You and your employee pay NI contributions on all earnings, including those below the lower earnings limit.
At what rate are contributions paid?
•The employee
NI contributions are normally paid at an initial percentage rate on all earnings up to and including the lower earnings limit, and at a main percentage rate on earnings between the lower and employee's upper earnings limit.
i Not contracted-out Tables, table A.
If your employee has the right to pay the married woman or widow's reduced rate NI contributions, she pays employee's NI contributions at a fixed reduced percentage rate on all earnings up to and including the upper earnings limit.
i Not contracted-out Tables, table B.
If your employee is over pension age, he or she pays no employee's NI contributions.
i Not contracted-out Tables, table C.
i Contracted-out occupational pension schemes: NI Manual, section 8 and Contracted-out Tables.
i NI contributions, people over pension age and contracting-out: NI Manual, paragraph 87.
•The employer
Earnings are broken into bands called earnings brackets.
The percentage rates at which employer's NI contributions are paid depend on the band into which your employee's gross earnings fall.
Example: P11
You will need to keep and record a P11 for every one of your employees, as shown here.
i NI Manual, sections 3 and 16.
Which table
You will find the following tables in the Not contracted-out Tables.
Table A (Standard rate)
Use this table for:
employees who are over age 16 and under pension age (65 men, 60 women)
employees who have their own appropriate personal pension (from July 1st 1988).
Table B (Reduced rate)
Use this table for:
married women and widows who pay NI contributions at the reduced rate and for whom you hold a valid certificate.
i NI Manual, section 4
Table C
Use this table for:
employees who are over pension age (65 men, 60 women) including those previously contracted-out
employees who have made other arrangements to pay their contributions (i.e. those for whom a form RD950 is held).
Use the current tables at the time the payment is made.
Make sure you refer to the correct table:weekly or monthly .
How do I work out contributions?
There are two methods: The exact percentage method .
For more details, see page 12.
The NI table method involves using the Not contracted-out Tables, as follows:
Decide what is the right table (A, B, or C) to use.
Go to the weekly or monthly table
The tables show the contributions due according to the employee's gross weekly or monthly pay
If the exact gross pay is not in the table use the nearest lower figure and the contribution shown next to that lower figure
Write the amount due on a P11
Use a separate P11 for each employee to record earnings (table A only), NI contributions and SSP and SMP payments.
i Company Directors: National Insurance Fact Card (NI 274).
i Contracted-out occupational pension schemes: Contracted-out tables; NI Manual, section 8 and 16.
What am I expected to do on a regular basis?
At the end of each month
Within 14 days of the end of each income tax month you must pay to the Inland Revenue Accounts Office:
the NI contributions taken from your employee's earnings during that month
your own contributions
any income tax due.
You will be sent, by the Inland Revenue, a booklet containing payslips.
All you need to do is send one of these payslips with each month's payment.
One payment can cover both tax and NI contributions.
Follow the instructions on the payslips.
They tell you how to complete the payslips and how to pay.
Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) deductions
As from 6th April 1991, you can recover 80% of the total gross SSP paid to your employees in the tax month.
You must round the 80% calculation to the nearest penny.
Exact amounts of half a penny or less are rounded down.
Example:
Total SSP paid = £141.38 x 80% = £ 113.104 = £113.10
If SSP was due or paid before 6th April 1991 but you have not recovered it, you can still recover 100% of the SSP paid.
There is no National Insurance contributions (NIC) compensation on SSP from 6th April 1991.
But if SSP was due or paid before 6th April you can still recover the NIC compensation.
Example P14
Shown is an End-of-Year Return for an employee in not contracted-out employment paying standard-rate contributions.
Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP) deductions
You can recover 100% of SMP paid to your employees from the total NI contributions due for all your employees in the tax month.
You can also recover all SMP paid in previous months in the same tax year if you have not recovered it in an earlier month.
If you have not recovered SMP paid in an earlier tax year, please ask your local Social Security office.
you can also get back an extra percentage amount of NIC compensation on SMP.
i SMP tables
Example:
Total SMP paid = £138
Recovery from NI contributions = £138.00 total SMP plus £6.21 (NI compensation at 4.5% of £138).
i Recovering SSP and SMP: NI Manual, section 7.
At the end of the tax year
Employer's End-of-Year Return
Also known as the P14.
This must be completed for each employee .
The form is self-explanatory.
At the end of the tax year, simply enter the totals in the appropriate columns (they match those on the P11), along with the employee's details.
Employer's annual statement, declaration and certificate.
Known as a P35, this form is also self-explanatory.
It is a summary of all SSP and SMP paid, NI contributions and tax payable, for every employee.
You can get the total figures from a completed P14 or P32 (from April 1991).
Also show any NI contributions and tax still due to the Inland Revenue.
i NI Manual, sections 3 and 16.
In the case of a limited company, the secretary or a director should sign.
To whom should I send my P14 and P35 forms?
Having completed all P14 forms (or whichever substitute you are using), bundle Parts 1 and 2 separately and send both, together with the P35, to the Inspector of Taxes.
Bundle any alternative forms separately from any P14 forms.
If you use continuous stationery, please remove sprocket margins and separate the sheets clearly into individual documents for each employee.
Send also any balance NI contributions or tax due with a payslip, to the Inland Revenue Accounts Office.
What forms do I need to give to my employees?
At the end of every tax year, you will need to give every employee a P60 (Employer's Certificate of Pay, Income Tax and National Insurance contributions).
You will find this in Part 3 of the P14 form.
Information on the P60 corresponds with the totals taken from the P11.
Even if no tax has been paid, you need to issue a P60 if the employee has paid contributions and was working for you on 5th April.
How long should I hold on to records?
You should keep all your P11 forms and pay records for at least 3 years after the end of the tax year to which they relate, or longer if the Inland Revenue asks you to.
This applies even if your employees paid no contributions in a tax year.
i Using your own record sheets: NI Manual, paragraph 39.
Any other questions?
What should I do when an employee starts to work with us?
When you first pay your employee at or above the lower earnings limit of £52 (from 6th April 1991), NI contributions are due.
Work out the contributions according to the normal earnings period (for example, weekly or monthly), even if the first payment covers less than that period.
Remember to use the contribution rates and earnings limits current at the date of payment, even though these may not be the same as those for the period the payment covers.
Do not count any earnings your employee may have received from other employment.
What should I do when an employee leaves?
i NI Manual, paragraphs 34 and 64.
What records do I need to keep?
For every employee, you must keep a record of the employee's name and NI number, and
their NI contribution table letter (which shows whether they must pay full, reduced rate or no contributions).
For every payment you must record:
its date
pay for tax purposes (gross pay including SSP and SMP, less any occupational pension contributions and allowable charitable gifts)
any occupational pension contributions
any allowable charitable gifts
where pension contributions or charitable gifts are deducted from pay for tax purposes, and keep a separate record of the amount of gross pay used for NI purposes.
Also record the pay figure for tax purposes on the P11 and P14.
For information on filling in a P11, please see page 8 of this guide.
i NI Manual, section 3 and 16.
What if I make a mistake?
The answer is simple: you can put it right in your next monthly payment, or when you pay any balance due at the end of the year.
If, however, you find you have made a mistake with contributions after your P14 (End-of-Year Return) has been sent to the Inspector of Taxes, you have two alternatives:
Before the tax year has ended, ask the Inland Revenue if you can still make an adjustment.
If it is too late, ask your local Social Security office.
After the tax year has ended, talk to your local Social Security office.
In neither case should you adjust your current payment to the Inland Revenue Accounts Office.
How do I use the exact percentage method?
An alternative way of calculating NI contributions is to use the exact percentage method instead of the tables.
To do this, apply the exact percentages (employees' and employers') to your employee's gross pay.
Each percentage calculation must be made separately.
Round each calculation to the nearest 1p (round down any amounts of ½p, i.e.
0.0050 = ½p).
Now, work out the employee's contributions:
at the initial percentage rate
and at the main percentage rate (not contracted-out or contracted-out).
Round the calculation
then add together the calculations to arrive at the employee's contribution.
In addition, you should work out your contributions, as an employer.
If you have to use more than one percentage rate because you have your own contracted-out occupational pension scheme, calculate each part separately and round each calculation.
i Current percentages, earnings limits and earnings brackets: Not contracted-out Tables or Contracted-out Tables.
What about contracted-out employment?
From 6th April 1991, there are important changes for married women and widows paying reduced rate NI contributions under contracted-out table E (or O for mariners).
i Contracted-out Tables and NI Manual section 8.
For other enquiries, contact the Contracted-out Employment Group, Contributions Agency, Newcastle upon Tyne NE98 1YX Telephone: 091–261 2341 
What if I want to keep computerised records?
You can keep your own computerised records.
You can even make your returns on magnetic tape or floppy disc.
i NI Manual, paragraphs 141–42.
Or write to:
DSS Magnetic Media Recruitment Section Room D2914 Longbenton Newcastle NE98 1XY
Will I suffer a penalty on late returns?
Yes — if your End-of-Year Return (P14 or substitute) is submitted late.
Depending on the circumstances, you may also suffer a penalty if an underpayment of NI contributions and tax results from an omission from an omission from your End-of-Year Return.
Inland Revenue leaflet IR73 ‘Inland Revenue Investigations’.
Any queries?
If you have any further queries on NI contributions, call the Social Security Advice Line for Employers,free , on 0800 393 539.
Statutory Sick Pay
As an employer, you are obliged to pay a minimum level of sick pay to most employees, aged 16 or over, who have been off sick for four or more days in a row.
This is called Statutory Sick Pay (SSP).
SSP is straightforward to operate and is paid by you, the employer, as if it were normal pay.
You can claim back 80% of it each month from your NI contributions or tax payments.
The weekly rate, from 6th April 1991, is £52.50 (unchanged) or £43.50, depending on the employee's average weekly earnings.
Employees who are not eligible for SSP can claim Sickness Benefit from the Department of Social Security (DSS).
SSP Terms
These are some of the terms you'll come across when you're dealing with SSP:
Period of incapacity for work (PIW)
This is a period of sickness lasting four or more days in a row.
Any period less than this, does not count for SSP.
Linking
Any two or more PIWs separated from each other by eight weeks or less are ‘linked’, and treated as one PIW.
Qualifying days.
These are the only days for which SSP can be paid.
They are usually those days on which your employees are required by their contract to work for you.
Waiting days
SSP is not payable for the first three qualifying days in a PIW.
These are known as waiting days.
Forms you must use
SSP1
Changeover form.
Use this where your employee has not entitlement to SSP or where that entitlement has run out but he or she is still sick.
SSP1(L)
Leaver's statement.
Use this where your employee is leaving and has had at least four days' SSP in the last eight weeks of the contract.
Forms you may find helpful
SSP2
Record sheet.
This will help you to record all the details required by law.
SC2
Employee's Statement of Sickness.
You can ask your employee to fill this in for absences of between four and seven days.
These forms are available from your Social Security office.
How do I prepare for SSP?
Right from the start:
Tell your employees to phone or write if they're sick.
They may, if they wish, get someone else to tell you.
If they're sick for seven days or less, you may want them to fill in a form saying so.
This could be your own form or an Employee's Statement of Sickness (SC2).
You can ask them for a sick note from their doctor, but only if they have been away for more than seven days.
Make sure that you and your employees agree which are the their qualifying days for SSP.
These are the only days for which you can pay it.
They are normally working days.
For example, if someone usually works Monday through to Friday, these are the qualifying days.
If your employees have unusual working patterns, you can agree different qualifying days.
There must be at least one qualifying day in every week of an employee's contract.
i SSP Manual, paragraphs 9–12.
What should I do if an employee is off sick?
Is there a period of incapacity for work (PIW)?
First of all, has your employee been off sick for four or more days in a row?
This is known as a period of incapacity for work (PIW).
Count all days including Sundays and holidays.
If the answer is no, take no action.
If the answer is yes, you may have to pay SSP, but check first…
Does the PIW link with a previous one?
You can find the answer in the linking tables in your SSP 55.
Spells of sickness lasting four or more days in a row link and count as one PIW if separated by eight weeks or less.
This is important to know when working out whether you have to pay SSP, and how much.
What if it does link?
Check your records to see what you did at that time.
If you decided on the first day of the PIW you could not pay the SSP or that you had to stop paying SSP during the PIW, you employee cannot get SSP now.
In this case, fill in a Changeover form SSP1 and send it to your employee.
Keep a record of the employee's sickness and why you cannot pay SSP.
What if it doesn't?
Check whether any of the reasons for not paying SSP apply on the first day of the PIW.
These are listed below.
Be extra careful with new employees who have worked for you for eight weeks or less.
Please see page 17.
When do I not pay SSP?
SSP is not payable if on the first day of the PIW your employee:
is making average weekly earnings which are below the level at which NI contributions must be paid (£52 from 6th April 1991).
If you're not sure what average weekly earnings are, see page 16
is a woman aged 60 or over, or a man aged 65 or over
is holding a contract of service for a specified three months or less
has a PIW which links with a Social Security benefit.
If you have a new employee, there are extra points to check: see page 17
cannot get SSP because of pregnancy
i SSP Manual, paragraph 63.
is not in the European Community
is away from work because of a trade dispute
is in legal custody
has already had 28 weeks' SSP with a previous employer
i SSP Manual, paragraph 59.
has not yet done any work for you
i SSP Manual paragraph 67
If any of the above apply on the first day of the PIW, do not pay SSP.
Fill in the Changeover form SSP1 and send it to your employee without delay.
Tell them to use the SSP1 if they want to claim sickness benefit.
Always keep a record of what you do.
When do I stop paying SSP?
You stop paying SSP when your employee is no longer sick, or when one of the following happens:
you stop employing him or her
your employee has had SSP for 28 weeks in the PIW
your employee goes outside the European Community
your employee goes into legal custody
your employee's PIW with you has lasted for more than three years
your employee can no longer get SSP from you because of pregnancy.
i SSP Manual, paragraphs 73–78.
If any of the above apply, do not pay SSP.
If your employee is still sick when you have to stop paying SSP, fill in the Changeover form SSP1 and send it to your employee without delay.
Tell them to use the SSP1 if they want to claim sickness benefit.
Always keep a record of what you do.
What about the actual business of paying SSP?
What days do I pay for?
You only pay for qualifying days.
These are usually the days when your employee works for you.
But you never pay SSP for the first three qualifying days of a PIW.
These days are known as waiting days.
Pay SSP from the fourth qualifying day in the PIW.
Example:
An employee is sick from Monday to Sunday.
The qualifying days are Monday to Friday.
No SSP is due for Monday to Wednesday.
These are the three waiting days.
Pay SSP for Thursday and Friday.
Remember, if a PIW links with a previous PIW there may not be any waiting days left to serve because waiting days are served only once in a PIW.
You can then start to pay SSP from the first qualifying day.
If you pay SSP when it is not due, you will have to make good any mistake.
How much do I have to pay?
There are two SSP rates, depending on your employee's average weekly earnings.
The rates from 6th April 1991 are:
£43.50 a week for those earning between £52 and £184.99 or £52.50 a week for those earning £185 a week or more.
The daily rate of SSP is the weekly rate divided by the number of qualifying days in the week you are considering.
For SSP purposes the week always begins with Sunday.
And for how long?
SSP is payable for up to 28 weeks in a PIW, but most periods of sickness are over in three weeks.
How do I work out average weekly earnings?
If your employee is paid varying weekly amounts, or is paid monthly, you will need to calculate the average weekly earnings.
Use one of the following methods:
For weekly paid employees:
Add together the gross earnings on the last eight pay days before the start of the PIW and divide the total by eight.
The result is the employee's average weekly earnings.
If it is less than the level at which NI contributions must be paid, your employee cannot get SSP.
You must include all payments made on the eight calendar weeks.
If, on any of the pay days, your employee was not due any pay (for example, if wages had been paid in advance at holiday time), the ‘blank weeks’ are still included in the calculation.
For monthly paid employees:
Add together the gross payments made on the last normal pay day before the PIW began and any other payments made since the pay day which was at least eight weeks before that.
Multiply the total by 6 and divide by 52 or;
Where an employee is paid once each month,but in multiples of a week , for example on the last Friday of each month, add together the gross payments made on the last normal pay day before the PIW began and any other payments made since the pay day which was at least eight weeks before.
Then divide the total by the number of weeks covered by the payments.
i SSP Manual, paragraphs 84–87.
A helpful example
Your employee normally works for you from Monday through to Friday.
He or she is sick on Sunday and continues sick until the following Sunday.
What do you do?
First check whether there is a PIW (a spell of sickness lasting for four more days in a row).
Yes
Does the PIW link with a previous one?
No
Are there any reasons for not paying SSP?
(Check the lists on pages 15 and 16)
No
Identify the qualifying days in the week of sickness.
There are five, Monday to Friday
Stop the waiting days
These are Monday to Wednesday, the first three qualifying days in the PIW.
Pay SSP for the remaining qualifying days.
These are Thursday and Friday (Saturday and Sunday are non-qualifying days).
What rate do you pay?
£52.50 or £43.50 depending on your employee's average weekly earnings.
Deduct any tax and NI contributions due.
Record details of the PIW and SSP paid.
i Daily rate: SSP Tables.
How do I get my money back?
You can get back 80% of the total gross SSP you have paid in the tax month.
Simply deduct this from your NI contributions and tax which you send each month to the Inland Revenue.
See SSP deductions, page 9.
What SSP records must I keep?
If you wish, you can get a record sheet from the Department of Social Security to help you do this.
Ask for an SSP2.
You must keep records of:
all PIWs (periods of sick absence of four or more days in a row)
what days you have paid SSP for
how much SSP you have paid
reasons why you have not paid SSP.
You must give the total gross SSP payments you have made to each employee on your P14 End-of-Year Return.
You should also show the total gross SSP payments on a P35 form.
Any other questions?
; What do I check if I've got a new employee?
If your new employee falls sick and has worked for you for eight weeks or less, check whether they have any of these linking letters from the Department of Social Security: BF218, BF220, BM7 or BM8 (or BF219 in Northern Ireland).
If they have, follow the guidance given on the form.
If this shows that no SSP is due, fill in the Changeover form SSP1 and send it to your employee.
Keep a record of what you have done.
Alternatively, does your employee have a Leaver's statement (SSP1[L ]); from a previous employer?
If so, check Date 2.
If this date is within eight weeks from the start of the PIW, you will not have to pay SSP for so long.
i SSP Manual, paragraph 44.
If the employee has been working for you for up to eight weeks and does not have a linking letter or a Leaver's statement, phone your Social Security office and ask if the start of the PIW you are dealing with links back to a claim to a Social Security benefit.
What should I do when an employee leaves?
If your employee is sick during the last eight weeks before leaving and you have paid SSP for more than three days you have to fill in a Leaver's statement SSP(L).
You can get this form from your Social Security office.
You must give this form to your employee .
i SSP Manual, paragraph 51.
What if we have our own sick pay scheme?
If you already have your own company sick pay scheme, it must pay the employee at least what he or she would have been entitled to on SSP.
If not, you are obliged to top it up to the statutory level.
Statutory Maternity Pay
SMP is normally paid by you to an employee who is away from work to have a baby.
You can get back any SMP you have paid from your normal NI contributions or tax payments.
You can also get back an additional amount as compensation for the NI contributions you have paid on SMP.
Abbreviations and terms
EWC
Expected Week of Confinement.
QW
Qualifying Week.
Fifteen weeks before the EWC.
MPP
Maternity Pay Period.
The period of up to eighteen weeks during which SMP can be paid.
Forms you may need to use
MATB1
Maternity Certificate.
A pregnant employee will be given this by a doctor or midwife.
SMP1
For employees not entitled to SMP.
Available from your local Social Security office.
SMP2
Record sheet (optional).
How do I prepare for SMP?
Make sure that your employees know:
they must tell you at least 21 days before they plan to take maternity leave.
You can ask for notification in writing if you wish.
i SMP Manual, paragraph 8.
they must normally give you notice in person.
If this is not possible, you should accept notice given on their behalf.
what sort of medical evidence you will need in order to decide whether you can pay SMP or not.
In addition, you should keep a supply of form SMP1 which you will need to give to those employees who cannot get SMP from you.
These forms are available from your local Social Security office.
•What do I do if an employee says she is expecting a baby?
Before you can work out if SMP is payable, you will need medical evidence of the date the baby is due.
This will normally be on form MAT B1 (maternity certificate) which your employee will get from her doctor or midwife.
You can, however, accept other medical evidence.
i SMP Manual, paragraph 9.
Next, consult Column 1 of your SMP Tables to find the expected week of confinement (the week in which the baby is expected).
Column 2 against this will tell you the qualifying week , which is fifteen weeks before the baby is due.
Check your records to make sure that your employee was employed by you at some time during that week.
If she was not, she cannot get SMP from you unless she was ‘fairly dismissed’.
i SMP Manual, paragraph 13.
Who's eligible for SMP?
You have to pay SMP to any woman who has been continuously employed by you for at least 26 weeks into the qualifying week and whose average weekly earnings  are at least equal to the lower earnings limit for NI contributions which applied in the qualifying week .
How do I work out average weekly earnings?
If your employee is paid varying weekly amounts, or if she is paid monthly, you need to calculate her average weekly earnings.
Use one of the following methods:
For weekly paid employees:
Add together gross earnings on the eight pay-days up to and including the last pay-day before the end of the qualifying week (QW) and divide the total by 8.
The result is the employee's average weekly earnings.
If it is less than the lower earnings limit which applied in the QW, your employee cannot get SMP.
You must include all payments actually made in those eight calendar weeks.
If on any of the pay-days, your employee did not get any pay (for example, if wages had been paid in advance at holiday time), the ‘blank weeks’ are still included in the calculation.
For monthly paid employees:
Add together the gross payments made on the last normal pay-day before the end of the QW and any other payments made after the pay-day which was at least eight weeks before that.
Multiply the total by 6 and divide by 52
Where your employee is paid once a month but is paid in multiples of a week (for example, on the last Friday of each month), add together the gross payments made on the last pay day before the end of the QW and any other payments made after the pay day at least eight weeks before that.
Divide the total by the number of weeks covered by the payments.
i SSP Manual, paragraphs 84–87.
If it is less than the lower earnings limit which applied in the QW, your employee is not entitled to SMP.
i Payment at other intervals: SMP Manual, paragraph 32.
How much SMP do I pay?
There are two rates of SMP.
The lower rate
If your employee has been employed by you for a continuous period of at least 26 weeks into the qualifying week, regardless of the number of hours worked, she is eligible for lower rate SMP.
The rate from 7th April 1991 is £44.50 a week.
An employee who qualifies only for the lower rate of SMP is entitled to it throughout the Maternity Pay Period of up to 18 weeks.
The higher rate
If your employee was employed by you for a continuous period of at least two calendar years into the qualifying week and normally worked 16 hours or more a week, she is eligible for the higher rate of SMP.
Alternatively, if she has been employed by you for a continuous period of at least five calendar years into the qualifying week for 8 hours or more each week, then she is also eligible.
The higher rate is 90% of your employee's average weekly earnings.
If your employee qualifies for the higher rate, it should be paid for the first six weeks that higher rate SMP is due.
For the remaining weeks, you pay her at the lower rate of £44.50 a week.
At what point do I start paying SMP?
Normally, the Maternity Pay Period (MPP) cannot start before the eleventh week before the expected week of confinement (EWC).
A woman has some say as to when her MPP starts.
She must, however, give up work before the start of the sixth week before the EWC if she is to get SMP for the full eighteen weeks.
SMP is payable for up to 18 weeks unless the woman goes abroad outside the European community, is taken into legal custody, or returns to work.
i SMP Manual, paragraphs 20–28.
How exactly do I pay SMP?
Pay SMP in the same way that you would normally pay your employee's wages.
Remember that SMP is subject to NI contributions and tax.
A helpful example
Your employee gives you a maternity certificate (such as MAT B1) showing the date her baby is expected.
What do you do?
Find the expected week of confinement (EWC) in Column 1 of SMP Tables, and the qualifying week (QW) in Column 2.
Was she employed by you in the QW?
She was
Has she been employed by you for at least 26 weeks into the QW?
She has
Were her average weekly earnings (see page 20) equal to or above the lower earnings limit?
They were
She is entitled to SMP
Has she been employed by you into the QW for at least two years (full-time) or for five years (part-time)?
She has
Higher rate of SMP is payable for the first six weeks of her absence.
Did her maternity absence start more than six weeks before the EWC?
It did
SMP is payable for 18 weeks.
How do I get our money back?
You can get back the gross amount of SMP you have paid out, plus an additional amount (4.5% of the total gross SMP from 6th April 1991) as compensation for the NI contributions you have paid on SMP.
All you have to do is deduct both amounts from your monthly NI and tax payments.
What records are necessary?
•
Any maternity certificate such as MAT B1 given to you by employees for whom you paid SMP.
•
A copy of the maternity certificate where the original has been returned to the employee, for example, where your liability for SMP has ended.
•
Dates of maternity absence notified by your employees.
•
Any weeks within the maternity pay period for which SMP was not paid, with reasons.
If you wish, you can get a record sheet (form SMP2) from your Social Security office.
You need to:
•
record SMP payments in Column 1g on your employee's P11
•
show the total SMP payments on your employee's P14
•
show total gross SMP payments and the total amount of NI contributions (NIC) compensation on a P35.
Any other questions?
What if an employee works during the Maternity Pay Period (MPP)?
You cannot pay SMP for any week in which your employee works for you.
She will lose one week's SMP for each week or part-week that she works during her MPP.
SMP which is lost in this way is at the lower rate first.
i Working for someone else or other changes in circumstances: SMP Manual, paragraphs 50–52.
What if we have our own maternity pay scheme?
If you already pay your employee any money while she receives SMP, for example, occupational maternity pay, this will count towards your SMP payment for the same week.
i Offsetting SMP: SMP Manual, paragraph 44.
What if an employee is not entitled to SMP?
If your employee is not entitled to SMP, you need to complete form SMP1 and give it to her together with any maternity certificate which she may have given you.
Keep a record of what you did.
i Disputes about entitlement: SMP Manual, paragraphs 55–61.
What if I make a mistake?
i SMP Manual, paragraphs 68–74.