

The West 
THE Western borderlands of Soviet Russia were the nearest to Moscow of all frontier regions, yet they were relatively neglected by historians and travellers alike.
Even by 1926 party contacts between the capital and Smolensk were to remain mostly at the written rather than at the human level.
Arnold Toynbee once argued that it is the ‘barbaric’ vital periphery that finally topples a declining civilization, but this maxim does not hold for the Russian Revolution.
The political centre suffered a series of heart attacks from 1905 onwards, of which the body of society as a whole was only to become fully aware after 1928.
Despite Lenin's theory of national self-determination, the new Soviet Union still embraced the great bulk of the old imperial domains, including minorities like the Georgians and the Ukrainians who had been civilized for centuries before the denizens of what was to become Muscovy.
After the Civil War Bolshevik control expanded easily from its bastion which had been reduced to the size of medieval Muscovy.
The Tambov revolt and other peasant disturbances were soon contained and squashed.
This does not mean that the vast provinces of Russia should be ignored, although they usually are.
The idea of centre is deeply rooted in the human mind.
The concept of a national centre has been a hierarchical mental device used by historians since the Reformation to over-simplify the chaos of diverse local stimuli.
In primitive societies with small, self-sufficient units there was no differentiation between centre and periphery, and it could be argued that many peasants in Russia remained at  this level of perception during NEP.
Yet urban, industrial polarization had already developed to a considerable degree before 1917, creating awareness of the political centre among the more sophisticated peasant strata such as village teachers, zemstvo clerks, bookkeepers, doctors' and veterinarians' assistants.
E. D. Vinogradoff has shown how local agrarian social and economic conditions shaped the collective political behaviour of peasants elected to the Fourth State Duma.
This was clearly the case in the Central Agricultural Region, which we shall consider in Chapter 2.
The difficulty is that its traditional features — communal tenure, a three-field system, and growing land pressure — have often served as all-Russian criteria, but they did not apply to the West.
Prior to 1917 most Belorussian peasant farms had belonged to individual families and had averaged less than 20 acres.
The small upper class — mainly Polish and Russian — had owned most of the land.
When this class disappeared in the Revolution, the peasants increased their landownership to 28 per cent more than they had before 1917.
Pressure was reduced further by state funds applied in 1922 to the improvement of the large marshy areas.
The Central Region also lacked those national and religious minorities whose commonly held views in some borderlands had bridged the psychological gap between town and country and had led to the formation of political parties after 1905.
Agrarian, ethnic, and religious influences will be examined here, but in the post-revolutionary situation they all had negative rather than active political influence on the conduct of high politics.
That an atheist regime was likely to take scant notice of advice based on religious preference is self-evident.
Less obvious is the indifference to ethnic variations, despite the fact that Belorussian nationalism was itself weak.
Moscow also neglected agrarian provincial variations even in the liberal conditions of early NEP.
Yet negative influences, so long as they were sufficiently weighty and cumulative, could have  enormous effects on the formulation of all-Russian policies.
This proved to be the case by the end of NEP.
The only positive line of local-central political communication was the Bolshevik Party network.
We shall see how much or how little of local nuances it succeeded in conveying to the top authorities.
Let us begin at the roots of this multifarious society.
In january 1922 79.29 per cent of the entire population of the ex-Empire, estimated at 133,890,100, lived in European Russia; 77.3 per cent of all inhabitants lived in the countryside.
Thus it is clear that our typical inhabitant is a peasant living in European Russia.
In a village somewhere in the uezd of Roslavl' in the southwest of the Smolensk guberniia a peasant mother rises at dawn in the spring of 1922 on hearing the passing herdsman drum on his barabanka , a cast-iron drum.
She has slept in her clothes as usual, so she reaches at once for her birch-bark pail (podoinik ) with its removable lid and spout for pouring out the milk once she has returned from milking her cow, or two cows if she is rich.
It has been calculated that in 1922 an average of 38 minutes would be spent on going to work and coming back, with a working day of between 14 and 15 hours in the warmer months.
The second job of the day is to light the stove, a monument in itself, taking up a quarter of the thatched hut with its various extensions — a sill (pod ) with an area for keeping dishes warm (chestok ), niches (pechurki ) for small objects and matches, holes on the side for drying out leg and foot wrappings (for lack of shoes), holes near the summit for reviving chilled hens in winter, and on the triumphal summit worn clothing on which to stretch out and sleep in the delicious warmth —‘U hholodnoi pechi ne sogreesh'sia ’(‘You can't heat yourself at a cold stove’).
Diagonally opposite the stove is the icon corner, although for a Belorussian peasant the most sacred spot is the stove column, where the souls of predecessors reside.
Together with the first harvest sheaf hanging beside the icon  for its protective magic, these are reminders that our peasant lives in several cultural times simultaneously, one of them embedded deep in the pagan past, another in the religious present, a third focused on the trip she is about to take to the town of Roslavl'.
And away and above her imagination lie the remote worlds of elegant Petrograd, and of Moscow, the city of the Communist future as well as of her inherited religious past.
After making first animal feed (korm ) and only later cabbage soup (shchi ) for the family, she may finally turn to the work that occupies the womenfolk from November until Lent — spinning flax from that blue-flowered, frail-leaved plant plucked by the root in handfuls in the August of 1921.
The thread is spooled on an enormous reeling-machine (nituchha ) before being woven on a primitive loom into mens' shirts and trousers, household linen and curtains (pologa ) to protect the sleeper from the mosquitoes that are so prevalent in the marshes of the western plains.
When the women gossip at their looms, they do not speak Tolstoy's pure peasant Russian, but a dialect that differs from one village to the next.
Here in Struga they speak what they call ‘struskii ’, a hotchpotch of Belorussian, Russian, and Ukrainian.
It would be mental laziness to assume that each national minority was more of a unity than the ex-empire as a whole.
Innumerable subcultures split up by language, region, class, religion, generation, type of work, and sex existed within Belorussia alone.
Women lived a different cultural, economic, and political life from men in the 1920s, as will be seen in more detail when we return to this area and topic in 1926.
Our peasant is starting off today to Roslavl', 55 miles away, in order to see her soldier son who has been away in the Civil War, and is passing with his peacetime unit by train tomorrow from Briansk further south to the city of Smolensk with an hour's stop in Roslavl'.
She knots up some girdle-cakes  (lepëshki ) in a kerchief and plunges through the thick spring mud of the village track to the river Iput' near by where she catches one of several small boats plying to Volga, a market town on the way to Roslavl'.
The next day she transfers to the much slower cart (telega ) which arrives in the late afternoon in Roslavl', a bustling railway-town.
She buys some soap and ribbons in the market, where she notes the huge rise in prices since her last visit.
The gossip flows in, as at all meeting-places in a largely illiterate environment.
She gathers that she has been lucky on her journey to avoid the widespread banditry, carried out more often than not by deserters from the army.
Her son had better stay within the ranks, she thinks.
Another danger she must avoid is the typhus still raging in the town.
She hurries to the railway station.
Near chaos prevails here.
A group of people have just been arrested by the railway Cheka for trying to travel without tickets, yet our peasant notes how the wife of a Roslavl' party member flourishes an authorization for a free pass typed out on a Tsarist form.
It is clear to her that the old ropes are still being pulled by the new masters.
She wonders if she will in fact see her son, since a tender has come off the track down the line.
She knows from home that many trains do not run because thousands of peasants have not been paid for hauling wood to the engine fuel-dumps for the whole of 1920–1, and so have refused to carry on.
In fact the son's military train, despite the fact that it has priority (a hangover from the days of the armoured trains), only passes through on the following day, when his mother has left.
On the platform he picks up the local rumours.
The  Roslavl' party cell is thinking of recruiting up to seventy-five soldiers from the town garrison in order to collect potatoes from the area as a tax in kind.
He is glad that at least he will not be pitted against his own class in this way.
His pay is appallingly low and one month in arrears, and yet he hears that the local party is about to mobilize by force peasants aged between 20 and 40 for the army.
He fears a further decline in peasant confidence in the Bolsheviks.
In the voting for the Constituent Assembly during the winter of 191 7 his vote, together with that of many thousands of other ex-front soldiers and their wives and neighbours, had given the Bolsheviks healthy rural support.
On arrival at Smolensk, our peasant soldier discovers that all the equipment of his unit has been embezzled or stolen from the luggage-van.
To make matters worse, he finds that his unit has been brought to Smolensk in order to organize the procurement and protection of wood at local timber yards and fuel dumps.
All recalcitrant peasants are to be arrested, and the Presidium of the Smolensk gubispolkom (the party executive committee) has put the campaign ‘on wartime footing’.
Shades of Trotsky's labour armies, he and his comrades murmur between themselves when the political commissar leaves them.
In 1922 the capital of the guberniia could hardly be called a bastion of the proletariat.
The nearest useful census is for 1923, when the total population of Smolensk was only 63,669 of which a mere 15.1 per cent were workers.
Like the population of all the cities of European Russia, it suffered a decline (from 72,559 in 1917 to 56,826 in 1920).
This was far less dramatic  than in a much larger city like Petrograd.
At the turn of the century industrial production in Belorussia had been half that of the average for Russia as a whole.
The area was thus unusually weighted towards agriculture, but it was only an exaggeration of the normal situation in all provincial regions.
Throughout NEP Russia remained plunged in a largely preindustrial society, conditioned far more by its natural environment (of marshes, flax, large forests in Belorussia) than by its few industrial cities.
By the end of 1923 only 12,323 persons were engaged in all of Soviet Belorussian industry, compared with 23,438 railway-workers.
Belorussian industrial capacity had been split in half by the World War and its consequences.
Western Belorussia still lay under Polish control, with its heavier concentrations of textile-workers.
In 1922 10,000 textile-operatives in the Belostok region of Western Belorussia struck under the influence of the Polish Communist Party.
Ironically, and not for the last time in history, the Communist-inspired proletariat had more clout outside the Soviet borders than within.
Given Russia's high latitudinal position, her short farming season, low productivity, absence of markets, and scant incentives for yield improvement in the late Tsarist period and until the advent of NEP, the natural result was a strong peasant urge to supplement agricultural income by promysly (craft industries), one of which was the production and working up of flax for the kustarnyi industry.
The latter was defined by Soviet terminology in the 1920s as all establishments producing goods for more than one household but employing thirty wage-earners or less; or if motive power was used, fifteen wage-earners or less.
The accent on rural industry had actually increased heavily over the years prior to 1922.
The chaotic transport situation did not harm it, since it had access to local raw materials and fuel.
The clothing industry, including flax, had flourished because it supplied both the Tsarist and the Red  Armies which trampled through Belorussia.
There were also other reasons for the growing importance of small-scale industry during the Civil War and NEP.
The famine of 1919–21 forced industrial workers back to the countryside, where they proceeded to apply their skills, encouraged by the local peasantry, thwarted by the lack of industrial consumer goods from the towns.
The loss of the Polish and Baltic provinces, which had supplied the Russian market with a large quantity of consumer goods, also served to increase the dependence of the Soviet population on the kustari, particularly in the west.
The 1897 census had listed 20,000 kustari for the six Belorussian provinces of that period.
By the end of 1922 the number rose to 33,800 for Soviet Belorussia, a smaller area.
This figure was 2.7 times higher than for employees in large-scale industry.
Their volume of production was one and a half times greater, and they were engaged chiefly in clothing, woodwork, skins, and agricultural repairs.
During the war years 480 large and small-scale industrial enterprises had been knocked out in Belorussia.
A further huge reduction of about 80 per cent in the labour force had taken place since the introduction of khozraschet at the start of NEP.
Throughout Russia heavy industry suffered the most.
Whereas the national monthly output of iron-ore had sunk from 45.87 million pudy in 1913 to 0.98 by September 1922, and cast-iron from 21.43 to 0.94, flax yarn had only sunk from 0.236 to 0.104.
This set-back meant that flax prices went up steeply in 1922 to meet demand, and sowing increased sharply in the autumn, bringing quick prosperity to parts of Belorussia.
Another consumer industry of prime importance to this area, paper, recovered very rapidly during 1922, in the effort to supply the hungry central bureaucracies and cultural institutions which had been sorely deprived.
Yet until 1923  much pulp had to be imported from abroad in view of the atrocious transport situation in Belorussia and the chaotic state of the timber industry.
Capital investment in Belorussian industry, centred on Smolensk, was only 485,000 roubles in 1922, but this was stepped up by 271 per cent in 1923.
On average workers' pay in Belorussia had dropped by 1922 to 73.5 per cent of the 1913 level, but in 1923 it was to rise to 112.5 per cent.
In the first half of 1921 nearly all workers and state employees had been paid almost entirely in kind but by june 1922 66 per cent came in the form of cash.
The best-paid workers in Belorussia were in the bristle industry.
Metal-workers, the vanguard of the 1917 proletarian revolution in Petrograd, here received two-thirds less than bristle-workers, and flax-workers, most of them unqualified and women, earned four-fifths less.
Private firms paid up to 28 per cent of wages towards social insurance for their workers, whereas state concerns contributed between 15 and 19.5 per cent.
By the end of 1922 many relatives of war casualties began to receive small social-welfare payments.
Yet.
in all Belorussia there were only 1,669 hospital beds.
Such was the frail nature of the Belorussian working class, cut off from its metropolitan Russian brothers by a broad sea of peasants.
Now it is time to consider the area's ethnic relationship as a whole to the Great-Russian heartland.
Subsequently, three themes of great concern both to the local population and to the political authorities in Smolensk and Moscow will be treated — taxation, religion, and cultural and political education.
In the course of this book we shall come across other national minorities: the Ukrainians and the Kazakhs in our tour of the provinces, and the Georgian question at the more theoretical level of high politics.
At the outset it may prove useful, if only to discover differences rather than similarities, to contrast Great-Russian nationalism with French.
Both nations were highly centralized, and both underwent fundamental revolutions, but their geographical scale and relationship to national minorities were  very different.
After 1789 politicians were the main architects of French nationalism, but in Russia at the start of NEP Marxist internationalism and Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution still imbued most leading Bolsheviks, with the significant exception of Stalin, whose treatment of Georgia in 1922 was to shock Lenin.
French patriotism had been whipped Up through the antics of her revolutionary armies abroad, but the Russian Civil War had no effect of this kind.
For the most part Great Russians were fighting Great Russians, and in the process trampled over the lands of peasants, whether Russian, Belorussian, Ukrainian, etc., none of whom was more inclined thereafter to feel particularly attracted to Muscovite patriotism.
Moreover Lenin held the view from Babeuf via Marx that regular armies should be abolished, thus reducing the danger of the nationalistic Bonapartism that overcame France.
The second chief instrument of French post-revolutionary nationalism was her culture as disseminated through her educational institutions.
In the early Soviet period, until well after Stalin's introduction of the notion of ‘Socialism in one country’, state education was rigorously infused with those same ideas of proletarian internationalism that influenced military circles.
Much of Russia's traditional culture was still rejected in early NEP.
What little remained of it had never rejoiced in the calm self-assurance of the French, who had equated their race with civilization.
Paris was the world's cultural capital in their eyes, but Russia suffered alternately from a deep-rooted inferiority complex, saddled with two cultural capitals looking away from each other towards Asia and Europe; or from an unstable Messianic superiority complex, derived from Byzantium via Dostoevsky and now resurrected phoenix-like by the Bolsheviks under a new guise.
The results of this brief comparison may surprise those Whig interpreters of Soviet history who read back into it before its time the dominant Great-Russian nationalism of the 1930s.
The only glimmer of it in early NEP was, ironically, the attitude of one Georgian, Stalin, towards his own national birthplace.
Nothing had changed radically between shortly before 1917 and 1922 to cause any further deterioration in non-Russian — Russian relationships.
As before 1917, so by 1922 the central political authority still mingled quite closely, at least in the European provinces, on territorial and cultural grounds with the minorities, whether in Belorussia or the Ukraine.
Indeed the three languages were very close to each other.
The Bolsheviks proved in the Civil War that they could defend the minorities just as well, or indeed better than the Tsarist regime had done in the Great War.
One type of authoritarian rule had been followed by another, not allowing for that kind of unsettling liberalization which is so conducive to uprisings among minorities.
The Bolsheviks at least promised to tackle regional socio-economic backwardness, and their bureaucratic intervention in the localities was at first less oppressive in some ways than in the Tsarist past simply for lack of personnel.
The relatively relaxed stance of most of the leading Bolsheviks, many of whom in any case were themselves not Great Russians, was met at least half-way by the malleable reactions of the Belorussians.
A leading Western authority on the reincorporation of the nationalities into the Soviet Union opined that of all the minorities the Belorussians had the weakest urge to set themselves apart.
In purely practical terms the largest population in Belorussia after the indigenous inhabitants remained from the 1897 to the 1926 census the Jews and not the Russians.
Prior to the Revolution there was scant institutional evidence of deep-rooted nationalist sentiment.
There were no institutions of higher learning except for an obscure agricultural college in Mogilev province.
The very few secondary schools and the rare rural schools gave lessons in Russian only, on general Russian lines.
Belorussia had the lowest literacy rate among all the peoples of European Russia.
Without going into the intricacies of Belorussia's fate between 1917 and 1921 (she was occupied in turn by Germans, Poles, and Russians, and there were three successive Soviet governments), a few salient points may serve to show the indifference of all the four nationalities involved to Belorussian national claims.
In 1917 the Belorussian National Committee, a hotchpotch of indecisive and divided intellectuals, eventually mustered sufficient unity to send demands to Petrograd, only to be nullified by the differing views of the Petrograd- and Moscow-based Belorussian groups (intimations of those wider cultural and political differences between the twin capitals which are taken up in a later chapter).
Abstract theorizing continued in Moscow and Petrograd, unrelated to the practical needs and wishes of the ordinary Belorussian back at home.
As a result, in the first free elections in the spring of 1917 to the zemstvo and municipal Belorussian governments, not a single nationalist representative won any popular support.
If this tendency to ratiocinate in central isolation was already rife by 1917 in the microcosmic situation of the Belorussians, how much greater were the potential dangers for the future of the Bolsheviks' wider theories as applied to the all-Russian macrocosm.
At least, after the outcome of the Civil War and the suppression of all other parties, the Bolsheviks no longer feared non-election.
When the Germans invaded Belorussia in February 1918, they paid no attention to nationalist aspirations.
After the Polish invasion of April 1919, Belorussia was said to be historically an inalienable part of the Polish Commonwealth.
The local landowners were reinstated and Polish introduced as the official language.
At the end of 1919 Lenin showed Russian indifference by offering virtually all of Belorussia to Poland in order to stave off a Polish offensive, but the most telling instance of Russia's attitude had already occurred after the German withdrawal in December 1918, when the Northwestern Regional Committee of the Russian Communist Party held a conference at Smolensk.
It blithely renamed itself the Belorussian Party.
When even Belorussian Communists complained, they were told that ‘the majority could not form a faction’.
The majority cited was not in fact the Belorussian Communists, since Russians predominated: the reference was to the Belorussian ethnic majority in the republic's population.
The final Russian snub, though it does not appear to have been taken as such by the Belorussians, came in January  1921 when the Belorussian SSR was constituted.
It was confined to a small border strip of 20,000 square miles and 1,500,000 inhabitants, encompassing Roslavl' and Smolensk, but excluding important districts centred on Vitebsk, Gomel, and Mogilev which were incorporated into the RSFSR.
Over the last two centuries minority unrest has often stemmed from a thwarted intelligentsia impatient for power and capable of perceiving its nationality's relative backwardness.
However energetic such a group may be, it has to draw on popular ethnic support.
Its traditional ally, newly settled city-dwellers, were almost completely lacking in Belorussia, as we have seen.
The peasant grass-roots culture that has been examined briefly here was too local in scope, too illiterate, to line up strongly with the intelligentsia.
Two authorities on this question disagree with each other, the one claiming little or no contact, the other maintaining that some Belorussian intellectuals appealed to the peasant masses throughout the 1920s by proclaiming the Bezburzhuaznost' (the non-existence of a bourgeoisie) of the whole nation.
On the positive side one could cite the wider political knowledge acquired by a territory invaded on all sides during 1917–21, so that at least the many peasants, caught up in military life, like our travelling soldier, might acquire broader interests.
On the negative side it should be recalled that many Belorussian nationalists were more pro-Western than specifically Belorussian in their emphasis, while many others became so identified with the Bolshevik Party that they shed earlier inclinations.
On balance Voltaire's maxim that the poor could have no patrie probably still held sound for the vast majority of Belorussian peasants in early NEP.
Their main foe, irrespective of his nationality, was the tax-collector, and their main ally, if only they knew it, the educator, irrespective of whether he spoke Russian or Belorussian.
The only widespread bond that clearly separated some of them from Russians was their Catholicism, but it also separated them from fellow Belorussians.
We shall turn to these three themes shortly, but finally the relatively smooth course of Russian-Belorussian collaboration  during NEP should be underlined.
One of the liberalizing facets of NEP was the effort to reconcile the Bolsheviks and local nationalists, and even Stalin endorsed it.
This era of mild concessions to Belorussian culture impressed Belorussians amongst the diaspora abroad who continued to believe that a truly democratic system might yet emerge.
Only towards the end of the 1920s did the central regime start to suppress Belorussian cultural institutions, and it was not until 1933 that general persecution of nationalism became prevalent in the area.
Religious rather than political beliefs permeated the everyday lives of both Russian and national minority peasants.
These beliefs were rooted far deeper in the past than attitudes to taxation or to education, and they were to remain tenacious into late NEP despite mounting persecution, as will be seen when this same area is re-examined later.
There have been many Western and Soviet studies of religious belief per se , and of the interaction in Soviet history between an atheist regime and a highly religious peasantry, but scant reference is made to socio-economic views and actions derived from religion that had ultimate political repercussions.
Emphasis is laid on them here, since they coincide with the line of approach adapted for other themes.
Merle Fainsod once wrote ‘The vantage point which the Smolensk Archive affords for a study of religious activity in the area is a peculiarly distorted one’.
This is because we can read only of anti-religious work as described in party documents and, from 1925 onwards, in the reports of the local League of the Godless.
In order to circumvent this bias to some extent, let us first burrow beneath this middle level to look at grass-roots religious sentiment which for the most part in 1922 escaped party supervision, since the latter was restricted geographically to the larger centres of habitation and their immediate hinterland.
The arrival of the atheist Bolsheviks as the new élite merely  accentuated the cultural schism between the peasantry and the ruling strata that had existed since Peter the Great's reign.
Whereas the peasants continued to be edified through oral accounts of the lives of the Saints and of holy pilgrims, and occasionally learnt to read the alphabet through the Psalter, the upper classes had paid lip-service to the state religion whilst immersing themselves in rationalist Western thought.
Towards the end of the Tsarist period the Slavophils, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, and others tried to bridge this gulf.
The last Empress, a German, was more Russian than peasant Russians in her devotion to Orthodox religion and to unorthodox holy men.
Yet all these trends were eccentric, neither pulling the bulk of the intelligentsia with them, nor penetrating to the heart of peasant psychology.
This was hardly surprising, given that earthy pagan beliefs mingled in the peasant mind with Christian tenets, creating a ‘double faith’(doeverie ), the icon and the wheatsheaf together.
Before confessing to a priest, most peasants would ask the earth for forgiveness.
The passionate faith in the deep influence of the soil on man might at first sight appear to be an idea which a Marxist regime could easily harness to its own ideology, as was the Russian peasant's deeply ingrained sense of co-operative toil on the land, a notion likewise derived from his dvoeverie.
In accounts of religious opposition to the Bolsheviks, these possible points of convergence have always been overlooked.
That they never bore fruit was due as much to Bolshevik neglect of them as to the eventual insistence from above on the abolition of the private farms.
Another trait stemming from religious inspiration was the passive humility of the peasants.
Quite apart from educational and other handicaps, this was one reason why they and even their social betters took so little part in government, leaving it so often to Balts or Germans before 1917, and to other non-Russians after that date.
When they did bestir themselves on rare occasions, as in 1917, but more slowly than any other group, they could read plainly Christian meanings into Bolshevik slogans such as‘universal peace’ and ‘if any would not work, neither should he eat’.
When their typically apocalyptic  vision of a new world faded, they retreated for the most part into traditional humility.
In their rural isolation Belorussian peasants were at first little affected by anti-religious campaigns and actions emanating from the towns, even if priests disappeared and churches were commandeered.
Before 1917, as in most other parts of the Empire, one wooden church served for up to forty or fifty scattered villages.
There was no feeling, as there was among Catholics, that priests were indispensable: heads of families could and did conduct simplified forms of service in front of their domestic icons.
Increasingly some peasants realized the truth of the proverb ‘Dli popa temnota naroda — istochnik dokhoda ’(‘For the priest the unenlightened people is a source of income’).
Yet for lack of personnel, funds, and initiative, Bolshevik Party members were not making sufficient capital out of the situation.
As a peasant from the Kursk guberniia put it in 1922: ‘We are not for priests nor for the church, but if only the Comrades would give us a little of what they promise: they promise a school and Socialism, but our hands are still as empty as ever.’
Certainly it would be wrong to associate anti-Bolshevik sentiment with religious persecution in too many cases.
Priests in the Tambov area, the centre of peasant revolt in 1921, reported in 1922 that church attendance had dropped by more than half as compared with pre-1914.
The extent and depth of religious belief is notoriously difficult to estimate at any time in any country, but a few general statistics can be applied reliably to the peasantry of 1922 in areas like Belorussia, Kursk, and Tambov.
Older people were more religious than the young, women more than men, and above all, the rural areas more than the urban workers, as S. G. Strumilin discovered in 1922 (Table 1).
That anyone could dream up the notion of quantifying time spent on prayers was indicative of the ‘scientific’ attitude of the central authorities, to whose actions in 1922 we now turn   briefly before considering the middle level of the local party men in Smolensk.
At the close of 1921 the Soviet government ordered a survey of church valuables, and in a decree of 16 February 1922 commanded that they should be collected and sold for the benefit of those suffering from the Famine.
When a further instruction stated that vessels used in services were not exempt, the Patriarch Tikhon told the faithful to resist.
Although similar requisitions were carried out on treasures in museums, it did seem that the state had finally decided to test the power of the Orthodox Church on a socially explosive question.
The government had also noted the proliferation of schismatic religious movements over the previous few years.
When Tikhon was placed under house arrest in June 1922, one of these movements, the Living Church, was given numerous concessions by the regime, and at first looked set to take over the role and some of the property of the Orthodox.
Trotsky went so far as to call the agreement ‘an ecclesiastical NEP’, implying a similar tolerance to that meted out to ‘kulaks ’ or to Nepmen, but this was a superficial and short-sighted judgement redolent with propaganda.
The year 1922 in fact marked the start of the regime's long-term siege of the Church.
In the spring a weekly journal,Bezbozhnik , was set up to conduct a popular anti-religious campaign.
The rise of the Living Church, which itself soon split into various groups, allowed the  party to divide and rule; at no point did it commit itself unconditionally to any sect.
The Living Church owed its popularity to the parish priests, the oppressed ‘white’ clergy whom it supported, rather than to any enthusiasm amongst the masses.
Like all cultural movements during NEP, its influence did not extend far beyond the towns.
Both Soviet and hostile critics observed subsequently that in the eyes of the people Living Church members often looked like Soviet agents and opportunists.
In the light of high political intent and peasant sentiment, let us now return to the market town of Roslavl' and examine Party and urban reactions there in 1922.
It is interesting to note that the local Party cell's initial report for January, that is, prior to the central decree of 16 February on church valuables, already concentrates on two things — possible rifts within the Church, and the flow of ecclesiastical monies.
A very large amount had already been collected on a voluntary basis by religious groups for the Famine, making it seem almost superfluous or extortionate to do more.
Party spies had been assigned to people sending sums through the post for the personal use of the bishop.
The February decree was only implemented in Roslavl' one month late, on 15 March.
This may have been due to a reluctance to suck more money out of a generous population, or to the usual delays in carrying out orders from Moscow.
On 15 March Party officials took gold objects from the main church, despite protests outside from a large crowd including factory workers.
When the clergy tried to calm them, the crowd declared that the valuables belonged to the people, not to the church, so that priests could not give them away.
Further Party raids were carried out into April.
On one occasion the church bell was rung to summon protesters.
Troops were called in (as they had been to protect fueldumps).
There was some shooting and a number of people lay dead on the church steps.
Others were arrested.
The Roslavl' Party also reported on events in Smolensk, where shots were fired on 28 March when factory workers downed tools to protect churches.
From Vitebsk it was heard that a railway-wagon workshop meeting convened on 30 March with the aim of helping in the requisition of church valuables broke up because of the ‘thunderous outcries of believers’.
Others in Vitebsk suspected that gold seized would not go to the Volga famine relief but into the Bolsheviks' pockets or their mouths in the shape of much-fancied gold teeth.
One workers' meeting had even suggested that it would be better to shoot Lenin or Trotsky rather than Patriarch Tikhon.
In the same period Trotsky was suggesting from his ivory tower in the capital that in order to avoid saints' names, children should be called Ninel (Lenin backwards) or simply Rem (the initials for revolution, electrification, and peace).
The remarkable features of this struggle were the extent of violence, the number of urban workers involved, and the outspoken nature of their protests.
Undoubtedly much of the anger was directed at further extortions of any kind, whether anti-religious or not.
In April the Smolensk Party advised the Roslavl' cell that contributions to the Famine were tailing off in the Roslavl' area, so two new directives were issued: first, to collect another famine tax, with every twenty town-workers or employees supporting one hungry child, and every five peasant households contributing for one hungry adult; second, to hold agitational meetings in all trade-union branches and at village skhod meetings.
In view of the vastness of Russia and the striking parochialism of the localities, it must have been hard to whip up yet more sympathy and funds for remote peasants in the Lower Volga.
Yet as we shall see, the Famine did produce considerable horizontal side-effects between one province and another.
As a general principle it should not be imagined that all economic, social, and above all political repercussions were of a vertical central — local nature or vice versa.
Horizontal influences have been virtually ignored in Soviet and Western historiography alike.
Here we have stumbled on the first of many.
Another feature of Party activity in Roslavl' and Smolensk  reflected in microcosm top-level efforts in Moscow to divide and rule by setting the Living Church and other sects against the official Orthodox Church.
A January Party report in Roslavl' noted with glee that the local clergy were divided, even before the February decree.
By May the Smolensk authorities were writing that the ‘black’ Bishop Philip in the city still opposed the collection of church valuables, whereas the rural ‘white’clergy assented to it.
The latter were to be encouraged by Party propaganda at the uezd level to send in supportive letters to the press.
Other religious scapegoats were not hard to find, especially in Belorussia with its preponderance of urban Jews and large Catholic minority.
In Roslavl' during March and April it was frequently noted that the public believed that ecclesiastical gold was to be handed over to the Jews.
In June town employees were angered because they had to pay six million roubles commission to Jews in order to exchange a hundred million given to them in the form of bonds for their pay.
The Smolensk open-air market was flooded in April with leaflets declaiming ‘Down with the Yids — save Russia!’
On 13 May three Jews were robbed and killed 10 versts from the village of Liozno, and the perpetrators were allowed to get away.
At least a portion of the jewish population was saving its skin by allying with the Party, for in April we discover 400 Jewish delegates in Minsk speeding up the fight against Zionism and proposing the closure of their religious schools in Belorussia, a notion which had become a reality by September according to the central press.
No doubt the local Party authorities were helped in their divide-and-rule policy by Orthodox allegations that the Living Church had arisen due to‘Jewish agitators’.
Although Catholics are not cited in the Smolensk Archive with reference to the taking of church valuables, their activity can be traced from other sources.
At the time of the last and only census of 1897, there were more of them in the Vitebsk area than in any other part of the Empire except for Kovno, Vilno, and Grodno.
As with the Orthodox Church, so with the Catholics it was the February decree that precipitated the crisis in relations with the Soviet government.
Catholic churches in Smolensk were heavily plundered.
Like Patriarch Tikhon, but rather later, the Catholic Archbishop Cieplak was called to trial for 17 November 1922.
Here too the Party could fend off opposition by a policy of divide and rule.
When an agreement was drawn up in 1922 between the Vatican and the Soviet government for a Catholic famine relief mission, some Orthodox leaders in Western Russia declared that the Communists hoped that Catholic propaganda would bring about the downfall of the whole Orthodox Church.
This was clearly a wild exaggeration, but it showed, at least as far as the large Catholic minority of Belorussia was concerned, that any attempt to base nationalism on Catholic separatism would be doomed to failure.
Despite the considerable pressures on the churches at the central and top provincial levels in 1922, sparse reverberations as yet reached that grass-roots base which was considered earlier.
On 2 February 1922, a reporter in Izvestiia enthused,
It is a great rarity in the countryside to find a Communist who does not have an icon hung up at home.
Religion and Communism make an excellent household together.
Here are the facts.
A Communist gets married in a village.
All the wedding procession goes to church.
In front, the red flag with the inscription, ‘Workers of the world, unite!’
Next come the icons, and then the bridegroom, with a red sash on his chest.
Such marriages are frequent in the villages.
In his fashion the peasant understands Communism and Soviet power.
Although the rustic idyll was no doubt the result of wishful thinking, it may have approximated to the real situation in some localities.
No such co-operation was possible in the sphere of taxation, but then it never had been under the Tsars, so Bolshevik extortion seemed hardly more arbitrary than previous methods.
There was no volte-face here as there had been on religion.
Requisition of grain at the point of a gun during War Communism had proved a novel experience for the peasantry, but by 1922 that had been replaced by slightly more civilized methods.
The lack of administrative control from the centre during the Civil War together with a rapidly depreciating currency meant that taxation became a dwindling resource after 1917.
In theoretical terms, however, Lenin had made it quite clear, when local Soviets advocated independent local finances in 1918, that ‘democratic centralism’ would be vigorously enforced.
Over the first nine months of 1922 money taxes reached on average a mere 3 per cent of the pre-war level in real terms.
Two-thirds of this was raised through excises, which had been the most common method in the late Tsarist period.
Despite the need to return to a monetary economy under the liberal market conditions of NEP, by the end of 1922 over onethird of total revenue still came in the form of taxes in kind.
A special series of graded poll-taxes towards famine relief began in February 1922.
Since national expenditure reached 14 per cent of the prewar level in the first three-quarters of 1922, huge currency issues had to be made to bridge the gap between income and expenditure.
The rate for the pound sterling was 1,650,000 roubles in January 1922 and 71,730,000 by October.
Internally the value of the rouble decreased seventy-two times with regard to goods during 1922.
Only at the end of November did the State Bank introduce a new denomination of notes equal to the gold content of the pre-war ten-rouble coin.
By the end of the year there were at least five methods of conducting business, starting at the centre and moving towards the periphery.
Moscow traders kept cash balances in gold or foreign valuta.
The more sophisticated provincial dealers tried to acquire the new denomination at the end of the year as a means of hoarding.
Meanwhile they and nearly all other levels below them in geographical terms were condemned to use the  rapidly inflating old notes.
In the sluggish provinces, as in some towns, double-headed-eagle notes from the old regime overstamped with Bolshevik signs continued to circulate for lack of anything else.
Below all these strata lay the immemorial peasant base of straight barter and the still-important tax in kind.
Thus NEP as a monetary phenomenon took time to seep slowly through the various levels of society, just as pistoles and écus had competed with the franc in the French provinces after that other great revolution.
The same was true of NEP as a fiscal reform.
The revival of trade between town and country was crucial to the NEP system, but it could clearly be conducted only in money.
Yet heavy taxes in kind continued until after the end of 1922.
The central authorities had great difficulty from the start of NEP in collecting taxes of any sort.
Confused data on peasant landownership and family size made it virtually impossible to make accurate assessments, so that for many provinces only half of the taxable land per head was in fact recorded in the tax lists.
This was exactly the proportion of the tax in kind collected in the Roslavl' area up to November 1921.
Since October 1921 military detachments had been sent out to the local villages to billet in them and to insist on the tax in kind (shades of expropriation by force in the period of War Communism).
Another throw-back to the past was reported by the Roslavl' Party cell in January: at a volost' meeting an ex-member of the Kadet Party had spoken up against taxation.
In the same period a peasant group calling itself the Union of the True was also advocating opposition to taxes.
Resistance of this kind was to keep the authorities extremely nervous throughout 1922, and one has the sense from the enormous detail of the Smolensk Archive that fear of outright revolt and even counter-revolution was ever present in the local Party's thoughts.
Roslavl' officials would have lain quieter in  their beds at night if they had bothered to read Maxim Gorky's book On the Russian Peasantry published that same year.
He pointed out that peasant opposition to government did exist, but on account of Russia's huge distances it expressed itself more by evasion than through open fighting.
This psychology naturally lingered on into the supposedly liberal atmosphere of NEP in the form of the utopian hope that obligations imposed ‘from the Centre’, as the peasants put it, could be avoided, whilst retaining economic rights.
At the end of the winter of 1921–2 a cautious directive went out from Roslavl' Party headquarters to all local head collectors of the tax in kind.
They were not to put undue pressure on the peasants themselves, but only on their fellow subordinate collectors.
Nonpaying peasants were to be arrested in minimal numbers, and only millers were to be imprisoned.
They were to be very ‘diplomatic’ with recalcitrant poor peasants, and on no account were they to take to court more than a small minority in any one area, even if a majority were guilty.
Memories obviously lingered of the War Communism strategy of trying to divide richer from poorer peasants.
Above all head collectors were ordered to omit from court lists of non-payers all persons in positions of authority, and particularly Party members.
The Roslavl' Party report for 15 March hinted at the reason for this order when it revealed that peasants were of the view that the volost' authorities were imbued with self-seeking (shkurnichestvo ); Soviet Russia was turning into a ‘purely bourgeois republic’.
The peasants could not muster enough cash, on account of galloping inflation, to pay the excise duties.
The rumour was going round that a new tax on cattle and horse-ownership was to be introduced.
This was not true, but in a largely illiterate society the snowball effect of malicious rumours worried the Bolsheviks, as it had the Tsarist officials before them.
The last we hear from Roslavl' on taxes is in May, when fifty-eight of the seventy-eight soldiers requested from the town garrison were sent out to collect the potato tax in kind.
This failed in the main, not because of violent peasant resistance, but because they were simply too poor to give up  any of their potatoes.
The local Cheka quoted ominous peasant complaints against the government: ‘They aren't planning freedom for us, but serfdom.
The time of Godunov has already begun, when the peasants were attached to the landowners.
Now we are attached to the Jewish bourgeoisie like Modkowski, Aronson, etc.’
This reminds us again of the anti-Semitism prevalent in Belorussia.
State investment, rare enough in itself, was earmarked for industry (in the 1923 national budget less than 5 per cent was to be allocated to agriculture).
The peasants had to rely on themselves, which meant recourse from 1922 onwards to private lenders — local Jews in this area.
It is interesting to observe that private capital was more significant both in absolute terms and in relative importance at these provincial levels than in the great urban centres in 1922.
Thus although the political initiative for the start of NEP came from the top, the economic life-blood at first began to flow from the bottom upwards.
The Roslavl' authorities were besieged by continual instructions on taxation from the Smolensk guberniia Party committee.
They were told in May to avoid making errors in assessments, and to stop peasants concealing the extent of their property.
This was not the only class at fault in this respect.
A female landowner of substance induced a handsome peasant to live with her in her mansion; the estate was cunningly converted into a collective farm, but the local peasantry frowned on this breakdown of the old class barriers.
A telegram from Smolensk on 1 June urged that the peasants be better informed on tax matters.
The wording of the telegram was badly misspelt and like some local banknotes was stamped with the Imperial eagle.
As was to be the case with far more important orders to the peasantry from the very highest level at the start of collectivization after NEP, bureaucratic delays and excessive central demands soon resulted in comparable excess of zeal at local levels.
By October we find Smolensk party officials  annulling a delayed payment of 425 pudy of rye still being demanded by one local authority (some taxes in kind had been reduced from March onwards to a single uniform tax calculated in terms of rye).
In November the Smolensk guberniia executive committee is being rebuked in turn by no less a person than V. Molotov, Secretary of the Central Committee in Moscow, for allowing subordinates to impose taxes beyond those laid down in the All-Union list.
The years 1921–2 did in fact cover one of the worst periods in the economic fortunes of the Smolensk guberniia.
By 1923 the area sown for food crops had increased by 14.8 per cent compared with 1920, making for improved incomes, more cash, and so more taxes in this area; but viewed from the middle of 1922, there was little prospect of such a happy outcome.
Over the whole of Russia there-was a dearth of agricultural goods caused mainly by the Famine, and a comparative glut of industrial products from the towns.
This was the start of the famous ‘scissors crisis’.
The terms of exchange between manufacturers and agricultural produce moved swiftly to the disadvantage of the towns; a pair of boots which in 1913 had been worth 283lb. of rye flour was worth as little as 133lb. by May 1922.
Central reforms were eventually to adjust such discrepancies, but as with the tax changes, they turned out to be blunt bureaucratic instruments not sufficiently finely tuned to local needs.
By 1923 the scissors had opened too widely in the opposite direction, this time in favour of the towns.
In fact the whole financial framework of NEP was shaky, and much of it was brought in piecemeal on ad hoc lines, as was the case with the vital currency reforms.
The introduction of the profit notion through khozraschet looked promising on paper, but in reality at the start of 1922 there was no definition, even in the highest economic organs, of what was meant by ‘profit’.
As late as 1923 there were still many  different ways of assessing production costs and profits.
Similar discrepancies opened up in the agricultural sphere.
The Agrarian Code of 1922 strictly forbade the sale of land and the granting of mortgages.
Yet poorer peasants in their thousands in this year were turning to private, mainly peasant, lenders, though many Jews were also involved in Belorussia, as we have seen.
Many soon found themselves in long-term debt to richer peasants, particularly in the Famine areas.
This phenomenon was noted in the central press, where the lenders were often referred to as ‘beglye’(unstable): however the shaky nature of their new-found prosperity, like the uncertain fits and starts of NEP in economic terms, was soon to turn into solid gains which looked like becoming permanent.
The ‘beglye’ became ‘kulaks ’when many poor peasants were unable to liquidate their debts despite the better harvests of 1922 and 1923.
Thus the very foundations of NEP were steeped in economic obscurities, loose interpretations, and plain evasion of coded principles.
In this sense as a system it was a house built of sand which could scarcely have lasted as long as Bukharin and others wished it to.
It seemed a near miracle that it got off to a relatively smooth start, politically speaking, in 1921–2.
Although these years witnessed a very low tide of economic activity including the horrors of widespread famine and even peasant revolts in some areas like Tambov, problems concerning religious belief and taxation never led to large-scale uprisings in the Smolensk guberniia (nor indeed anywhere else in Russia).
After all, the Civil War was over in most areas, so the peasants' best chance of retaliation, by linking up with local White armies, was lost.
Again, Lenin's promise that the main aim of NEP was to restore peasant fortunes did begin to bear real fruit before the end of 1922.
Yet through most of the year many government promises remained on paper.
The Bolshevik Party was therefore especially eager to win over minds by means of cultural and ideological propaganda and education.
Let us follow the method already adopted in an examination of religion and taxes, looking briefly at central political attitudes and then  observing their impact at middle and local levels in the Smolensk guberniia..
The general situation had been most unsatisfactory right from the start in 191 7, even amongst the proletariat of Petrograd, the core of Bolshevik support.
In her capacity as a pedagogue, Krupskaia discovered a high proportion of illiterates among the factory workers of the Vyborg raion .
At many cultural levels the old Petersburg continued to prevail for a while over Moscow in many informal, non-governmental ways, as will be noted in a later chapter.
Its slightly more liberal ethos seemed to affect Krupskaia, for when she first went to work in the People's Commissariat of Education (Narkompros ) after the revolution, she stressed the need for independence from central management by intellectuals.
Yet by 1920 she was already submitting to governmental pressures in her Moscow office.
She acknowledged that ‘cultural work must be closely combined with political tasks’, and went on to prove it by signing three directives on the censorship of libraries between 1920 and 1924.
The tighter political hold was in part a reaction to the worsening economic and organizational situation in cultural affairs.
Whereas 10.4 per cent of the central budget was allocated to Narkompros in 1920, this was reduced to 4.2 per cent for 1922.
A substantial proportion of educational costs was transferred to local authorities at the end of 1921, although the latter had neither sufficient financial nor administrative means to carry out their new assignments.
The result was an alarming drop in resources — 3,684 public libraries in 1922 as opposed to 14,800 in 1920; 1,126 ‘illiteracy liquidation points’ as against 17,462 before NEP.
Only 38 per cent of children attended elementary schools at the close of 1922, compared with roughly 48 per cent in pre-revolutionary Russia.
A. Lunacharsky underlined the growing rift between  the educational health of the larger towns and the benighted countryside, but to no avail.
As was so often the case in central-local relationships, poor distribution was often to blame.
The nation-wide state publishing organization,Gosizdat , was responsible for the dissemination of official literature of all kinds, but the flow of materials to the provinces remained very weak even as late as 1923.
Only seven of the fifteen large bookstores in Moscow took the trouble to send anything out to provincial peasant reading-centres.
None of them made a special selection of materials suitable for the peasantry, so the few books that were dispatched were often too dry or too expensive.
Credit for this trade was hard to get, since publishers argued over terms with distributors.
In March 1922 a monopoly was granted to a new state advisory body on the publication of textbooks, but through the rest of 1922 it was powerless to stem the growing tide of texts from private publishers which threatened to drown official party ideology in educational affairs.
The precarious hold of the party over cultural ideology will be examined in greater detail in Chapter 6.
Turning now to middle levels of cultural control, in this case to the Smolensk guberniia offices and then to Roslavl', our chosen locality, it is clear that fresh unorthodoxies were apt to creep in below and beyond those emanating from private central sources.
It should not be imagined that the tiny Party élite at either of these provincial levels could maintain a tight hold.
By the end of 1922 the size of the guberniia Party organization totalled 5,925,9 compared with, for instance, 3,286 local officials of the Commissariat for agriculture, most of whom were not Party members, but who, by the very nature of their work as surveyors, land-reclaimers, timber and livestock experts, were scattered more widely round the rural areas than were Party workers.
As late as i April 1924, 3,704 out of the 5,416 Party members were concentrated in the towns.
Thus there was obviously scope for the propagation of nonparty unorthodoxies at the grass-roots level.
The traditional sowers of culture at middle provincial levels were the schoolteachers.
They had far wider influence over the peasants than was indicated by their formal school syllabuses.
In the Smolensk area as elsewhere, they linked up with agricultural advisers in the effort to make the peasants realize that subsistence farming was a form of self-exploitation, since their energies were dissipated in a multitude of tiring undertakings.
It was the teachers too who taught the metric system as against the local weights and measures, thus slowly inculcating a sense of wider, national unity.
Yet as of 1922 the political reliability of the teachers was notoriously low: large numbers of them were remnants from the old regime.
Their pay in paper money was so bad and came so late that unless they had peasant relatives who could supply food, they were reduced to making shoes, singing psalms in church, or hiring themselves out as labourers to peasants.
When schools shut for lack of fuel in the winter, they gave private lessons to the richer peasants' children.
Thus their dubious loyalty to the new regime was eroded even further.
The inculcation of political orthodoxy and instruction of a more coercive nature was left strictly in the hands of the Party.
A reading of the directives of the Smolensk guberniia committee to all executive committees at lower levels for 1922 reveals centrally isolated bureaucrats surrounded by a swamp of unreliable social elements.
On the occasion of the first All-Russian Congress of the peasant committees of mutual social aid, a directive exhorted all local branches to interest the peasantry in the workings of central management.
Wherever possible, Red Army men were to be installed on the committees.
As we have seen, they were amongst the staunchest Bolshevik supporters in the voting for the Constituent Assembly, and in Belorussia they were more than usually numerous and influential due to the fact that this territory had lain directly in the path of invading and retreating forces in the Civil War.
Administrative help from Smolensk brought with it obligations, such as‘compulsory self-taxation’(samooblozhenie ) for the peasant committees.
Within a mere three weeks the Smolensk Party authorities also required all uezd executive committees to collate, check, and comment to them on the minutes of every single peasant meeting on mutual aid.
When we shift our attention away from sources emanating from Smolensk city to Party archives based on Roslavl', we recapture through official documents that feeling of social, economic, and possibly political unrest sensed more informally by our peasant-woman visitor and her soldier son.
Even at the height of NEP prosperity in 1926, considerable resistance to central patterns and instructions was to linger on the further one got away from Moscow down through all the provincial levels, but in 1922 strong fears of such resistance provoked a siege psychology among those party officials located nearest to the grass roots.
They juggled nervously in Roslavl' with the various leading local social and power groups.
The agitation section of the town's Communist Party committee decided, or rather passed on a directive probably originating in Moscow, that the Paris Commune of 1871 should be celebrated on 18 March.
In particular all local factories and the military were ordered to rejoice.
Lectures and concerts were to be given, for which topics of current interest should be very carefully chosen, and which had to be free for all comers.
Throughout the year the anxieties of the Party were focused on local workers and soldiers rather than on the surrounding sea of peasants.
Great concern was often expressed about lack of military interest in political affairs.
At a meeting of the commissars of the Roslavl' garrison the military commander of the town hospital admitted that the political cell in his institution did not really exist, although there were occasional discussions of newspaper articles.
The automobile workshop, likewise under tight military control, had a cell with ten members, but the commander reported that few attended its Marsiksii (sic ) circle.
At a level where either the commander concerned or the typist could not render ‘Marxist’ correctly in Russian, it seems doubtful whether rejoicing for the Paris Commune would be very well informed or sincere.
The deputy  commander of the first artillery battalion reported that all its cell members had been so busily engaged on operations amongst the civilian population that there had been no meeting for over a month (they were probably occupied in some of the unsavoury tasks noted earlier by our peasant soldier and his mother).
The only optimistic statement came from the third cadre of military transport, which had recently held two cell meetings.
Thirteen per cent of the cadre were illiterate, so political and cultural training was being concentrated on this sector.
Work had begun on equipping a club.
The Roslavl' party committee expended most energy of all on plans for the commemoration of the fifth anniversary of the October Revolution.
Again, workers and soldiers were subjected to especially close scrutiny and control.
The four local factories were told in no uncertain terms that they had to celebrate.
Gifts were to be handed out to all soldiers, and their food rations were to be improved between 6 and 8 November.
In return the garrison was to decorate the main square with red materials as issued.
Military units were to stage a show depicting victories over counter-revolutionaries for the benefit of invited workers.
On the following day, 7 November, there would be a joint parade by trade-union representatives and their military comrades.
In the evening soldiers were detailed off to perform folk-dances in the primitive town theatre.
On 8 November they would continue to sing for their suppers by reading out newspapers to the less literate and explaining the significance of the Third International.
This could be a formidable task in a society where even widely travelled soldiers firmly believed that Thomas Cook's wagon-lits were the spearheads of the Third International since the latter word could be read in Cyrillic on the side of carriages.
The majority of local Roslavl' workers would undoubtedly be railway rather than factory personnel.
The main event on 7 November after the parade was to be a ‘spectacle’ in the railway club.
The town Soviet was also to hold discussions with representatives from the factories and the women's section.
The sole reference to the peasantry in these laborious instructions was an order to open all rural reading-rooms in the surrounding volosti on 7 November.
The meaning of the October Revolution was then to be explained to anyone who bothered to turn up.
Given the importance of this area of Russia in the Civil War and the Polish campaign, the Party's care for and vigilance over the army does not come as a surprise; nor does the considerable military presence in 1922 in civilian organizations like the hospital and the automobile workshop.
The Party's obvious nervousness about railway and other workers and relative neglect of the rural hinterland needs a little more explanation.
As the year went by the economic sops to the peasantry provided by NEP began to have a relaxing effect on this class, but industrial unrest throughout Russia continued to rise.
The level of productivity went up slowly, but employment prospects did not.
Provincial market towns, in 1922 as throughout the Soviet period, collected the first rural tide of those looking for work — peasant vagrants, demobilized soldiers, and in the case of the Smolensk area, flax-workers out of a job as their industry began to decline after the boom of the war years.
It also proved difficult at the start of NEP to gear local manufacturing industries to peasant demands.
These are some of the reasons why the Party devoted so much care to its favourite but weakling class in provincial Russia.
We shall come across this concern again in 1922 when we travel through the much stronger industrial nexus of Kharkov.
The peasants in the Roslavl' region did come in for some attention during 1922, though supervision was at best paternalistic, sporadic, and myopic.
In January 1922 the town Party committee observed that there was no anti-Bolshevik agitation amongst the local clergy, the main focus of possible rural discontent.
It was noted however that what was contemptuously called the ‘village intelligentsia’ still maintained a hostile attitude to the Party and the Red Army.
At the end of February news filtered in that no peasants were willing to join the military ranks, and there were quite a few desertions.
The  greater part of the required prodnalog (tax in kind) had been collected, but several villages were fractious due to silly actions by some officials.
Most of the Party's agitational work was devoted to the very small number of local kolkhozy , as if , like Catherine the Great, it sought to derive comfort from over-concentrating on its equivalents of Potemkin's model villages.
The nation-wide number of these paragons for the Marxist future was a mere 8,641 even by 1924.
However, there was one big kolkhoz consisting of 150 households only 20 versts from Roslavl' that was said to be too well satisfied with itself, and so did not welcome visits from the town.
The party wished to introduce the shefstvo system in its relations with the kolkhozy .
A shef organization from the towns such as an individual factory would take on the role of cultural and political mentor to some rural group.
Shefstvo wag intended to be a nation-wide movement, the concrete expression of the more abstract notion of smychka, the theory of town and country alliance as expounded originally by Marx.
The ideal was very far from being a reality in 1922, or indeed throughout NEP.
A kolkhoz to the east of Smolensk city in the Dorogobuzhskii raion complained that in 1921 its two shefi, a nearby hospital, and a regiment, had helped with the harvest, but no one had visited it in 1922.
Sometimes the tie was purely economic in rationale.
One kolkhoz further to the north-east of Smolensk exchanged potatoes for farm machinery, whilst another shef factory that manufactured spare parts for linen plants gave iron to a local kolkhoz on its visits.
It insisted on calling a separate meeting for the kolkhoz women, so as to persuade them of their independence from their menfolk.
An undated set of questionnaires in the 1922 file for the Roslavl' area reveals the prickly atmosphere that prevailed between the busybodies from the towns, as the rustics perceived them, and the primitive mores of the rustics themselves.
When asked if their shefi acted in too authoritarian a manner, some kolkhozniki at first said it was very rare, but then in peasant  fashion slowly warmed up to the fact that they had been very angered by some young students who had written in Rabochii put ’ that their horses were badly fed and cleaned, and that they had not sown enough crops.
The arrogance of Bolshevik-inspired youth towards the patriarchal rural community also transpires from other criticisms directed against younger visitors.
But peasants also complained when what they called ‘doctors’ came out to inspect their cattle and sanitary arrangements, or when two peasants who had murdered their wives had to be handed over to a visiting ‘social court’(obshchestvennyi sud ) set up by a shefstvo team.
The party's myopic concentration on the kind of agricultural organizations it wished to nurture for the future is also shown in the frequent reports for 1922 on the fragile co-operative network.
These efforts proved to be in vain for the most part.
By the middle of 1924 the Agitprop section of the Smolgubkom was openly declaring that both shefstvo and smychka were a farce in actuality because they had deteriorated into mass weekend outings to the countryside in search of illicit stills.
This led to the usual ‘drinking bout…
This kind of smychka produces nothing but harm.’
Three documents dealing with political culture at the Smolensk and Roslavl' levels convey several general impressions.
Party officials full of earnest endeavour were passing down all-Russian directives from Moscow in rather a wooden manner.
There were too many organizational structures with too few members and even less real action.
Above all, local educational standards were as yet not up to the demands put upon them by ‘the Centre’.
In 1922 even the Moscow intelligentsia continued to confuse Old and New Style dates.
There was little hope for political enlightenment in the provinces at a time when the number of literary centres and of those attending them fell to one-tenth of what they had risen to in 1921.
This was largely the result of the application of khozraschet and the transference of funds for adult education to local budgets.
Menshevik  critics of the regime claimed that compared with the prerevolutionary period Russia in 1922 had 30 per cent fewer schools overall and that 70 per cent of all children between 8 and 11 years of age were illiterates.
When it is also remembered that Belorussia had the lowest literacy rate of all European Russia, the sluggish response of the denizens of the Roslavl' area comes as no surprise.
Local involvement in nation-wide politics does not just depend on intellectual evolution, however, but on the strong conviction that national affairs affect one's life and so need to be considered.
After all, hundreds of fundamental revolutions involving the whole and almost completely illiterate populace of countries have taken place in the history of civilization.
As late as the end of the nineteenth century in some Western European states local politics retained their dominance over central concerns, until markets, jobs, and communications like the railways became part of a national whole.
Until such a time peasants in a country like France were really only interested in a few restricted matters like land, taxes, and the threat of military service.
These remained the concerns of Belorussian peasants in the 1920s, but unlike French peasants there were no small-scale politics for them to latch on to in order to climb slowly out of their deep provincialism.
For lack of alternative parties or serious candidates with known individual characters to vote for, a gulf opened up between the isolated villagers on the one hand and the Roslavl' or Smolensk Party men on the other, intent on modelling themselves strictly on Smolensk or Moscow prototypes and on Moscow's instructions.
When we read in the Roslavl' files that twenty-three agitator brigades were dispatched to villages in order to celebrate international Women's Day, it is hard to imagine that they ever came across our peasant woman from Struga, and even more difficult to believe that they would have much impact on her ways of thinking even if they did.
She would probably conform to the type of village heroine K. Fedin described in his story Tishina (Stillness) which depicts the depths of Smolensk guberniia in 1922–3, where Fedin was to spend several sum, mers during NEP.
In his notes Fedin writes of his heroine: ‘She  is somehow reconciled, and of course she would never go off anywhere for good.
She lives in stillness.
There is no world for her outside this stillness…the world ends somewhere beyond Kaluga’(a nearby provincial centre).
The economic provisions of NEP were soon to act as a slow salve on the material well-being of the peasantry, but even before NEP had begun all political bridges between the centre and a free-thinking periphery had been burnt with the establishment of a one-party system and the elimination of any traces of local independence in the party hierarchy.
This lack of initiative in the hierarchy will be examined at the middle (Moscow-Smolensk) levels in the chapter on Bolshevik controls.
As good Marxists the Bolshevik leaders tended to believe that following on the eventual restoration and ‘correct’ development of favourable economic conditions, ‘correct’social and political attitudes would also come about at all levels.
This view seems to have rubbed off on foreign, non-Marxist interpreters of the passage of NEP, who as a whole are inclined to think that a cultural policy of laissez-faire was pursued throughout NEP.
In fact this was not so right from the start, even at the sophisticated intellectual heights of Petrograd, as will be seen when we approach that city.
If at the beginning of NEP local party attitudes appeared to contain an element of laissez-faire , this was only because very little in fact could be achieved for lack of human and other resources.
Certainly in the Smolensk and Kursk gubernii the will was there from the outset to mould and to control.
The strict pedagogic methods and moral precepts being worked out in 1922 by A. Makarenko at a microcosmic level near Poltava were to be taken over and applied wholesale to Stalin's Russia in the 1930s.
Even Krupskaia at the hub of power quickly modified her earlier liberal views concerning the inculcation of political culture.
In the early 1920s she published a series of three guide-lines for the removal of what she termed as ‘counter-revolutionary’ literature from local libraries.
The volume issued in the early spring of 1923 applied above all to village libraries.
She took a no-nonsense approach.
Although she held that both abstract and concrete points of view were valuable, she labelled all  Russian peasants as practically inclined.
She therefore proscribed all religious, philosophical, or psychological books for village libraries.
Tracts were to be chosen solely for their propaganda value and for their capacity to instil a Communist ‘world’ view.
The ex-peasant Maxim Gorky threatened to renounce his Soviet citizenship on discovering ‘this intellectual vampirism’, as he called it, but Krupskaia's directives were allowed to pursue their philistine course.
If minds of the calibre of Krupskaia were so firmly closed so soon, there was little hope that her pedagogic instructions would serve to open the minds of the temnye liudi in the Smolensk or any other guberniia.
The Centre 
As the crow flies, or rather those rooks in A. K. Savrasov's famous painting, the distance south-east from Smolensk to Kursk is 480 km., which is a fraction more than the distance due north from Kursk to Moscow, and 80 km. deeper into the provinces than Smolensk from the capital.
Like Smolensk, Kursk was a guberniia administrative centre in 1922 and also lay in a river-valley (the Seim) amongst low hills.
However surrounding agricultural conditions were very different.
We shall not linger in Kursk itself but wander gently down a side road through this part of the Central Agricultural Region until we reach the Nikol'skaia volost' (cluster of villages) roughly 40 km. to the south-east (Roslavl' lay 110 km. from Smolensk).
Here relationships between the local inhabitants and party members and agents will be examined without reference to Kursk, let alone to Moscow.
Then we shall head due south again on the same road, passing into the Ukraine and out of the hills.
The first large and industrial city we reach is Kharkov.
After a brief stay there, we move south-west into the ubiquitous rural ocean until we arrive at a remarkable experimental settlement just off the main road between Kharkov and Poltava.
This is the colony for young vagrants and orphans recently established by Anton Makarenko.
In order to make some local comparisons with Nikol'skaia, ties between the fifty-nine party cells and the people in Poltava guberniia will be looked at in passing.
Again no reference will be made to party authorities in the guberniia capital, since this has already been done for Smolensk.
In Chapter 3 the focus will be directed instead on those contacts between the guberniia centres of Saratov and Samara and Moscow which were crucial for the alleviation of the famine conditions.
Kursk guberniia was in the famous central Black-Earth area  which also covered all, or most of Tambov, Orlov, and Voronezh gubernii, with the southern uezdy of Tula and Riazan' gubernii.
The fertile soil made it a grain-surplus area, in contrast to Belorussia and the north-west in general.
However market relations were much less developed in the Kursk guberniia than in the productive Ukraine and Volga areas.
This was partly due to the weak local transport system and remoteness from urban influences.
The most striking difference from Smolensk lay in the large numbers of peasant communes: before 1917 most Belorussian farms had belonged to individual families.
They had averaged less than 20 acres, whereas in Kursk guberniia heavily populated and extensive communes prevailed.
This system led to many problems.
Plot sizes were very small and the distance between them large.
Each household worked up to forty separate strips.
If a family held a small amount of land and was in a village with a large number of households, its strips could be so small and scattered that too much time was spent in travelling between strips.
Some of these would therefore lie fallow.
The overall result before and after the 1917 Revolution was pressure on land and frequent redistribution.
In this Kursk guberniia was quite unlike Western Russia and also Siberia, which had never experienced strip-farming and redistribution.
What broad effects did these diverse economic and social conditions have on nascent political behaviour?
Given the enormous upheavals in all areas from 1917 onwards and the consequent stirring up and obscuring of peasant reactions, the clearest historical clues oh this question may be gleaned from peasant elections and behaviour in the quieter period of the State Dumas.
Socio-economic problems remained largely the same in 1905–14 and 1922 in Kursk guberniia (though not of course in the Lower Volga area on account of the Famine).
Peasant representatives for the Black-Earth Region in the Dumas had shown ho interest in any political problem apart from the land issue.
On this question all social grades had taken the same line — the need to seize local gentry estates.
Yet despite  this unanimous view, the peasants of the Central Agricultural Region were completely incapable of uniting amongst themselves or of taking any joint action.
Instead of linking up with political parties, they relied on official helpers or on individual members of the gentry, who were normally their main opponents on the land question.
This lack of sophistication and coordination was in marked contrast to the behaviour of the Siberian peasant representatives in the Dumas.
They were active on a large number of political, economic, and cultural issues, and their views closely reflected their varying socioeconomic positions.
The fact that Siberia had never undergone strip-farming and redistribution, and was underpopulated, begins to account for this discrepancy.
Most Siberian peasants also farmed the complex multifield rotational system.
They could earn a return on a considerable number of different investments.
They had to take many economic decisions in the course of each annual cycle, and according to their status and wealth they made different decisions from one another in various places and over the year.
In all these ways they were more akin to urban dwellers, and felt they had some independent choices to make in order to improve their lives.
The lot of the Kursk peasant, in 1922 as shortly before 1917, was far more narrow.
In his three-field system only investment in land really counted, and the commune, not the individual, controlled most forms of capital.
Each annual cycle entailed the repetition of well-tried methods which had to be taken in common.
A mentality of servile subordination interspersed by ineffective jacqueries tended to arise from such conditions.
Furthermore there were minimal chances for urban or industrial employment in the vicinity.
Worst of all there was very little interlocking between separate communes, a circumstance which was reflected in these peasants' lack of political cohesiveness in the Dumas.
When we come to look in detail at the Nikol'skaia peasantry  in 1922, many of these inhibiting features will become more evident.
Yet the influence of the socio-economic background alone should not be exaggerated.
Note should be taken of the political electoral system under which peasants had to vote, both in the Duma and the early Soviet period.
The peasants of the Nikol'skaia volost', in the Duma elections as in 1922, did what all others did throughout Russia.
The most enterprising and literate, those few who had travelled, in the army or otherwise, and the thin cream of village intelligenty (agronomists and the like) everywhere rose to the top in order to represent their less sophisticated brethren.
When a great political crisis arose, however, there was little to distinguish the political reactions of the Siberian from the Kursk peasantry.
When the Constituent Assembly was dissolved after the 1917 Revolution, and the Bolsheviks' Land Decree had stolen the main plank of the Socialist Revolutionaries' platform, Siberian and Black-Earth peasants alike failed to give any further support to their still loyal party, despite the fact that for a period an SR-dominated Directory prevailed in eastern Russia.
The vote for the SRs had been strong in the Kursk and Poltava gubernii.
Further non-economic influences that cannot be ignored are ethnic and religious differences.
These do not concern us for Kursk guberniia, which was almost exclusively Great Russian and Orthodox, but the traditional independence of the Old Believer elements in the Siberian peasantry must not be forgotten.
Kursk differed radically in this way from Poltava, which lay in the Ukraine.
It was seen in the last chapter how minority ethnic and religious strands in the Smolensk guberniia presented a potential, though not an actual, source of unified protest against the central Great-Russian regime.
Significantly, the European areas of the ex-Empire that had been more pronounced than Belorussia in their ethnic and/or religious divergence from the Great-Russian norm had either broken away from Bolshevik Russia (the Baltic littoral and Finland) or else created serious difficulties for the Bolsheviks (Georgia in 1922).
The various provinces of Russia were too many and too mixed to allow of any division into two or a few camps, irrespective of whether socio-economic conditions, nationality, religion, or politics are concerned.
Thus in religious and ethnic  matters, Smolensk stood somewhere between safer Kursk and insecure Finland, but numerous other areas were scattered along this spectrum between Finland and Smolensk, and between Smolensk and Kursk.
In the present state of our knowledge of provincial life during the late Tsarist and early Soviet periods, no precise scale can as yet be drawn up on any single topic, let alone a general model that encompasses and balances all factors.
In 1917 Kursk guberniia was amongst the worst twelve Russian provinces affected by disorganized rural unrest.
Four others also fell within the Central Agricultural Region.
They all had a long tradition of agrarian troubles, and all suffered from overpopulation and land scarcity.
Peasant rental of nonpeasant lands was most widespread here and in the Middle Volga regions.
Violence was more widespread than in Smolensk and other gubernii near the fronts, despite the fact that the latter were more subject to disturbances caused by soldiers, according to militia reports.
The height of peasant unrest in the Central Agricultural Region was reached in early September 1917; the epicentre was the Koslov uezd of the Tambov guberniia, from where the killing of landowners and sacking of estates spread rapidly to Kursk and other neighbouring gubernii.
Conditions in Kursk town seemed propitious for an anti-Bolshevik armed peasant uprising in October.
Power lay in the hands of a Committee of Public Safety, which represented all local parties and institutions.
By the end of November the Kursk Soviet had cast aside this committee and set up its own provincial executive in which the Left Socialist Revolutionaries were the largest group.
Rural representatives nearly outnumbered urban ones.
Anarchists and SRs continued to wield considerable influence into the spring of 1918.
In the middle of October 1917 peasants in the guberniia had carried out particularly aggressive seizures of land and timber.
According to the Bolsheviks' own admission, the local militia was incapacitated.
The diminutive local garrison was ineffectual and demanded more pay.
Peasants from nearby gubernii were coming in and exporting wheat.
The local railway administrators were terrorized into collaborating.
Such tales of peasants stealing grain from one area to take elsewhere, or of refusals to supply it to hungry neighbours, were very common throughout all rural areas in 1917–18.
Acts like these provide the superficial evidence for the failure, in Kursk as elsewhere, to keep Bolshevik encroachment at bay.
The deeper reasons have been cited already.
The peasants had little notion of belonging to any wider grouping than their own volost', like Nikol'skaia, or even sometimes, and depending on the subject, than their own village.
If students in the 1990s have difficulty in distinguishing all the political parties and coalitions that sprang up in Petrograd after the February Revolution, how could a peasant in 1917 be expected to assimilate them in the place of the Tsar, who at least represented a more easily understood form of political authority?
Peasant comprehension was low, but far from lacking altogether.
It was clear to them in 1917 that if they smashed the local power structure, they were at least achieving some short-term practical aims, such as grabbing woods, estates, and livestock.
They realized dimly that, for the moment at least, the Bolsheviks seemed even keener than the SRs to provoke similar disorder at all levels: and their Land Decree seemed indistinguishable from the old SR demands on behalf of the peasantry.
An outstanding example of peasant political particularism had occurred in 1921 in the Tambov guberniia bordering on Kursk.
This was the best-known and recorded peasant revolt in Soviet history, yet its practical achievements were nil.
As in Kursk, so in Tambov the potential had been there.
In Tambov town there were reported to be as few as three Bolsheviks on the very eve of the October Revolution.
The local Soviet was under the firm control of the SRs.
Yet at the height of the Tambov revolt in 1921 only three south-eastern uezdy of the twelve comprising the guberniia were engulfed by  disturbances.
Even here the peasantry was soon split as a result of Communist organization and the creation of a privileged group of peasant soldiers whose better food and clothes cut them off from their fellows.
More striking still was the failure of the Green movement to link up with Kursk or any other neighbouring area.
The Bolsheviks clung to Tambov town and prevented any contact with Makhno to the south in the Ukraine, or with Sapozhkov, another peasant rebel, on the Volga.
Antonov, the Tambov leader, probably never realized anyway the strength of his neighbours in a period of chaotic means of communication.
Yet it is hardly likely that even if links had been made a ramshackle group of peasant armies using antiquated military techniques could have stood out for long against the Red Army.
The effect of the Famine in 1921–2 was far more crippling in the Volga provinces than in Tambov guberniia, so that one can argue either way as to whether it had a stimulating or depressing effect on the mettle of the Tambov Greens; certainly in Samara and Saratov its vehemence blew out all hope of resistance.
More telling were the concessions ceded by NEP.
When Antonov was finally caught and killed on 24 June 1922, his slayers were warmly greeted by peasants as the corpse was taken into Tambov.
We know this from Soviet accounts, but there is little reason to doubt them.
They chime too well with human and especially Russian peasant nature.
What can be discounted as nonsense on the other hand is the conclusion drawn by a Soviet historian with regard to the Tambov revolt: ‘In that period the kulaks’ political banditry became the most important means of struggle by international imperialism, Antonov could not even make contact with subversive elements in Kursk guberniia, let alone London.
A closer look at relationships between the party and the people in the Kursk area may be obtained by accompanying Ia.
Yakovlev, nine statisticians, and four peasant communists on horseback along the road from Kursk to Nikol'skaia volost, at the end of 1922.
Yakovlev at this time was head of the  Agitation and Propaganda Section of the Communist Party.
His aim was to assess local reactions to Bolshevik rule in 775 peasant households.
By travelling with him we are reversing the process adopted with our peasant woman in the Smolensk guberniia.
Here the rulers are going to the ruled and examining them from their point of view.
The first change they noticed as a result of the Revolution was the indiscriminate and wasteful hacking down of the woods by the peasants: large trees had merely been deprived of their thinner branches.
Schoolhouses were soon easy to spot by their lack of doors and window frames and dilapidated thatched roofs.
They had been abandoned and pillaged.
In many ways, however, the old customs continued.
Although younger peasants stared with curiosity at the little band of visitors, the old ones made deep bows —‘the legacy of the age of serfdom’, as Yikovlev commented.
The best-kept huts were still those of the village priests.
They were the only ones with glass windows and metal roofs.
Outside one church the crowd of peasants young and old was so large that it was reminiscent of Repin's famous painting of 1882 of a church procession in this pious guberniia.
On asking the reason for such an assembly, Yakovlev was told that the local priest had refused to marry any couples unless the community attended services.
Here there was not the slightest evidence of ‘religion and Communism making an excellent household together’, as Izvestiia now reported.
Another sign of the past was carefully concealed from passing strangers, but Yakovlev's interest was aroused by the frequent sight of windowless huts with smoke pouring out from all sides of their thatched roofs.
On entering one, he discovered a home-brew still which the owners broke up in a trice, handing the retort to Yakovlev ‘as a trophy’.
This practice was very widespread in Kursk as opposed to the Smolensk guberniia.
It was a prime grain-producing area with poor access to markets.
A barter economy still prevailed widely in 1922, so that alcohol was a money substitute that kept and travelled better than grain.
As one peasant put it to Yakovlev on a later  occasion: No one will help you for cash, but everyone will for home-brew.’
A local priest was even so bold as to call the system ‘a home-brew democracy….
In the towns they drink wine and liqueurs, but we can't do that in the villages…the result is that the gents can drink, but it's forbidden to the lower classes.’
Another difference between Nikol'skaia and Roslavl' was the obvious greater isolation of the former, although it was nearer to the guberniia capital.
That did not mean much, since Kursk was itself a drowsy centre with almost no factories and only the main railway line from Moscow to enliven it.
As late as 1926 90.9 per cent of all inhabitants in the guberniia were in rural locations, one of the highest percentages for European Russia.
Nikol'skaia volost' had actually become even more cut off since 1917.
Whereas only 146 households out of 775 had lacked any horses, the number had risen to 175 by 1922.
Virtually all local trading was transacted in grain rather than in cash, thus limiting peasants' ability to travel far with their heavy ‘money’ loads.
Prior to 1917 there had been two annual fairs (iarmarki ) in the area, but only one of them had been revived in 1921, with a quarter of its previous turnover.
In the past some craft-trading had been carried on beyond the vicinity, but this and nearly all other economic ties with the Ukraine to the south and their fellow Great Russians to the north had stopped.
The picture was even worse with regard to information from outside.
Out of the 775 households in five villages, only one, headed by an ex-merchant, subscribed to a newspaper of any kind.
Even Ivanovka, the only village not far from the Moscow railway line, had received its last single copy of a newspaper some months prior to Yakovlev's visit.
A striking example of the area's isolation occurred when Yakovlev and his thirteen men arrived at the end of their horse-ride in the village of Nikol'sk.
Since 1917 the locals had never seen such a large group of visitors.
As a result the peasant gathering (skhod) which happened to be scheduled then assembled an unusually high number of villagers.
All they could imagine was that some  new sort of tax was to be imposed on them.
They were relieved to find that this was not just another ‘Communist trick’.
How was the common lot of this audience changing in 1922?
The number of working hands had risen in the volost' from 577 in 1917 to 872 now.
This was mainly due to demobilization, but others may have been attracted to the region due to the fact that through the expropriation of landowners, the area held by peasants had gone up by 65 per cent since 1917.
This huge increase should have allayed the peasants' suspicions of the new regime, but this was hot the case.
By 1922 only 232 households owned a plough, whilst 278 lacked even a primitive wooden plough with which to turn over their new earth, if indeed they possessed any.
In 1917 a mere fifty-three households had been able to sell off excess grain.
In 1920 this figure dropped to twelve, despite the fact that this area suffered less in the Civil War than Smolensk guberniia.
By the end of 1922 the figure had jumped to a remarkable 155, showing that recovery was on the way and economic activity increasing.
Another sign of security was the rising number of households which did not need to buy seeds, but planted their own 634 in the autumn of 1922, as against 554 in 1920.
The other side of the coin was the increasing subjection in 1922 of the poor peasants to those better off.
Yakovlev may have exaggerated this shift, given the abstract Marxist tenets on class struggle that he came equipped with from Moscow, but there was already some objective evidence of this right at the start of NEP.
Peasants told his collaborators that under NEP conditions not even the poorest received financial help and advice on sowing and agricultural methods from the local Soviets, as they had done previously, during the period of War Communism.
When the cutting of timber free of charge was prohibited, it affected the poor peasants most severely.
They could not afford to buy a horse, and although the richer peasants were more heavily taxed, this did not compensate for the wide difference in equipment, which was not taxed.
As there were up to sixteen different taxes, the more ignorant, who were usually also the poorest, were compelled to run to their more fortunate fellows for  advice on how to calculate, time, and pay (or avoid paying) these complex dues.
Another kind of hazard was already looming on the horizon for the weaker peasant elements.
As trade slowly picked up, so did the number of non-peasant traders.
They were later to acquire the vague title of ‘Nepmen’, but in 1922 they were not so clear-cut a phenomenon, and even by the end of NEP it was not possible, despite all Bolshevik propaganda efforts, to lump their origins and subsequent characteristics into the same abstract pigeon-hole.
Their diverse origins can be seen in the microcosm of Nikol'skaia volost' alone.
Most scholars, both Soviet and Western, have thought that Nepmen sprang up from nowhere like mushrooms under the gentle economic rain of NEP.
In fact many of them were pre-1917 private traders who surfaced again after 1921.
The richest local personality was Dmitrii Alekseevich D'iakov.
After twenty years of trading in the volost' and in Kursk town he came to own by 1914 eight houses (four of them in Kursk) and had a turnover of a million roubles.
In 1918 his stock was confiscated, but he became chairman of the cooperative to which it was assigned.
By 1919 he was also heading a government grain-collecting centre.
When this job terminated at the start of NEP, he became the State Bank's Kursk agent for purchasing grain.
In December 1922 he resigned graciously to return to his large goods store which had already started up in June.
Here Yakovlev met him surrounded by packed shelves and metals acquired with two months' credit from the Tartar Republic.
He confessed that everyone trusted him now, as they had done in the old days.
Three other local traders from pre-war times had also acted as careful vicars of Bray until 1922.
All had served for state organizations during the period 1917–21.
One had served as chairman of a local Soviet through these years, with a canny transformation into starosta (village elder) when the White Army appeared briefly.
Another had kept a continual eye on the grain trade by serving in a Red Army supply regiment and then managing a state grain-collecting centre.
Of the new ‘Nepmen’, two were Jews who had come in from  some other guberniia, and the other three all had military experience but little capital in goods or cash.
Nevertheless they were to flourish.
From a monthly turnover of 400 roubles at the end of December 1922, one of them was to rise to a turnover of 2,000 by March 1923.
At the time of Yakovlev's visit, the state-controlled grain organizations still controlled 45 per cent of all trading turnover in goods and cash, as opposed to 12 per cent through private hands, but Yakovlev realized that the balance was changing quickly in favour of the Nepmen.
Thus not long after the start of NEP, in a province as sleepy as Kursk, we find already the seeds of socio-economic decay, from a Marxist point of view (Yakovlev's), leading to possible political difficulties for the centre.
The irony was that many Nepmen had in fact been nurtured by the state during the harsh economic stringencies of War Communism.
Here, as so often when one penetrates to particulars, the rigid historiographical divisions (War Communism, NEP, the Five-Year Plan years) crumble.
In our survey of the financial arrangements of NEP as they applied to the Smolensk guberniia, it was noted how they were unstable and poorly defined from the outset, leading to economic and social tensions at the lower levels.
Right from its inception NEP carried within itself the germs of its own fatal illness, whether one looks at its fiscal organization or the economic persona (like these Nepmen) which it soon evoked, or in many cases re-awakened.
It is true that high-level Bolshevik theorists in Moscow and Petrograd tended to select, filter, and interpret evidence from the localities in the light of their prevailing general beliefs, so that their conclusions had little foundation in hard evidence.
Yet although Yakovlev was one of their kind, his factual findings show little sign of conscious or unconscious censorship or exclusion.
What we do find, as with the few collective farms in Roslavl', is an obsession with possible growth-points admired by the Bolsheviks.
Yakovlev devotes loving attention to the single, insignificant sovkhoz (state farm) in the whole area, although it only employed eleven people.
If only more leading Bolsheviks had left their ivory tower in the Kremlin in early NEP in order to examine Russia at first hand, as Yakovlev did, the reifications that poured out from their pens and mouths might not have succeeded in obscuring the realities of actual life in the 1920s.
On reaching the rarefied heights of Moscow politics, more attention will be paid to the ideas of Lenin and others on smychka, the Marxist-Leninist theory of town and country alliance.
At this point of our journey attempts at smychka in practice between the more sophisticated and politically orthodox in and out of the party, and the Nikol'skaia peasantry, can be considered.
The volost' party cell and its activities are taken first, before moving to less politically secure organs like the local village Soviets and the Komsomol (Young Communist League).
Then other potentially useful agents, the ex-military, and teachers, will be examined.
At first sight the very core of party support appeared to be rotten.
The party cell contained several dubious characters.
Only three of the eleven members were peasants.
Two of the others, including the chairman, were using their positions to feather their own nests.
The cell secretary told Yakovlev that ‘for one named Kochergin and for the chairman of the cell they [the peasants]have stabbing eyes.’
Kochergih was the son of a merchant, from the same type of background as D'iakov.
The cell members said that four of them read papers regularly (that is, once a week), four read them seldom, and the rest very rarely.
One member shone out from this picture of lethargy and petty corruption.
He was a former horse-vet who provided the teachers with food when it was short, criticized the priests, and guarded the local fire-carts.
This latter task was not as trivial as may be supposed in a society where wood and straw huts burnt down regularly.
There were no cell meetings open to the public.
The cell failed to send anyone to take part in the few educational courses available, such as those arranged by the agricultural station.
Its total energy seemed to be expended on the collection of taxes, and like Yakovlev himself, it had no interest in the mainsprings of peasant culture.
It comes as no surprise to discover from another source that in 1921 the Kursk guberniia party committee had tried to deal with these problems; ‘the purge of the party was the first basic step towards the strengthening of the personnel of the party and yielded enormous results.’
This declaration proved to be premature, although a recommendation that there should be a longer term for the candidate stage towards full party membership must have provided a useful mechanism for sifting the wheat from the chaff.
The reasons for the centre's heed fur taxes like the prodnalog and many others had not been made clear to the villagers by the party cell.
The peasants saw the cell as just one more town agency that confined itself to tax gathering, as all other organizations from the centre had done in history.
Indeed since eight of the eleven cell members were not peasants, they probably fell easily into this view of their own roles.
When an anti-tubercular campaign was initiated by the cell, the peasants called it the ‘tubercular tax’, because money gathering methods were applied.
The party cell was afraid to have open meetings mainly because it feared criticism from what it called the ‘kulaks' .
Yakovlev acquiesced in this polemical and unfounded notion.
In actuality it was the poorer peasants who grumbled louder and suffered more from taxation, as Yakovlev was to discover for himself a year later in Tambov guberniia.
He at least, unlike his superiors in ideology in Moscow had the courage to revise his stereotyped class views in a second book he published in 1924.
He found that a poor Tambov peasant who harvested 35 pudy of grain from one desiatin of land had to pay 15 pudy of it for the hire of a plough, 7 pudy for having the grain carted off in a richer man's wagon, and to top it all 7 pudy in tax.
This left a mere 6 pudy for his family's consumption and to provide seed.
The crux of the problem lay in the lack of equipment.
In 1922 on average throughout European Russia and Siberia the percentage of peasant households without a plough was about 23 per cent.
In the Revolution landowners had disposed of large quantities of farm equipment to those who could afford it.
Subsequently only the latter  could pay to have complicated machinery repaired.
None of the sixteen taxes endured by the Nikol'skaia peasants was aimed at capital held in the form of equipment.
Despite the trials of many peasants in 1922, the Nikol'skaia villagers tolerated the party cell although they disliked some individuals within it.
Cell members themselves seemed to be much more impervious to the danger of possible political attacks on them than their nervous counterparts in Smolensk guberniia.
This difference appears to be a clear reflection of the traditional lack of political sophistication amongst Black-Earth peasants.
The quiet but bitter resignation of the vast majority was expressed to Yakovlev by one of them in this way: ‘A peasant is a sheep, and whoever wants his wool fleeces him.
The Tsar, the landowner, Denikin's troops, and your Comrades all fleeced him.
But now they'll have to spare his wool, or they'll rip off his hide and then there'll be no wool left to fleece.’
Even at the level of the Nikol'sk village Soviet a high proportion of time was spent on tax problems.
Rabkrin (the Central Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate) calculated that at the start of 1923 from 20 to 26 per cent of all village Soviet business lay in this sphere, whereas cultural and commune activities took up only 5 to 10 per cent of their time.
In the village Soviets of the Nikol'skaia volost' 162 out of the 775 households had served since 1917 in some capacity.
This very high participation rate was due to the fast turnover in membership, especially of the chairmen, who were very poorly paid in a time of rapid inflation.
Two criteria had governed their election.
The leading one was that there were sufficient other able-bodied persons in the household to enable one of them to be freed for Soviet work.
The other indicator was political.
When the Soviets were first set up, richer peasants had become chairmen, but soon and throughout the period of War Communism poor peasants had replaced them.
Now, in 1922, some  of the same rich peasants were making a reappearance together with newly prosperous ones.
Relations between the village Soviets and the peasants varied according to local socio-economic conditions, not only from one region of Russia to another, but even between Nikol'sk and Ivanovka, roughly 75 km. apart.
The Nikol'sk Soviet was dominated by an ex-merchant, who was chairman.
He could compensate for his low official pay by means of the strings he could pull in conjunction with the other few rich peasants in the commune.
Most of the other peasants were poor, but almost as deferential to the Soviet as the old men who bowed to Yakovlev along the road.
They described their prosperous neighbours on the Soviet as ‘very wise and understanding’, not only because they had proved it by accumulating a little property, but above all because they were pismennye , or literate.
They had also survived what was referred to locally as the ‘Old Economic Policy’, or War Communism, which was universally disliked, even by the poorest.
As one of them related to Yakovlev, he had tried to get straw from his brother in a nearby village when he ran out of lighting-fuel, but officials had stopped him, since he was stealing ‘from the poor…there's sucilizm (sic ) for you’, Ivanovka Soviet on the other hand was managed by no obvious clique, and the very few rich peasants had no general influence in the village, which contained no poor households but a lot of middling ones.
Yakovlev found this contrast with Nikol'sk bizarre and inexplicable, but he should not have done.
The combination of deference to prosperity and literacy from one side, and the manipulation of equipment, local goods stores, and the like on the other easily created a vicious circle in Nikol'sk which could not be repeated in Ivanovka.
One of the prime aims of the system of Soviets was being thwarted in this region, and in many others throughout Russia.
This was to draw the ‘poor’ and ‘middle’peasants away from the private trade of the ‘rich’and to turn them eventually towards an alliance (smychka) with urban inhabitants.
Another important purpose was to use the village Soviets as gates through which peasants would enter into wider administrative experience and escape from the stifling parochialism of the mir and the skhod.
This goal too appeared to be self-defeating in the Nikol'skaia volost'.
It was true that there were now ‘whole chanceries’ of paperwork in the offices of village-Soviet secretaries, but most of the secretaries had worked for the volost' in the Tsarist regime and were somewhat suspect.
Other local agencies seemed to be flourishing.
There were now 13 militiamen as against 6 in the old regime; 7 secretaries in the medical centre as against 2; 72 administrators in the uezd-level agricultural centre as against 16.
The trouble was that their general educational standard was much lower than in the past.
In 1922 11.6 per cent of all village Soviet officials were illiterate.
Also there was a marked tendency for all efficient personnel, especially Communists, to move quickly up the hierarchy from the villages to the guberniia centres.
At the highest levels by 1922 there was an almost complete overlap of personnel between party and Soviet committees.
This meant that the localities were overstaffed with poorly paid semiliterates at the receiving end of an ever-growing mountain of paperwork from the hyperactive guberniia towns and from Moscow.
The result, at least in Nikol'skaia volost', was that the few literates from the old regime were starting to occupy the best bureaucratic jobs and to run parish-pump economics and politics in ways barely supervised from above and in fact quite inimical to the aspirations of the guberniia officials.
Yakovlev realized this, and recommended that party men be sent out in large numbers from Moscow and the guberniia towns.
Not only should they fill posts in the lower Soviets — they should grasp the core of the political problem, which was cultural in essence: they would have to run the literary points, the schools, and the agricultural centres themselves in order to push the peasantry into the twentieth century and towards socialism.
It was the age-old problem that had not been solved since the Populists first went to the people in the 1870s.
For lack of sufficient members in the countryside, the party had to rely on the most lively agents to effect smychka between itself and the masses.
Although the Komsomol in 1922 only enveloped 0.8 per cent of ill peasant youth, there did exist a cell in the Nikol'skaia volost', and seven of its twelve members were peasants.
Unfortunately their crude tactics, due to a very low educational level, made them better counter-agents than agents for the Bolsheviks.
They had not seen the party programme and regulations, nor any copy of their own journal Young Guard .
They tried to drive the adult peasants into paying their taxes, instead of coaxing them.
They spread round vicious tales about the priests, yet they had read nothing (those that could read) on religion.
A local priest told Yakovlev that the Komsomols were the most eager and confirmed ‘Communists’, but then he had met no real ones to judge them by.
The Komsomols themselves knew they did not understand the instructions they got from the party cell, and said so, but received no advice as a result.
Yakovlev himself dismissed the Komsomols as ‘scamps’, and turned to demobilized Red Army men as another feasible link between party and people.
This category was now proving vital to Bolshevik organization in the Roslavl' uezd, even if much of its work was more like security and espionage rather than positive encouragement to the peasantry to collaborate with the party.
In the five villages of the Nikol'skaia volost' there were no less than twenty to twenty-five ex-servicemen in each.
Their political knowledge surpassed that of the members of the party cell.
They were more articulate, had seen something of the wider world, retained a thirst for knowledge, and were sceptical towards the Church.
Yet this apparently admirable material proved to be of almost no use to the party.
They feared that if they refused to marry or baptize their children in church, they would be ostracized in a particularly religiously minded part of Russia.
They were sharp enough to realize that if they joined the party cell, they would likewise be cut off from their fellows for other reasons.
In their view the older generation could never be persuaded of the value of a proletarian ideology.
So they gave excuses of shortage of time or  involvement in other activities to explain why they did not register for the rural party cell.
One soldier even hid from Yakovlev the fact that he was a party member.
It may be imagined that the village schoolteachers could establish cultural ties between party and peasant, but some of the weaknesses of these agents have already been revealed in the Smolensk guberniia.
Those that had not fled out of fear, political animosity to the Bolsheviks, or for lack of food and pay, were apt to be shackled as much by their own situation as by peasant recalcitrance to learn.
Since the start of NEP schoolteachers had had to rely on the local mir, skhod, or Soviet for their pay.
Any attempt on their part in, say, Nikol'sk village, to undermine the new controlling clique of richer peasants and nascent Nepmen through Communist-inspired teaching on class structure in the local school would result in their immediate loss of livelihood.
Many peasants, particularly the less well off, still preferred the priest as a source of education.
As one told Yakovlev: ‘the priest is well taught, you can't chuck him out.
We don't want any new religion: a new religion means new churches.
We'd have to pay out more money, so let's stick to the old one.’
The schoolhouses had been left empty in the Revolution, and then ransacked by peasants, as the Bolshevik investigators had noticed on their way to Nikol'skaia.
When questioned about this, one peasant retorted ‘From where else are we to take thatch, there's nothing left on which to feed the livestock,’ An exception proved the rule.
One peasant walked 15 versts to get Yakovlev to act on a building designated for a school that was still occupied by an influential peasant.
He was granted his request, but he walked another 40 versts to the uezd party committee to see that the promise was kept.
If necessary he would walk to Lenin himself in Moscow.
In this ‘Leninist’, as he was dubbed, still shone that naïve peasant trust in the very highest authority that had  kept the Romanovs secure for so long.
This anonymous peasant sensed intuitively the lack of communication between the centre and the grass roots, and was prepared to overcome it through personal effort.
In any backward society the role of sympathetic intermediary agents and interpreters between high and rural politics is crucial.
They have to ensure the concrete yet flexible transmission of written, central theories to illiterates by means of patient speech and demonstration.
Their kind was sadly lacking in Nikol'skaia volost' in 1922.
The plight of the teachers became even worse in 1923.
The central authorities, late as usual, grasped this detail of local life by 1924, when Krupskaia at the Thirteenth Party Congress noted that due to the tightening of the economic ‘scissors’, the higher bread prices could no longer be afforded by starving village-teachers.
For lack of sympathetic agents, the peasants were often left to their own devices in matters of general and even political culture.
Yakovlev observed that state publications for 1922 from Gosizdat and Krasnaia Nov' included nothing on agricultural and rural affairs.
How could the undiluted works of Kautsky and Engels appeal to this audience at a time when even party members at lower levels rarely understood the meaning of such concrete words as ‘official’, ‘categorical’, ‘Plenum’, ‘memorandum’, or ‘territory’?
Only five peasants in the whole of Nikol'skaia volost' had read any political or agricultural texts.
The minds of the other literate villagers were dissipated on what they could pick up in a random manner: most of it naturally consisted of religious tracts, the traditional fodder left over from the past.
To sum up, in 1922 the Soviet government found itself in a situation similar to that of the late Tsarist regime, which in its final years had grasped the connection between literacy and modernization and between formal schoolwork and social control.
Neither political system could rely with confidence on those to whom it entrusted the task of educating the peasants.
Yakovlev's group understood this perfectly well.
They advocated the promotion of party schools at the guberniia level to speed up the educational attainments of local leaders so that they really could set the tone in political culture in sufficient numbers without having to depend so much on shaky agents.
Yakovlev wanted to see eight to ten thousand new cultural workers sent to the villages over the next two to three years.
This large number would still provide just one per volost' in the largest of all countries.
The gulf between peasant and party which Yakovlev noticed in the Kursk guberniia was typical of all rural localities in early NEP, despite their enormous local differences from each other in every other way.
It was the case in Smolensk, and the position was very similar in Poltava, the guberniia to the southwest which we shall be visiting shortly.
During this same period a far wider survey had been undertaken of all the fifty-nine party cells in the Poltava guberniia.
It was found that scant attention had been paid to raising the cultural level of party members.
As to the wider dissemination of culture, the few cells that had been active in this respect seemed to equate success with the regular dispatch of newspapers and made no personal contacts to follow this up.
In other spheres the results of the Poltava survey were closely reminiscent of the Nikol'skaia findings.
There were no discussions at all on the improvement of the peasant economy, despite the fact that they would have reaped quick propaganda rewards for the Bolshevik Party.
This was the earth of which Aleksei Tolstoy wrote: ‘Know ye the land where all breathes plenty and content, where rivers flow as silver clear.’
It comprised some of the very best of the Black-Earth belt, but after the Revolution it had been trampled over first by the Red Army advancing on Kiev from Kharkov, then by the German 20th Army Corps, and later by ruthless and bloodthirsty ‘Green’ armies.
The worst peasant uprisings in the Civil War had been against German expeditions in search of food supplies.
If there had to be a foreign, non-Ukrainian government  in Poltava, then for the local peasantry Great Russians were preferable to Germans.
Yet the Bolsheviks made no political capital out of the recent past.
As in Nikol'skaia volost, all fifty-nine Poltava cells spent nearly all their time and energy on tax-collecting and expediting administrative directives from higher authorities.
Let us now leave the Great Russians of the Kursk guberniia and move out of the hills to the south of Nikol'skaia volost'.
Eventually the plains of the eastern Ukraine are reached, and the city of Kharkov.
It was atypical of most provincial towns in that it had been a thriving industrial centre for some time, and was taking off again after the disruption caused by the Civil War.
We would be imitating the Bolsheviks' own rose-tinted over-concentration on their favourite study topics (like the proletariat state and collective farms) if we lingered here too long.
On the other hand any balanced survey of early Soviet society cannot ignore the presence in certain pockets of strong working-class forces.
The proletariat of the guberniia capital of Tver and Moscow city will be studied in more detail in 1926.
The special case of a disseminated labour force, the railway and other communications workers, will be looked at for 1922.
In 1917 roughly one million had been employed on the Russian railway network.
The town census of 1923 gave the population of Kharkov as 324,500.
Like its larger industrial brothers, Petrograd and Moscow, it had declined fast between 1917 and 1920 (the number of inhabitants fell by a quarter).
Yet by the end of 1926 its strength would rise to 417,300, of whom 28.8 per cent were industrial workers, and 13.5 per cent independent traders, including kustary.
In 1926 38.3 per cent of the population were Ukrainian as against 37.9 at the time of the 1923 census.
Kharkov was a major centre for metallurgy, chemical, and machine-building plants.
By 1924, when these industries had re-established themselves, one-fifth of all factory workers in the Ukraine were concentrated in the Kharkov and Ekaterina  gubernii.
The kustar' system, which recovered much faster than heavy industry, had 122 arteli in the city in 1922.
They organized a craft exhibition in January that attracted interest from abroad.
The more isolated character of Kursk guberniia may be illustrated by the fact that the whole province contained only 595 arteli.
Although most of the new recruits to Kharkov's metallurgical plants in 1914–17 had been ex-peasants from western Ukraine, there was no danger of nationalist sentiment ousting the Bolsheviks from the city.
They had wrested factory management from the hands of the very right-wing Congress of Mining Industrialists which had disallowed even neutral forms of workers' control in 1917.
For part of the Civil War Kharkov rather than Kiev became the temporary capital of the Ukraine, and a Bolshevik military stronghold.
Its civilian upper echelons remained predominantly Great Russian into the 1920s.
As we travel south-west along the main road to Poltava, the feeling of being under secure Bolshevik rule recedes.
In this rural area there had been no fewer than nineteen peasant uprisings in 1919.
It was clear from the reports on fifty-nine cells in this guberniia that collaboration between the party and the people was minimal.
The density of population in this finest of all Black-Earth regions rose to 60–70 per sq.
km.
There were scarcely any towns of significance near Poltava.
As in Kursk guberniia, the classical three-field system prevailed, but there was more variety.
The lucrative sugar-beet industry had led to the buying up of large tracts of land before the World War.
The production of vegetable oil, especially sunflower seed, was also important.
The climate becomes more benign as we move nearer to the Black Sea.
Male peasants in the fields wear their distinctive broad-brimmed straw hats, with their coats hanging loosely over their shoulders.
Six kilometres short of Poltava we turn aside from the highway into a colony for homeless vagabond children run by Anton Makarenko.
He had come here in the autumn of 1920.
Born in 1888 of working-class parents in Belopole, a small Ukrainian town, he had graduated from the Poltava Teachers' Institute in 1917 with a gold medal.
He then taught in a higher elementary school, but became critical of the local Bolsheviks' lack of progress in educational and social affairs.
As a challenge the chief of the Poltava guberniia Department of Education offered him the directorship of this residential school for war-orphans.
The human contents of the colony were symptomatic of the general state of Russia in 1922.
The Civil War was over, but the social repercussions of external and internal war and revolution flowed on right through the 1920s.
Young victims from all over the Ukraine and far beyond came in and out of Makarenko's institution.
There are social phenomena that are specific to confined areas: that is why any survey of Soviet politics and society must refer to discrete geographical localities.
Yet even in a country so vast and diverse as the ex-Empire, there were some features that affected most parts, and set up their own horizontal influences at all lower levels of society irrespective of any vertical political pressures acting from a single centre.
The orphans were one of these phenomena, as was the great Famine of 1921 2.
So that although reference is made here to a remote children's colony, its social significance had much wider reverberations, as indeed did the pedagogical theories worked out by Makarenko.
At the end of NEP the author of an article in the Bolshevik Encyclopaedia claimed that Russian orphanages were ‘the result of capitalist exploitation of the masses’.
Krupskaia admitted more truthfully that at least three-quarters of their inmates were the result of contemporary conditions, not of past sufferings.
Since 1914 millions of Russians had been on the move — four to five million away from the advancing armies of the Central Powers; at least twelve million fleeing into exile during and after the Revolution; the largest land army in the world  manoeuvring, dying, and deserting from the longest front-line in history — to give the major examples alone, with very approximate numbers.
The Famine affected many more millions further east.
Parents left children in food asylums by the thousands.
The traditional founts of charity, the church and the local gentry, had dried up.
Jobs were unavailable in the towns to which the hordes of young found their way.
Overnight the new Soviet government, with plans for social welfare that on paper went far beyond those of Scandinavia or Britain in 1945, had to take over.
It set up a succession of bodies to deal with the problem, but in 1922 it actually cut back expenditure, already insufficient, in this sphere.
Krupskaia reported in early 1923 that seven million bezprizornye (neglected ones) were registered; Lunacharsky later put the early NEP figure at nine million.
The pressure was still so great by 1924 that 40 per cent of all urban youths under the age of 18 were unemployed.
In 1920 the government discussed the idea of placing the bezprizornye in Red Army units.
At the end of the Civil War roughly one-quarter of a million roved around the Ukraine, a region that had suffered greatly from the hostilities.
These orphans and vagabonds were just one group among many that were virtually lawless in the disturbed countryside.
Leaving the reasonably safe confines of Kharkov town was like quitting E. Zamiatin's proletarian city for the rough no man's land of instinctive outsiders as described in his famous anti-Utopian novel My .
The workings of the legal system in 1922 will be examined in a later chapter as one aspect of Bolshevik control over society, and the general extent of crime will be noted.
In the daily life of Makarenko's colony crime can be observed in microcosm.
For a long time after his arrival there, armed groups of various kinds continued to be chased through the nearby woods by Red Army units.
Every evening throughout 1922 a band of youths from the colony volunteered to guard the local stretch of the main road into Poltava.
This was to prevent attacks by bandits on  travellers whose cries floated nightly over the fields to the colony.
Another youth patrol fended off neighbouring peasants who constantly tried to fell trees belonging to the colony (shades of Nikol'skaia volost').
They had already carefully taken away the entire orchard, roots and all, and the glass and window frames from the hostel buildings.
Makarenko was thus driven to take the law into his own hands in order to survive, but his pupils needed no encouragement in this respect, since they themselves were the product of a disturbed society.
Makarenko describes them in this way:
During those early years of the colony's existence we received very few of the homeless children who had grown accustomed to street wandering.
The majority of the colonists had only recently lost contact with their families.
During the war and the revolution many old criminal families, living on the outskirts of the town or in bandit villages, left their influence behind even after they had been broken up.
The weakening of family ties during the war — through death, evacuation, and executions — led to many youngsters becoming accustomed to wandering as regimental camp-followers in Tsarist, White, Red, or guerrilla bands.
These lads were adventurers who had acquired the habit of applying a simplified anarchistic logic to life, involving contempt for all property, contempt for life and human personality, contempt for cleanliness, order, and so on.
But they were not used to wandering by themselves, in the manner of the later homeless children.
Bands of boys and girls from the colony made illegal forays that were countenanced by Makarenko just in order to live.
Their thefts of milk, honey, and melons from local household plots he ironically termed as acts of smychka.
They also smashed up the peasants' illicit vodka stills.
More striking examples of lawlessness took place in Makarenko's dealings with several local authorities.
They are indicative of the government's shaky hold over grass-roots politics.
In 1922 Makarenko acquired the nearby estate of Trepke as a more suitable future home for his colony.
The local village Soviet, whose members Makarenko referred to as ‘a lot of parasites’, declared that the Trepke cistern was state property.
The issue was solved, not by due legal process, but by a brawl between the colonists and the village lads, who were chased back into the Soviet building which was later smashed up.
Nevertheless the official surveyors who came to map the Trepke boundaries remained too afraid to go into the fields of the estate.
When the Soviet sent the militia to the colony in order to accuse the inmates of robbing peasants, Makarenko sent even it packing.
He showed the same scant respect for other agents of central power.
His opinion of the local Komsomol was no doubt coloured by the fact that his own colony was a kind of rival organization, but his view broadly reflects that of Yakovlev on the Nikol'skaia Komsomol; Yakovlev was a more disinterested outsider.
Makarenko wrote: ‘The local Young Communists were very weak in both number and quality.
They were far too interested in girls and vodka, and they had a rather negative influence on the colonists.’
Soviet historians have subsequently tried to cover over this situation.
They have written that ‘It is well known that the great Soviet pedagogue, A. S. Makarenko, succeeded in forming a genuine Soviet collective of charges only after a Komsomol organization was established in his colony.’
In reality, a Komsomol political instructor (with a criminal record) entered the colony in 1925, well after Makarenko had established discipline.
This Komsomol representation apparently played no role in the subsequent administration of the colony.
Makarenko also dealt summarily with the Poltava educational authorities who had appointed him in the first place.
He made fun of the pseudo-learned, bureaucratic speech of an inspector which began like this:
The localized system of medico-pedagogical influence on a child, in so far as it is differentiated in an institution for social education, ought to prevail to the extent that it is in accordance with the natural needs of the child and to the extent that it opens creative prospects for  the development of the given structure — biological, social, and economic.
Arising out of this, we consider…
This reads just like the conversational style of the Soviet satirist of NEP, M. Zoshchenko.
It was used in a similar way by the newly literate or semi-literate Bolsheviks at the higher levels of the Smolensk and Kursk guberniia party organizations, as can be seen from even a cursory reading of their minutes.
This style also reflects the attempt by the political élite in Moscow to hand down to the provinces general directives which were as sophisticated as possible and based on Marxist tenets in so far as they could be understood at lower levels.
Zoshchenko could caricature them in the 1920s, but by the 1930s it became too dangerous to ridicule what had solidified into a standardized bureaucratic mode of oppression.
Makarenko went further than making fun of educational inspectors.
When they tried to stop him from taking into the colony a youth from the Political Special Section of the Army First Reserves, he appealed over their heads to the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate (Rabkrin ), which came down on his side.
This is not the first time nor the last that we encounter this influential organization.
It was one of the more effective Bolshevik controls as early as 1922, and not only in negative ways.
When the colony ran short of horses, the manager of the Economic Section of Rabkrin offered to lend some in exchange for wheels and wheat.
He drew up an agreement in two copies, setting out the terms in ponderous detail: ‘…referred to henceforth as ‘the colony'’…which wheels shall be considered as handed over to the Economic Section of the Provincial Workers' and Peasants' Inspection after their reception by a special commission and the signing of the corresponding protocol.’
During his inspection of Nikol'skaia volost', Yakovlev prided himself on his objectivity in criticizing local party activities, given that he was a highly orthodox representative of the central apparatus with a broad knowledge of all-Russian affairs.
In sharp contrast Makarenko was a deep provincial who had an independent, determined mind.
He was never to become a party member, and was not conversant with Marxist  ideas in 1922.
In any case Marxism was broad enough to lend itself to different educational interpretations.
Makarenko made the important deduction that as the theories discarded at the Revolution had not been replaced by precise new ones, the abstract and muddled notions of officials like the education inspector were no substitute for practical self-help.
This colony was virtually self-subsistent, in management methods as in food.
Its solidarity was achieved by its sense of being a small-scale unit isolated from the rest of society, and frequently preying on it in 1922.
There was a moral dilemma here, since what was good for the survival of the colony was harmful for others in a society which Makarenko wished to see participating in group ownership on collective lines.
Education and socialization were almost synonymous in his view.
He wanted to incorporate the individual into the collective in a way that he believed himself to belong to it — freely and without compulsion.
This noble idea was all very well in the relatively lax atmosphere and control of early NEP, with only one unique educational experiment involved.
Yet even at this time many members of industrial trade unions realized fully that they were no longer free agents in a wider collective, but increasingly regimented subjects of the Party.
The aim of creating a sense of prime loyalty among members of the colony, which was small enough for them to know each other, did not constitute any kind of a threat to central authorities in 1922, but it would not have been tolerated in the 1930s, when family members were encouraged to spy on one another in the state interest.
Yet paradoxically Makarenko's educational theories were to be taken up, approved, and widely publicized in the Stalinist period.
Why was this so?
One way of answering the question might be that Stalin was as unorthodox a Marxist as Makarenko, but this avoids the crucial problem of political control.
The real answer lies elsewhere.
A military career had fascinated the young Makarenko, though he disliked it and had to be discharged on account of poor eyesight.
as if to compensate for this, he applied military techniques in the colony.
Without thinking twice about it, and without a single shudder, I  began to drill the boys in military exercises and manoeuvres.
They were delighted, and gladly followed my lead.
After the day's work we had all the colony drilling for an hour or two in the yard, which formed a spacious square.
As we added to our knowledge we extended the field of our activities.
By the winter our squads were carrying out very interesting and involved military manoeuvres throughout the area covered by our group of villages.
Soon afterwards we were able to use real rifles, for the authorities made us members of the ‘Universal Training’ organization, our criminal past being deliberately overlooked.
I soon noticed the influence of military training.
The change of behaviour in the boys was very marked.
Their faces took on a different expression; they grew more spruce and upright of bearing, ceased to loll about on the tables or against the walls, and held themselves up.
Makarenko had better relations with the local secret police than with any other official authority.
They found many candidates for admission to the colony, and in 1922 Makarenko wrote of them:
Among the Cheka people high intellectual standards combined with education and culture had not assumed the outward expression which I had found to be so hateful among the former Russian intellectuals….
The Cheka people are devoted to principle…[they have an]all-pervading good humour, terseness of speech, a dislike of ready-made formulae.
Makarenko was not alone in the disorderly climate of 1922 in thinking on these lines.
Yakovlev was worried by the way in which teachers were being turned into what he called ‘the slaves of the kulaks’ through their financial dependence on richer peasants in the Kursk guberniia.
He recommended that Red Army youths become village teachers to counteract this trend.
The shadow of long-term violence since 1914 hung over many aspects of Russian society.
External and internal war produced their victims, of whom Makarenko's stray youths were but one example.
Military violence had led to civil coercion in many forms, of which the Secret police in peacetime was the most notorious example.
It had also led to  the adoption of military influences in Bolshevik governmental organization and propaganda jargon which did not disappear at the end of the Civil War.
Trotsky's idea of converting whole regiments into Labour Armies had failed, but it was symptomatic of the time.
Makarenko revived the military model in microcosm, and his strict pedagogical methods were adopted on a vast scale in the 1930s by Stalin, who reawakened many other lingering aspects of military-inspired government.
Often in NEP when thoughtful leaders at many levels became exasperated by the seemingly chaotic situations they saw about them, they dreamt of, and sometimes put through, as in Makarenko's case, schemes which looked forward to the methods of the 1930s.
Stalin was by no means alone.
We find Makarenko by the 1930s writing, ‘How is it that the resistance of materials is studied in all higher technical institutes, while in the pedagogical institutes no study is made of the resistance of personalities to educational measures?’.
Humans had become mere technical grist to the mill like any base metal.
The position eventually taken up by Makarenko was one where the ultimate criteria of truth and morality had to reside in the centralized state.
From there they would flow outwards to the masses through all state agencies, which by the 1930s included even the family.
He failed to show how from the other direction values could arise from the people and become incorporated in the state ideology.
The South-East 
EASTWARDS from Poltava lay the gubernii of Tsaritsyn, Saratov, and Samara (now Kuibyshev) on the Volga.
In 1922 they were the hub of the maelstrom that was the great famine of 1921–2.
The whole of Russia was affected by its repercussions.
Many historians maintain that they are concerned, not with human actions of all kinds, but only with those that are reflective, arising from a purpose pursued.
They rarely study natural events, and only in so far as they impinge on the human world.
In the Soviet context an inordinate amount of attention has been paid to the willed aims of Bolshevik leaders.
On the other hand, since nearly 80 per cent of the nation were illiterate in early NEP, consisting of a disorganized and fragmented peasantry, it has often been assumed that the actions of this class have been both unreflective and ineffective.
Illiterates leave no written record of their views, but they nevertheless reflect and act accordingly.
Peasants caught up in the Tambov and other revolts did just this, although they remained politically ineffective for lack of large-scale organization.
We have noted how the peasantry of the Black-Earth region was palpably influenced in its social and political manners by its traditional natural background.
In the case of the famine of 1921–2, a sudden alteration in the agricultural setting deeply affected, not just the local peasantry, but all the other provinces of European Russia and the very basis of the economic and political calculations that had led to the introduction of the NEP in the first place.
No such claim could possibly be made for the Smolensk, Kursk, or Poltava gubernii.
They deviated from central expectations and in many ways escaped from rigid control from above, but their local eccentricities did not upset Moscow's broad calculations in the short term.
Neither  Belorussian nationalists nor Catholics, nor the proximity of the Tambov revolt to Kursk guberniia, set any major political fires alight.
In the longer term the accumulation of social and economic deviations in all areas of Russia would indeed have profound effects on Bolshevik plans for the future.
This was already clear by 1926, and could even have been in 1922, if only the central authorities had kept a closer watch on the pulse of rural life.
Any study of the Lower Volga in 1922 differs from investigations of other localities in another respect.
Since foreign aid from many countries poured into the famine area, a wide variety of non-Russian accounts can be consulted.
Not a single articulate foreigner penetrated the Smolensk or Kursk gubernii to leave a record behind.
It is true that the Smolensk archives dropped uncensored into German hands in the Second World War, and that Yakovlev is remarkably self-critical of his own party; but only Makarenko stands outside the Bolshevik view of things.
Yet we cannot take foreign accounts at their face value either.
Political propaganda on the part of the American Relief Administration, by far the longest foreign source of aid, warped its judgement at the time, and the subsequent polarization of Russian-American relations has not improved the objectivity of later scholarly accounts of the Famine as seen through American eyes.
Even F. Nansen, the esteemed Norwegian co-ordinator of many other foreign relief organizations, could on occasion be carried away by his emotions and give a semi-fictional account of conditions in the Volga provinces.
Calm assessments were hard to come by in the shadow of a tragedy of such proportions.
A native Russian of genius, L. Tolstoy, had been blinded by his feelings in the famine of  1891–2 when he made mildly inaccurate statements about the Tsarist relief administration.
Most students of the 1921–2 Famine have concentrated on foreign aid, the causes of the Famine, statistical evidence on mortality and disease rates, and the extent of crop failures.
The aim here is to look at its political and social repercussions and to set it in the wider context of central-local administrative relations.
Another interesting aspect that has been almost entirely neglected concerns horizontal influences in near and distant gubernii.
But first the causes of the Famine should be given in order to put it in perspective.
The Middle Volga region, like the Nikol'skaia volost' in Kursk guberniia, was an area of good chernozem soils and so predominantly grain-producing.
Unlike the Central Agricultural Region, the grain here was partly produced for market and transported on the Volga.
The pressure on land was also less severe here.
The number of strips held by households were larger and fewer than around Kursk, but distances between houses and plots were even larger, since peasants lived alongside the water-courses away from their land.
Water shortage was often acute, especially in the Lower Volga area.
In general, conditions of land tenure, communal arrangements, and cultural traditions differed considerably in the Volga provinces from those in the West and the centre of European Russia.
For instance, members of Volga communes were apt to be more outward-looking than those in Kursk guberniia because of their wider market ties and better transport facilities.
This was one of the reasons why they were more prepared than many sedentary peasants to escape over huge distances in the Famine, though of course hunger was the main spur.
In August 1921 the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs stated that the Famine covered Ufa and Viatka and the Volga  gubernii of Astrakhan, Tsaritsyn, Saratov, Samara, Simbirsk, and the German Volga Commune.
Foreign sources added several other provinces: Tambov, Voronezh, Tula, Riazan', and the Ukrainian gubernii of Kherson and the Crimea.
The widespread implications of the Famine were already coming to the surface.
Both Soviet and foreign estimates of the numbers threatened with starvation and death over the period 1921–2 varied enormously, and no amount of detailed research is ever likely to come up with reliable figures.
By the early autumn of 1922 the Soviet government put the number at 22 million, or about one-third of the population of the RSFSR.
Nansen's estimates fluctuated between 20 and 30 million in September 1921 to 50 million twelve months later.
For the long-term causes of the Famine we have to delve deep behind the flat time-dimension of 1922.
Famines had been a cyclical phenomenon in the Volga region, as they had been in Asia, for centuries.
Poor irrigation, transport, education, and medicine multiplied the chances of disaster, together with the fact that even in good years many peasants hardly existed above subsistence level.
The organizational defects of the commune system were another barrier, as elsewhere in Russia.
The short-term cause of overriding local significance were the droughts and crop failures in 1920 and 1921.
Due to wartime conditions the peasantry got the same amount of agricultural machinery over the years 1915–21 that they had been able to buy in a single year prior to the World War.
They had suffered in the Civil War from requisitioning by Red, White, and Green armies, and to some extent from the Bolshevik-inspired kombedy (committees of poor peasants).
As the Famine grew, poor co-operation between the Soviet authorities and foreign relief groups, and amongst the foreign organizations themselves, exacerbated the situation.
The worst aspects  of co-ordination, however, were central-local relations within the Soviet hierarchy.
We will return to this later, but at this point the course of the Famine needs to be related very briefly.
Between early May and late August 1921, no rain had fallen in the Middle Volga, central and eastern Ukraine, and the steppes north of the Caucasus.
Taken together, these areas supplied three-fifths of Russia's grain.
The steppes were the first to be affected, so that in June alone over a million peasants left them for the Volga.
Thousands died in transit.
Since the total grain harvest proved to be a mere 52 per cent of what it had been in 1913, even the least affected areas had barely enough.
Livestock was slaughtered in the worst-hit areas on the Volga, thus rendering any movement and the basis for any future recovery even more precarious.
Epidemics spread with the diaspora.
The winter of 1921–2 was bitterly cold.
Grain-importing regions now suffered, beginning with the Donbas and then the Moscow region.
It was only after the reasonable harvest of 1922 that the spectre of nation-wide starvation receded.
Since the accent in this study lies on 1922, a report in The Times for 6 January may suffice as an eye-witness account of conditions in Saratov and Samara gubernii.
The author was an Englishman, Dr Farrar, who had just died from typhus.
He can still be seen on film in November 1921 in Saratov surrounded by hungry children.
It would need the pen of a Zola to do justice to the reality and appalling intensity of the famine in these parts (Saratov and Samara).
It is getting steadily worse and is moving westward with the stream of refugees, who, having eaten their last stores and sold everything that would buy a morsel of bread, are wandering they know not whither.
To give an idea of the desolation of some of the villages (in the Saratov area)(may mention that the village of Kano, in the Markstadt district, which has a normal population of over 3,000, has now only 1,100 inhabitants left, and remember the winter is only just beginning.
One of the worst features is the number or enfants trouvés — orphans or children abandoned by their parents, who are found in the streets.
The ghastly emaciation of these children is horrible.
I saw yesterday' in Markstadt a shelter which has beds for 100 of these children; 42 children had died in the last 24 hours, but these places had been filled up.
I saw the corpses of eight, photographed some of them.
More than 50 per cent of these enfants trovés perish in spite of the care that is given them.
But if the children some under the care of the relief agencies, little ones, who were emaciated, hollow-eyed, and listless, become after about a fortnight's feeding quite plump again and begin to laugh and sing.
Since beginning this letter I have been with Nansen in the Samara district, where the conditions are even worse than in Saratov, in spite of the very good work done by the ARA in Samara and by the Friends in Bouzoulouk.
We saw awful conditions in Bouzoulouk, where, out of a population of 35,000 they are dying at the rate of 100 a day.
Corpses are found lying almost every day, and murders are frequent.
We saw in the cemetery a pile of about 60–70 corpses, two days accumulation (not reckoning the private burials), waiting to be tumbled into a pit, and also a pit full of other corpses.
We saw in the main street the corpse of a woman already gnawed by dogs (people are beginning to be afraid of dogs).
Copemaman of the Friends, told us that he seldom went out without seeing corpses lying about.
There are whispered stories of cannibalism.
Conditions in the guberniia capitals were dire, but they were even worse in the rural hinterland.
It was still possible in early 1922 to buy foodstuffs in the city markets if one had the money.
Soviet and foreign relief organizations had installed themselves with efficiency and were giving out free food.
The villages on the other hand were quite desolate.
Up to half of the houses were boarded up in areas that were starving.
Village clerks could not keep a proper record of deaths, since they were so frequent.
This was the source of the central authorities' difficulty in making adequate assessments.
A member of the Indian Civil Service who visited Samara guberniia in January 1922 noted how the whole of the rural population in the famine region proper was absolutely starved.
In Indian famines of which he had long experience, only landless labourers and smaller cultivators —‘the submerged tenth’— needed relief.
Local agronomists from the Commissariat of  Agriculture discovered in the Samara guberniia that 40 per cent of the machinery that had been hired out was unusable, and virtually all the rest was in need of repairs.
There was neither time nor money to deal with agricultural pests.
The agronomists’ reports on the spring-sowing campaign reveal a long list of mainly unfulfilled bureaucratic resolutions passed down from Moscow.
In Saratov guberniia the reduction in livestock between the springs of 1920 and 1922 was found to have been 94.6 per cent in pigs, 68.7 in sheep, 61.3 in horned cattle, and 59 in horses.
When agronomists held courses for peasants, they fretted that on average only 150 turned up, as compared with attendances of 4000 at a single conference in Smolensk guberniia.
Given their atrocious living conditions, it is a tribute to the tenacity of the Saratov peasantry that even this number appeared.
The effects of rural famine took their toll on city-workers in due course.
The sewing industry in Saratov reported that its factories were closing in January through lack of demand for its products.
Another plant which made military uniforms was on the verge of closure for lack of orders from Moscow.
This was due to the impossibility of conveying such goods between the two cities at a time when the railways could not cope with grain supplies coming into Saratov.
Agronomists were much in evidence in the localities in the spring of 1922.
This was not the case for those other connecting agents between town and country that have been studied in Smolensk and Kursk gubernii.
Rural teachers melted away into the towns as their schools closed down for lack of pupils and funds.
By February only forty-three of the 394 schools in Samara guberniia remained on the official food supply list.
All local funds, which had been cut as a result of the introduction of NEP, were poured into famine relief.
There was even less money available for education after September, when many new famine duties and financial burdens were shifted from Moscow on to local authorities.
There is little evidence of either the presence or practical aid of Russian priests in the afflicted rural areas, though a considerable number of West European churchmen came in with relief organizations.
Churches, like the schools, were abandoned.
The government's anti-religious campaign in connection with the Church's alleged refusal to donate money and valuables for the Famine crippled the reputation of church aid and made some priests unwilling to become entangled in relief work.
Others saved their own skins and left the worst-hit areas.
At high and local levels the government intervened to stop what active church help there was.
On 22 April the American Relief Administration wanted to clear a shipment to Patriarch Tikhon for him to distribute at his discretion.
An earlier load had been passed on to him, but this was no longer permitted.
Tikhon was arrested at the end of April and charged with advocating resistance to the confiscation of church treasures.
When ARA village committees wished to elect Russian priests as members, back came the objection, phrased in the usual official provincial style: ‘according to the laws of our constitution, the said element (ecclesiastical) is harmful to the younger generation, and by the principles of the Soviet government this element is deprived of all active or passive participation in our work.’
Another unwelcome element in Soviet eyes was lacking altogether.
Whereas Nepmen were already flourishing in Kursk guberniia, they could not yet arise here in an area where as the Indian civil servant observed, rich and poor peasants alike were afflicted.
The only conceivable opening for venality was in the private shipment of food supplies for profit.
Traffic of this kind had occurred on a large scale in the period following on the October Revolution, but if there had been any ‘bagmen’ left by 1921–2 in the Middle Volga region, they would have been ruthlessly stamped out.
It was lucky for the Bolshevik government, though not accidental, that two of its most suspected categories in local society were powerless in the Famine areas.
On the other hand, neither did the faithful military figure so much here as it did in the political activities of the Smolensk party organization.
During 1922 soldiers were used almost exclusively in civilian affairs for guarding the train-loads of grain entering the Famine region, and for monitoring the distribution of food.
The rations of the Red Army were assiduously protected.
In March food supplies purchased by the Commissariat of War for the Red Army were given priority in evacuation at the Black Sea port of Novorossiisk over ARA famine stocks.
It was different for the rank and file at the receiving end.
The officials who sent them off from the ports with the loaded railway-wagons gave them rations for the number of days which the grain would in normal times take to its destination.
Due to the enormous delays, soldiers arrived in the Volga cities nearly dead for lack of food.
It has been argued that the Famine led to a long-term levelling process amongst the afflicted peasantry, thus keeping the ‘kulak ’ at bay in the stricken areas.
This was indeed the immediate consequence, but only until the middle of 1922.
In 1921, there was a huge increase in the emigration and physical extinction of households.
A big drop took place in rates of partitioning.
The poorest households suffered the most, and this led temporarily to both a levelling and an aggregate move downwards in Volga peasant society.
Yet by the summer of 1922, when recovery was in sight, the slightest advantage of one peasant over another could be manipulated to gain quick and large profits.
Meagre amounts of food were bartered by the less unfortunate to the starving in return for land and equipment.
Between June and September 18,000 bargains of this kind in Samara guberniia were annulled by the government, which declared them to be invalid, but thousands more went undiscovered.
Twenty pounds of butter was enough for the lease of two and a half desiatiny of land for five years.l Five pudy of linseed cake were exchanged for the approaching  harvest of a desiatin of wheat.
Machinery was much scarcer than land, as has been seen.
In 1922 the percentage of households without even a plough was 32.7 in the Central Industrial Region, 33.6 in the Siberian guberniia of Omsk, and 55.8 in the guberniia of Tsaritsyn to the south of Saratov.
Peasants with a minimal surplus of food could barter it for vital equipment.
In the spring of 1922 only those households in the Famine area which possessed the necessary machinery and livestock were given grain to sow for the next season.
By the mid-1920s the universal result of the earlier shortage of equipment had become clear: 75 per cent of all cases of letting out land were due to lack of adequate tools.
It was difficult for the authorities to detect this cumulative process at work.
Richer and poorer peasants connived to hide the indebtedness of the latter, who were often described in the tax returns as relatives or voluntary helpers of the farmer.
As always, the better-off peasants were more successful than others in avoiding taxation.
The new tax in kind fell on all areas of Russia and on all types of peasant in 1922 except for the completely destitute.
A progressive tax on the more productive regions and peasants might have been more just and welcome from the political point of view, but it was not applied for fear of removing the incentive to sow from the better-placed peasants.
Even the famine area was made to pay one-half of the supplemental tax levied for famine relief.
This had a crippling effect on the worse off at a crucial stage of recovery from the Famine.
To this extent the region was actually encouraging the formation of richer peasant strata at the expense of the poorer.
At this point we can embark on an investigation of the spatial or ‘horizontal’ effects of the Famine in 1922.
Internal movement within the worst-affected areas should be looked at first.
Those peasants who continued to own draught animals had lent them to relief organizations at the height of the  Famine, but by the spring of 1922 they refused to do this any longer, since they now found many profitable uses for them.
Owners of draught animals had a virtual monopoly oh the transport of grain to the miller, the market, and the local collection-point for the tax in kind.
If the tax was paid promptly, a discount was given.
They could carry goods for local co-operatives and state authorities.
Their cultural as well as their economic life could be broadened: in the winter of 1922–3 it was found that more peasant children from families owning draught animals attended school regularly than those without any.
Less fortunate children still converged on the village relief-kitchens to which food and other supplies fur a month to two months were brought in peasant carts over lung distances from railheads and steamer-landings.
In the more remote localities Bolshevik officials, desperate for transport facilities, ‘ignored NEP and all its works, and commandeered right and left as if military Communism [War Communism]was still pure and undefiled’, yet another indication that military methods did not go completely out of fashion with the advent of NEP.
Communications did not improve away from the grass roots.
For Saratov guberniia the main supply-base was at Pokrosk, on the east side of the Volga, directly opposite the city of Saratov.
From Pokrovsk railway lines ran in three directions through famine areas, but in January 1922 there were only one locomotive in the yards, and that took up to seventeen days to cover less than 150 miles.
Camels were used for moving railway-trucks round the Pokrovsk yards.
The spring of 1922 was the crucial period, when the unmetalled roads began to break up into mud and the rivers had not yet melted By the time grain had arrived from the Black Sea to an area north of Samara, only one in ten of the available sledges could get through to rural areas, so that instead or 48,750 pudy of corn, a mere 1,500 were delivered.
The ice disappeared from the  Volga in the last days of April, when steamers, tugs, and barges converged at Tsaritsyn on the warmer Lower Volga to transport supplies up the river and its tributaries.
There were six village landing-points in the Samara guberniia and eight to the north and south of Saratov.
This campaign suffered from the reduction of the river fleet from four to two thousand steamers between 1917 and 1921.
Barges had been destroyed for fuel or left by their previous owners to be broken up by ice or swept downstream by the spring floods.
Grain converging on the Middle Volga from other parts of Russia and from abroad was subject to similar near-chaotic conditions.
Massive bottle-necks built up in the early spring on the railway network, at Koslov, west of Saratov on the route to Moscow and particularly at Balashov, between Saratov and Tsaritsyn on the west side of the Volga.
On 21 March there were forty-two trains there, each with about thirty trucks.
The leader of the American Relief Administration agreed with A. Giduk, his Soviet counterpart, that 1,100 trucks should be unloaded temporarily into warehouses.
Coal specially imported from England to Baltic seaports was still stuck there, so that most engines were fuelled with ‘nothing but logs…in most cases wet and covered with ice and snow…giving no heat….
The gratings are ruined and finally the engines have to be taken out of service…‘
The number of ARA truck-loads failing to reach their destination had accelerated, from 11 per cent in October 1921 to 35 per cent by the end of January 1922.
The position began to improve in spring.
Later figures showed that for the whole of 1922 over twice as much grain was transported by rail and waterways as in 1921.
The Famine in the south-east of Russia even affected international relations in the far north-west.
The ARA used its good offices to speed up railway agreements between Latvia and Poland on the one hand, and Russia on the other, so that relief supplies could flow in more easily from Western Europe.
Goods trains coming from the Baltic to Moscow took between one and four weeks, a distance that was covered in fourteen hours by passenger trains.
The first goods train from Novorossiisk, a vital grain port in the north-east corner of the Black Sea, wandered over much of European Russia before arriving at Ufa.
Novorossiisk like most other ports had suffered from the Revolution and Civil War.
Scuttled ships lay in the bay and only two quays were fit for use.
Bottle-necks were not restricted to the railways; at the end of March twentyfive ships lay in Reval harbour waiting for berths.
At Theodosia in the Crimea dockers struck for better wages and rations.
ln good capitalist fashion local officials recruited Tartar shepherds and quarrymen from the hills to act as temporary stevedores and strike-breakers.
Drastic action was indeed necessary to keep transport cogwheels turning all over Russia to supply the Volga provinces.
Vital grain supplies due in from Siberia were so badly held up that in January 1922 the national Council of Labour and Defence sent there Felix Dzerzhinsky, the head of the secret police, and since April 1921 Commissar for Transport.
With forty picked men he was given special powers; 228 wagons were needed, but only thirty had been sent to Siberia.
Dzerzhinsky found explosives in many of the railway workshops.
They had suffered from twenty cases of arson in the last two months of 1921, which he ascribed to White supporters of Kolchak.
He proceeded to declare a state of military alert in nineteen railway stations.
The trucks slowly began to roll.
ARA officials met Dzerzhinsky on 12 April to complain about the requisitioning of their supplies.
By 27 April the problem was solved, to the surprise of the Americans.
Thereafter they learnt to invoke the name of the head of the secret police when dealing with obdurate local officials.
Central intervention was successful to a certain degree where means of communication were concerned, especially those between Moscow and the provinces.
They will be examined in  more detail when we quit regional life and approach the political capital.
Traditionally, Tsarist as well as Soviet local government was conducted on a strictly bilateral basis between the centre and each separate guberniia.
Independent lateral contacts at provincial levels were discouraged.
So that when want numbers of non-directed peasants began to spill out of the disaster areas in the early summer of 1921, the Central Committee of the Communist Party ordered its guberniia counterparts to put a stop to migration ‘since the flight of the peasants…will ruin entirely our economic life’.
Fears for the political stability of the area, once the bastion of the Socialist Revolutionaries and bordering on Tambov guberniia, were also rising, though not expressed publicly.
Refugee movements were very complex throughout 1921–2, but the main tides swept in a south-westerly direction from Saratov and Tsaritsyn gubernii towards the Ukraine or westwards from Samara, Simbirsk, Ufa, and Kazan' towards Moscow and beyond.
In one sense international or even civil war had less disturbing effects on central administration, since the' had more clearly defined fronts than those of the Famine.
Troop numbers and locations were also much more precise.
It is impossible to have even approximate figures for the diaspora.
One careful observer, a British Quaker, gave a figure of 800,000 for the period between 1 July 1921 and April 1922.
The fact that Omsk railway station on the less-frequented eastern escape route was sometimes deluged with up to 20,000 refugees a day gives some idea of the scale of migration.
Another reason for our inability to give accurate figures is due to the prevalence of several other types of population movement, some of them on a huge scale, although extended over a longer period.
In the winter of 1921–2 an American relief organizer discovered several thousand Polish war refugees huddled in railway trucks at Orenburg, waiting to be repatriated.
The dislocations caused by the World War and the Civil War were immense in terms of human lives.
The  White emigration added at least another twelve million.
Then there were the mass flights from the industrial cities of European Russia after 1917, besides many regional movements too numerous to mention.
Given this situation, which persisted into 1922 and beyond, what hope was there for Gosplan to construct a carefully planned economy and society under any kind of political conditions, whether those of War Communism, NEP, or the Five-Year plans of the future?
The future was indeed at stake, since official Soviet figures put the number of starving children in the famine areas at 7,246,317.
By 1920 the government had already been giving public support to 7,667,769 children in need.
These colossal numbers diminished very slowly through NEP.
Makarenko's colony near Poltava was a drop in the ocean at a time when 200 children a day were abandoned in Samara.
Renewed commitment to child welfare had the initial effect of inducing parents to desert their offspring at an even faster rate.
The incidence of the Famine was in fact worse for those peasants who wandered into the nearby Volga cities or travelled much further afield.
Cut off from regular feeding-points, subjected to atrocious public transport conditions, and more prone to the cold and disease, up to half of the migrants died in transit on the railways.
A minority were more fortunate, if one can take as reasonably accurate the report by the Commissariat of Agriculture that 109,705 peasants were taken out of the famine zone and settled on farming land in Siberia, the Ukraine, the Caucasus, and elsewhere.
The results were beneficent, but less well handled were the reverse migration procedures ordered by Pomgol on 15 March 1922.
They appear to have been premature.
For example 1,530 persons were reevacuated to the Saratov guberniia in early June, despite the fact that the Central Evacuation Department had taken 2,151 refugees away from there in late May.
More ominous for the  future was the fact that the central authorities were learning how to control and transport huge numbers of peasants.
The great bulk of population movement occurred independently of Moscow in the years 1917–22, but after the end of NEP it was to be strictly enforced, and took place on a vast scale again.
Another horizontal effect of the Famine that was also hard to check was the spread of disease, carried above all by refugees.
Those fugitives who congregated on the Omsk railway passed on spotted typhus to 60 per cent of the regional railway workers.
Through Samara passed the chief railway lines from Siberia and Central Asia, bringing in diseases of all kinds from the east.
The ARA dispensary at the station filled out 75,000 prescriptions for arriving passengers and inspected 868 trains.
At the receiving end of refugees from the Middle Volga, Rostov-on-Don was the prime source of cholera outbreaks.
They occurred from 1920 onwards, but 1921 and 1922 were the peak years.
Rostov stood at the crossroads of another traffic stream, from north-west Russia to the northern Caucasus by train and boat.
At the hub of the crisis, hospital conditions in Samara and Saratov were atrocious.
Patients suffered from frost-bite in bed.
Thermometers were lacking completely.
It has been estimated that in a narrow clinical sense the Famine probably accounted for under 15 per cent of the extra mortality recorded at the height of the disaster in Saratov in 1921–2: but in a broader sense, including deaths due to severe malnutrition and other causes, the Famine contributed to most of the rise in mortality that took place before the 1922 harvest.
After that point, the recovery from widespread disease and the high death-rate was dramatic.
By the end of 1923 levels were down to the best pre-1921 records for Saratov.
For lack of funds, equipment, and means of control, central  government and famine-free areas had to stand by passively to some extent as disease-ridden migrants besieged them.
In other ways positive help could be given by more fortunate regions.
Indeed M. I. Kalinin, the nominal head of famine relief, claimed that 70 to 80 per cent of the adult population of Russia was active on the ‘hunger front’.
Party, Soviet, co-operative, military, educational, and trade-union organizations were involved.
The latter designated special weeks for the production or collection of goods to be contributed to the aid programme.
By February 1922 trade-union lotteries were being held in forty-eight gubernii.
For lack of sufficient central funds the rudimentary basis of a welfare state was being set up through contributions from the workers' own meagre wages.
In Saratov itself it was suggested that there should be a 2 per cent deduction from water-workers' pay in order to improve cultural facilities.
The national union of workers in education and the arts gave 5 per cent of their pay for famine relief.
The prestigious university of Petrograd, whose affairs will be reviewed later in another context, set up a famine commission and sent an expedition to afflicted areas.
On 2 January 1922 a decree issued by VTsIK (the All-Union Central Executive Committee of the Communist Party) arranged for the requisitioning of valuable articles from museums, and this was followed on 16 February by the more controversial decree on the seizure of Church treasures.
The violent repercussions of the second decree have been examined in the case-study of Roslavl' in the Smolensk guberniia.
Citizens died on the church steps in their attempt to prevent altar-pieces being taken away.
If tension was so high in an area not stricken by famine, it may be assumed that as much or more violence occurred in regions like the Ukraine and Tambov guberniia, which were nearly as badly off as the Volga.
Every twenty Roslavl' inhabitants had also to contribute to the support of one hungry child in the distant south-east, whilst  every five peasant households had to help one hungry adult.
In addition a special series of graded poll-taxes for famine relief began in February 1922.
By 11 October we find local party authorities demanding from peasants the delayed payment of 425 pudy of rye for maintaining ten children on the Volga.
This order was annulled on 26 October by the Smolensk guberniia party committee for being excessive and too late to be of any use.
On 9 November a Moscow circular from Secretary V. Molotov himself forbade somewhat belatedly the imposition of any local taxes not laid down in the list issued by VTsIK.
This move can be interpreted either as yet another instance of poor central-local ties or as deliberate slowness so as to let more money flow into public funds.
In contrast local military authorities would brook no delay.
The commander of the Western Front virtually ordered the Smolgubispolkom to eject school number 9 out of what was now a Volga orphans' home run by a ‘revolutionary military committee’.
The effects of the Volga famine were more disruptive and politically dangerous in another national minority area that had more ethnic pretensions, and above all suffered nearly as much from famine as the Great-Russian Volga provinces.
On the day of the Kronstadt uprising, 23 February 1921, Lenin appealed to the Ukraine to step up its aid, in the form of foodstuffs to the workers of Petrograd and Moscow.
The proclamation of NEP did not apply to the Ukraine, where the punitive requisitioning methods of War Communism were officially extended until the autumn of 1921.
In the Civil War the Red Army had blocked off the northern part of the Ukraine from the hungry south and commandeered the crops from the north for Great-Russian cities.
When the ‘official’ Famine struck the Volga, the Soviet press made no mention of the position in the Ukraine.
Only later did occasional references appear on inner pages devoted to food collection there.
It was poor propaganda for the outside world to know that the granary of Europe was suffering from famine  conditions.
In fact it soon found out, since by the end of July 1922 the ARA was having to feed 822,000 children and over a million adults in the Ukraine.
When the starvation rate accelerated in the southern provinces, and no help was available from outside, peasant refugees from the west added to the flood from the east converging on the less afflicted Ukrainian gubernii of Chernihiv and Poltava.
It was not at all surprising that the main road to Poltava town near Makarenko's colony was full of travellers and plagued by bandits.
Ukrainian sources claimed that ninety-two wagons of grain were collected from starving Ukrainian gubernii, of which thirty-six were sent off to feed the hungry in the Volga-Ural area.
So-called food gifts arriving in Saratov were forced out of Ukrainian peasants by the food-collecting army (Prodovol'stvennaia armiia ), although they were still paying agricultural taxes which had been waived in the Volga provinces.
Central policy seemed to be so prejudiced against the Ukraine that it evoked the suspicion in several foreign observers that this particular national minority was being deliberately neglected as a punishment for its hostility to Russian rule in the Civil War.
In the religious sphere the government was quite clearly using the Famine as a political weapon with which to subdue the Orthodox Church.
Certainly in 1922 Ukrainians came to envy and hate the preferential treatment given to their eastern neighbours on the Volga, thus falling prey to the methods of divide and rule which the Bolsheviks inherited from their imperial predecessors.
In terms of the survival of the regime, such a policy may have been deemed necessary.
The peasant revolt that broke out in February 1921 in the Tambov guberniia threatened to cut off rail connections between Moscow and the Volga region, since hungry peasants held up wheat trains and ransacked them.
Bolshevik sources reveal that about half the population of the guberniia did not have enough to eat by then, and the position was no better by spring  of 1922.
The revolt was squashed, but Tambov peasants in 1922 were still compelled to pay a levy on the acorns they picked to eat as a substitute for bread.
The economic plight of the Volga peasantry was even more crippling than that of the Tambov or Ukrainian population.
There was no fear of revolt in the countryside on the Volga, due to sheer exhaustion.
Consequently no clearly visible political strings were attached to relief operations there.
This does not mean that they were entirely lacking, as will be seen later.
The main problems in the Volga region, however, lay more in the administrative than in the political domain.
Most of them arose as a result of an all-Russian phenomenon in 1922 — the lack of co-ordination and exchange of information between the centre and the localities, together with nonchalant neglect of provincial problems so long as they did not affect central political issues.
These attitudes were reflected in the arrangements for famine relief in Tsaritsyn guberniia, to which we will now turn, since our attention has been directed so far on Saratov and Samara gubernii to the north of it.
Organization at the grassroots level was clearly the most urgent need in order to reach remote starving villages, yet in Tsaritsyn as in other gubernii no local relief committees were set up at the uezd and volost' levels until October 1921, that is, over two months after the formation of the guberniia committee.
This was due to the lethargy of the central and guberniia authorities who appointed local committee members.
Uezd and volost' organs were required to report twice a month only to the guberniia, which sent a monthly summary to Moscow.
The local committees varied greatly in their composition and operating procedures, some of which were highly unusual.
Between January and May 1922 no money from any central agency was given to them, so they had to depend on the surplus of local  revenues and gifts after the guberniia relief committee had made its own collections.
These local committees were supplemented in the autumn of 1921 by the newly formed peasant Committees of Self-Help.
They had been suggested as early as 3 August by VTsIK, but typically no action was taken until the Communist Party had time to look into the question.
Village as well as volost', uezd, and guberniia peasant committees were established in Tsaritsyn and other gubernii.
At the lower levels their aim was to promote aid from less unfortunate households to the poor and the starving.
They also collected seed grain for the 1922 sowing campaign.
Neither they nor the local relief committees were given any remit whatsoever with regard to how food should be dispensed or who was eligible to receive it.
The contrast between this complete lack of instructions and the highly detailed directives from the centre to, say, the Roslavl' uezd or the Nikol'skaia volost' party committees on political matters is striking.
The results were often counter-productive.
In the villages the peasant committees consisted entirely of local peasants.
Some of them were ex-members of the committees of poor peasants (kombedy) that had requisitioned in military style during War Communism, a style that lingered on.
There were many cases of theft, misappropriation, and favouritism which tended to destroy confidence in officialdom in general.
Since peasants who still possessed any seed reserves or livestock were excluded from relief, they were compelled to sell them off in some cases in order to survive.
This depleted the famine areas further, and sparked off new hatred amongst the peasants.
In the subsequent scramble for survival and enrichment which mounted towards the end of 1922, it was not surprising that those who were slightly better off often took a kind of revenge in driving hard bargains with their poorer neighbours, as has been noted earlier.
The intermediary between local bodies and Moscow were the guberniia Commissions for the Relief of the Starving.
The  Tsaritsyn Commission was set up on 8 August 192 1, and like its counterparts in other gubernii, were very closely modelled on Pomgol, the all-Russian organ in Moscow.
It had no special apparatus, but consisted of thirty-one members chosen from nearly every branch of local government.
Its working methods were almost a caricature of those prevailing in high political bodies in Moscow.
Plenary sessions were held once a month only, even at the height of the Famine, and merely ratified previous decisions of the two-man presidium.
Five subsections were supervised by eight ‘technical staff’, whose title by implication precluded them from taking political decisions.
The sections were for agitation, public works, public feeding, the investigation and procurement of resources, and after February 1922, a special section for the removal of church treasures.
The Tsaritsyn gubpomgol was similar in structure and operation to other gubpomgoly.
Like them it relied heavily for income on local sources such as gifts, taxes, profits from licences, lotteries, etc.
They yielded over 68 million roubles by December 1921.
By that date Moscow had provided a mere three and a half million roubles, and one million had come in from other gubernii.
Each guberniia that was officially designated as lying within the famine area was linked up with supposedly ‘rich’ gubernii which had to provide supplies.
Tsaritsyn was linked with Kursk and Voronezh, Saratov with Kursk and Voronezh again, and also with Tambov and Orël while Samara was allied with no less than five other gubernii.
Given that co-operation and consultation in more normal times was virtually unknown on this lateral basis, inexperience led to many defects.
There were no specifications as to what type or quantity of goods should be sent.
Poor control over shipments led to theft and other misdemeanours.
Despite internal and foreign suggestions as to how to improve horizontal co-operation, the central authorities took no action throughout 1922.
At both guberniia and central levels the Soviet government established a liaison system between their own plenipotentiaries and all foreign relief organizations.
It was headed by Alexander Eiduk, a pugnacious character who was a member of the GPU collegium.
Foreign organizers soon discovered that the system seemed to be modelled on Trotsky's military commissars.
Co-operation was often subordinated to the more important task of insulating local Russian relief staff and the general population from political contamination by foreigners.
Given the disturbed local conditions, and keen memories of American, British, and other intervention in the Civil War, this suspicious approach was not entirely unwarranted, particularly with regard to the cities of the Middle Volga.
They contained a large middle class, which together with dissatisfied refugees and war workers from the fighting zone in the World War, had often expressed dislike of central intervention, and had even encouraged local autonomy.
Moving for the first time in this book to Moscow and central administration, we find that from 18 July 1921, the Central Commission for the Relief of the Starving (Pomgol) was in charge of the Famine programme.
Although its decisions were intended to have ‘military urgency’ for the rest of the government, Pomgol had an independent apparatus, since its staff was drawn from many Commissariats and departments.
To put teeth into it, Pomgol was chaired by M. I. Kalinin, who was to become president of the newly formed USSR in December 1922.
He was supported by three well-known figures, L. B. Kamenev, A. Rykov, and P. G. Smidovich, who took a prominent part in the suppression of the Tambov revolt according to the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia .
Pomgol's activities extended to the purchase and distribution of foodstuffs, medicine, and other supplies; help to the starving to get work; and collecting donations.
That it was not always successful, even in  its own backyard, so to speak, can be gleaned from critical Rabkrin reports.
In April 1922, Moscow collectors of valuables were not making proper valuations, and foodstuffs were being left to rot in warehouses.
Rabkrin was less perspicacious in its investigations of distant pomgolgub committees.
It claimed that there were not enough members on them; yet we have seen that in Tsaritsyn at least there was a superfluity of ineffective plenary members.
As with the guberniia committees, the small Pomgol presidium conducted nearly all the business, and in considerable secrecy.
Only its formal subdivisions are known, despite the fact that the press was admitted to its open sessions.
Mystery also surrounds the brief existence of a rival non-governmental body, the All-Russian Famine Relief Committee, set up in July and dismantled at the end of August 1921.
Besides Maxim Gorky and a daughter of L. Tolstoy, it included the President of the Second Duma and even S. N. Prokopovich, the Minister of Food in the Provisional Government of 1917, who was neither a Bolshevik nor a Menshevik.
The official reason given for the committee's demise was that it had indulged in counterrevolution and illicit dealings with foreign powers.
Certainly suspect committee members had attempted to go abroad, but the real reason was probably that the committee had served its purpose by acting as a bait to attract foreign relief organizations (the ARA drew up an agreement on 20 August).
Alternatively the committee could have served as a scapegoat if Pomgol activities had failed completely.
Since all foreign relief organizations dealt with Pomgol and with Eiduk as chief plenipotentiary, subsequent non-Russian scholars have tended to over-concentrate on the workings of Pomgol and its guberniia equivalents.
Yet Pomgol was little more than a conglomerate made up of other relevant state departments.
The Commissariat of Agriculture was the key element within Pomgol.
Light can be thrown on the administrative  efficiency of this Commissariat (Narkomzem ) by looking into the account of an inspection of it in early 1922.
The Commissariat was found to be ‘exceptionally developed’ and full of ‘a series of purely academic-parliamentary institutions’.
Staffing had increased by 189 per cent between 1 January 1921 and 1 March 1922.
Both large and small versions of many sections coexisted, but did not communicate with one another, or even know of one another 's presence.
There were chronic reshuffles of all organs.
Central-local ties were weaker still.
Provincial branches of Narkomzem only contacted Moscow when in need of salaries and funds — otherwise they led independent lives.
When Narkomzem handed out a questionnaire with 226 questions at an All-Russian Congress of Agricultural Organizations, a single reply was returned.
Central officials were ignorant of the number and location of their own local agencies.
They gave out huge cash advances without checking: each local branch had its own accountants.
If even only some of these criticisms were true, then national leadership in the agricultural sphere, and above all the subjugation of the Famine, was in precarious hands.
Another report from Rabkrin accused Tsentroevak , the Central Refugee Evacuation Commission, of behaving in a very complacent fashion over the number of migrants piling up in the cities of Samara, Penza and Voronezh.
The administration of the Famine was divided into two distinct parts by VTsIK.
On 12 September 1922 it issued a decree abolishing Pomgol and replacing it with Posledgol (the Committee for the Struggle Against the Consequences of the Famine).
It was announced that ‘the impact of the Famine had disappeared’.
Substantial foreign aid had helped; weather conditions seemed likely to give good crop yields, and the early  returns of the spring harvest had provided a new supply of food.
Gosplan and other central economic organs from 1921 on had accumulated on paper a number of plans for reconstruction which they were now eager to realize.
As in the recent past, and as was to be the case with much greater frequency after the start of the Five-Year Plans, planners in Moscow drew up neat and rather abstract formulations that did not match up closely with local realities and timings.
Foreign relief organizations and subsequent students of their work have tended to exaggerate this dichotomy with regard to the Famine, but internal Soviet sources lend credence to the view that the sudden withdrawal of many kinds of domestic relief was premature.
In 1922 it was not so easy to predict crop yields as it is today.
In that sense the shift in policy contained an element of chance.
More important in human terms,Izvestiia and other papers in early October recorded many instances of further starvation.
Local correspondents were ‘warning every day that the events which we saw last winter may occur again'.
As late as January 1923 Pravda reported that in some villages in the Saratov guberniia 80 to 85 per cent of the population were still starving.
The abolition of Pomgol was greeted with so many protests from the affected areas of Russia that Kalinin had to issue two statements in which he tried to show the stricken population that it had not been abandoned by the government.
At first this was hard to prove, since local authorities were now given many new relief duties: at the same time a number of extensive taxation rights were transferred away from them to the Centre.
This move at least gave greater financial stability.
Between 15 October 1922 and 1 August 1923, for example, it received 719,502 gold roubles from the tax in kind (its highest source of income was 1,344,639 roubles from church treasures).
When in September 1922 the ARA discovered that the Soviet government intended to export grain in considerable quantities, most foreign relief organizations joined in the hue and cry.
The government gave a series of reasons for its  decision, some of them more plausible than others; but the main aim seemed to be to acquire cash or foreign credit for the rehabilitation of its industries.
More grain than expected had to be exported due to the precipitous fall in the grain price in the middle of the winter of 1922–3.
The fact that the price fell so steeply indicated that the gamble on the harvest had paid off, but due to delays and maladministration peasants were still starving, as we have seen.
It is clear that there were disagreements at the highest levels on the timing of the abolition of Pomgol and the export of grain.
The correspondent of The Times in Riga, with access to both current Western and Soviet sources, picked up the discrepant views of M. Litvinov at the Hague and L. Krasin, the Commissar for Trade in Moscow.
At the start of August the former was telling the outside world of Russia's quick recovery, just when the latter was still being very pessimistic.
Lenin's attitude, in so far as it is discernible, will be looked at in a moment, but by this time he was more cut off through illness from daily supervision of affairs.
That there were divisions within the Politburo was indicated by the absence of Stalin, Trotsky, Bukharin, Tomsky, and Zinoviev from the friendly farewell ceremonies for the ARA.
The administration of the Famine was remarkable for the absence of nearly all leading Bolsheviks, apart from a few speeches from one or two of them.
Kamenev and Rykov served on Pomgol, but the extent of their participation is unclear.
Alone of all the top Bolsheviks, Kalinin visited some of the stricken areas by train, a peasant among peasants.
Lenin knew the Middle Volga better than any other leader, for he was born in Simbirsk, not far up river from Samara, had studied at Kazan’ university, and been a barrister in Samara.
Traditionally it was an area of peasant insurrectionists, schismatics, and sectarians whose acerbic style was reflected in Lenin's own.
Did he have any political motives for apparently dealing with the Volga population almost as harshly and coldly as with starving Ukrainians or the Tambov peasantry?
What follows must be speculative in nature until the Cheka archives for 1921–2 are opened up, since matters are involved which would never have been aired publicly.
Certainly from the spring of 1918 Lenin was almost obsessed by the need to get grain to the cities of the north-west, for it was their turn to starve at that time.
He named the food supply crisis as the most important question of all, and called for a great ‘crusade, against speculators and the ‘kulak' , that recurring bogeyman of the regime until 1928.
Conceivably he may have thought in 1921–2 that previous peasant intransigence was now receiving its just reward.
Beyond this, it is quite clear that the Middle Volga still contained strong pockets of potential political resistance to the centre — the tradition of revolt died hard.
At the Left Socialist Revolutionary trial in Moscow in 1922 it was revealed that the Left Socialist Revolutionary Central Committee had sent emissaries to Tambov and other nearby gubernii.
One of them was probably the Samara guberniia, where since July 1920 a Left Socialist Revolutionary peasant called Sapozhkov had led an insurrection in the Buzuluk uezd.
After his death the standard was taken up by Serov, who still commanded 3,000 men as late as January 1922.
The threat to supply lines between Moscow and the Volga provinces was obvious.
Lenin decreed the taking of hostages from villages along the rebels’ line of march and instructed local party leaders to ‘cut down at the root’any evidence of sympathy with the rebels on the part of the population.
Repercussions of these disturbances came to the attention of foreign relief workers.
In April 1922 an ARA representative complained to Eiduk that the local Soviet plenipotentiary's assistant had arrested five of his Russian employees in the Pugachev district of the Samara guberniia.
Eiduk's reply was  swift: ‘all active members of the Socialist Revolutionary Party were being arrested and the ARA happened to have employed them.’
In Samara city another hostile faction, the Workers' Opposition, had been very strongly entrenched up to March 1921.
One authority on nation-wide local party activity in this period states that of all provinces Samara was the most troubled by wrangles inside the party in 1921.
The wounds were still visible in 1922.
May not Lenin have reacted in private in a way not so dissimilar from Stalin's overt and more violent reaction to political opposition in Georgia in the same year?
Both men no doubt were vexed by the unorthodoxy of their own birthplaces.
Whatever was in Lenin's mind, it is certain that the great Famine of 1921–2 wiped out any likelihood of peasant resistance.
Until 1921 some elements among the peasantry had kept a certain independence of outlook.
The Revolution had impinged on their consciousness only in so far as it provided them with land, or took away foodstuffs during War Communism.
It is usually said that the introduction of NEP pacified the peasants, but the Famine had a quicker effect in this respect.
Agricultural resources had been reduced drastically.
In the course of eight months 20 per cent of all horses in the country had been killed.
Thirty-five per cent of all draught animals were lost, if Civil War casualties are included.
Although the provinces round Petrograd and Moscow and on the Upper Volga recovered fast economically and were probably better treated, since they had stayed faithful to the Bolsheviks from 1917, they were relatively unimportant as agricultural producers.
The fact that the government thought it vital to supplement the economic incentives of NEP by a new Agrarian Code, brought out at the end of 1922, showed how far the Famine had altered previous calculations.
Rural areas were now allowed more freedom of choice as to farming methods, and the peasants' propensity to more individualistic action was encouraged.
The main consequence of the Famine, after human loss of life and suffering, was continuing economic and social  instability.
At the conclusion of the survey of tax and other fiscal arrangements in the Smolensk guberniia it was noted that the financial framework of NEP was shaky from the outset.
When the disruptions caused by the Famine are added to this scenario, the situation appears more grave.
Discounting loss of human and animal lives and equipment, the dislocation in revenue alone was enormous.
The tax in kind for 1921–2 realized only 150 million pudy, half of the total collection for 1920–1.
The estimate had been 240 million pudy.
This was not for lack of punitive methods.
One uezd in Simbirsk guberniia, just to the west of Samara and nearly as badly affected, had been assessed for tax at 470,000 pudy in 1919 on a good crop, of which 350,000 had been collected.
In 1922 the tax was 698,000 pudy on an indifferent crop.
The chief symptom of continuing instability was the ‘scissors crisis’ which began to affect Smolensk and all other gubernii in 1922, as has been seen, and reached a climax in 1923 when the scissors opened too widely in favour of manufactured goods.
Industrial prices by then had risen two to three times more quickly than agricultural ones.
The huge slump in the grain price on the Volga and elsewhere in the winter of 1922, and the lesser slide in the price of flax from Belorussia, were but two of the contributing factors, though grain played a basic role.
As a result the rural population of all Russia would need four years, until 1926, to recover from the combined disasters of the Famine and crude central fiscal and administrative measures.
There was little hope that it would weigh for much in the balance of political life until then.
One of the main reasons for the introduction of NEP had been the peasants, ability to throttle the industrial towns of European Russia by withholding food supplies.
The cities and the regime survived this temporary threat, but the boomerang effect of the Famine on the countryside had more lasting influence.
Communications 
PROVINCIAL LIFE as such is now left behind as we turn to various types of connections between it and the political and cultural centres of Russia.
Some nationwide systems of Bolshevik political control are examined in the next chapter, whereas here more neutral communications networks are studied.
However, since the accent in this book lies on social and political affairs, the railways and the press will be considered from this angle.
In fact both networks were subject to heavy political intervention.
The first carried goods and people, the second ideas and information.
Within their own spheres, they were of overriding importance.
Road, air, and even river transport were of little significance by comparison with the railways.
The public relied to a minimal extent on what were by modern standards vestigial radio, telephone, and film-distribution systems.
Lenin and the Bolsheviks had grasped the supreme political importance of the railways and the press as instruments for turning their domination of some cities of European Russia in 191 7 into an all-Russian revolution.
This lesson had been reinforced as far as the railways were concerned each spring from 1918 to 1920, when urgent orders went out from the highest level to rehabilitate them in order to cope with the influx of vital foodstuffs and fuel to the towns.
In addition the strategic significance of the railways had impressed itself on the Bolsheviks.
Through their hold over the nine main lines fanning out from Moscow to all points of the compass they had succeeded in cutting off one White force from another in the Civil War.
Lenin took a personal interest in railway and  electricity technology for another reason.
Both networks fed energy (light, and food, fuel, human agents) round the ex-Empire.
Both were subject to easily measured norms, timetables and co-ordinated planning: therefore of all systems they seemed to be the most suitable for the immediate application of Taylorism and what Lenin called ‘the precision of clockwork’.
He also realized that if large-scale economic and social organization on Marxist lines was ever to replace the small-scale realities of early Soviet life and improve the volume of exchange of goods between manufacturing plants and the villages, then efficient railways would serve as the thin edge of the wedge.
The ex-peasant Sergei Esenin viewed them in a more suspicious way in a poem published in 1922:
With what blind fear in snow-chaos
The changing terror rocked and swayed.
Good day to you, black Nemesis!
I come out to meet you half way.
The railway system continued to figure largely in high political planning in 1922.
As Tomsky put it at the Fifth Congress of Trade Unions on 2 October 1922: ‘Without the strengthening and support of transport there can be no construction of socialism.’
In reality, as opposed to the somewhat utopian visions of Lenin, the railways in 1922 were an unlikely candidate for Taylorist methods.
Although the government placed ‘the political and economic backbone of the Republic in heavy industry and in transport’, Trotsky observed at the Twelfth Party Congress that they actually formed the rearguard.
During the Civil War 1,885 km. of railway track had been destroyed; 8.6 million pudy of metal were required to repair them, but only 5.3 million could be produced.
Of the 19,067 engines in stock in 1921–2, 64 per cent were unusable  according to official estimates.
Not until 1926 did servicing catch up with urgent repair needs.
In 1922 3.32 per cent of all wagons lay idle for lack of maintenance.
Gudok , the railway newspaper, reported on 22 September 1922 that the Moscow workshops on the Kursk line were full of rusting machinery, since rain came through the roof.
Railway stock sent from Black Sea ports to another area, the Middle Volga, was not sent back for more grain, but for the most part ended up in Siberia.
In Smolensk guberniia a long list of bridges, points, and crossings had been blown up in military action.
In the chapter on Smolensk guberniia it was noted how peasants were bludgeoned into hauling wood to engine fuel-dumps, although they were not paid for it.
In January 1922 the Smolensk party committee estimated that there was only enough fuel of all kinds left for seven to eight days' consumption.
This was a nation-wide phenomenon.
In Kharkov and Poltava lack of fuel was cited as the worst problem of all.
Three times as much unsuitable wood, which ruined engine-boilers, was being used throughout Russia than in 1913.
It comprised 38 per cent of all fuel, as opposed to 13.1 per cent in 1913.
The layman usually thinks of passenger traffic first, and freight second, but the latter is usually of far greater importance, and Russia was no exception.
The level of truck loadings for 1922 was under one-third of what it had been in 1913, although there was a vast improvement towards the end of the year.
The carriage of private goods accelerated most.
Despite Gosplan's Marxist ideal of trying to stop uneven economic development, by the end of NEP the position had changed very little from the old Tsarist need to move commodities from the south ind cast to the more heavily populated north and west of European Russia.
That is why the Moscow Kursk and Moscow Volga lines were so sensitive, amongst others.
In industry  machines are stable and raw materials are mobile.
On the other hand agricultural land is fixed so that beasts and tools have to be taken to the fields and then off them.
Russian agriculture in early NEP was an involuntary small-scale transport industry which for the most part lay far away from the railway lines.
Remember how our peasant woman made her way painstakingly on foot, then by boat and cart to the uezd centre of Roslavl' in Belorussia.
The railways, like rivers, fertilized only a very narrow strip along their course, leaving nearly untouched the rhythm of life in the rural hinterland.
A Soviet propaganda film showing a map of Russia lights up the rays of the 1917 Revolution spreading round the country.
It is not fortuitous that they follow the railway lines from Petrograd and Moscow.
Both the Provisional Government and the Bolsheviks were aware of this in 1917.
The position had not changed by early NEP.
The more remote the locality from the main network of political and other communications, the more likelihood there was of unorthodox behaviour, whether of a passive kind, as in the recesses of the gubernii of Smolensk or Kursk, or of a more menacing nature, as with the Tambov and Siberian peasant revolts.
As late as 1926 this general pattern, though subject to some exceptions, is clearly observable, as will be seen in the case-studies of Tver guberniia and Kazakhstan.
The number of passengers on Russian railways in 1922 was calculated to be 91.1 million, as opposed to 184.8 million in 1913.
This huge decline was soon to be reversed in NEP, for by 1926 the figure was 259.9 million.
Some allowance must be made for the large number of passengers without tickets in 1922.
In one incident alone near Smolensk, seventy-four persons were arrested for not paying for their journey.
The different categories of traveller are very hard to assess at all precisely.
Before 1914 they would have been mainly peasant-workers commuting twice a year to the cities, gentry and their numerous domestic servants moving from their estates to town, kustari with their wares for sale, government servants, and the military, etc.
By 1922 the first three types had either disappeared completely (the gentry) or were at a very low ebb.
The  ‘Nepmen’ had not yet prospered sufficiently to replace the ‘bagmen’, those petty speculators of War Communism.
Demobilization was drawing to an end, and many of the suffering migrants like the Famine refugees and the wandering hordes of orphans and youths could not often afford to take a train.
Travel went at a very slow pace.
The average commercial speed was 12.8 km. per hour at the start of 1923.
When ARA famine officials went from Kazan' to Simbirsk in the autumn of 1921, it took them four days to cover 150 miles.
In July 1921 the new statutes of the Commissariat of Ways and Communications had been issued, putting the railways on a peacetime basis.
In the spring of 1922 their management was decentralized to some extent and subjected to khozraschet (strict accounting principles).
It was hoped that this would result in better co-operation from local administrators and party members in the supply of labour and fuel, etc.
The reorganization was recommended by an engineer in the pages of a leading Petrograd journal, since he thought it would lead to the dissemination of experts.
At the local level, too, there were calls for the maximum amount of latitude in self-administration.
However, tension arose between the need for decentralization in order to ensure more technical efficiency and political fears of too much independence.
It was not long before the chairman of each local railway-board was compelled to become a representative of the central Commissariat.
Railway construction, together with textiles, had provided the impetus for large-scale industrial products in Russia.
For long-distance hauls the public, the economy, and virtually all messages in the form of letters, newspapers, telephone, and telegraph, continued to rely heavily on railway communications in the 1920s.
Railways are a type of transport that fall easily under central control, and whose construction may even intensify political centralism, because of the rationality of disposing lines so as to converge at a central point.
Like the absence of useful maritime peripheries, however, they can only serve as a secondary reinforcement of pre-existing leanings to  political centralism.
Canada similarly depends greatly on railways, has widely separated confines and high latitudes, but possesses a very different socio-economic and political system.
Sea, inland waterway, and road transport came under the control of the Commissariat as well as the railways.
For long hauls the rivers still remained more important than roads in NEP, despite the fact that many of them flow to the Arctic and are frozen for long periods.
Long- and cheap-haul facilities were vital in a poor country occupying 17 per cent of the inhabited surface of the earth.
Natural resources were scattered over vast areas.
The faster Russia modernized, the more she needed her population dispersed in order to extract newly developed wealth.
The massive preponderance of peasants up to the end of NEP and beyond also ensured a widely disseminated population.
River traffic suffered in the Revolution as the railways had done.
In 1913 there had been 59,400 km. of navigable internal waterways, but this was reduced to 53,900 by 1922, a relatively small decline compared with the railways.
It is not so easy to destroy a waterway.
The number of passengers carried was 11.5 million in 1913, 7 million in 1920, and 12 million by 1924: the productivity of river transport rose much faster after 1921 than that of the railways, although many problems had to be overcome, as was seen with regard to the Volga fleet in Chapter 3.
The length of metalled roads in the country was well under half that of navigable rivers in 1913 — 24,300 km.
This remained steady at 25,000 km. in 1920, but actually dropped in the more prosperous years after 1922 to 23,100 in 1924.
Roads much traversed in the Civil War or in the invasion of Poland, like those of Belorussia, deteriorated from use by military vehicles.
Even less important than long-distance  roads were air routes.
The first regular civil flight opened up in May 1922 between Moscow and Königsberg.
A new service began between Moscow and Nizhnii Novgorod in 1923.
Nearly all messages in the form of letters, newspapers, telephone, and telegraph went along the railway lines.
Telecommunications were easier to build, service, and tap in this way.
In 1913 there were 11,000 post and telecommunications offices, of which only 3,000 were in rural localities.
The figures for 1924 were 9,000 and 2,700, showing yet another decline in facilities.
On 9 February 1922 a letter of complaint to the press from postmen headed ‘The uncommunicative Commissariat’ stated that the Moscow post office, with 4,000 employees, was frozen up for lack of snow-cleaners.
Letters had to be sent in bulk to Smolensk to be sorted and distributed.
It took fifteen days for telegrams to get from Moscow to Tsaritsyn during the Famine.
In Smolensk guberniia 350 telegraph-workers went on strike for better pay and conditions on 29 April.
On 5 May telegraph-wires were cut down near Bykhov.
The party authorities ascribed this to sabotage by peasants objecting to tax assessments.
Even by 1926 links remained feeble.
In Kursk guberniia the telephone system was a subject for derision.
Frequent administrative changes ‘created conditions for its progressive (sic ) decline and to a kustar’ development of communications' (it is interesting to note that ‘kustar'’had by then followed ‘kulak ’as a term of abuse).
In the Tver guberniia conditions in 1926 were as good as anywhere outside a few industrial regions.
Letters were delivered twice a week only.
The inhabitants of Goritskaia volost' near Tver received fewer letters towards the end of 1926 than they had done in 1913.
There were single telephones in one or two villages.
It was too expensive for most private individuals there to send telegrams; the network was used almost exclusively by the authorities.
Whereas 577  telegrams had been sent off and 1,158 received in the volost' in 1913, the figures for 1926 were 672 and 785 respectively.
The overwhelming majority of peasant communications were oral in nature in a society that was still largely illiterate.
The range of information was thus short, though the art of rumour sometimes had widespread effects.
The radio was a useful political and social tool in a society of this kind, but its impact did not hit even Britain until the 1920s.
In Russia there were almost no major broadcasts until 1922.
The retarded development of all the means of communication mentioned above had certain economic, social, and political consequences throughout NEP.
Not until the years of fast industrialization and construction were these defects to be remedied.
The lack of an efficient railway system was a major contributing factor to the stagnant economy.
Since the railways and the cables alongside them carried most of the nation's newspapers, letters, and long-distance oral messages, little stimulus could be given towards the social and ethnic unification of a country that was notorious for the gap between town and country living conditions.
Together with Germany in the 1930s, Russia since 1917 has had the most penetrating system of political propaganda, but it was severely hampered at first by inefficient technical means for dissemination over vast spaces and many minority nationalities.
In order to show how acute the problems were, let us return to the government's handling of the railway network in 1922.
On the last day of 1921 the Party Central Committee appointed Feliks Dzerzhinsky, the head of the Cheka and Commissar for Transport, to the commission for the dispatch of food supplies and grain seed from Siberia and the Ukraine.
On 5 January he went to Siberia.
Three motives lay behind this.
The first was as stated in the conditions of his appointment; but there were two other political reasons which will be examined later.
One-fifth of all Russian victuals came from  Siberia at this time according to local estimates.
Dzerzhinsky discovered 2,583 unused railway-trucks there (some of them sent on from the Volga and dumped, as has been seen).
Over two thousand telegrams, mainly concerning the supply of the Famine areas, had been held up inside Siberia.
Railway workers had gone without pay, proper food, and clothes for months.
Dzerzhinsky at once put his programme on a military footing in nineteen rail-centres.
The central authorities were instructed to send 100 million roubles to pay the railwaymen.
As a result loading went up in volume by four times within a month.
Yet by the end of the year the fuel supply was still critical.
Gudok reckoned that there would be only two to three days' reserve for the railways as a whole.
This newspaper also criticized Dzerzhinsky for neglecting water transport and port facilities, though no doubt his great energies were stretched in Siberia where he stayed until March.
He did in fact inspect the port of Petrograd in late June.
Although politically a centralist, Dzerzhinsky was pragmatic enough on the spot.
Once in Siberia he realized that estimates made on paper in Moscow for the dispatch of 250 wagons a day to the Volga were completely unrealistic.
Only seventy could be handled.
In a letter sent later to the central authorities he advised that transport problems should be viewed in organic conjunction with local economic needs.
Gosplan was still demanding central control.
Dzerzhinsky was also a strong advocate for the application of khozraschet, although he understood the peculiar difficulties of nation-wide utilities in this respect.
In a report to a plenary meeting of Tsektran in June, he said that trains should stop acting like droshkys, carrying people and goods where they wished for little or no pay.
The tariff for goods carriage now stood at  20,000 times previous rates, but this still fell far below the cost-of-living index due to astronomical inflation.
The second reason for the dispatch of Dzerzhinsky to Siberia was to clear up the situation after the Civil War, and to deal with Siberian peasant revolts.
These aims are admitted to in Soviet sources, but we as yet know very little from any source about the nature and extent of peasant disturbances.
White forces had intended to blow up more railway lines and workshops.
Explosives were found in nearly all of the latter and there had been twenty fires in them between 1 November and 26 December 1921.
Dzerzhinsky had been made Commissar for Transport in the first place to deal with internal troubles among the railwaymen, many of whom had opposed the Bolsheviks in 1917 and nearly brought Lenin's government to its knees after the October Revolution.
Lingering resistance was not confined to Siberia.
The railway secret police were active throughout 1922 in Smolensk guberniia: in their February report, they noted the presence in one section of the railways of six active Mensheviks, one SR, and an ex-Tsarist secret police agent.
Equal ruthlessness was applied to those who misused the railways and were brought before ‘the revolutionary tribunal, whose avenging hammer will fall with all its crushing might and wrath’.
In September 211 speculators in railway tickets were arrested at Moscow stations.
In October the secret police were permitted by the Central Committee to start shooting railway bandits on the spot without legal proceedings.
Yet another suspect category were the many spetsy (bourgeois specialists) who worked for the Commissariat.
Dzerzhinsky stressed that local authorities should collaborate with them, but at the centre he was adamant that they should take no part in transport decisions that had any, political implications.
The third reason why Dzerzhinsky was sent off to distant Siberia was purely political, and had little to do with the railways.
At the Ninth All-Russian Congress of Soviets on 22 December 1921, Lenin called for the reform of the Cheka. since NEP required more ‘revolutionary legality’.
Dzerzinsky's absence the Cheka was replaced by the GPU (Gosudarstvennoe politicheskoe upravlenie ), which was now to be integrated within the Commissariat for Internal Affairs.
No doubt it was easier to reform it with Dzerzhihsky nut of Moscow, although he retained his post as head.
In fact its effectiveness was hardly diminished, although its staff was reduced, like those of all Commissariats at the time.
The new secret police swiftly recovered many of the powers of its predecessor.
It was one of those Bolshevik instruments of nation-wide control which will be studied in the next chapter.
Dzerzhinsky frequently thought of the railway network in very similar terms.
For lick of adequate progress in the improvement of central local party and social ties in general, he and others, including Lenin, diverted their energies into the immediate practical tasks of rehabilitating the transport system.
Dzerzhinsky wrote that the swifter exchange of goods would help to reduce taxes levied on the peasants and so mollify them and speed up the realization of smychka between town and country; but towards the end of the year he admitted in a resigned tone: ‘Can such a huge enterprise like transport really change in a moment, can people really be regenerated at once?
It is done slowly, step by step.’
He was to die in 1926 with his vision still unfulfilled, although the Turkestan-Siberian railway, that considerable economic, social, and ethnic unifier, was on the drawing-boards.
It was opened in 1931.
What type and number of men did Dzerzhinsky control on the railways?
For the first time in this book we shall take a closer look at one branch of the proletariat.
It was a very special branch in many way.
In the first place it comprised by far the largest number of workers in one industry.
In 1922 there were no less than 983,045 of them, though the number  was reduced to 793,000 by 1923–4.
Their trade union was instructed to find jobs for those thrown out of work.
Some had already left because pay was so far in arrears.
Others with more initiative from the administrative ranks had taken up farming.
Whereas there had been 12.8 workers for every verst of line in 1913 there were 10.4 in 1922.
This was still overmanning to a considerable degree by world standards.
The labour code of 1922 made labour productivity worse by introducing an eight-hour day for engine crews.
Under the previous rules fourteen hours had been the maximum shift allowed.
The railway industry was huge in both size and geographical extent.
At the top of the hierarchy were the civil service employees in the administration headquarters of the different branches and in Moscow.
Next came the engineers, planners, statisticians, and less important office-workers.
None of these could be classified strictly as proletarians, even by the loose and ideologically biased definitions of the early Soviet period.
In 1917 this group had comprised between 16 and 17 per cent of all railway employees.
The gamut then descended from skilled engine-drivers and railway telegraph workers, conductors, points men, couplers, etc., to depot-workers and porters.
At the bottom end of the scale we leave the proletariat altogether with the track-maintenance men, who were usually recruited from the local peasantry.
In less industrial areas of the country there were more railway-workers than any other kind.
In Belorussia in October 1922 there was a labour force of 23,428 on the railway network, as against 12,323 other workers in all Belorussian industry.
Numbers alone did not mean automatic economic and political strength.
The geographical and social distribution of railway-workers meant that they were not as cohesive a force as  other industrial groups like the steel- or textile-workers.
These weaknesses were exploited by the Bolsheviks in 1917 when Vikzhel , the old railway trade union, threatened to cut off the capital and the government from the rest of Russia unless Lenin listened to its political demands.
a rival trade union was formed which drew much more heavily on the lower social strata in the labour force and on the Moscow railway workshops and other industrial centres.
Never again was there to be a nation-wide intervention by the railway-workers, although those social tension persisted which had helped the bolsheviks to divide and rule in 1912.
In March 1922 ‘snobbish clerks’ on the Moscow Kursk line, which had been on of the most revolutionary, in 1905 and 1917, were refusing to attend meetings where common signalman and the like were to be found.
Other lines showed more solidarity and local initiative.
In the Gomel'sk workshops in Belorussia 450 railway staff collected one and a half million roubles in order to start up their own social insurance scheme for lack of an adequate state system.
A training-school with forty students was opened.
Like all other workers in 1922, Belorussian railwaymen complained about their pay.
In May 200 struck on the Orlov-Vitebsk line on this account, declaring that instead of devoting its energy to extracting gold from the churches, the government should find ways of paying them better.
The rank and file pointed out that even skilled workshop men earned only 12 million roubles, but administrative heads got 45 million: ‘it's like the old monarchical structure.’
On the Moscow Petrograd line workers reported in the middle of February that they had not been paid for all January; in the Caucasus the backlog in August stretched back to October 1921.
When forty-two railway-workers who defected from Syzran' station were put on trial, their sentence was alleviated because they had not been paid.
Railwaymen were encouraged to start up kitchen gardens near the stations in order to survive.
Gudok ran frequent articles on the wage demands of badly paid German railwaymen.
The severe military tribunals of War Communism for  railway discipline were not disbanded until 1923, so potential strikers could be discouraged by the threat of what amounted to a court martial.
Civil War conditions lingered on in other ways.
In January an armoured car of the type that had proved so useful to Trotsky's campaign blocked the Tashkent-Moscow line and held up a locomotive that had been seized by an armed gang.
In April a complete armoured train was sent in pursuit of bandits on the Vladikavkazskaia line.
Gudok pointed out that such an exploit could not be repeated all over Russia, so staff on individual railway lines would have to keep their eyes skinned for military or criminal activity.
From the start of the year until 20 October there were thirty major railway crashes in contrast to none for all of 1913.
The bad state of the tracks and the huge shortage of sleepers were mainly to blame.
Railway officials, like their political bosses in Moscow, were apt to muse on the brilliant future in order to escape from pressing current problems.
The electrification of the network, a topic close to Lenin's heart, was discussed in the pages of Gudok .
It was hoped that soon the lines to the Don basin and Nizhnii Novgorod would be electrified, followed quickly by the whole of the Siberian network.
The railways were seen as ‘colonization [sic]pioneers’ for a huge agricultural country with vast mineral and other resources waiting to be exploited.
In reality the system was caught between the stringencies of the Civil War and the burgeoning petty corruption of NEP.
Bureaucratic wrangles were conspicuous at every level.
Other Commissariats were accused of holding on to rolling-stock that should be handed back now the war was over.
The Commissariat for War still hung on to 752 coaches; the Commissariat for Health had no fewer than 2,718, and was even demanding a further 1,200.
From a reading of Gudok for the whole year the impression is received of workers indulging in an endless series of meetings on a range of subjects from pay to culture, the Famine, technical improvement, national and international politics, usually during work hours.
One sector pilfered from another, causing havoc.
When the Vladikavkazskaia line stole the only shunting locomotive from Mozdok station, camels and bullocks were harnessed to trucks which had to be moved.
A  cartoon shows them being supervised by an ass in uniform.
‘Uncultured’ workers loaded manure on to a passenger train bound for Ekaterinburg, so that not even ‘hares’(passengers without tickets) would board it.
Corruption flourished in the wake of galloping inflation and the relaxed conditions of NEP.
Hens pecked at unwanted rouble notes from piles of sacks dumped on the railway lines for no clear reason.
One enterprising station-master frequently told all passengers that their trains would not leave for a long time.
When the trains left at once, those stranded were invited to eat at the buffet, heated by fuel filched from locomotives and run by the master and his cronies.
As trade picked up slowly towards the end of the year, genuine Nepmen started to make their presence felt.
Railway employees, or ‘Nepo-idols’ as they were called, queued for hours for scarce tickets for the Nepmen who tipped them for their service.
Other Nepmen used Pomgol labels on their goods in order to avoid paying the railway tariffs.
Compared with the railways, the press network suffered very little from corruption or abuse.
In this sphere Lenin had an ever stronger interest than in the railways.
His mainstream career prior to 1917 had been that of a journalist.
The imposition of a severe censorship and the sacking of all hostile editors (there were almost no spetsy in the press) immediately upon the seizure of power in October 191 7 had ensured its smooth running from the political and administrative point of view.
The key to any understanding of the prime importance of the Soviet press is contained in Lenin's remarks on its function.
For him a paper was much more than a published news-sheet.
It had to be a collective propagandist, agitator, and organizer as well.
He compared the press to a scaffolding, surrounding a building under construction (the worker's state), which marked the outlines of the structure, facilitated communication among the builders, enhanced the effective assignment of tasks, and made possible a clear view of the achievements of the builders.
In its role as the chief purveyor of propaganda and  agitation, the press had shifted its accent at the start of NEP.
The years 1917–21 had been devoted chiefly to the legitimization of the regime, whereas the stress from 1922 until 1926 lay on the urgent need to raise the cultural level of the population.
After 1926 the accent was to lie on the development of technical education.
Three levels of consciousness were involved in creating a sense of political and cultural unity in the largest country in the world.
the first level was concerned with the stamping out of political regionalism and other local attitudes that limited central authority.
This had been accomplished in the main by 1921, thanks to the combined application of brute force in the Civil War and the persuasive methods of the press and other media.
Pockets of resistance still remained in 1922, in Tambov, Siberia, Georgia, and Central Asia: seemingly safe areas, like the Smolensk and Kursk gubernii, were not as stable as they seemed to be on the surface.
Yet the general position had improved enough for the government to proceed to its second level campaign — the creation of nation-wide cultural uniformity through mass education as the chief instrument of modernization in a period when technical means and financial resources were not as yet adequate for fast modernization through industrialization.
The problems confronting the Bolsheviks in early NEP were formidable.
The difficulty of undermining traditional ways and beliefs has been noted again and again, in the continuing hold of religion in Smolensk, the educational crisis in Kursk, the peculiar problems in Makarenko's colony.
The cultural conquest of the countryside by the towns and of oral by literate culture was the prime aim of the press, and we shall examine this role in more detail.
The third and most sophisticated role in initiating cultural ideas comprised those intellectuals who were faithful to Bolshevik goals.
They played a significant role in initiating cultural ideas at the centre for subsequent vulgarization and dissemination throughout Russia, at first through ‘fat’ specialized journals and then later via the popular press.
Their activities at the start of NEP are studied in the chapter devoted to the cultural capital, which was still Petrograd rather than Moscow in 1922.
As will be seen, there was a serious lack of cohesion within the cultural élite itself.
Furthermore their activities at the rarefied levels of Petrograd and Moscow often had very little impact, either at the time or subsequently, on the masses and on provincial life.
The low circulation and poor distribution of leading literary journals provide clear evidence of the élitist character of the cultured few.
Young Guard , one of the most popular of this type of journal, had a circulation of only 9,000 in 1922, and dropped to between 5,000 and 6,000 an issue by 1926.
As the son of a school-inspector and a typical representative of the pre-Soviet intelligentsia, Lenin was torn between the conflicting needs of creating a politically and culturally conscious nation as fast as possible, yet at the same time ensuring that vulgarized, superficial agitation did not become a substitute for thoroughgoing education on a broad base.
The second alternative would take a long time to achieve.
Neither alternative was anywhere near implemented by 1926, let alone in 1922.
Prevailing conditions in the organization and distribution of the popular press were partly responsible for this.
Two factors at the start of 1922 had an inhibiting influence.
In January all newspapers were transferred to khozraschet.
The initial deleterious effects of cost accounting struck the press as badly as they upset the railways, education, local Soviet administration, and trade.
The Agitprop section of the Central Committee of the party worked out a blueprint for all the central and local press networks in January.
Papers under the control of the gubispolkomy should be curtailed drastically, whilst central organs directed at mass party propaganda would expand quickly in numbers and influence.
Party committees at every level should supervise local editorial boards more closely.
As a small sop to regional differences, special networks were to be set up in the Ukraine, the Caucasus, and the other national minority areas.
Moscow and Petrograd papers were allowed to continue at the same volume but the rest of the press was to be reduced eventually to 232 papers, 158 of them guberniia and 74 uezd.
The combined result of khozraschet and the over-centralized and ill-informed onslaught oh the local press by Agitprop was a fast decline at guberniia and lower levels: of the 802 papers in existence on 1 January 1922, a mere 313 remained by 1 July.
Some of the casualties had small circulations, but by the spring papers with an average circulation of about 50,000 copies were also going to the wall.
The total number picked up to 423 by 1 December.
This situation was hardly conducive to the unification of the country through the medium of the press.
Journalists themselves as well as the party seemed almost oblivious of the harm being wrought.
The third congress of journalists which met at the end of January simply stressed the importance of party leadership of the press and made no practical survey of what was actually happening.
Only a few delegates sensed that pressing problems had been shelved.
The situation had become so severe by the spring, however, that the Eleventh Party Congress took time off other matters to discuss it.
The debate was opened by none other than our party visitor to Kursk, Ia.
Yakovlev, the head of Agitprop and one of the chief architects of the cut-back in provincial newspapers in January.
Yet he appeared surprised to find in Kursk guberniia near the end of 1922 that even villages near to the Moscow railway line had received their last single copies some months earlier.
The Congress was told that journalists had been registered in only fifty of ninety guberniia committees.
Editors were instructed to mould their articles far more to the educational levels of workers and peasants.
Prime costs for newspaper production were rising fast as supporting industries and services demanded real payment under khozraschet conditions.
Thus subscription prices were shooting up and cutting off thousands of readers who could no longer afford them.
The Congress made several resolutions.
Party members were now obliged to subscribe to at least one party newspaper.
Such a basic prescription indicated how low the readership was sinking.
The output of private presses, which was growing much faster than that of the party and the state, had to be monitored, and surpassed in quality by party organs.
‘The rising gutter  literature’, as the private press was called, appealed especially to wayward youth.
In this connection the whole of the local Komsomol press was ordered to put itself under the leadership of the party guberniia committees.
In view of the unorthodox behaviour of the Komsomol that we have noted in the provinces, such a move was overdue.
Finally, guberniia executive committees were charged with the resurrection of village reading-rooms, most of which had gone under in the changed economic conditions of NEP.
Mere words could do little in the short term to reverse the chaotic situation.
Saratov guberniia, admittedly a troubled area, reduced its press network from twenty-five organs in mid-1921 to two by the spring of 1922.
Petrograd, still the cultural centre of the whole country, had been spared the cut-back of January 1922, but due to financial pressures four papers merged into two in order to save costs.
By the spring a single copy of krasnaia gazeta in the city cost 100,000 roubles.
Only at the close of the summer did things improve at the central, though not yet at the local level.
In August the Agitprop section of the Twelfth Party Conference had set up a commission to start a state subsidy for the politically reliable press.
Private journals continued to burgeon, as will be seen in Chapter 6, but the state press could henceforth stand better on its own feet financially.
A glance at the pages of Gudok , the organ of the railwaymen, will show the style and problems of a central newspaper at this time.
A long puff of printed steam trailed over the title of the paper, and this popular touch prevailed through its pages.
The language used was simpler and chattier than that of Pravda or even of Trud , the main labour organ.
The format was smaller.
Cartoons for semi-literate railwaymen studded the pages, and the back page was nearly full of capitalist-style advertisements of all kinds.
This novel source of income was not available to papers in the stagnant agricultural hinterland.
Despite the huge number of potential customers (just short of a million) and the fact that all copies of Gudok were delivered free on the railways, the circulation was a paltry 30,000 in June.
A campaign was started to raise this figure to 100,000 by 1923.
The military was more crucial in terms of political control than the railwaymen.
As early as March 1918 the Bolsheviks had merged military and peasant newspapers into the single organ Bednota (Poverty) under the direct supervision of the Central Committee.
The largest army in the world was recruited mainly from the peasantry, and, as has been seen in the provinces, the party still relied heavily in 1922 on ex-army men to act as leaven among the ‘dark people’.
Bednota up until 1923 was not a successful paper, however.
It cost too much, its intellectual standard was far too high, and its distribution was inefficient.
The independent Red Army press was rather better adapted to its readership.
In 1922 it received a shot in the arm through a large subsidy from the Central Committee.
The end of the Civil War, the transition to khozraschet, and its inability to use advertisements, had put all the military press in jeopardy.
The Commissariat for War stressed that the new funds should be concentrated on papers produced for distant units which would not otherwise get any press organ.
In his writings on the military press, Trotsky made it quite clear that party interests came first and the military second.
Despite good intentions and solid backing, the military published only fourteen papers with a circulation of about 70,000 copies, or little more than double that of Gudok alone.
Another vital area in terms of sensitive political control were the national minorities.
Their press network, built up from 1917 on, had fluctuated in extent with the fortunes of the Civil War, but at its end nearly sixty papers in various national languages had been set up.
Most of them had been due to efforts on the spot by units of the Red Army.
At the start of NEP many of these papers collapsed for the same reasons that affected others.
It is strange that the party gave priority, not only to central and military organs, but also the guberniia- and  uezd-level papers in 1922, before intervening in the national minority sector in 1923.
Non-Russian papers were left to local military supervision until the end of Civil War, and largely to their own devices throughout 1922, unless they exhibited blatant defiance of high political directives, as in the case of Georgia.
This did not necessarily mean that all local party chiefs in the minorities were also lethargic during 1922.
We know from the Smolensk archive that the guberniia committee in the winter of 1922–3 convened meetings of many local organizations, compelling their members to subscribe to various Belorussian and Great-Russian newspapers.
Particular stress was laid on subscriptions to Rabochii put' , the guberniia party and Soviet organ.
The local peasant press was in a lamentable condition still.
Bednota was read very rarely in the villages and hardly ever subscribed to, because, as the peasants themselves recounted, it never printed real peasant articles but presented the countryside as some kind of fairyland.
Even Smolenskaia derevnia , an organ specifically designed for local peasant consumption and far better attuned to Belorussian interests than Bednota , was criticized in 1923 for insufficient contact with village life.
At the start of NEP experienced Bolsheviks were not at the editorial helm of central and especially local newspapers.
Frequent orders from Moscow to appoint them indicate that until after the Twelfth Party Congress party editors were the exception rather than the rule in the regions.
Only by 1926–7 were 94.3 per cent of provincial editors party members.
In the early days of Soviet rule it was not unheard of for remote journals to attack Izvestiia and the Central Committee.
Below the editorial level the real contact between the masses and the press was intended to be the worker-peasant correspondents (Rabselkor ).
Until the beginning of NEP they constituted a disparate group of individuals to whom the party appealed for letters on local affairs, but in 1922 they acquired their official title and were subject to much more pressure from the centre.
This change took place for three reasons.
The fast growth of private trading and corruption associated with it could best be checked by individuals familiar with their localities.
Secondly, the switch to khozraschet meant that the press had to attract paying subscribers, who wanted to read about their own regions and not be submitted to generalized and boring directives from Moscow all the time.
In the third place peasant correspondents in particular looked as if they would be a useful source of information for the central authorities on dissatisfaction in the countryside and on the rising influence of peasant types not in favour with the party.
As with most initiatives, however, strength flowed from the centre first.
In 1922 formal circles of worker correspondents sprang up in Moscow and Petrograd, and then in Rostov-on-Don and Baku.
After the murder in April of one of Pravda's rabkory who had reported abuses in a Moscow factory, the whole movement was galvanized into greater activity, and was to spread round the provinces by 1923.
By that year Bednota had a circulation of roughly 100,000, with a network of about 4,000 peasant correspondents.
From January 1922 on, Lenin received a report every two months from the Bednota editor on the contents and tenor of letters from peasant correspondents.
Since the majority of them were neither party members, nor teachers or agronomists, they represented a valuable addition to the ranks of those who might be able to promote smychka in the countryside.
The hopes with regard to smychka that were current in this period were proved utopian once again.
By 1923 there were frequent reports in the press of murders of peasant correspondents by fellow muzhiks.
This only incited the centre to renewed activity.
In November 1923 a new peasant paper,Krest'ianskaia gazeta , was to appear, with a circulation of 125,000 by March 1924.
Many correspondents complained that their constructive advice, as opposed to their prying, fell on stony ground, since most peasants lacked the means to put technical advice on agriculture into effect.
There were other reasons.
The  peasants did not fail to note that the correspondents were often ex-clerks of the Tsarist regime, and so extremely bureaucratic and long used to writing what their employers wanted to read.
We can in fact penetrate beyond the officialese of the correspondents, thanks to the investigations conducted by R. Shafir at this time into the peasants' own view of the press.
His main conclusion, after long travels round the countryside, was that among the peasants ‘there are no subscribers, no readers’.
He found that most of them relied for information on their nearest educated contacts, the priests and the Nepmen, or else fell back on rumour, which still loomed large in their news lives.
Most of the gossip was about taxation.
It was thought that anyone subscribing to a newspaper would have to pay a special tax.
Among the wilder rumours in strong circulation were that Lenin was dead, that the French had chosen Nicholas as their Tsar, and that England had declared war on Russia, so there would be wholesale peasant mobilization once again.
The distribution speed of oral rumour was much quicker than that of newspapers, which from the guberniia capital of Voronezh' Shafir calculated to be one verst for every four and a half hours.
The chief stumbling block to a wider newspaper audience remained the high illiteracy rate.
Shafir made a detailed study of comprehension levels by the supposedly literate.
A 27-year-old party member and ex-Red Army man had read the press regularly since 1917, but did not know the meaning of words such as‘class enemy’, occupation, period, or most abbreviations, including the USSR.
Words of foreign origin defeated many readers, and place-names of remote areas like Georgia had no meaning at all.
From 1923 onwards the party was to single out key categories of the rural population for education: these included ex-Red Army men, Komsomol members, and women deputies to the local Soviets.
In 1922 the number of literacy centres and those attending them fell to one-tenth of what they had risen to by 1921.
Menshevik critics of the regime claimed that compared with the pre-revolutionary period Russia in 1922 had 30 per cent fewer schools overall and that 70 per cent of all children between 8 and 11 years of age were illiterate.
The burden of Russia's social backwardness could not be thrown off as quickly as the threat of political counterrevolution had been by the end of the Civil War.
It lingered on well into the 1930s.
Illiteracy was but one of its multiple facets.
Military victory in the Civil War had been achieved by a heavy emphasis on combined political and military control from the centre, and this successful method was broadly reapplied in NEP to social life, despite the relaxation on the economic front.
Insensitivity to local needs and aspirations was the result.
The Tsarist system had suffered from a similar defect.
Students of Russia who hail from much smaller and less heterogeneous countries might pause to ask themselves whether democratic rule under any kind of government is possible in a country as awesome in its administrative complexity as this one.
The example of the United States may be cited in order to refute such a fatalistic approach, but the American colonies were the progeny of the most sophisticated democratic country in the world, and in any case the American republic expanded from a near tabula rasa , politically and geographically speaking.
The Bolsheviks inherited a long tradition of centralist rule from which they had suffered, but whose methods they had imbibed only too deeply.
So had the provinces, which scarcely knew how to struggle for local political and cultural rights.
This is not to deny that the Bolsheviks' intentions for future political, social and national minority devolution were genuine, but at the close of the Civil War they governed a financially exhausted country.
Sufficient funds did not exist for the fast rehabilitation of the railways, for the immediate implementation of mass education.
In the long run the centralist traditions were to win the race against all hopes for some measure of local autonomy.