

The Years of retreat 1969–1879
THE YEARS OF DISCONTENT 1977–1979
BRITAIN after the IMF crisis had an air of being a nation after the deluge.
The cuts had been agreed without the collapse of the government or immediate catastrophe in the economy.
The unions were acquiescent; other than in Northern Ireland, there was no overt social conflict.
The Labour government, it is true, did suffer an immense personal blow soon after the IMF negotiations were completed, with the sudden death of Anthony Crosland, recently appointed Foreign Secretary.
Apart from disturbing the balance in the Cabinet, this removed the only major socialist theoretician of the day.
His Future of Socialism in 1956 had provided a point of reference for the party, and progressives throughout the nation, over the past twenty years with its emphasis on social equality rather on public ownership as the instrument of change.
He was replaced, not by the senior figure of Denis Healey, who was chained to his oar at the Treasury in the aftermath of the IMF cuts, but by the youthful and little-known figure of David Owen, Crosland's junior minister at the Foreign Office.
The Cabinet, however, even though shorn of Crosland, and also of Roy Jenkins on the right and Barbara Castle on the left for different reasons, still remained credible as an agent of authority, and in the early months of 1977 Britain slowly emerged towards a plateau of greater tranquillity and modest economic recovery.
The revival was in many ways only a relative one.
Unemployment continued to rise to reach over one-and-a-half million by mid-1977.
The people's standard of living was further depressed as both the longer-term effects of the oil-price increase of 1973 and the post-IMF cuts of the immediate past began to sink in.
Nevertheless, by the time of  the Queen's jubilee that summer there was some sense that a good deal of the worst might be over.
The custodian of this mood of growing calm was the new Prime Minister, James Callaghan, who imposed himself on the public consciousness as a new Baldwin, the apostle of peace in our time.
His press soubriquet ‘Sunny Jim’ was rather misplaced since it concealed a somewhat touchy disposition, just as Henderson's unwontedly benign term of endearment, ‘Uncle Arthur’, had been in the past.
But he commanded general respect as an authoritative voice, in tune with the need for social order, sensitive to the needs of the unions and his own party, but also with a genuine cross-party appeal.
‘You can trust Jim’, was Labour's appeal, reminiscent of a friendly village bobby or a family doctor of the old school.
He proved to be the most effective Prime Minister since Macmillan's first phase.
In the Cabinet, Callaghan's open methods and refusal to countenance conspiracies made for a more harmonious atmosphere than ever prevailed under Harold Wilson (now Lord Wilson of Rievaulx).
Even the left-wing Tony Benn was relatively quiescent, not least perhaps because he was now the bringer of good news at the Department of Energy, as North Sea oil began to flow in large quantities.
No doubt, Callaghan had his limitations.
Although an advocate of open Cabinet discussions, he also firmly believed in the principle of confidentiality or plain secrecy in key areas.
Thus, defence policy was kept in the hands of a small group of ministers (Callaghan, Healey, Owen, and Fred Mulley).
A major consequence was that the development of the extremely expensive ‘Chevaline’ warheads went ahead despite all the economic difficulties of the period, with no Cabinet discussion at the time.
Even David Owen was later to admit that they should have been scrapped during his time at the Foreign Office in 1 977–9.
Chevaline in all had risen in cost from £350 m. in 1974 to over £1 billion by 1982, on top of the Polaris missile programme-even though by this time US-Soviet arms limitation agreements had made Chevaline redundant.
It was the price of maintaining Britain's posture as a supposedly independent nuclear power, under Labour as under the Tories.
Equally, exchange rates and aspects of market economics were kept for close-quarter deliberation, notably within Harold Lever's so-called ‘economic seminar’.
Along with this, Callaghan was not by instinct an institutional radical.
He had been a trade-union official, in a white-collar civil-service union, in his young days, and he regarded as sacrosanct maintaining the liaison between unions and party at all costs.
Thus, in 1969 he had been the main Cabinet instrument of dissent in rejecting Wilson and Mrs Castle's proposed statutory incomes policy.
Many, therefore, blamed Callaghan for the explosion in union wage claims that followed in the early seventies.
In the Home Office, he had demonstrated broadly conservative views on crime, drugs, and racial issues, not surprisingly so perhaps for one who served as parliamentary spokesman for the Police Federation.
Over such key issues as the European Common Market he had followed a prudent, unadventurous course, only moving to endorse membership at the last moment when political circumstances seemed so to dictate.
In his years in Number 10, he showed limited interest in social or institutional reform.
The changes wrought by the Heath government were allowed to survive, to be left for Mrs Thatcher gleefully to dismantle in the eighties.
But this cautious, adroit, enigmatic leader seemed for long to be very much what the nation and the times required.
The country seemed to be on a knife-edge, with a minority government, the economy poised on the edge of collapse, and potential disorder in industrial relations, racial matters, and the affairs of the Celtic fringe.
Callaghan proved to be an imperturbable and shrewd pilot for these storms.
Further, he was not unwilling to show enterprise.
The move towards cash limits, cuts in current expenditure, and a generally monetarist policy were heralded by a speech to the TUC in September 1976, which (as noted) reflected the influence of his son-in-law, Peter Jay.
Again, on education, Callaghan attempted to promote new standards of literacy and numeracy, based on an agreed core curriculum in schools.
In foreign policy, while seldom innovative, he did try to carve out new relationships with Britain's new European partners, especially through his close personal association with Helmut Schmidt, the West German chancellor and a fellow social democrat, as well as maintaining his contacts with the new US Democratic administration of Jimmy Carter.
In 1977 and 1978, Indeed, Callaghan showed the ability to do more than survive, and emerged with a stature which perhaps surprised his many jaundiced critics in the party and press.
He became the personal embodiment of a new solidarity, a new ralliement , nudging his fellow-countrymen  towards a new accommodation to changing circumstances at home and overseas.
The new Conservative leader Mrs Thatcher, was finding it hard to assert herself, especially with a Shadow Cabinet consisting largely of followers of the defeated Edward Heath.
In Sir Ian Gilmour's Inside Right , a defence of the post-1945 political consensus, it was clear that the Tory centrists could fight back, and the monetarist radicals had, therefore, to be wary.
With little pressure from that quarter for an early general election, Callaghan almost imperceptibly emerged with growing command.
Until a sudden decline from September 1 978, he seemed almost unchallengeable.
He was fundamentally assisted by political accommodation, and by evidence of growing economic recovery.
The first was his own work, the latter the somewhat ambiguous achievement of Denis Healey, with incidental assistance from the IMF, the central banks, and Jack Jones of the Transport Workers.
The political accommodation stemmed from the ‘pact’ concluded between the Labour government and the tiny Liberal Party.
The latter had a mere twelve members but nevertheless carried weight in a situation where the Callaghan government was in a technical minority in the House and in danger of imminent defeat.
In March — April 1977, however, the so-called ‘Lib-Lab pact’ was concluded between Callaghan and the new Liberal leader, David Steel.
The Welsh leader of the parliamentary Labour Party, Cledwyn Hughes, himself a ‘Lib-Lab’ figure of noted moderation and an admirer of Lloyd George, was an important go-between.
The upshot was that the Liberals promised to support the Labour government in the House by their votes.
The conditions included a joint consultative committee being set up to consider future legislation, chaired by Michael Foot, the leader of the House, and regular meetings between Cabinet ministers and Liberal spokesmen to consider government measures.
The government agreed to press on with devolution, and also to advance direct elections to the European Parliament, to which Labour had been hostile, while the Local Authority Works Bill, perhaps Labour's last instalment of  socialism, was watered down.
On balance, it was a package strongly in favour of the government.
No major concessions were made; in particular, no ground was given to the Liberal demand for proportional representation to give minor parties a more enhanced position in the country.
The government, in effect, was guaranteed perhaps an extra two years in power.
For the Liberals, they gained an indirect foothold in government for the first time since 1931 in peacetime circumstances, and it flattered their self-esteem as a small third force to become part of the governing process.
David Steel, the Liberal leader, was anxious to enhance his, and his party's, authority following the damaging departure of the former leader, Jeremy Thorpe, in a series of scandals involving accusations of homosexuality, fraud, and even attempted murder.
Steel himself was a noted tactician, more concerned with manoeuvre than with policy-making, a style appropriate for the parliamentary situation.
The government thus gained a new foothold on power relatively painlessly, apart perhaps from the consultations between Denis Healey and the Liberals' economic spokesman, John Pardoe, two combustible personalities whose stormy meetings (or shouting matches) provided amusement and entertainment throughout Whitehall.
With its political basis ensured, the government could now settle down to consolidate and enjoy the fruits of recovery.
There was much to enjoy in 1977.
The benefits of North Sea oil were now coming through strongly.
The first oilfield to come on stream had been the small Argyll field in mid-1975, followed by pipeline deliveries from the Norwegian ‘Ekofisk’ field and the massive British Forties field later that year.
Five more oilfields were producing oil from the North Sea continental shelf in 1976, including the massive Brent and Alpha fields.
By the end of 1978 nine were in production and several more on course for development.
It was evident that by the end of the seventies Britain would be self-sufficient in oil and was likely to remain so, depending on depletion policy, until at least the end of the century.
By 1980, Britain would be producing 100 million tonnes a year, with 500,000 barrels a day from the Forties field and 370,000 from the Brent field, putting the United Kingdom on a par with Kuwait, Nigeria, or Iraq as a major oil producer.
With a  growing number of nuclear power stations (the old Magnox reactors such as Calder Hall in Cumbria or Wylfa and Trawsfynydd in North Wales being supplemented by stations such as Sellafield, despite the opposition of environmentalists and the anti-nuclear lobbies); with hydroelectric power in the Scottish Highlands and North Wales; and a still important, if aged, coal industry, together with another huge energy bonus in the shape of North Sea gas, Britain's energy position seemed remarkably secure.
Many of the problems faced by other industrial nations thus disappeared.
Among other things, the successful strikes of North Sea oil proved a notable bonus for British technology, reinforced in the seventies by other achievements such as the Anglo-French Concorde transatlantic airliner, and the emergence of the ‘high-speed train’ capable of speeds of up to 130 miles per hour.
Clearly the native resources of scientific talent and ingenuity had not run dry, for all the disappointment caused by the failures of the ‘science and government’ campaigns of the early 1960s.
External improvement in the balance of payments was accompanied by a steady fall in the rate of inflation from a peak of 25 per cent at the end of 1975 to around 7 per cent by mid-1978.
The precise cause was open to debate.
Labour partisans hailed the effectiveness of the Jack Jones ‘flat-rate’ formula which had introduced a virtual wage freeze until mid-1977, and which the government then continued with a year-long pay-restraint policy.
Critics claimed that a more likely cause of the fall in the rate of inflation was the stagnation of the British and international economy, with the loss of manufacturing output and rising unemployment.
This took pressure out of the economy by reducing demand.
For all that, the decline in inflation was undeniable.
By August, after Healey's latest mini-budget had been passed through the Commons with surprising ease, there was a glow of good news, with bank rate falling to 7 per cent, the stock market rising strongly, the pound being sustained, and the balance of payments showing impressive recovery.
The month of August 1977 showed a balance-of-payment surplus of £316 m., the largest ever recorded in numerical terms for one month.
Share prices soared, although some of this was due to falling interest rates that followed the unhooking of the pound from the dollar, stimulating gilt-edged, rather than a major increase in manufacturing output or exports.
Healey was able to pay back the first instalment of £2 billion to the IMF with some ease, and indeed the full IMF loan proved to be unnecessary, while income-tax allowances were raised and a bonus for Christmas could be afforded for old-age pensions.
A balance-of-payments surplus of £206 m. in October meant a surplus of £758 m. for the past three months, much helped by North Sea oil cutting the fuel deficit, and a strong pound.
Exports showed some improvement, although the rise in the import of finished manufactures such as motor cars and other vehicles was continuously alarming.
At the end of the year, Britain seemed much revived from the black days of the IMF crisis twelve months earlier.
The market soared, especially in government gilt-edged stock, and the pound emerged ever stronger.
Denis Healey himself, a long-established whipping boy, now became almost popular, with his chairmanship of the International Monetary Fund inner steering committee making him a figure of greater eminence.
Alongside his Chancellor, Callaghan emerged with more credibility in the international arena, especially through his pact with the West German Chancellor, Helmut Schmidt, and the partial decline in the reputation of the French President, Giscard d'Estaing.
Britain seemed in almost bullish mood as 1977 went out.
It seemed well on the way to revival, with the balance-of-payments surplus rising to £1,000 m. in 1978 and the pound, now a petro-currency, rising to not far short of $2 on the foreign exchange.
Douglas Jay observed that the later 1970s were a time of genuine recovery —‘one of the few examples of any Western governments in the seventies reducing both inflationary pressures and unemployment’ at one and the same time.
The revival continued for much of 1978.
Indeed, by the middle of that year critics were saying that the cuts imposed at the time of the IMF crisis may have been too harsh, and that fixed investment in manufacturing capacity needed to be stepped up, even though it actually rose by 8 per cent in 1978.
Sir Brian Hopkin was later to describe the relaxation of monetary targets at this time as ‘the last dying kick of Keynesian demand management’, but clearly there was life left in the old orthodoxy yet.
Denis Healey, nevertheless, had  to contend with a wide range of critics, from socialists such as Benn who claimed that his successes resulted from such right-wing nostrums as a wage freeze and cutting public spending, to the monetarists of the Policy Studies Committee who attacked him for being far too dirigiste .
In the spring of 1978 there were signs of the happier times coming to an end, with the pound under pressure and Healey himself attacked for anticipating tax cuts that summer in the budget he introduced in April.
Under some pressure from the Liberals, he agreed to accept amendments to reduce the standard rate of income tax in his Finance Bill, but his alternative scheme of including a 2 per cent surcharge on employers' National Insurance contributions was much attacked in the City.
There were, indeed, tremors both in the markets and in the strength of sterling that summer.
But, on balance, the government seemed able to claim that it had turned the tide, albeit with the aid of £2 billions from North Sea oil to swing the balance into surplus.
After a steady series of by-election blows throughout the seventies (including a calamitous defeat at Ashfield in April 1977), Labour was cheered by a decisive defeat of the Scottish Nationalists in the Hamilton seat (May 1978), one of the markers in the SNP advance in the 1960s.
After lagging as much as 15 per cent behind the Tories in the opinion polls in 1977, Labour was actually level with them in July 1978 and threatening to pull ahead.
Whether by luck or careful management, Callaghan's administration looked much more credible now, and many expected him to call an autumn election in 1978 to cash in on favourable economic and political trends and, against all the odds, snatch another term of power.
The significance of the economic recovery, such as it was, in 1977- 8 caused much debate and some perplexity.
Some genial foreign observers claimed that it illustrated that gloomy predictions about Britain's demise, like that of Mark Twain, were much exaggerated.
Keynesian apologists partially recovered their confidence.
The North American economist, John Kenneth Galbraith, took a distinctly positive view, claiming that the crisis had shown both the revival of industrial technology and the reimposition of civic discipline as demonstrated by the pay pause, in the face of difficulties which might have led feebler nations to buckle under, or even lapse into military or other dictatorships.
The American journalist, Bernard Nossiter, even saw Britain's decline of manufacturing output as a sign of  advance and of maturity, since the British, civilized and civic-minded as they were, were proclaiming the need for more leisure and less regimented ways of living.
Without lapsing into the complacency, or even euphoria, of some of these judgements, there was certainly evidence of a nation enjoying the fruits of prosperity, however deceptive.
Public spending had risen from 40 per cent to 45.5 per cent of gross domestic product in 1974–6, partly through heavy industrial subsidies and the cost of maintaining the ‘social wage’ through the social security system.
Despite the severe cuts imposed in late 1976, public spending continued to rise in absolute terms.
There was, in particular, a renewed surge of spending on state schools, part of it to finance the rapid completion of the comprehensive secondary education system now being finished under the aegis of Shirley Williams, a right-wing member of the government but also a critic of private schooling.
Expensive new capital projects were under consideration including a vast new British Library to replace the Georgian splendour of the British Museum.
One spectacular monument of much value to historians opened in 1977 was the glossy, computerized Public Record Office at Kew, to supplement the venerable Victorian legacy in Chancery Lane.
Elsewhere, in Scotland and Wales, regional policies continued to thrive, as if the economic hammer blows of the 1970s had never been.
The Welsh Office and the Welsh Development Agency were active in extending financial aid for a variety of local causes from advanced factories in decaying mining villages to Welsh-language schools and the Welsh National Opera.
Throughout Britain there was an extensive road-building programme, including a rapid growth of the motorway system and such impressive developments as the new bridges across the Humber and the Severn.
The arts generally continued to thrive through public subsidy, to orchestral music above all, and new forms of partnership were being developed between the Arts Council and local authorities and industry and finance.
Much of this artistic creativity was more innovative than before.
In the world of youth or pop culture, Britain, without reaching the frenetic heights of the years of the Beatles and the Rolling Stones  in the sixties, remained a market leader, with rock festivals taking place in such unlikely locations as Windsor Great Park and Stonehenge.
Even so, there was broad agreement that this evidence of innovation and vibrancy was being achieved at the cost of institutional inertia, a reluctance to champion enterprise, and an avoidance of any deep-seated restoration of the national economy.
The linchpins, after all, were such traditionally unsocialist (or even anti-socialist) policies as a very severe incomes policy, a move from direct to indirect taxation, and swingeing cuts in public expenditure in both 1976–7 and 1977–8.
Under the shield of North Sea oil and gas, the endemic problems of the economy in the sixties — low productivity, backward manufacturing capacity, immobile and inadequately retrained labour, and excessively cautious unions and management — remained untouched.
On balance, the general reaction to the greater social tranquillity was one of relief rather than euphoria.
Britain was proving itself to be better than the ungovernable ‘banana republic’ of hostile critics in 1975–6, but still an ailing ex-imperial giant lacking focus and perhaps even faith.
There was much national rejoicing at the jubilee to celebrate Queen Elizabeth II's reign since 1952.
But it was countered by the somewhat cooler attitude towards the royal family that had emerged in recent years, some of it captured in an ‘anti-jubilee’ number of the New Statesman edited by Anthony Howard.
The jubilee, like, indeed, the royal wedding of the then Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh back in 1947, was less than unbridled in its lavishness.
The Department of the Environment confined itself to spending £175,000 on banners and other adornments along the Mall and in Trafalgar Square.
For all the obvious potential of the pageantry in attracting tourist income from America and the Commonwealth, official expenditure on flags and bunting in the City of London came to just £150, while, to save money, the cleaning of the floor of St Paul's Cathedral before and after the jubilee service was done by an army of volunteers.
Like George VI and the then Queen Elizabeth eating spam from a gold plate during the Second World War, this was pageantry on the cheap rather than an unrestrained recapitulation of the glories of the first Elizabethan Age.
Many of the major issues confronting government and nation  remained unsolved, or at best marginally confronted in the 1977–8 period.
In the Commonwealth, Callaghan (previously a supporter of arms sales) took a firm line in promoting a ban on sporting and other contacts with South Africa, and enforced the so-called Gleneagles Agreement with other Commonwealth countries, amongst whom the Conservative Prime Minister of Australia, Malcolm Fraser, proved an unexpectedly vigorous opponent of apartheid.
But the abiding issue of Rhodesia, still in the unilateral and technically illegal control of the minority white government of Ian Smith, despite strong black guerrilla opposition from supporters of the rival Nkomo and Mugabe factions, remained undisturbed.
The main new initiative attempted by Callaghan was the dispatch of the much-respected former Cabinet minister, Cledwyn Hughes, to southern Africa in 1978, partly to facilitate a continuing rapport with the Carter administration in Washington on relations with the illegal Smith regime.
Hughes's talks with black African leaders such as Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo, and the heads of the so-called ‘front-line’ African states, Zambia, Malawi, and Mozambique, suggested, however, that there was no common ground or any possible basis of negotiation with the Smith government.
Remarkably, however, the seeds of change emerged in Rhodesia itself.
Under pressure from the South African government, and in the face of growing guerrilla warfare, Ian Smith unexpectedly announced on 24 September 1976 that there would be majority rule in the country within two years.
In May 1978 he reached agreement with the more moderate African leaders, Bishop Muzorewa and Nabadingi Sithole.
In April 1979, on the eve of a British general election as it happened, Bishop Muzorewa's United African Council received more than 60 per cent of the votes in a general election, and the Methodist Bishop became Prime Minister of ‘Zimbabwe-Rhodesia’, although in the face of the opposition of the Nkomo/Mugabe forces.
It was an astonishing climax to the long-running Rhodesian crisis.
But it owed everything to political manoeuvres and economic pressures in southern Africa, and nothing to British influence.
Elsewhere, the legacy of Empire was allowed to decay.
Gibraltar, whose importance as a naval base was now much diminished, caused continuing diplomatic embarrassment with Spain, although the local population made clear their wish to remain British.
In the Far East, the future of Hong Kong, an immensely important financial and manufacturing centre, where the British lease was due to run out in  1997, was left in abeyance by both the British and the Chinese governments, in the post-Mao era.
Only in one remote, unnoticed, and unreported area did imperial authority ring out with any confidence.
This was the Falkland Islands in the distant southern Atlantic, where Callaghan managed to deter, or dissuade, the Argentine military junta from taking naval action in the vicinity of the Falklands or occupying South Georgia.
The British vessel,Endurance , an ice-patrol ship reinforced with helicopters and missiles, was kept in Falklands waters despite pressure from the Ministry of Defence.
Callaghan not unreasonably claimed in his memoirs that the Tories won the Falklands War but that Labour had kept the peace.
On the other hand here was again a problem where a settlement was postponed rather than achieved.
Meanwhile, the dispatch of a Foreign Office minister, Ted Rowlands, to Port Stanley to try to persuade the Falklanders of the merits of starting up diplomatic negotiations with the Argentine government, which claimed the islands as their sovereign ‘Malvinas’, had an ominous ring to it.
Nearer home, Northern Ireland only produced renewed deadlock.
There was, in truth, little initiative that any British government could offer in the unpromising circumstances of 1977–8.
The return of a Fianna Fáil government under Jack Lynch meant something of a decline in Anglo-Irish cordiality or willingness to collaborate in security matters, while the end of the constitutional assembly in early 1977 had removed any prospect of finding any viable Ulster administration to modify the picture of direct rule from Westminster.
Under Roy Mason, the tough ex-miner who had succeeded Merlyn Rees as Home Secretary, a strong policy was adopted against the violence of Sinn Fein.
This was foreshadowed by the appointment of Major-General Timothy ‘Bull’ Creasey as General Officer Commanding in Northern Ireland in late 1977, along with the increasing use of SAS forces and a freer hand given to the RUC police.
The government's policy was formally one of ‘Ulsterization’, namely allowing a wide range of local programmes and policies to be taken over by local leaders.
But the realities were spelt out mainly in military terms.
Indeed, in 1978 there was some evidence that the British security forces, coupled with divisions amongst the  Provisionals, were swinging the balance away from the IRA.
The year 1978 saw only 81 deaths, the lowest annual total since 1970.
The ‘men of violence’, it was claimed, were truly against the ropes.
But these successes were achieved by military and legal means which did Britain's international reputation much harm, including the use of the ‘Diplock courts’, stern methods of interrogation and arbitrary imprisonment, and severe conditions of detention or confinement amongst political prisoners in the H block and elsewhere.
A new wave of IRA attacks then broke out early in 1979, including several on the British mainland.
The most spectacular of them (April 1979) was the assassination through a car-bomb attack of the right-wing Tory MP, Airey Neave, a close friend and confidant of the Conservative leader, Margaret Thatcher.
This was claimed to be the work not of the IRA proper, but of the Irish National Liberation Army, an offshoot of it.
Clearly as a military phenomenon alone Ulster would continue to trouble the conscience of the British in the 1980s.
In political terms, there was no sign of breakthrough.
Indeed, 1977–9, with Roy Mason at the Northern Irish ministry, was the most unproductive period that Ireland had known, in political or constitutional terms, since the troubles began in the late 1960s.
The tenth anniversary of the civil rights movement was celebrated on 1 January 1979 amidst a growing alienation of the minority Catholic population, a rising toll not only of violence but also of poverty and unemployment in the six counties, and an increasingly unbridgeable gulf within the majority Protestant ranks, with the Official Unionists and the so-called Democratic Unionists under the Revd Ian Paisley vying with one another in intransigence and extremism.
Relations on security matters between the Westminster government and the Dublin Fianna Fáil government of Jack Lynch were never close or cordial.
In short, Ulster remained more of a violent backwater, removed from the mainstream of British social development, at the end of the 1970s than it had been at the start of that troubled decade.
The irony was that, for all their political ineffectiveness, the Ulster Unionists exercised a matchless political influence for quite fortuitous political reasons.
Their existence, like that of other nationalist splinter groups, was vital to the continuance of a Labour government, and private negotiations with them (amongst whom was now numbered Enoch Powell) ensured that their numbers in the new House of  Commons would be raised from 12 to 18.
But this was the only positive outcome of an otherwise peculiarly negative and dismal phase, even by the standards of Northern Irish history.
The issue of governmental devolution for the other Celtic nations of Scotland and Wales made more headway.
The Scottish and Welsh Devolution Bills made steady progress through the Commons, until both became law in 1978.
But there was much evidence of divided counsels on both the Labour and Conservative sides, as has been noted above.
Indeed, the government had to make major concessions during the committee stage, especially to Labour critics.
The amendment by an expatriate Scot, George Cunningham (Labour, Islington), by ensuring that a 40 per cent vote of the electorate (not simply of those voting) would have to be achieved for a devolution bill to go through and for a repeal order not to be tabled, made devolution, at least for Wales, virtually an impossibility.
Even when the Scottish and Welsh Bills became law in July 1978 it was clear that the issue was very far from settled and that the referendums, finally announced for 1 March 1979, would be the decisive factor.
The ‘great debate’ over the structure of the United Kingdom and the relations of the Celtic nations to the predominant English partner, was likely to be diverted from the outset.
It was achieved in a mood of almost stunned boredom amongst English opinion, confident that the dismantling of the United Kingdom as it had endured since 1707 or 1536 would not in fact take place.
There was much criticism of the time taken up in the Commons by these devolution measures, and also of the careless drafting of two bills which were likely to produce a legal and constitutional nightmare if they ever took effect.
The devolution campaigns began in the winter of 1978–9 when, as will be seen, the public was far more concerned with the ‘winter of discontent’ with the trade unions and the likely approach of a general election.
In Wales there was not much doubt that the result would be negative.
The dominant Labour Party included large sections of industrial South Wales which was openly hostile, fearing that devolution would separate Wales from the economic and social structure of England and perhaps become a paradise for linguistic nationalists.
Plaid Cymru itself was distinctly half-hearted on the issue.
There was never any prospect of a ‘Yes’ vote being recorded, and the treasured plans for a Welsh assembly to occupy a derelict  corn exchange in Cardiff docks were put on ice.
In the event, on 1 March 1979 there was a 4 to 1 majority in Wales against devolution, 243,048 votes in favour and 956,330 against.
In Glamorgan and Gwent the votes were overwhelming, but even in Welsh-speaking Gwynedd, with its two Plaid Cymru MPs, there was a 2 to 1 majority against devolution.
Self-government disappeared from Welsh history amid universal derision, and attention now concentrated on further building up the Welsh Office instead.
Even in Scotland, the huge majorities in favour of devolution once recorded steadily diminished in the opinion polls in 1978 as the Scottish economy appeared to recover and Labour regained much of the ground lost to the Nationalists.
Two of the main Labour devolutionists had been lost, Professor John Mackintosh, an eloquent and gifted academic advocate of devolution, by death, James Sillars through defection to a minority splinter-group, the Scottish Labour Party.
(Sillars later married the Scottish Nationalist ex-MP Margo MacDonald and became SNP member for Govan in November 1988.)
Labour's devolution campaign in Scotland lacked force and credibility and Scottish enthusiasm waned steadily.
On 1 March 1979, devolution did, indeed, gain a majority amongst the Scottish voters, by 1,240,937 to 1,153,502, 51.6 per cent to 48.4 per cent, but over 36 per cent of electors did not vote at all .
Even Scotland was far removed from the necessary 40 per cent margin.
The decade ended with Scottish Nationalism as a political force decidedly on the wane, and devolution discredited.
The issue was clearly much more buoyant than in Wales, and Scottish Labour circles continued to be sympathetic.
But in general, here, too, was a major issue in which the 1970s had been wholly unproductive, in which Celtic nationalism had been inflamed but left impotent and dissatisfied, and real questions about accountability and democratic participation left unanswered.
Devolution, even in Ulster, was a relative sideshow.
The main issue, undoubtedly, lay in the sphere of industrial relations.
This would decide whether the hard-won economic recovery of the post-IMF phase would be destroyed by rampaging wage demands and raging  inflation.
Between the Labour government and the unions there was an uneasy détente at the start of 1977.
An interlude of social peace had been forged of which Jack Jones of the Transport Workers' Union was the architect.
Jones was now in the twilight of a complex and often controversial career.
In 1977 the campaign was already afoot to choose the successor to him as General Secretary, with Moss Evans as the favourite.
Certainly, such peace as prevailed owed an immense amount to Jones's personal stature in the movement, as one of the old-style union leaders who had, nevertheless, taken an outward-looking and creative role in trying to relate union demands to a wider pattern of economic stability and also, incidentally, the wellbeing of a Labour government.
Jack Jones was an interesting, transitional figure.
He was an old leftist who had fought in Spain in the International Brigade.
He had grown up in a quasi-syndicalist tradition in the Liverpool docks, and his influence in the sixties had been thrown behind the growth of the shop-stewards movement and local plant bargaining on a devolved basis very much on the lines of the 1968 Donovan Report.
He was far removed from the centralism embodied by his predecessors Ernest Bevin and Arthur Deakin.
On the other hand, he had played a nationally constructive role also, especially since he and Hugh Scanlon helped the TUC defeat Barbara Castle's incomes policy in 1969.
Jones had then worked closely with the docks employer, Lord Aldington, in getting a new wages agreement for the docks including a settlement for the problem of casual labour which drew on him the fire of many militant shop stewards amongst the stevedores.
He was also the leader of a pressure-group to improve the lot of old-age pensioners.
Jones emerged in 1975 and 1976 as the unique champion of a policy for wages which reconciled voluntary bargaining with a national perspective.
Until the autumn of 1976, the £6 fiat-rate increase for wages and salaries below £8,500, agreed by the TUC General Council by a narrow margin in July 1975, held firm and clearly played a major part in the sharp reduction of inflation that year.
As a testimony to one trade-unionist's authority and stature, carried through in the face of some hostility within the administration and somewhat glacial relations with Denis Healey at the Treasury, it was a remarkable accomplishment.
But the achievement was always precarious and was maintained only with some difficulty.
With the mounting  balance-of-payments crisis, the TUC was reluctantly persuaded in the summer of 1976 to renew a virtual wage-freeze policy with a limit of 5 per cent increases for the next twelve months.
The financial atmosphere was dire at this period.
Even so, the new relationship between government and the unions was unlikely to last, at least on the present basis.
Jack Jones told Healey that summer: ‘We will have to get back to normal collective bargaining.
The most you can expect from us is an attempt to organize an orderly return with emphasis on some priorities.’
Clearly, the optimism in some quarters that the unions were moving towards any long-term incomes or anti-inflation policy was quite unfounded.
Jack Jones himself remained poised, perhaps torn, between his traditional stance as a union negotiator committed to autonomy and his wider view of the need to recast an adversarial industrial-relations system.
Somewhat remarkably, he gave strong support to the proposals emanating from a committee under Lord Bullock for co-determination or industrial partnership as a basis for management.
But the horizons of most trade-unionist leaders were much more limited.
In 1977 the skein of any agreement on wages policy began to come apart.
Trade-union leaders, hailed in the press as industrial statesmen during the period of the fiat-rate wage policy, were now denounced as over-mighty tyrants.
Jack Jones found himself assailed by Paul Johnson, the ex-editor of the New Statesman who had moved to the far right, as ‘The Emperor Jones’, almost a fourth estate of the realm in himself and the symbol of overweening trade-union power.
Despite the warnings of Callaghan and Healey, the TUC at its conference in September 1977 voted for a return to ‘unfettered collective bargaining’, with Jones and Scanlon taking the adverse view.
Although the TUC also, and somewhat contradictorily, endorsed a twelve-month gap in pay settlement, the banks of wage agreements were being burst again.
The pressure for an increase in wage levels, at least as agreed at the local branch or shop-floor, steadily mounted, and in the 1977–8 pay round settlements averaged over 1 5 per cent.
TUC support for a national limitation steadily eroded, not least because a so-called ‘Top People’ pay-review inquiry under  Sir Edward Boyle recommended large rises for already well-paid professions such as High Court judges and top civil servants, while the police, the armed services, the dentists, and doctors also benefited from substantial salary rises.
This was not helpful to TUC advocates of wage restraint.
Len Murray, the General Secretary, worked solidly on behalf of the government's 5 per cent policy but, unlike his predecessor Vic Feather, had no illusion of his power or ability to dictate to autonomous and all-powerful national unions.
Anxiety about trade-union power was rife at this period, as the personal attacks on Jack Jones indicated.
National unions like the Miners seemed able to advance almost any inflationary proposition with some real hope of success.
In the NUM a left-wing spokesman like Arthur Scargill advocated a broad pay increase of up to 80 per cent, and denounced local incentive schemes accepted in most coalfields as a means of increasing productivity.
Although nationwide strikes diminished in 1976–7, such disputes as did occur caused the maximum of attention, most of it highly unfavourable in tone.
When the firemen went on strike in 1977, a state of emergency was called by the Callaghan government and the army was employed in a strike-breaking capacity with the use of ‘green goddess’ fire-fighting vehicles.
A similar occurrence came when NHS ambulance drivers also stopped work.
An episode which attracted particular concern was a strike that occurred at an obscure photo-processing plant in North London, the Grunwick works.
This saw mass picketing by the unions after the employer, George Ward, a member of the ‘National Association for Freedom’, sacked some Asian workers following his dismissal of employees who were members of unions.
After almost a year of dispute, mass picketing began in June 1977.
The union involved was APEX, a notoriously moderate union with a right-wing General Secretary, Roy Grantham.
In addition, the mass picketing outside Grunwick's works was intended to publicize the dispute rather than cause violent obstruction, as with Arthur Scargill's massed legions at the Saltley coke depot in 1972.
Nevertheless, violence outside the Grunwick works rapidly escalated, culminating in a so-called ‘day of action’(11 July 1977) when about 18,000 people turned up to picket and there was much fighting with the police, resulting in seventy arrests and several injuries.
Daily scenes of confrontations outside the Grunwick works between the pickets and their supporters (sometimes not members of unions at all) and police cordons dominated television  news coverage.
Right-wing members of the Labour government like Roy Hattersley and Shirley Williams felt it their duty to show solidarity with the pickets.
In the end, picketing was much reduced from the summer of 1977.
But the entire episode promoted anti-union sentiment, not only amongst Conservatives, and led to many cries for legislation on picketing to clip the power of the overmighty trade unions once and for all.
The TUC had now the dilemma of wondering how far to authorize secondary action, for instance by calling out water workers or electricity power-station personnel.
In the event, the General Council drew back from this extreme policy and the outcome was that, after months of violence and intense bitterness, George Ward won his point and unions were excluded from the Grunwick plant.
The workers on strike found jobs elsewhere.
But, even in defeat, the unions had succeeded in imprinting the notion of workers' power on the minds of the public.
They had reinforced international criticism, not always well founded, of the ‘British disease’ of chaotic and adversarial industrial relations and endless strikes.
The industrial scene thus looked much more alarming in the early months of 1 978.
The government's hard-won economic plateau seemed unlikely to last.
Len Murray of the TUC worked hard but was unable to exert power that he did not possess.
A major factor was that the two famous left-wing union leaders, both to some degree poachers turned gamekeepers, Hugh Scanlon and Jack Jones, were now removed from the scene through retirement.
Scanlon's successor as President of the Engineers' Union, Terry Duffy, was, in fact, a strongly right-wing figure anxious to reach an accommodation with the government, but naturally it would take him time to build up his authority.
Jack Jones's successor was Moss Evans, a Welshman who had worked in the car industry as TGWU National Organizer.
He was a man with a limited grasp of wider economic or political implications who had set his face against wage restrictions, or even any notion of a social contract.
Indeed, it was largely because of this stance of old-fashioned industrial unionism that he had been elected in the first place.
The government's reaction pivoted on the response of the Prime Minister, James Callaghan.
As noted, his prestige had steadily risen since his accession to office.
In particular, as an old union man  he was thought to have a particularly sensitive, almost intuitive, understanding of the unions and how best to sell a policy of wage restraint to them.
In the crisis, quite unexpectedly, Callaghan seemed to lose some of his touch, with fatal results.
In July 1978, he announced bluntly that the government would commit the unions to a pay-increase norm of just 5 per cent for the next twelve months.
This proposal, unexpectedly small and unexpectedly rigid, took the unions aback.
It was by no means clear how the figure arose in the first place.
Callaghan later stated that it ‘popped out’ at the end of 1977 and then became firmer following a television broadcast.
It was argued that 5 per cent on paper would mean nearer 8 or 9 per cent in reality through wage-drift effects.
Even so, to proclaim so dogmatically a single-figure norm (instead of something attainable such as 10 per cent ) was widely perceived to be a mistake.
The previous year, a more credible figure had been achieved without the need of a formal agreement at all.
Defending the increasingly indefensible policy of a 5 per cent pay norm led the government into growing difficulties.
Closely related to this was the prospect of a general election.
Labour had actually moved ahead of the Tories in some polls at the start of August 1978.
Many in the Cabinet felt that Callaghan would be in a uniquely favourable position, both politically and in terms of the balance of payments, to call an election in October.
Nicholas Kaldor urged him: ‘It is a peak.
Maybe a submerged peak, but a peak nevertheless.’
The Prime Minister wavered throughout the summer with the contradictory signals coming from his colleagues and closest advisors.
Some trade unionists later felt that they had been misled by private assurances from the Prime Minister that there would be an early election.
In the end, Callaghan backed down because his private information suggested that Labour prospects were too precarious.
The Tories had again moved ahead in the polls at the start of September.
In part, perhaps, this was because of an effective advertising campaign on their behalf by Saatchi and Saatchi who published posters of the alleged army of unemployed people (recruited, in fact, from the affluent ranks of the Young  Conservatives) which claimed that ‘Labour isn't working’.
Private polls in the constituencies conducted by Robert Worcester also suggested that in seventy marginal seats in England Labour would do badly, partly because a decline in the Liberal vote there was likely to assist the Conservatives.
Callaghan, therefore, decided against an early election.
But he did so in the most unfortunate manner.
At the TUC conference, which was intended by its chairman, David Basnett, to be a pre-election rally, the premier displayed some unwonted frivolity, singing an old music-hall song about ‘There she was, waiting at the church’.
On 7 September he delivered a television broadcast in which he claimed that, for the sake of the economy and the national wellbeing, the election would be postponed to some time in 1979.
It was altogether a mysterious episode.
The Liberals had decided to end their pact and so the government had no firm majority in the House on which to rely.
Their policies on devolution seemed to be going awry.
There was every indication that the economic prospects would be much less favourable in 1979, with industrial trouble of a major kind looming up.
A mood of excitement had been allowed to build, followed by a feeling of let-down.
It made Callaghan seem untypically fragile and lacking in confidence.
There followed an alarming period in which the carefully contrived economic recovery and social peace created under the Callaghan government disintegrated.
This became enshrined in popular memory as the ‘winter of discontent’ in which all the components of the British malaise emerged in heightened colours.
The manoeuvring ability left to the Callaghan government was now slight, following the decision not to call an early election.
In the Labour party, as in the TUC, the policy to impose a 5 per cent norm had provoked much fury, and the party conference in October heavily rejected the policy, even though Callaghan and Healey made it clear that they would ignore the views of the delegates.
The party continued to swing to the left, with the prestige of Tony Benn, albeit still a Cabinet member, rising ever higher, and new left-wing figures like Neil Kinnock and Dennis Skinner elected to the constituency section of the NEC.
At the same time the party continued to contract and  disintegrate, even in its old mining and inner-city strongholds.
The official figures showed the party membership to be around 650,000; the real figures were well known to be far below that number, possibly below 300,000, with an undue proportion being middle-class activists who had taken over old and decaying working-class parties or management committees.
Transport House was, in terms of its organizing capacity, under-financed and distinctly run down.
On the Conservative side, the decision of Callaghan not to hold an election came as a shot in the arm.
Mounting industrial unrest gave the party new heart after internal disputes over incomes policy, immigration, Rhodesia, and much else.
Mrs Thatcher found it more possible to assert her own right-wing views as against those of moderates like Prior or Walker, with a strong thrust towards monetarism emerging in the party's The Right Approach to the Economy .
She now called, with increasing confidence and with the backing of a sophisticated advertising campaign, for ‘a change of direction’ and an attack on the monopolistic powers of the state and the crushing incubus of the trade unions.
The suburban middle class were fighting back, in the wake of the economic setbacks and union advances of the 1970s.
A new mood of aggressive support for ‘privatization’ and economic liberalism resulted.
The union troubles mounted apace that autumn, partly as a sign of growing strength.
Union membership continued to rise steadily, especially in service employment, to reach a peak of over 13 million in 1979.
The flash-point came, as so often in the past, in the car industry, with Ford workers, members of the TGWU, deciding to smash the 5 per cent guideline with calls for a minimum pay rise of £20 a week and associated fringe benefits.
By the end of September, all twenty-three plants were lying idle, the management's offer of talks on productivity deals being abruptly rejected.
Moss Evans, the new Transport Workers' Union leader, made no effort to rein in his members' demands, while the Ford company itself, worried by loss of profits, was in no mood for a prolonged fight.
After two months, a settlement of 17 per cent was agreed, but the green light had been given for others to follow on.
There followed a 22 per cent pay rise  for the firemen, a 14 per cent deal for the bakers, and no less than 30 per cent, in two stages admittedly, for heating and ventilation engineers.
It was in the Transport Workers, above all, that the main battle was taking place, with the Ford dispute leading to another threatened strike by British Oxygen workers, and finally a conclusive dispute amongst the drivers of long-distance lorries and oil tankers.
A nation-wide strike by lorry drivers was declared for early January, starting in Scotland, with also an overtime ban, and another threatened strike by oil-tanker drivers early in the new year.
Britain faced the prospect of a winter without food and without energy, at the mercy of powerful unions and ineffective employers.
The Cabinet did what it could both to promote talks and also to set up emergency procedures under the Civil Contingency Unit chaired by Merlyn Rees, the beleaguered Home Secretary.
But the sheer impossibility of providing a national network of food and oil delivery made these efforts relatively ineffective, especially in the absence of legal or financial sanctions against the unions.
The situation was worsened by the ineptitude and intransigence of the oil companies.
No doubt the threat of national paralysis seemed much worse than it was: after all it would take many weeks for the full effects of a national strike to have an impact.
But the prospect was alarming enough and it was a gloomy festival at Christmas 1978.
Early in the new year there was a meeting of the leaders of the main industrial nations, Carter, Schmidt, Giscard, and Callaghan, on the attractive island of Guadeloupe in the French West Indies to discuss both economic and defence matters.
From this, Callaghan, sun-tanned and confident, returned to cold, strike-torn Britain.
At the airport, he replied to interviewers with words that were memorably misreported as being: ‘Crisis — what crisis?’
Certainly, he failed to respond immediately to the gravity of the situation, and his authority slumped accordingly.
On 19 January the lorry drivers' strike ended with an almost total victory for the unions.
A rise of between 17 and 20 per cent was agreed, amounting to £64 a week, a dramatic demonstration of workers' power.
But the malaise of discontent was now spreading  fast.
Public-service workers in such unions as NUPE and NALGO objected to the effects of the 5 per cent pay norm on low-paid workers, and on 22 January a national strike of 24 hours was declared by public-service workers.
It was followed by a rash of local selective strikes by health-service workers, dustmen, even the grave-diggers of Liverpool.
Rotting rubbish piled up in the streets.
Schools were kept closed because their caretakers stayed away, as did cleaners, cooks, and deliverers of fuel.
In the end an agreement on St Valentine's Day 1979 was cobbled together of 9 per cent plus an extra £1 a week, but the stakes were going up all the time.
Some COHSE hospital workers told Bernard Donoughue, the Prime Minister's personal adviser: ‘We'll tell you straight.
Our purpose is to get more than you offer and whatever you offer it won't be enough.’
Formally, the main crisis was now over, even though strikes by civil servants and many local groups continued in February and March.
The government and the TUC were now committed to a concordat to bring inflation down to 5 per cent over three years, while new TUC guidelines were issued over picketing and the operation of the closed shop.
But this hardly carried credibility in view of the collapse of three attempted wage-restraint initiatives by the Labour government since 1974, and the failure of the 1969 ‘solemn and binding’ covenant, the 1974 social contract, and a myriad other scraps of paper in the past.
Correctly or not, the public interpretation was of an industrial system out of control and a government in a state of near-paralysis.
Literally this was not so, since the emergency procedures of the Civil Contingency Unit were kept in being and it felt able to cope with almost every dispute other than that of council grave-diggers.
But it was obviously impossible to deal with a nation-wide emergency such as lorry-drivers' strikes, and equally impossible to respond properly to a rash of major disputes all at the same time.
The evidence also suggests that, in the two weeks between the Prime Minister's return from Guadeloupe and the subsequent attempts to settle the public-service strikes, there was a remarkable absence of initiative in the Cabinet and Whitehall and an unusual mood of despondency in Number 10 Downing Street.
Callaghan told Joel Barnett that he had never felt so depressed, and the news spread.
The Callaghan government never recovered from the sense of ungovernability and social chaos heralded by the winter of discontent.
In a vote of confidence on 28 March about the government's handling of the industrial crisis, the Liberals, the Scottish Nationalists, and most of the Ulster MPs voted with the Conservatives, while the government enlisted the support only of the 3 Welsh Nationalists, 2 Scottish Labour, and 2 Ulstermen.
One Labour MP, Sir Alfred Broughton, was away sick and that proved decisive.
The government lost by one vote, 311 to 310, and for the first time since October 1924 an administration had been voted out of office through a Commons vote.
The general election followed, in which Labour fought a vigorous but undeniably defensive campaign.
Callaghan himself followed a staid and dignified, but uncharismatic, course.
The main excitement, apart from the concerns of Ulster, came with disputes between Tony Benn and his NEC colleagues over the future direction to be pursued by a socialist government.
In the end, Callaghan managed to remove such policies as unilateralism, abolition of the House of Lords, and nationalizing the ‘big four’ banks from Labour's manifesto.
The polls showed a drift back towards Labour during the campaign and an NOP poll, extraordinarily, even showed a Labour lead of 0.7 per cent at the end of April, though this was not confirmed elsewhere.
Peter Jenkins in The Guardian opined that ‘it would no longer be amazing to see Mr Callaghan win by a whisker’.
In general, though, it was notable that Labour, as in 195 1, fought a negative and backward-looking contest, offering no new initiatives, and reiterating its well-known support for the National Health Service, public education, and fuller employment.
What Labour could hardly claim was that it had a magic formula for preserving peace with the unions, although the St Valentine's Day ‘concordat’ with the unions was milked for what it was worth.
The radicalism of the campaign came wholly from the Conservatives, redolent of the shift in the political and intellectual climate of the period generally since 1974.
The overall expectation was that the Conservatives would win and in the event they did so with rather more comfort than the polls had tended to suggest.
There was an overall majority for them of 44, which guaranteed a full term in office, with 339 Conservatives.
268 Labour, and only 11 for the Liberals who had clearly not benefited  from their quasi-governmental experiences of the Lib-Lab Pact.
Even though its vote was slightly up on that of October 1974, Labour's share of the poll had fallen to 36.9 per cent, the worst since 1931, while the Tories had risen to 43.9 per cent .
With the Liberals in decline and nationalism in retreat (only 2 SNP and 2 Plaid Cymru members were returned), the discontent with Labour had flowed strongly towards the Conservatives.
Under the leadership of a woman Prime Minister for the first time in western European history, the forces of the right, of private business, and the beleaguered middle class regrouped to redesign their nation before it was too late.
The ‘winter of discontent’ and the subsequent return of the Conservatives for what proved to be a very lengthy period of rule seemed to most observers to mark a profound watershed.
It seemed to provide an envoi to the policies and economics of consensus, which had coincided with decades of calamitous financial and international decline.
Few doubted that Britain's position had eroded substantially.
This was powerfully expressed in a valedictory message from the retiring ambassador to Paris, Sir Nicholas Henderson, who was about to succeed Peter Jay at the British embassy in Washington.
The gloomy terms of his report to the then Labour Foreign Secretary, David Owen, were widely leaked.
Henderson drew a sharp contrast with the years after 1945 when Britain was still a major and respected force in world affairs, the dominant power in the Middle East down to the time of Suez, the second most important power in the Far East at least down to the 1954 Geneva Conference.
More controversially, Henderson linked subsequent failure with the inability of Britain to involve itself in ‘Europe’.
either in the Schuman Plan or in the Messina Conference.
This meant, he argued, that in the 1960s the members of the EEC were able to develop a large and sophisticated market with much technical innovation as a result, while Britain continued to trade in its traditional markets, still partly obsessed with its Commonwealth relationships.
In the 1970s, Henderson argued, Britain was clearly not in the front rank, even as a European power, with its declining economy and lack of investment in managerial and engineering resources.
This diagnosis, that linked national decline so closely with non-membership of the European  Common Market, was open to much debate.
But the broad facts of internationally diminishing status, linked with economic weakness and social division at home, was generally accepted.
They were underlined by Labour's Defence Review of 1974–5 which committed Britain's ground forces solely to the defending of continental Europe, and stripped away the last fragments of the country's global pretensions.
There was, indeed, a broad sense that the gloomy seventies had brought about a transformation not only in Britain's external status but also in the main instrument and agents of planning and social policy, after the oil-price explosion, the IMF crisis, and the winter of discontent.
The mandarins were losing their charisma.
Sir Alec Cairncross, himself a distinguished practitioner of the Keynesian policies of the 1950s and 1960s, ruefully recalled in 1981 that the standing of economists, which was at its peak just after the war, was now back ‘at its pre-war low’.
He added: ‘We live in a society in which all forms of management and leadership, however advised, are under constant challenge….
Consensus and cohesion in the execution of policy are increasingly hard to achieve.’
The sense of common purpose and common direction that governed the war years had been lost, perhaps for ever.
In place of the Fabian imperatives of post-war planning and the corporate outlook of the 1944 White Paper, there had come sectional interest and a declining confidence in the public sector.
A nation unsure of its standing in the world was also unclear in its internal lines of direction and command structure.
No doubt, in many ways this gloom about the condition of Britain in the seventies was exaggerated.
The partial recovery of the economy after 1983 was to show that some of it was misplaced, and that fears about national ungovernability and inability to adapt were ill-founded.
The seventies came to an end with somewhat contradictory signposts of national advance or regression.
The arts continued to flourish, amidst growing argument over the role of the Arts Council, the right balance to be struck between the metropolitan and the regional, and between private and public funding.
British higher education remained another source of national pride and complacency, with the high international standing of British universities and polytechnics generally assumed, even though the  differential fees imposed on overseas students in Britain, first by the Callaghan government, and later by the Conservatives after 1979, somewhat eroded this appeal.
Above all, there was a general belief that, after three decades of social welfare and redistributive taxation, the spirit of Beveridge and ‘fair shares’ was not dead, and that Britain was a far more equitable society than before the war, with more genuine opportunity for different classes and races.
Thus, the marked advance of women in education and in the professions in the seventies was a notable, if belated testament to social advance, even if some of this progress owed much to the belligerent assertiveness of the feminist movement as well.
The Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth, chaired by Lord Diamond and originally set up by the Wilson government in 1974 to appease the unions over a wealth tax, made a series of oracular judgements which confirmed the progress which was generally assumed.
Reporting between 1976 and 1979 it showed how the share of the before-tax distribution of wealth of the top ten per cent had fallen from nearly 30 per cent in 1959 to 26.6 per cent in 1974–5.
The effect of taxes and social benefits had achieved ‘a substantial redistribution towards equality’.
Even at the poorer end of the scale, the effect of the distribution of benefits in cash and in kind had been substantially to equalize the wealth of older and poorer people.
The 20 per cent of the poorest households, who had claimed only 0.9 per cent of the ‘original income’, rose through welfare benefits and other supplementary assistance to a ‘final income’ share of 9.0 per cent.
A social wage had been provided for those unable for whatever reason to earn, or those whose earning capacity had been interrupted by illness, injury, and unemployment.
Beyond aspects of redistribution, almost all classes of the community showed a picture of greater affluence and comfort over the past thirty years.
Aided by substantial tax relief on house mortgages, the proportion of owner-occupiers had risen from 29.5 per cent of dwellings in 1951 to 52.8 per cent at the end of 1975.
Conversely, privately rented dwellings had fallen in proportion from 44.6 per cent at the former date to 16 per cent in 1975.
Clearly, a large and growing majority of occupiers owned their own home.
Their assets had improved in other ways also.
For instance, building-society deposits, bank cash accounts, and National Savings holdings all rose sharply throughout the period, especially with high interest rates prevailing for almost the whole of the 1970s.
It was a good decade for the rentier and the small investor.
In many ways, then, it seemed that the pressure of welfare policy and social planning had indeed led both to greater equality and to more diffused prosperity as pioneers like Beveridge and theorists like Titmus had long forecast.
It had promoted social provision, income maintenance, and (down to 1973) full employment, in contrast to the social misery after 1919.
Yet there was cause for anxiety even here.
This affluence was disproportionately concentrated in southeast England.
Even in the seventies there was awareness of a ‘north — south’ divide.
In 1978, 42 per cent of all personal income went to 33 per cent of households concentrated in south east England, especially Greater London.
The new patterns of the economy, the steady decline of manufacturing industry (in which 6.5 m. of the population were directly employed at the end of the seventies) as against the rise of the service and transport sector (which employed 7.25 m. at the start of 1980) also told in favour of the redistribution of resources in favour of particular regions and occupational groups.
Managers, technicians, and other ‘lower professionals’ expanded in number with especial rapidity.
Again, the welfare state had in many respects advanced equality of opportunity, but not equality of outcome.
It was above all the white middle class who benefited from a free health service, earnings-related pensions, and the growth of larger secondary schools.
The new comprehensive schools, educationalists complained, seemed to have less social mixing than the old grammar schools had done.
Less than ten per cent of the  university or other higher-education student population came from working-class households.
The welfare state, then, had not closed the gap between classes, despite the growth of supplementary and other benefits under the 1974–9 Labour governments.
There had been some redistribution of income.
But in terms, say, of residual wealth and capital, educational mobility, or occupational status, even in everyday terms such as dress, hobbies, or accent, British social divisions remained unusually pronounced by European or transatlantic standards.
Some of the social and economic assumptions on which Beveridge and other pioneers had based their welfare schemes had been proved to be over-optimistic.
There had been steady, if slow, economic growth down to the 1970s.
The national income had doubled since 1948; in the period 1951–73, the average annual rate of growth was 2.3 per cent.
But, apart from being a relatively poor performance by international standards, national resources had not grown sufficiently to take account of total need.
There had been weakened competitiveness, endemic balance-of-payments problems, cyclical stop — go movements in the economy, and a falling off of the rate of capital accumulation.
This weakness had become far more pronounced since the oil crisis of 1973 with a severe cut-back in output and demand, and the annual percentage rate of growth in 1973–9 a mere 0.7 per cent.
The welfare state was a particular casualty.
Pensions and benefits had not risen to keep pace with the rate of inflation, especially in the 1970s.
Hopes that private and voluntary agencies, along with the nuclear family, could supplement the welfare state did not apply with equal validity to a society with more dislocation, more one-parent families, a growing divorce rate, and less active involvement by religious and other charitable bodies.
The army of social workers had indeed risen sharply.
At the start of the 1970s, at least 135,000 people were employed in local authority social service departments.
But the task was increasingly beyond them, as social surveys showed the inability of the welfare services to cope with the specific needs of  the aged, the disabled, and one-parent families.
Divorces rose steadily, though the real acceleration in the divorce rate was to come after the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act of 1 984 which allowed petitioning for divorce after only one year of marriage.
Especially disadvantaged were children, whose needs were dramatically highlighted by the Child Poverty Action Group and similar organizations.
The ending of the former child allowances and their replacement with tax-free child benefits in 1975 meant an increase in the problem of dependency, with only about half the 750,000 one-parent families in 1976, for instance, able to rely on their income as means of support.
An unduly high proportion of such families were black.
The rising toll of unemployment was another alarming problem, involving as it naturally did the families and children of the unemployed man or woman as well.
Over a million people found themselves dependent on supplementary benefit to eke out an inadequate existence as regards food and drink, with inflation taking its toll of what was provided.
Relative poverty, more markedly than absolute poverty, clearly rose rapidly throughout the 1970s.
On balance, social scientists glumly concluded, the welfare state, in spreading its net so wide, was often avoiding the needs of specifically targeted groups and individuals who needed help.
The social provision that had been Britain's thank-offering to an expectant postwar world after 1945 had left the problem of poverty, in some respects, remarkably and alarmingly unaffected.
It had also generated complacency and an insufficiently productive, administratively-oriented work-force.
In most respects, Britain spent a smaller proportion of the annual budget on welfare than did continental European countries with a system financed from contributory sources or with a greater mix of public and private provision.
Nor could it be said that the British welfare system identified, or even defined, let alone assisted, the genuinely needy groups as effectively as did some systems prevailing elsewhere.
In short, quite apart from economic or foreign policy considerations, the social momentum which had sustained the British throughout their difficult experiences since 1945 was not being maintained.
Underlying these themes was the belief that the problems of the British system were being thrown into stark relief by the endless economic difficulties of the 1970s.
The Oxford economists, Bacon and Eltis, found a receptive audience across the political spectrum  for their diagnosis that Britain was generating far too few producers of wealth.
In their stead came a new intermediate breed of service operatives working in administration, in finance, or in the professions.
University graduates became accountants, solicitors, or stock-brokers instead of entering industry.
One consequence in industrial terms was the greater bargaining power of professional and white-collar groups, especially focusing on their trade unions as during the ‘winter of discontent’, able to use their bargaining muscle to claim a growing share of the national income for themselves without much compensation in manufacturing or investment.
Eltis linked this with the basic errors he detected in Keynesian ideas, as propounded by such recent disciples as Harrod or Kaldor, who gave full employment and job creation the priority over price stability.
Demand management had been given priority in preference to profitable or productive work.
Rather than being the workshop of the world, Britain was becoming one of the world's secretarial colleges, with priority given to non-manual clerical and service occupation.
While the drift out of industrial employment was common to all developed countries after 1945, in Britain in 1975 the ratio of non-industrial to industrial employment was 41 per cent, compared with 32.8 per cent in Germany, 27.9 per cent in the USA, 22.5 per cent in France, and just 4.5 per cent in Japan.
One pointer was the way that a growing percentage of the work-force was employed in the various activities of tourism, much of it of necessity on a shortterm or seasonal basis.
This disparity loomed ever larger in the rescue of the balance of payments.
It affected not only rural or seaside communities (some of which were now facing a crisis with the growing attractiveness of continental holidays and the inroads made by car and caravan into the traditional domain of the seaside landlady), but even industrial areas, where such attractions as Big Pit at Blaenavon in South Wales paid testimony to the passing of the age of coal.
The socalled ‘heritage’ industry brought large numbers of foreign and other tourists to old centres of attraction like country houses (now increasingly taken over by the National Trust), towns like Stratford, York, or Bath, and also to monuments of industrial or other archaeology.
But the entire heritage concept was an ambiguous one, culturally and financially.
It had an educative purpose, and it brought in some cash to hard-pressed regions.
But it also increased the focus on unproductive, marginal, service employment, and perhaps encouraged a pervasive, discontented nostalgia, in which the inheritance of the glorious past was either unrelated to, or else unhistorically contrasted with, the bleak, discontented present.
Survey after survey in the 1970s pointed both to growing public expenditure (much of it on defence) and yet also to a run-down public sector.
Trains and telephones broke down, cities and highways were grubby and unhygienic.
There was a failure to invest, an inability to sustain science which led to renewed talk of a ‘brain drain' of British scientists to American and other campuses, an inherent suspicion and division which prevented effective collaboration in industry.
Britain's social engineers had prided themselves on the ability to plan as they had done during the war.
But compared with the Monnet ideal in France, or the corporate strategy of Japan, Britain had scarcely planned in any meaningful sense at all.
Harold Wilson's ‘white heat’ talk of 1963 seemed in 1979 extraordinarily dated.
Michael Shanks, author of the powerful Stagnant Society of 1961, bitterly criticized fifteen years later the sterile failure of the planning imperative.
In 1977, at the time of the Bullock Committee on remoulding industrial relations, Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany had been brought in to instruct the Prime Minister, Callaghan, and Britain's industrial leaders and trade unionists on the need to frame a new industrial climate as a basis for productive growth and a revived influence in the world.
Callaghan and some of the CBI, at least, were duly impressed.
But the consequences were abuse from the unions, hostility from the CBI, caution in Whitehall and Westminster, and no real change at all.
Bullock's call for worker-directors was generally derided as utopian.
The very lack of dynamism, or pro-active vision in British industry, government, and scientific development, while widely perceived and understood, resisted efforts at reform.
The ‘winter of discontent’ thus encouraged a wider sense of national enfeeblement and decline.
There was a tidal wave of pessi — mistic literature on this theme —The Future that Doesn't Work: Social Democracy's Failures in Britain (1977);The Politics of Economic Decline (1979);Britain: Progress and Decline (1980); and, most evocatively of all,Is Britain Dying ?
(1979).
History text-books invariably included in their titles such key-words as ‘Decline’, ‘Downfall’, and ‘Eclipse’.
Turmoil in industrial relations, ethnic disturbances, the growth of violent crime, even the dismal competitive record of British footballers, cricketers, and tennis players, were all grist to the commentators' mill.
The roots of all this, it was agreed, lay deep in British history — perhaps in the moral nihilism of the 1960s, perhaps in the collectivism of the 1940s, perhaps in the decline of the entrepreneurial spirit in the late Victorian period, perhaps even in the many centuries of geographical isolation and freedom from foreign occupation behind the barrier of sea power.
The point of reference for the origins of Britain's eclipse could be placed almost anywhere from 1968 back to 1066.
But, however sketchy or plain foolish the history and social anthropology might be, the existence of long-term degeneration, in some key respects at least, commanded widespread assent.
One demographic factor, much noted, was that the British, an old nation, were an increasingly elderly people.
The proportion of the population over 60 rose to nearly 29 per cent by 1980, most of them women.
At the other end of the age-scale, renewal was less in evidence.
In the seventies, after a rise in the birth-rate from the midfifties to the mid-sixties, creating a ‘bulge’ in the school and student population in the 1970s, there was a gradual decline in the birthrate in the seventies.
The Registrar-General's statistics showed a low point of 11.8 per cent of live births per 1,000 of the population in 1977, with a slight rise thereafter.
In part, this was because of rising affluence, and a sense of financial and other independence among women.
Working women were delaying or curtailing their capacity to bear children, marrying later or perhaps being reluctant to have children at all.
The rise of a new stratum of child-minders and crêche facilities, public or private, was testimony to the wish of women to lead more relaxed, interesting, child-free lives, accentuated by the fact of more women being middle class in status or perhaps aspiration.
The classic working-class ‘mum’, living at home to look after her numerous children with the man as the bread-winner, while a folk myth sustained by the Inland Revenue and the population census amongst others in the 1970s, conformed less and less to the reality.
These factors might well be seen as socially beneficial.
But many commentators saw only a decline in the desire to rear or look after children, a weakening of the cohesive effects of the family, and an associated diminution of the buoyancy of the stock in terms familiar at least since the Boer War.
The partial compensation found in the fertility of the black and brown immigrants of the Commonwealth countries who had sent over 3 million people into Britain since 1962 did not meet with universal enthusiasm, as the evidence from the Race Relations Board frequently suggested.
Afro-Caribbeans huddled in ghetto areas like Brixton or Southall.
Non-white Britons were having a growing impact, notably in mass sport and entertainment; commercial advertisements to an increasing degree focused on a poly-ethnic consumer market.
But only an enlightened few saw this as a symbol of national renewal.
In the face of this varied sense of internal malaise, the return of the Thatcher government, with its young-Turk generation of monetarists and entrepreneurs, marked at least a change of gear, even if the privatization of publicly-owned enterprises was a very minor feature of the Conservative manifesto in 1979.
An updated welfare state was linked with ‘strengthening family life’.
As yet there was no great sense that the policies of welfare and social egalitarianism since 1945 needed to be reversed.
The recasting of economic policy in a supply-side direction still remained the faith of a minority.
But that there was need for a substantial change in British society was a widespread conclusion.
The British in 1979 were poised between a reverence for old historic symbols which had provided order and cohesion over the centuries, and an uneasy awareness that such reverence had become a recipe for immobilism and devotion to the outdated totems of the past.
Polls in the state of  public opinion and attitudes offered contrary findings.
They suggested that, despite everything, most British people remained calm.
They continued to prefer (and, indeed, to expect) a quiet life.
A poll commissioned by the EEC in 1977 showed that 82 per cent of the population declared themselves to be broadly satisfied with living in Britain, compared with 68 per cent in France and 59 per cent in Italy.
Compared with most continentals and, indeed, Americans, the British by this crude test were a relatively happy people.
Their democracy had remained secure.
Suggestions in 1975 of a military coup by Colonel Stirling's ‘non-party, non-class organization of apprehensive patriots’ or General Walker's ‘non-class Militia’met with almost universal derision.
So, too, did the alarmist outpourings of the National Association for Freedom, a far-right pressure-group directed by a clutch of ex-army officers and Norris McWhirter, better known as the author of the Guinness Book of Records and apologist for South Africa.
At the same time, the British were in distinctly worried mood.
Since 1961 (to be precise, since Selwyn Lloyd's ‘pay pause’ that summer) British people had given sustaining the economy the priority over foreign affairs among their concerns.
They had become increasingly introspective.
In the sixties, polls showed that, even if they believed that they themselves were doing rather well, most British people felt that their country was doing rather badly, and falling further behind foreign competitors.
By the late 1970s, both private and public expectations were in parallel decline.
Britain in mid-1979 was unlikely to lurch into any drastic transformation, let alone a dictatorship.
Record inflation would not reproduce the panic of the Weimar Republic in the twenties, nor the ‘winter of discontent’ the pre-Vichy, neo-fascist despair of the French Third Republic in the later thirties.
The British had no wish to move elsewhere.
Emigration to Australia or New Zealand, let alone the United States, which had its own extreme problems of crime and racial violence, was little more than a trickle.
Like the immortal ‘Old Bill’ in Bruce Bairns father's First World War cartoon of the trenches, the patient British urged their neighbours that if they knew of ‘a better'ole’they should go to it.
For all that, it was a dismal phase in the chequered history of postwar Britain.
The urge for a redirection of effort to repair national self-esteem was predominant as the unpermissive, unproductive seventies came to their close.
Storm and Stress 1979–1989
The Foundations of ‘Thatherism’ 1979–1983
MORE than any change of government since 1945, Margaret Thatcher's election victory was taken as marking a decisive shift in the national mood, politically, intellectually, and culturally.
The fall of James Callaghan in the summer of 1979 meant, according to most commentators across the political spectrum, the end of an ancien régime , a system of corporatism, Keynesian spending programmes, subsidized welfare, and trade-union power.
To enthusiasts, it meant the passing of ‘the dependency culture’ in favour of a new wave of enterprise and individualism.
After forming the core of a post-war consensus for over three decades since the Attlee period, the bitter legacy of the old order was now seen in the uncollected refuse bins and undug graves which popular credence (somewhat exaggeratedly) identified with ‘the winter of discontent’.
On all sides, both in the government service directly and in its associated echelons of closed institutions, corporations, committees, and ‘quangos’, there had been evidence of a loss of national confidence.
The conventional wisdom of the pre-1970 period had perished in the ‘stagflation’ and social strife of the recent past.
In place of the chastened, latter-day apostles of Keynes and Beveridge, a new generation of hard-headed spokesmen of free enterprise emerged, taking their cue from the dogmas of the new Prime Minister herself.
Certainly there was abundant evidence as to how the centre-left had lost its entrenched intellectual and ideological ascendancy.
As the Thatcher government gradually recovered from a shaky and difficult start to retain power  by a hugely increased majority in 1983, followed by another overwhelming electoral triumph (in seats if not in votes) in 1987 and as the spectacle was observed in 1989 of a Prime Minister remaining in unchallenged power for over a decade, comparable to Lord Liverpool if not yet Robert Walpole in the past, the belief took hold that the values and style of modern Britain had been transformed.
More than any Prime Minister since Lloyd George, Mrs Thatcher appeared justified in proclaiming after some years in office, ‘I have changed everything’.
To adopt her favourite adverbs, everything had been ‘totally and utterly’ transformed, or so it seemed.
By the mid-1980s, this became increasingly the accepted view of what the Thatcher years had meant for Britain as a society and a polity.
On the political right, this implied the triumph of the market philosophy, the private ethic, and the imperatives of early-nineteenth-century liberalism in place of the dead hand of state-directed corporatism which Attlee, Macmillan, Wilson, and Heath had variously created.
Mrs Thatcher appeared to see herself as the embodiment of revenge upon a whole generation of social engineers.
She committed herself to the view that ‘there was no such thing as society’, only individuals and families, an extraordinary reaction against the outlook of the past forty years.
On the political left, a popular approach was to adopt the terminology of the long-dead Italian Marxist, Antonio Gramsci, to argue that Thatcherism was more than a governmental system, more even than an ideological banner.
It was truly a hegemony that extended the market ethic beneath the shelter of an increasingly powerful state apparatus, at the cost of both social cohesion and personal liberty.
It penetrated the very substructure of national culture, with the message of traditional capitalism proclaimed in an unusually explicit and aggressive form.
Between the ideologues and monetarists of the New Right, and the revisionist Marxists of the New Left, defenders of what they took to be the post-1945 social order floundered unhappily.
One after another, down to the end of 1988 at least, attempts to reform or redefine the old consensus on ‘one-nation’ lines proved ineffective.
Hopes  attached to the new Social Democratic Party of right-wing Labour Party defectors in 1981 collapsed after the internal divisions that followed electoral disaster in June 1987.
By mid-1989 the centre in British politics, split between the renamed ‘Democrats’, the remaining Social Democrats, and ‘green’ environmentalists, seemed weaker than at any time since the leadership of the old Liberals by Jo Grimond at the time of ‘Orpington man’in the early 1960s.
The Labour Party, riven by schism and self-doubt, seemed in long-term, inexorable decline, for sociological as well as ideological reasons.
The long march to 1945 and beyond had truly been halted.
Large sections of the community, especially the blacks in the urban ghettos, young unemployed in urban areas of the north, and a considerable swathe of the people of Scotland, seemed almost to contract out from traditional forms of participation and civic involvement.
The cultural activity of the land remained vigorous, with a notable revival, for instance, in British sculpture.
But the new generation of novelists and playwrights in the 1980s were somewhat more inward-looking in finding their cultural stimulation than, say, their predecessors in the fifties and sixties.
They were increasingly prone to introspective analysis without a social cutting edge.
Successful, Booker Prize-winning women novelists such as Anita Brookner or Penelope Lively, for example, did not reflect the feminist awareness of the time to any marked extent.
Aspects of class, race, or nationalism passed them by, though this was less true of another distinguished author, Margaret Drabble.
John Osborne's Look Back in Anger was presented in a new production in 1989 as a study of a failed marriage rather than of the playwright's early ideological concerns.
Truly, there were now ‘no great causes left’.
Meanwhile, significant groups of intellectuals and artists, often in a somewhat modish, self-conscious way which attracted derision in the press, seemed to move away from identification with their society, so alien to their instincts did what they saw as the unacceptable, philistine face of Thatcherism appear to be.
In the face of the self-confident panache of the new monetarists, the Policy Studies group, and the apostles of the market-place, significant numbers of British intellectuals seemed to lose heart.
There was open, if despairing, resistance in the plays of David Hare, Howard Brenton, or David Edgar, or in a realist film like My Beautiful Laundrette .
Critics tried to rescue older notions of ‘community’ or ‘citizenship’to set against the competitive values of the Thatcher government — only to discover that the latter was highly adept in taking over these themes itself in such areas as housing, education, and ‘neighbourhood watch’crime-prevention schemes, partly as a weapon against left-wing local authorities.
In the summer of 1988, a group of writers and other intellectuals, ranging from Alliance supporters to Euro-Communists, formed a new journal,Samizdat .
It openly evoked the example of the Soviet dissidents, and voiced the despair of liberals of varying shades at what had happened to the fabric of British society since 1979.
Not until the spring and summer of 1989 when, for the first time, the Thatcher government showed clear signs of frailty, with electoral defeats, economic difficulties, and internal acrimony which recalled the later years of Macmillan's government in the early 1960s, did the critics begin to regain their confidence.
For the first time in a decade the Thatcherite crusade seemed to be faltering, though how permanently it was too early to judge.
The new regime took its cue, to a truly extraordinary extent, from the personality and outlook of the new Prime Minister.
Margaret Thatcher was remarkable, of course, for being the first woman Prime Minister, and she could use this factor to persuade or beguile male colleagues on occasion.
But it was very seldom her femininity, but rather her image of toughness, determination, and ruthless single-mindedness that dominated public perceptions.
She took office in May 1979, proclaiming on the steps of Number 10 Downing Street the healing words of St Francis of Assisi —‘where there is discord, may we bring harmony.’
Yet it was not the message of saintly benevolence but the jarring note of conflict, belligerence, and confrontation which marked her style from the outset.
Moderates or doubters were dismissed as ‘wets’ or sometimes ‘wimps’.
From the outset, Mrs Thatcher had the sense of being a political outsider.
It went far beyond her role as a woman in public life.
She was the self-conscious product of a grocer's shop and a frugal Methodist background in Grantham in rural Lincolnshire.
Her exemplar was her father, a local patriarch and evidently an apostle of Samuel Smiles-type individualism: she omitted reference to her mother in Who's Who .
A minister in the Heath government, she had rebelled totally against its corporate style, and joined with Sir Keith Joseph in forming the Centre for Policy Studies in 1 974 as a forum for  proclaiming the cause of market individualism and monetary discipline.
She was elected as Tory leader in 1975 as the voice of petit bourgeois protest in the constituencies, as against grandees like Whitelaw, Carrington, or Pym.
It has been perceptively written that her victory was the product of a kind of ‘peasants' revolt’ within the Tory Party.
She rejected the complacent, paternalist inactivity of the ‘common ground’.
Her ability, like that of Lloyd George (a previous premier for whom she had no affection) to project herself as an outsider, detached from her party leadership, her civil service, even the Cabinet which she led, was a vital key to her effectiveness and impact.
When she was attacked by her venerable predecessor Harold Macmillan (now elevated to the Lords as the Earl of Stockton) for ‘selling off the family silver’, it added to her proud sense of detachment.
Mrs Thatcher was usually termed ‘a conviction politician’, most at home with others of that stern, unbending creed.
Moderates, liberals, ‘wet’ Tories of the old school, were witheringly dismissed as ‘not one of us’.
She was not an intellectual; her philosophical baggage was comparatively light.
The abiding influence, it appeared, was that of the venerable Austrian anti-statist, Friedrich von Hayek, a critic of encroaching government since before the 1945 election.
Mrs Thatcher claimed to have read Hayek's Road to Serfdom while she was still a student at Somerville College, Oxford, just after the war; but it was not until the 1970s, while in opposition, that she seems to have read Hayek's writings more generally.
In any case, her main ideological inspiration, like that of Lloyd George, came from people rather than from books.
One ideological guru was businessman, Sir Alfred Sherman, founder with her of the Centre for Policy Studies in 1974.
Even more did she rely on the guidance of Sir Keith Joseph, another rebel against the Heath interlude, whose speeches in 1974 first traced the clear lines of monetarism and market strategy which by 1979 had become the orthodoxy in many Conservative circles.
The main thrust of Thatcherite social and economic philosophy was far from clear when she took office in May 1979, so entrenched were key figures of the Heathite past in the party; but the general thrust would clearly lie in pursuing the monetarist approach of the Chicago economist, Milton Friedman, in which control of the money supply  through M3 indicators, and identifying inflation rather than unemployment as the central enemy, were the fundamental themes.
The central issue was seen to be the relationship between the growth or contraction of the money supply and the pattern of national income and expenditure.
In general, though, Mrs Thatcher's approach was not really philosophical at all .
Indeed, instinct rather than inductive reasoning marked her approach to life.
In the Burkeian sense, she followed prejudice and (sometimes) prescription.
Time and again, she would turn to simple, homely precepts drawn from the grocer's shop in Grantham, embellished with strongly held views about human nature.
On one famous occasion, these were defined as ‘Victorian values’.
This implied a distinctly selective view of the nineteenth century which omitted Dickens, Disraeli, Arnold, and Ruskin among others.
More than any Prime Minister, perhaps, since Douglas-Home, she had little interest in the development or clash of ideas.
It followed that her associates and most admired colleagues were invariably businessmen or entrepreneurs rather than intellectuals, writers, or artists, doers rather than talkers or thinkers.
She formed a distinctly close relationship with some business figures prominent in the Jewish community, though this did not unduly colour her view of the state of Israel.
She symbolized her down-to-earth philosophy in her own busy persona, ceaselessly active, endlessly combative at home and abroad, hardly ever taking a holiday, never relaxing with music, books, or in the world of the arts.
She apparently read every civil-service memorandum, personally confronted or abused officials, and intervened in departmental affairs as few premiers had done since Sir Robert Peel.
In time she also found allies in a handful of civil servants like Charles Powell and Sir Bernard Cradock and an occasional diplomat like Sir Anthony Duff and Sir Crispin Tickell.
On all issues, she appeared formidably well-informed.
A politician of intuition not of intellect, she served as the perfect antidote to the cerebral doctrines of the Keynesian planners of the 1945–79 period, against whose dominion she had so memorably rebelled.
It was not endearing, comfortable, or perhaps attractive.
But for many years after 1979 this approach seemed to embody many of the qualities which a depressed, declining nation yearned for and acclaimed.
The real essence of ‘Thatcherism’, indeed, lay not so much in its ideas, which proved to be increasingly malleable as the years went by, and especially when Nigel Lawson took over the Treasury in  1984.
It lay rather in the company it kept, the classes with which it was associated.
As noted, Mrs Thatcher came from a relatively humble, unprivileged background, though a degree at Oxford and later marriage to a millionaire businessman gave her a distinctly haut bourgeois status in time.
But her outlook was subtly different, say from that of Edward Heath, whose father was a carpenter in a small town in Kent and who, like Mrs Thatcher, went to a local grammar school rather than the private boarding schools favoured by most Tory leaders.
The Heath background was one of constructive, but deferential, working-class Toryism.
The Thatcher background was one of entrepreneurial, upwardly-mobile, self-sufficient, middle-class neo-liberalism.
It followed that her main associates and the figures to whom she was most naturally attracted, and who in turn revered her ascendancy, were self-made businessmen and smaller entrepreneurs, usually from the fields of finance, speculation, and investment.
The roots of Thatcherism lay in acquisition rather than in production.
It sought to create a business, perhaps a rentier , culture.
Its spokeswoman imposed on the Conservative Party values very different from those of industrialists like Peel, Bonar Law, or Baldwin in the past.
She was liable to propel into the governmental system men associated with business success, of whom Lord Young became the prototype from 1984 onwards She was truly a distinctive phenomenon, linked neither with the patrician values of the grandees in the shires, nor with the manufacturing Tories of northern England cherished by Disraelian Tory Democracy in the last century, nor again with the suburban Toryism dominant in the party in the interwar years and after 1951.
Mrs Thatcher gloried, among other things, in being a provincial, whose Lincolnshire origins would sometimes come out unexpectedly in her rhetoric.
Such time-honoured Conservative themes as reverence for the Church and the gentry, for ‘one-nation’ cohesion in the romantic style of the Primrose League, made little impact on this perpetually embattled leader.
Her relationship with Queen Elizabeth II was believed to be frosty and her regard for the Commonwealth, now dominated by black- and brown-skinned leaders from Africa and Asia, slight.
She made precious few concessions to the old orthodoxies.
Her detachment from her own party as well as her nation added to her strength and sense of invincibility.
The nation expected a radical new impetus from Mrs Thatcher in May 1979, but it was curiously long in coming.
For, alongside the  conviction politics, and the violent rhetoric, was in practice an ingrained pragmatism.
After all, Mrs Thatcher was also a supreme politician, not just an evangelist.
She could eat her words, while denying with the maximum of emphasis that she was ever ‘for turning’.
In fact, her first administration down to June 1983 showed the impact of Thatcherite policies to be somewhat muted, with even so single-minded a Prime Minister apparently lacking in direction.
There are many reasons for this.
No doubt it was hard to dismantle, or even dent, the consensus policies of thirty-five years at a stroke.
There were also inherited pledges which no new Prime Minister could disavow.
Thus, the Conservative attack on inflation and public-sector wage explosions was in part nullified by the Clegg awards on pay comparability.
This meant a huge rise of £1¼ billion in public-sector wage settlements in 1979–80 and drove inflation up far higher than the Callaghan government had ever done previously.
The decisive factor, though, was that Mrs Thatcher, for all her election triumph, was far from being mistress in her own house yet.
With far more reason than Harold Wilson in 1964, she could claim to be running (mutatis mutandis ) a Bolshevik revolution with a Tsarist Cabinet.
The domination of the old Heath Conservatives in her first Cabinet was overwhelming.
Lord Carrington, a consensual aristocrat of the old school whose experience of government went back to 1951, had to be Foreign Secretary.
The Home Secretary was Willie Whitelaw, another traditional practitioner of one-nation ideas, and a major influence on party and government.
James Prior went to the Department of Employment; in the words of one critic, Jock Bruce-Gardyne, he was to make this key department a citadel of ‘unrepentant corporatism’.
Francis Pym went to Defence; Peter Walker to Agriculture; Sir Ian Gilmour also to the Foreign Office; Norman St John-Stevas became Leader of the House.
Against these powerful Heathite figures, there were indeed very few colleagues whom the Prime Minister could safely regard as ‘one of us’.
The minority included Sir Keith Joseph, who took his bleak monetarist outlook to the Department of Trade and Industry, and John Biffen, an early apostle of Enoch Powell's financial credo, who became a Treasury Minister (and who also shared the Prime Minister's lack of enthusiasm for ‘Europe’).
Lower down in the government were such potential  agents of ‘Thatcherism’ as David Howell and (more doubtfully) Nigel Lawson.
The rogue figure of Angus Maude became Paymaster-General, another symbol of revolt against Macmillan-style — politics and an opponent of the consensus approach.
But, in general, fully three-quarters of her first Cabinet were identified with the mainstream Toryism of post-1945.
They were welfare democrats and public spenders, not at all in tune with Mrs Thatcher's awkward imperatives.
This was the supreme limiting restraint upon her ascendancy.
Not until the end of 1981 did she begin to fight free of their domination.
The real test of Thatcherite radicalism would surely lie with its economic and financial policies.
Here, the appropriate leader of change had been in some doubt.
Some Conservatives, astonishingly enough, had even visualized the return to the Treasury of Roy Jenkins, a Labour minister until 1976 and now President of the European Commission in Brussels.
In fact, though, the new Chancellor turned out to be the emollient figure of Sir Geoffrey Howe, once a vaguely progressive Heathite minister too, but a notable convert to monetarism in the later 1970s.
His yielding to the edicts of Number 10 on financial policy eventually enabled the main thrust of Thatcherite innovation to show itself here, even though it was often the moderation as much as the radicalism which was to impress observers.
Certainly, the Treasury was to be a major battle ground between contending philosophies.
Its respective champions were personified by the Permanent Secretary, Sir Douglas Wass, an entrenched mandarin prone to statements like ‘We're all Keynesians here’, and Mrs Thatcher's new army of private advisers, monetarist apostles like Terry Burns and, from 1981, Alan Walters.
Not until two years had passed was the outcome of these disputes at all clear.
Geoffrey Howe's first budget on 14 June 1979, only three weeks after the government had been in office, marked out the early objectives of the monetarist advance.
It included a sharp attack on public spending, with cash limits on the public sector, the raising of minimum lending rate to 14 per cent, some sale of public assets to help finance the public-sector borrowing requirement, and a major switch from direct taxation to taxes on spending.
The standard rate of income tax was lowered to 30 per cent, whereas the raising of  Value Added Tax and other indirect taxes switched tax policy to focus on expenditure.
The supply side was elevated in contrast to, Keynesian demand management.
Exchange controls were also notably relaxed; in the autumn they were to be abolished altogether.
This strikingly different budget was clearly intended to spearhead a monetarist assault on cost inflation.
Yet, in fact, inflation continued to rise sharply, partly through the effect of the Clegg awards.
Howe's budget deflated the economy and seriously added to unemployment.
Yet it managed to raise prices and to add to inflation at one and the same time.
For the next year and a half, the attainment of the monetarist objectives proved exceptionally difficult.
For the nation as a whole, the visible effect was a huge rise in unemployment and a vast drop in the gross domestic product, with factories, mills, and pits closing down all over the country.
In 1979–81, while other nations saw their GDP rise by 5.3 per cent, Britain's fell by 2.5 per cent .
Unemployment rose to 13.3 per cent, the highest in Western Europe.
Britain's productive capacity was falling more rapidly than at any time since the dawn of the industrial age.
Howe's second budget of March 1980 assumed a drop of 2 per Cent in the real national income, and continuing and rising unemployment.
After a year in office, the Thatcher government found itself presiding over mass de-industrialization, inflation of more than 20 per cent, a rise in public spending, and the prospects of a slump.
Only the blessings of a continuing income from North Sea oil kept the balance of payments in reasonable condition, but even here the emergence of the pound as a ‘petro-currency’(along with high interest rates) led to its appreciation in value to the cost of British exports.
A government elected to cut public spending and reduce inflation as the basis for economic recovery had achieved, it seemed, exactly the reverse.
The arguments within the Thatcher administration went on apace over whether to swing the axe fiercely into public spending in the winter of 1980–1, with ministers like Prior, Pym, Walker, and Carrington arguing the case for maintaining public expenditure and investment, monetarists outside the government like Alan Budd urging far more stringent monetary restraint, and Sir Geoffrey Howe at the Treasury buffeted about in between.
The bleakness of the government's economic approach was never more apparent.
The  Heathite ministers effectively won the Cabinet debates over the public-spending round in the autumn of 1980, but their victory was short-lived.
The Howe budget of March 1 98 1 marked a clear triumph for the monetarists and a new level of austerity.
In the face of the open dissent of Prior, Pym, Walker, and Gilmour, and even some resistance from the Chancellor of the Exchequer himself, the Prime Minister, urged on by her newest economic adviser, Professor Alan Walters, forced through the most resolutely anti-Keynesian budget of modern times.
It imposed Britain's biggest-ever tax increases, including a rise of 20p in petrol tax, and heavy taxation on smokers and drinkers.
A total of £3,500 million was taken out of the public-sector borrowing requirement.
Never before had there been so savage a fiscal squeeze; not since the thirties had there been a comparable increase in unemployment, now approaching 3 million.
There were widespread murmurs in Tory ranks, and the government's standing fell to only 27 per cent in the polls of March 1981.
A total of 364 economists, almost one for each day of the year, dispatched a formal letter to The Times denouncing the government's economic approach as ruinous — though they were soon matched by a similarly large number of economists who were prepared to endorse it.
Both the city and the CBI were strongly critical of the budget: Sir Terence Beckett of the CBI spoke of the need to have a ‘bare-knuckle fight’ with the government, though this aggressive posture later disappeared.
The government seemed to be presiding over massive industrial contraction; Mrs Thatcher at this time was the most unpopular Prime Minister since Neville Chamberlain in 1939.
At the 1 980 Tory Party Conference she pronounced stubbornly that ‘the lady's not for turning’.
There would be no ‘U-turns’ in financial policy.
But the cost of such rigour, both in economic and political terms, seemed almost unacceptable.
In fact, the government's policy from 1982 onwards became somewhat less rigid.
This was in part because it was simply not working.
The effect of high interest rates and a ‘petro-pound’ was to strengthen sterling; the consequences were for exports to sag and for inflationary pressure to increase rather than diminish.
Government ministers tried to stem the tide of mounting public expenditure: John Nott's replacing Francis Pym at the Ministry of Defence in January 1981 was thought to be a pointer in this direction.
Public spending  continued to rise nevertheless, not least because of the colossal bill of social-security payments to relieve the rising number of unemployed.
But after this period economic policy showed some moderation.
Attempts to claim that M3 was a precise yardstick of the money supply were abandoned; after all, it had actually expanded by 20 per cent with high inflation.
The much more limited test of M1, ‘narrow money’, including non-interest-bearing deposits, was favoured instead.
New curbs on wage settlements reminiscent of Selwyn Lloyd's ‘guiding light’ of the early 1960s replaced the doctrinaire ‘hands-off’policy of 1979–81.
As production began to recover somewhat during 1982, and inflation to fall (partly because of an improvement in the US economy), a less rigorous approach was adopted towards the money supply in the 1982 budget, while £1.3 billion in taxes were prudently ‘given away’.
By the end of the first Thatcher administration, even Geoffrey Howe was scarcely to be identified as a strict monetarist, and the ‘medium-term financial strategy, was in retreat.
Mrs Thatcher, ironically, now found herself criticized by the Chicago sage, Milton Friedman, for failing to apply the monetarist remedy with sufficient consistency or determination.
The major achievement that could be claimed by March 1983 — a notable one indeed — was that inflation had fallen from a peak of 22 per cent in early 1980 to a mere 5 per cent.
On the other hand, this was partly the result of huge unemployment depressing demand and consumer pressure, while the sharp fall of sterling against both the dollar and the deutschmark was also not what was intended.
It also reflected the passing of the second OPEC price shock of 1979–80.
At the time of the June 1983 general election, with Geoffrey Howe widely believed to be destined for transfer to the Foreign Office, the financial strategy unveiled in his first budget of June 1979 was being quietly buried.
Its major advocate, Professor Alan Walters, was back in the United States teaching economics.
While far from being a ‘wet’ herself, Mrs Thatcher was presiding over a distinctly watered-down form of Tory economic policy by the summer of 1983.
The relative caution of her first administration was equally confirmed in industrial and social policy.
For all the anti-statist rhetoric of the 1979 campaign, privatization, or the dismantling of public enterprise, was not seriously on the agenda down to 1983.
The sale of part of the assets of BP oil owned by the government in Howe's  first budget did little more than continue the policy of Denis Healey's Labour budget of 1976.
There was little or no attempt to denationalize the giant state monopolies thereafter.
Privatizing Cable and Wireless, Amersham International, even Britoil, excited only limited controversy.
There were, indeed, large subsidies still being paid to state-owned industries such as British Leyland, Rolls Royce, and the coal and steel industries, even by that apparently doctrinaire minister of Trade and Industry, Sir Keith Joseph.
The discipline of cash limits was repeatedly disregarded, with political factors often intervening to soften the government's monetarist convictions.
Thus the political decision was taken to keep all five major steel plants in operation, including the distinctly vulnerable plant in Ravenscraig in Scotland.
Celtic nationalist passion certainly was a factor here.
On the trade unions too, the Thatcher government again proved to be more cautious than its language might imply.
Under the aegis of James Prior, the Department of Employment was unlikely to go in for strongly anti-union policies.
Prior's Trade Union Act of 1980 was a moderate measure intended to forestall further attacks on union power.
There would be public money to provide union ballots on strikes and leadership changes.
Closed-shop arrangements would be made more difficult and secondary picketing outlawed, to avoid the kind of violence that had disfigured the Grunwick dispute.
On balance, the least inflammatory of the available options were selected.
More rigorous was the measure introduced by Prior's right-wing successor at Employment, Norman Tebbit, in 1982.
This went further by challenging the immunity that the unions had enjoyed from any financial damages incurred during strikes, a privilege dating from the Liberal government's Trade Disputes Act of 1906.
Henceforth unions could be fined very heavily for conducting what were deemed to be unlawful strikes: several of them were to suffer accordingly, starting with the National Graphical Association.
Tebbit's bill also applied firmer penalties to secondary picketing, and gave compensation for those dismissed as a result of closed-shop agreements.
Even so, the unions' power to strike and picket remained  substantial; Tebbit found himself unable to outlaw the closed shop entirely.
Despite the Act of 1982, Mrs Thatcher was obliged to give some ground to the unions on a number of occasions.
Thus, in February 1981, in the face of a series of lightning strikes in parts of the coal industry, notably in the Welsh mining valleys, the government had to retreat and extend a subsidy for this struggling industry in a way totally at variance with its basic philosophy.
A similarly timid attitude had to be taken with regard to strikes by ASLEF, the train-drivers' union, and the bailing out of British Rail.
Certainly, the government's rhetoric towards the union was much harsher, with the replacement of Prior by Tebbit at Employment a symbol of it.
Len Murray and the TUC General Council found themselves frozen out from communication with government to an extent unknown since before 1939.
But what was really neutralizing the power of the unions was the growing economic crisis and resultant unemployment.
The number of strikes fell dramatically; in 1981 only 4.2 million days were lost in industrial disputes compared with an average 13 million per year throughout the seventies.
Union membership had fallen from over 13 million in 1980 to below 10 million three years later.
The TUC itself, and especially Len Murray, repeatedly threw its influence, such as it was, against militancy and against challenging the government through industrial action.
In industries like British Leyland, workers were disavowing their own shop stewards; the star of such local firebrands as ‘Red Robbo’ and Alan ‘The Mole’Thornett seemed to have set.
It was really wider economic and sociological factors which were expunging memories of the ‘winter of discontent’ and uncontrolled union power, rather than the policies of the Thatcher government, which in this early period were broadly non-confrontational.
Social policy showed the same relatively moderate trend.
In one important area, indeed, the Thatcher government did launch a bold change of course, and one that had widespread popular backing among working people.
This was the conscious policy of furthering the sale of council houses, promoted by Michael Heseltine's Housing  Act of 1980.
This was attacked by Labour as dismantling the housing welfare programme as it had existed since 1945, or perhaps since the Addison Act of 1919.
But amongst many working-class Labour voters, the prospect of emulating their middle-class neighbours and owning their own homes on tax-subsidized mortgages proved irresistible.
This break with post-war social assumptions proved relatively easy to initiate: by the end of 1984, 800,000 council tenants were buying their own homes.
Elsewhere, the government proved to be surprisingly cautious.
The National Health Service, though evidently under-funded, was to survive as the basis of the health-care system of the nation.
Radical plans to remodel the education system, especially anything which resembled the undermining of the comprehensive secondary schools against which Tories had long since railed, were scrapped.
So, too, were proposals to end the state-funding of higher education and charge full-cost fees, or alternatively abolish the system of grants for university students (a particularly unpopular idea amongst middle-class Tory voters).
On the other hand, Britain's universities were afflicted from 1 98 1 with very severe cuts in their funding, amounting to a 2 per cent drop in income for most universities.
The era of the 1963 Robbins Report had truly come to an end.
With memories of the student ‘unrest’ of the late sixties still part of the living past, Sir Keith Joseph was able to impose a stern monetary discipline upon British higher education with the prospect, many feared, that some universities and polytechnics might disappear entirely.
Nevertheless, the conclusion must be that, down to 1982, Mrs Thatcher was anxious not to give many hostages to fortune by breaking too openly with the one-nation traditions of Butler and Macleod.
She bowed to Scots nationalists over Ravenscraig steelworks and to Welsh nationalists over the Welsh television channel, ‘Sianel Pedwar’ or S4C.
Bizarrely, even Mrs Thatcher became a kind of Bevanite now.
‘The National Health Service’, she had to proclaim in 1982, ‘is safe with us’.
This same pragmatism showed itself also in many aspects of Commonwealth and foreign policy.
Here again, the apparently abrasive style of Thatcherite ‘conviction politics’ proved less robust in reality, at least on one occasion.
Her government began with a huge surrender, the quite unexpected settlement in which she acquiesced which ended the long-running saga of British relations with the former  Southern Rhodesia, now renamed Zimbabwe.
When Mrs Thatcher took office in May 1979 it was assumed that southern Africa would cause a massive rift between her and the black African states of the Commonwealth.
It was expected that she would show sympathy with the white settler minority associated with Ian Smith's Rhodesia Front and propose a deal between him and the near-puppet government of Bishop Abel Muzorewa.
In the event, under heavy Foreign Office pressure which she secretly resented, Mrs Thatcher gave way completely.
A conference at Lancaster House in August 1979 saw the British government make concession after concession to the Black nationalists.
Both Muzorewa and the white minority had to undergo severe pressure.
It was agreed that elections would be held in Zimbabwe, despite the activities of various black guerrilla forces led by Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe, and a constitutional convention was to be held in London.
At this conference in November, an agreement was laboriously worked out to the effect that Zimbabwe would shortly gain its legal independence.
Sanctions would cease to be applied from 15 November, while the senior patrician figure of Christopher Soames (Winston Churchill's son-inlaw, no less) was sent to Zimbabwe to act as temporary governor to supervise new elections and restore the country's trade.
Much to the British government's surprise, the elections in early 1980 resulted in a massive victory for the Marxist Robert Mugabe, whose party gained 57 seats, as against 29 for Joshua Nkomo and only 3 for Bishop Muzowera.
A legally elected Zimbabwean state now came into being.
In fact, Britain's relations with black African states and the Commonwealth generally greatly improved, not least because the long-turbulent figure of Ian Smith was finally forced off centre-stage.
Mrs Thatcher's own demeanour at the Commonwealth Conference at Lusaka that August had certainly helped, as in the good relationship she struck up with President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia.
On the other hand, the main credit for resolving the dilemma of Rhodesia/ Zimbabwe really belonged to Commonwealth leaders such as Julius Nyerere of Tanzania and Malcolm Fraser of Australia, and especially to Lord Carrington and the mandarins of the Foreign Office.
Indeed, the very success of the Zimbabwean settlement, in line with repeated British withdrawals from colonial territories since the late 1950s, encouraged a growing impatience on Mrs Thatcher's part with the consensus men of the Foreign Office and with Lord Carrington, its grandee incumbent.
The bien-pensant , anti-colonialist, ‘Eurospeak’ Foreign Office, in Mrs Thatcher's view, was distinctly not ‘one of us’.
Otherwise, the Commonwealth relationship remained more tranquil under Mrs Thatcher than might have been expected.
Her differences with other Commonwealth states over economic sanctions in South Africa did not prevent collaboration with them on other issues, notably in maintaining a boycott of cultural and sporting links with South Africa under the Gleneagles agreement, which the British government faithfully observed.
Perhaps the truth was that for Mrs Thatcher, the Commonwealth, like ‘Europe’ was relatively low in her priorities.
She was no more a disciple of Churchill than she was of Heath.
Meanwhile the media kept the imperial mystique well to the fore, especially India.
Such notable films as Gandhi (a severe treatment of the Raj),A Passage to India , and Heat and Dust , even the james Bond spectacular Octopussy , kept the Indian sub-continent securely in the public's imagination.
One of the most triumphant television productions of the decade was ITV's dramatization of Paul Scott's ‘Raj Quartet’ under the title, ‘The Jewel in the Crown’, a testament to the uneasy, Forster-like, imperial conscience of a pre-Thatcherite age.
In foreign affairs, Mrs Thatcher's experience was slight, and her responses at first simple and superficial.
She had built up a reputation as ‘the Iron Lady’ with some stern condemnations of Soviet Communism and its imperialist designs, before she became Prime Minister.
Her prevailing stance in foreign affairs was one of cold-war hostility towards Eastern Europe, and an aggressive self-sufficient nationalism, almost Gaullism.
She adopted an abrasive stance towards the European Common Market, for which she had never been a strong enthusiast.
Her clashes with other European heads of state over Britain's budgetary contribution to the Community aroused all her basic emotions: here, indeed, she had strong support in Britain itself where sympathy for the bureaucrats of Brussels, with their butter mountains and wine lakes, was distinctly muted.
At the Dublin summit of the EEC countries in December 1979 she took a highly belligerent, insular line.
She claimed that the British  contribution to the budget was ‘our money’ which foreigners were taking away.
She came close to threatening the Community with a repetition of de Gaulle's policy of ‘the empty chair’ in the sixties.
Her relations with Helmut Schmidt, the German Chancellor, and Giscard d'Estaing, the French President, were glacial.
Yet here too the practice of Thatcherism proved less abrasive as time went on.
By mid-1982, an acceptable compromise had been reached over European affairs, including the budget and agricultural policy.
Mrs Thatcher was at least in a functional sense, beginning to show greater capacity for involvement in the life of the community, if without the passion of Edward Heath in the past.
On Europe, she was an agnostic rather than an unbeliever.
Indeed, surprisingly enough, Mrs Thatcher's reputation, in the doldrums at home at least to the end of 1981, began to grow in foreign affairs as she became more self-assured.
Ultimately, though, her success lay neither in Commonwealth nor in Common Market affairs, but in the North Atlantic alliance.
She struck up an effective rapport with the new Republican President of the United States, Ronald Reagan.
At last the ‘special relationship’ seemed to have some meaning, perhaps for the first time since the days of Macmillan.
There was accord over trade policy and over regional policy in such areas as Latin America.
Most important of all, on defence issues, the needs of Britain and the United States came closer together.
A deal was struck under which Britain would allow US Cruise missiles to be sited on British soil.
In return, Trident would be offered as a replacement for the ageing Polaris submarine-based missiles as the basis of the so-called ‘British independent deterrent’.
This provoked furious controversy.
Trident was hugely expensive — £10 billion at the first assessment alone.
The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament found in Cruise and Trident a stimulus it had not had since the early 1960s.
The campaign against the Cruise missile bases, in particular, led to passionate demonstrations.
One of the most notable protest movements of the early Thatcher years was the series of demonstrations by feminist and other women supporters of unilateral nuclear disarmament at Greenham Common in Berkshire, where the Cruise missiles were to be based (along with Molesworth in Cambridgeshire).
Clashes between the Greenham Common  women and the police were prolonged and often violent.
On the other hand, the general theme was one in which Mrs Thatcher was able to tap reserves of nationalist sentiment, as could her flamboyant, flak-jacketed Defence Secretary, Michael Heseltine.
On balance, the Cruise missile demonstrations embarrassed the left, and turned much to Mrs Thatcher's advantage.
The Prime Minister could strengthen her growing reputation as a tough, determined champion of British national interests, one whose role in the transatlantic alliance was testimony to the growing influence of her nation after decades of consistent decline.
Her firm stance enabled her to speak to the Russian government with greater authority also.
As Helmut Schmidt was defeated in the German elections in 1982, following Giscard d'Estaing's failure in the French presidential elections in 1981, Mrs Thatcher, to general surprise, emerged as a strong and respected world leader.
Yet she was one whose reputation was in reality based on dialogue rather than on sabre-rattling.
The same tendency to compromise showed itself in a facet of internal policy much closer to home, one whose violent impact threatened life and property on the British mainland herself.
Mrs Thatcher's sentiments were staunchly Unionist.
A close political ally was Airey Neave, a former intelligence officer who was to be murdered by the IRA in the precincts of Westminster.
Relations between Mrs Thatcher and the new Irish Fianna Fáil premier, Charles Haughey, were at first tense.
Horrific events continued to scar Anglo-Irish relations, as terrorist attacks, mainly by Provisional Sinn Fein, continued.
In the summer of 1980, an indefinite hunger-strike by Republican prisoners in the Maze prison in Belfast was followed in May 1981 by the death, after a lengthy hunger-strike, of the recently-elected Sinn Fein MP and convicted terrorist, Bobby Sands.
Violent events both in Ulster and in Britain itself continued to escalate, with the murder of Lord Mountbatten on his yacht in 1982 at the hands of the IRA.
Attempts by the Northern Ireland secretary, Humphrey Atkins, to promote a representative assembly, proved a complete failure.
Nevertheless, the prospect of a dialogue between London and Dublin remained, and the prospect strengthened when Fine Gael returned to power.
The result was a summit meeting between its leader, Dr Garrett FitzGerald, and Mrs Thatcher in November 1981, with the objective of exploring the idea of a kind of inter-governmental council.
This would clearly imply some involvement by the Dublin government in the internal affairs of Northern Ireland for the  very first time.
The dispatch of James Prior to the Northern Irish office, in place of Atkins, in the government reshuffle of September 1981, also presaged an attempt at further negotiation.
Prior came forward with the idea of a form of ‘rolling devolution’, with an elected assembly of seventy-eight members and a thirteen-man executive.
This was inevitably rejected by the Catholic SDLP as perpetuating Protestant rule in Ulster, while the Paisleyite Unionists condemned any form of power-sharing with the ‘Papists’.
Yet, while the background of terrorist violence remained, and the gulf between the two communities in the North hardly seemed to narrow at all over the years, the stance of the Thatcher government was clearly one based on diplomacy and compromise.
It would inevitably lead to a closer relationship between the government of the Republic and the people of Ulster.
Here again, the practice of the Thatcher government by 1983 was less strident and aggressive than its rhetoric suggested.
In many areas, then, the Thatcher government in the period 1979–83 was not far removed in many respects from the post-war outlook of the kind familiar to British experience since 1945.
And yet, to many British people and social groups, the Prime Minister and her colleagues appeared to be not moderates but extremists.
Their legacy was seen in rising unemployment, a growing gulf between a prospering, high-tech south-east and the squalid and declining towns and cities of the north, Scotland, Wales, and Ulster.
The ‘north — south divide’ became a familiar part of popular folklore as in the days of Mrs Gaskell.
Thus, in its first two years, the government's reputation slumped sharply; Mrs Thatcher's ability to impose her personality upon it suffered accordingly.
By the end of 1981, she seemed almost a Prime Minister at bay.
Throughout 1980 she had battled against a largely hostile public opinion and formidable critics in her own Cabinet such as Ian Gilmour, Peter Walker, and James Prior.
She won one victory in January 1981 when a palpable ‘wet’, Norman St John-Stevas, was removed as Leader of the House (where he had been a conspicuous success), while younger men like Leon Brittan and Kenneth Baker were promoted, the latter having been one of Heath's campaign managers in 1975.
But there still remained immensely powerful ministers who led the fight for increased public investment and spending measures to cut unemployment.
Men like  Prior, Gilmour, Pym, Walker, and perhaps Heseltine seemed to be challenging the very premisses of monetarism.
In the summer of 1981, Mrs Thatcher was at her lowest ebb, very far from the invincible leader she was later to appear.
There was open talk of revolt in sections of her party.
The economy continued to lapse into decline, with manufacturing output having fallen by no less than 10 per cent in the past twelve months.
At this time, too, there came violent racial disturbances in black ghetto areas like Brixton in London, Toxteth in Liverpool, and Moss Side in Manchester.
The subsequent Scarman Report on the Brixton riots spoke eloquently of the despair of unemployed young blacks, and their sense of alienation from the community and especially from the police, whose intolerance and insensitivity were deplored.
Britain, it appeared, was threatened with a racial explosion on American lines.
Although the Commonwealth immigration acts since 1962 had slowed the inward flow from Commonwealth countries to a trickle, the problems of assimilating the black population now resident were as acute as ever, especially during the period of rapidly rising unemployment.
From all these matters the embattled Prime Minister seemed strangely detached.
It was noted that she kept herself almost isolated from her own colleagues.
She had no senior heavyweight figure like Cherwell or Swinton to advise her, and indeed no close colleague at all.
Even Peter Thorneycroft, the veteran proto-monetarist of 1958 whom she had made Party Chairman, proved to be a ‘one-nation’ man at heart, and she was eventually to sack him in favour of a little-tried new favourite, Cecil Parkinson, the Paymaster-General.
Almost in desperation, Mrs Thatcher seized the initiative with a political purge.
It evoked comparisons with Macmillan's bloody ‘night of the long knives’ in July 1962.
On 14 September 1981, she removed four major Heathite ministers, Christopher Soames (the patrician Churchillian with whom she had clashed over civil-service pay), Mark Carlisle (Education), St John-Stevas (Arts), and Ian Gilmour (Lord Privy Seal).
The last-named issued a furious resignation statement in which he accused the Prime Minister of steering the ship of state ‘straight on to the rocks’.
More traumatic still, James Prior, with the greatest reluctance, was forced to move from Employment to the exile of Northern Ireland, even though Mrs Thatcher had to  keep him on the Cabinet's main economic forum, the E Committee.
In their place, new, rightish figures emerged — Nigel Lawson at the Department of Energy; Norman Tebbit in place of Prior at Employment; Nicholas Ridley, the driest of dry monetarists, as Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
For the first time, it appeared, Mrs Thatcher had some measure of command over her own Cabinet.
Its centre of gravity had shifted markedly to the right.
But Carrington, Pym, Walker, and, of course, Prior were there still, as was the equivocal figure of Whitelaw.
Throughout the autumn, even with the economy beginning to show signs of bottoming out and inflation falling fast, Mrs Thatcher was still under siege.
The turning-point — and in many ways the great divide of British politics since 1979 — came totally unexpectedly in March 1982.
It arose from a crisis in a disregarded part of the world, of no consequence to the British since the days of Captain Cook, namely the South Atlantic.
On Good Friday, 1982, it was announced that the government of Argentina had invaded and occupied the British colony, the Falkland Islands, long coveted by Argentinians as ‘Las Malvinas’.
This episode followed a period in which the Thatcher government had shown reluctance to maintain such meagre defences as the Falkland islanders possessed.
It had recently withdrawn the ice-breaker Endurance , generally taken as a clear sign of retreat.
This démarche by the Argentine government of General Galtieri, however, provoked a furious political reaction.
The House of Commons met on a Saturday for the first time since the war.
There were violent condemnations of the British government for its weakness, including from the leader of the Labour Party, the veteran near-pacifist, Michael Foot.
All the Foreign Office ministers, headed by Lord Carrington, had to resign from the government, though Carrington was replaced by the hardly more resolute figure of Pym.
The Defence Secretary, John Nott, narrowly retained his office.
The Prime Minister, however, responded with the instinctive nationalist belligerence that came most naturally to her.
On 10 April it was announced that a ‘task force’ of 10,000 men would be assembled under the command of Rear-Admiral ‘Sandy’Woodward, to sail into the South Atlantic, whatever the hazards, and recapture the Falklands for the British Commonwealth.
It was a dramatic approach, but one which was recorded as having  the support of 83 per cent of the British people.
Conservatives disliked the Argentine government for being aggressive foreigners; Labour men attacked it as ‘a tin-pot fascist junta’.
A mood of bellicose jingoism, unknown since the days of Suez in November 1956, swept the land, directed against ‘the Argies’.
But it was a most risky strategy.
The task force was only made possible by cobbling together the remnants of the battle fleet, including the two last aircraft-carriers,Invincible and Hermes .
The latter had been intended for the scrap-yard a short while earlier.
There would also be amphibious assault ships, notably the Fearless, while troops would be carried in tourist passenger vessels headed by the QE II .
The logistic capacity of the Royal Navy would be stretched to the very limit, as would that of the RAF to provide air cover and defence against missile attack.
The diplomatic context was also highly uncertain, with much opposition in the United Nations to the British action, not only from Latin Americans.
It so happened that the UN Secretary-General, Perez de Cuellar, was himself a Peruvian.
Most vital, and also most uncertain, was the support of the US government, whose radar detector services would be crucial to any British victory.
There were abortive attempts at a settlement by the American Secretary of State, General Alexander Haig, and discussions over a Peruvian peace plan which would bypass the British contention that it possessed sole sovereignty over the Falklands.
In the end Mrs Thatcher had to gamble that her friend, President Reagan, would, despite anti-British feeling from Irish-Americans, Hispanics, and others, throw his weight behind his old ally in the alleged ‘special relationship’.
In the event, through the use of a US air-base on Ascension Island, the gift of antiradar weapons and Sidewinder missiles, and much intelligence information, the Americans materially helped the British to win the war.
Mrs Thatcher's gamble, which might have caused a huge crisis and the fall of the government, came off triumphantly.
A War Cabinet, consisting of Mrs Thatcher, Whitelaw, Pym, Nott, and Cecil Parkinson, assisted by civil servants such as Sir Robert Armstrong, Sir Anthony Acland, and Sir Frank Cooper, along with Admiral Sir Terence Lewin of the Chiefs of Staff, directed operations, At this kind of uncomplicated executive command, the Prime Minister excelled: her instinct for isolated decision-making was now a strength, not a  weakness.
Information to the public was carefully processed and censored by the Ministry of Defence.
As the task force made its slow way towards the Falklands exclusion zone, hostilities began in earnest on 2 May when a torpedo from a British nuclear-powered submarine sank the Argentine cruiser,General Belgrano , with the loss of 360 lives; it was a highly suspicious episode, since the Belgrano appeared to be leaving the exclusion zone and heading back to Argentina at the time.
Mrs Thatcher's later versions of the affair showed much uncertainty over the facts.
Two days later, in reply, an Argentine Exocet missile sank the British vessel, HMS Sheffield , with the loss of twenty sailors.
Then, on 26 May, British troops landed near San Carlos Bay in East Falkland.
The early experiences were disastrous since there was only limited defence against persistent Argentine air attacks.
The Coventry, Ardent , and Antelope were all sunk; many Welsh Guardsmen, waiting to land, were killed or maimed in an air assault on the Sir Galahad at Bluff Cove.
But in the end the British troops managed to land successfully and soon proved their technical superiority over the poorly trained and equipped Argentine conscript army.
A British parachute batallion won a notable engagement at Goose Green, despite losing their commander, Colonel H. Jones (who gained a posthumous V.C.), with the capture of 1,200 Argentine troops.
There was a final assault by 7,000 British forces, including Nepalese Gurkhas, on Port Stanley, and on 14 June the Falkland capital was easily recaptured.
A tally of 14,000 bedraggled, disillusioned Argentine prisoners of war were taken.
It was a triumph beyond all expectations.
In three weeks, the British had re-evoked past imperial triumphs over inadequate opposition.
Omdurman and Mafeking had come again.
Mrs Thatcher urged the nation to ‘Rejoice!
Rejoice!’
The British tabloid press, notably Rupert Murdoch's somewhat pornographic Sun , reached extraordinary levels of distasteful jingoism.
The Governor returned to Port Stanley from which he had been expelled, and huge defence installations were then erected to prevent any further Argentine attacks, including a massive new airport at Port Stanley.
As a military exercise, however, many gaps in British naval and air provision had been shown up; but it was a spectacular triumph, the first that Britain had known since the 1950s.
The Falklands War totally changed the public and political climate.
Its mood of self-confident chauvinism galvanized the nation, however little the British knew of the culture, economy, history, or even postage stamps of the distant Falklands and its population of just 1,200 sheep-farmers and their dependants.
Mrs Thatcher turned from being the least popular Prime Minister of modern times to becoming an Iron Britannia, a new Boadicea, the very embodiment of toughness, triumph, and grim resolve.
For the first time in her premiership she had won a knock-out victory.
The opinion polls, which had shown a small move towards the Tories in the early months of 1982, now showed a large and growing Conservative majority.
From the time of the Falklands War, it was certain that the Tories would win the next general election, and that Mrs Thatcher would gain new stature as Prime Minister.
Within six months, the war had receded from most people's minds.
A service of thanksgiving in St Paul's Cathedral was marked (to Mrs Thatcher's displeasure) by a distinctly muted and moderate sermon from the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Runcie, himself certainly no jingo.
It now seemed extraordinary that so remote and irrelevant a place should ever loom so large in national and international affairs.
And yet, after the war in the Falklands, the triumph of ‘Thatcherism’, however that ambiguous concept be defined, was assured.
The political and social landscape was now transformed.
From this time onwards, commentators who had speculated on the Prime Minister's early removal from office, now assumed confidently that Thatcherism was here to stay.
One major factor, of course, was that the possible alternatives seemed enfeebled and lacking in conviction.
The Labour party showed little sign of recovering from its election defeat in 1979.
Indeed, it became increasingly torn apart by sectarian and ideological division.
The tension between the traditional, consensual centre-right and the doctrinaire, neo-Marxist left in the constituencies and many unions, who saw Tony Benn as their charismatic champion, became more acute.
The resignation of James Callaghan as party leader in November 1 980 added to the party's disarray.
Indeed, by a somewhat surprising decision, the parliamentary party elected not Denis Healey, the last of the centre-right heavyweights, but the deputy leader Michael Foot, ex-Bevanite and present unilateralist, the authentic voice of the old left.
He was unlikely to suppress the Bennites however little he sympathized  with their methods.
In a disastrous party conference at Wembley in January 1981, new constitutional procedures were adopted to form a hybrid ‘electoral college’ to elect the party's leader and deputy leader.
This followed proposals from a left-dominated ‘committee of inquiry’ at Bishop Stortford in 1980.
In addition, the compulsory re-selection of all parliamentary candidates, including sitting MPs, had already been agreed, to give spokesmen of the far left in constituency management committees the power to remove right-wing or moderate figures.
Only the drafting of the manifesto still remained precariously in the hands of the leader and the NEC.
In disgust, Shirley Williams, David Owen, and William Rodgers of the Labour right left to form a new Social Democratic Party.
Twenty-nine Labour MPs were eventually to join it.
With Michael Foot installed as party leader, his position was temporarily secure.
But Labour was shaken to the core by a passionate battle for the deputy leadership (a post originally created to placate Herbert Morrison after 1951) between Denis Healey and Tony Benn.
It was a battle of social leadership as much as of ideas.
Healey was the spokesman of the centre-right, the older unions, and the more traditional ‘broad church’ sections of the party.
Benn was the voice of the far-left, middle-class zealots in the constituencies, unilateralists and radicals of all persuasions, extra-parliamentary as well as parliamentary, college lecturers, and the newer public-sector unions.
The very identity of the party and the movement was at stake.
In the September 1981 party conference it was revealed that Healey had indeed won, by the narrowest of margins, with 50.3 per cent of the popular vote; the star of Tony Benn began to dim somewhat thereafter, not least because Michael Foot was able subtly to mount a movement of the old (or ‘soft’) constitutionally-minded left against the ‘hard left’ of the neo-Marxist, unilateralist fringe.
But the entire episode left the party looking damaged and fragile.
Its support began to crumble alarmingly even in its own working-class strongholds.
Far from being a challenger for power, it could not even hold on to its old citadels.
In a disastrous by-election in February 1982 in Bermondsey, a docks constituency in east London, Labour since 1918, Labour's youthful, far-left candidate, a Marxist homosexual  from Australia, was crushingly defeated by the Liberals.
Labour's support in the polls, partly it is true as a result of the Falklands War, steadily languished.
Beyond electoral matters, there was growing belief that, for long-term sociological and historical reasons, Labour was in terminal decline.
The Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm, in an important lecture entitled ‘The Forward March of Labour Halted?’(the questionmark was often mischievously omitted), argued that the old, historic, back-to-back working class based on mass labour-intensive industries and the distinct proletarian culture associated with the older industrial and urban areas, was rapidly eroding.
A much more flexible and pro-active strategy was needed, unless Labour was to pass into total oblivion.
Professor Hobsbawm's remedies included electoral reform and alliance with environmentalists, the peace movement, Scots and Welsh nationalists, and other dissenters.
The belief that Labour was a relic of an older past, of the first industrial revolution rather than its successor, took hold.
It seemed to be in permanent decline, possibly for some of the same reasons as the Liberals after 1918.
The idea of socialism, so passionately affirmed by the Bennite multitudes, attracted less and less support amongst the population at large.
The links with the unions, increasingly unpopular, dispirited, and losing membership, were no longer a source of strength.
The nostrums of statism, centralization, and planning had lost much of their thrust with the stagflation and popular disaffection of the 1970s.
No new Crosland seemed likely to emerge to give them a fresh charisma.
Neither sociologically nor ideologically did Labour have much to offer.
Instead, under an amiable leader, Michael Foot, who was savagely pilloried by a largely right-wing press, it was compelled by constituency pressures to have a far-left programme hostile to NATO, to membership of the Common Market, and to a system of national nuclear defence; it would also be committed to mass nationalization, reinforcing further the power of the unions, and a variety of other proposals unlikely to have much popular appeal.
The manifesto Labour finally adopted in the 1983 election paid deference to the wishes of ‘greens’, unilateralists, Irish republicans, homosexuals of both sexes, and feminists.
It included demands for ending the House of Lords and abolishing fox-hunting.
It was a very lengthy document, wryly termed, with some reason, ‘the longest suicide note in history’.
If Labour suddenly seemed old and unelectable, a real youthful challenge to the Thatcher regime seemed to come from the new Social Democratic Party.
It was formed after the ‘Limehouse Declaration’, issued from David Owen's home in February 1981.
This seemed a refreshing attempt to ‘break the mould’ of British politics.
It could appeal to old Gaitskellites like the ‘gang of four’, Owen, Williams, and Rodgers, joined by Roy Jenkins whose Dimbleby Lecture in 1979 had first outlined the prospect of a new centrist movement.
It could also draw in apolitical idealists alienated by both the extremism of the far left and the abrasiveness of the Thatcherites.
For much of 1981 and early 1982 the Social Democrats seemed to carry all before them.
An exciting new prospect of political transformation was opened up.
The SDP won an extraordinary by-election success at Crosby in Liverpool in November 1981, when Shirley Williams turned a Tory majority of 19,000 into an SDP majority of 5,000.
There was another gain from the Tories in Croydon in the south London suburbs.
Roy Jenkins, who had fought a striking campaign at Warrington that summer, won Glasgow Hillhead in March 1982, just before the Falklands War.
For a time, the Social Democrats seemed able to appeal to disaffected middle-class Tories and to moderate opinion of all shades.
Twenty-nine Labour MPs joined the new party, along with a reformist Conservative MP from East Anglia, Christopher Brocklebank-Fowler.
The mould was being broken and the two-party system left in fragments, so the SDP exultantly claimed.
But the momentum did not last long.
The Falklands factor was an element in pushing Mrs Williams and Jenkins from the forefront of the stage.
The SDP did not and could not have a good war.
The new party was also demonstrably vague in its ideological position — whether it was a reborn version of Attlee/ Gaitskell-type social democracy, a humane version of Butler-style Toryism, or a completely new variant of political programme which transcended all known political categories.
It was in many ways a mood rather than a movement, a transient phenomenon with shallow roots in the  constituencies, and particularly weak in local government.
Working-class voters were suspicious of its patrician, incurably middle-class image.
The main problem bedevilling the SDP, though, was its relationship with the old Liberal Party led by David Steel.
This problem was to plague the new party until its virtual disappearance from the scene after the 1987 general election.
The SDP claimed to have its own tradition and style, and to be more governmentally orientated than the decentralized, almost anarchistic, community-based Liberals.
It also had a tougher, pro-Trident stance on defence.
On the other hand, the Liberals were undeniably out there in the country, and it would be electorally suicidal to have two smaller centrist parties fighting for leadership of the middle ground.
The Liberals had powerful grass-roots strength and an historic identity in much of the Scottish Highlands, rural Wales, and especially Devon and Cornwall.
In early 1983, therefore, a somewhat difficult pact was concluded, the so-called ‘Alliance’, between the Liberals and the SDP, in which they would agree to choose one Alliance candidate in the different constituencies, and fight a joint election campaign with Roy Jenkins as leader and putative Prime Minister.
But the tense negotiations over the formation of the Alliance, debate over what precisely it meant in terms of policy and tactics (did it support a coalition, for instance, and if so, with whom?), left the SDP hamstrung from the start.
In the winter of 1981–2, at the time of the Crosby by-election, the Conservatives had been terrified by SDP threats to their support in south and east England and suburbia generally.
Roy Jenkins and Mrs Williams gave the impression of governmental timbre, with the Napoleonic figure of David Owen, an ex-Foreign Secretary after all, as the likely heir-apparent.
In the spring of 1983, with the public mood changed by the Falklands War and the fragmented nature of the Alliance already evident, the threat from the new party was manifestly beginning to wane.
Its novelty was wearing off.
The general election of June 1983 reflected all these factors.
With the consequence of the Falklands still exerting its potency, the economy showing distinct signs of recuperation, and inflation falling fast, Mrs Thatcher had been able to call an early election.
The outcome was never in doubt.
Labour was still in deep disarray, its  campaign badly led and generally disorganized.
The Alliance failed to make a distinct impression.
For the Tories, the issue was simply Mrs Thatcher's leadership, and she banged the election drum with fierce attacks on ‘pacifist’ unilateralists like Michael Foot, and ‘the dark, divisive clouds of Marxist socialism’.
The campaign showed few issues and, with the Conservatives overwhelmingly backed up in the popular press, was wholly one-sided.
Labour ended up with only 209 seats and 27.6 per cent of the popular vote, its lowest since 1918.
It finished only just ahead of the Alliance poll of 26 per cent(which produced for them only seventeen Liberal and six SDP seats).
Less than 40 per cent of trade unionists had voted Labour; even less than half of the unemployed.
They too had imbibed the market culture, it seemed.
The Conservatives, with 397 seats, had a huge majority of 142; the legacy of 1945 had indeed been reversed.
The victory for the Thatcherite ethic seemed overwhelming.
The evidence is less convincing on closer examination.
The Conservative Party won only 42.9 per cent of the popular vote, less than they had achieved in any election between 1945 and 1979, and did badly in Scotland and much of northern England.
It won because of its residual strength in southern and eastern England, and also greater London, where most of the constituencies were located.
As has been seen, the progress of Thatcherism had been erratic, even hesitant, since 1979, though the Falklands victory had given the record of the past four years a spurious consistency.
In large areas of Britain the results of the Thatcher government had been mass unemployment, collapsing public services, and urban decay.
In.
Merseyside or Tyneside there had been almost a general deindustrialization.
Britain's economic fortunes generally had fallen sharply compared with other western European countries since 1979.
In Brixton or Toxteth, the black ghettoes of the inner cities, alienation from the police, the government, and the social structure generally left a potentially combustible debris of explosive material.
Northern Ireland had deteriorated in its social and economic fabric too since 1979.
For most British people, certainly, living standards showed some absolute overall improvement since 1979; but there was also a popular sense  that the quality of life had degenerated, and that in particular violent crime had risen sharply.
Thatcherism, however, triumphed because of its political and social roots.
It had coincided with rising prosperity in the expanding towns of southern England and East Anglia.
High-tech industries, based on computer software and the like, had meant near-boom conditions for such places as Cambridge, Basingstoke, Winchester, and especially Swindon, the outstanding growth town of the decade.
Along the so-called M4 corridor, as far west as Newport in Gwent, new, technically sophisticated smaller industries were mushrooming.
The legacy of four years of Thatcherism, therefore, was an intensification of social division and varied economic expectations in different parts of Britain.
It went further than the much-discussed ‘north — south divide’.
Prosperity, too, had been the product of small enterprises and a lengthy consumer boom financed by credit.
The decline in Britain's manufacturing base was indisputable, though the causes were open to scholarly debate.
But for the clients of the Thatcher order in the south and east of the nation, it was more than enough.
The dispiriting memories of the seventies were fading.
Mass unemployment had lost its old political potency.
For the next four years, it was the suburban conquerors of southern Britain, not the decaying and dispirited north and west, who would pay the piper and call the tune.
High Noon for the New Right-Resurgence or Retreat?
1883–1989
GOVERNMENTS often lose momentum in their second term.
Many Conservatives still recalled the disarray into which the Macmillan administration had plunged after its striking election victory in 1959.
Mrs Thatcher was determined that this would not happen to her.
On the contrary, from the Queen's Speech of November 1983 onwards, she turned her second term into a crusade of increasing radicalism, the doubts and hesitancies of the first administration mostly shed.
It was in these years that the main contours of ‘Thatcherism’ as a phenomenon were firmly established.
It is on these years that the government's historical reputation will surely be based.
Faint hearts were summarily dispatched.
Francis Pym, who had given a somewhat hesitant performance at the Foreign Office in the Prime Minister's view, was removed from his post immediately after the election.
He was replaced by the safe, if decidedly dull, figure of Sir Geoffrey Howe, a diplomat not a policy-maker.
In his place at the Treasury came the younger, almost reckless, figure of Nigel Lawson, an able former financial journalist and apparently still a nominal enthusiast for monetarism.
To an increasing degree, the government and its outlying establishments bore the Prime Minister's stamp; her press secretary, Bernard Ingham, seemed more powerful than most Cabinet ministers, somewhat on the pattern of Lloyd George's use of ‘Bronco Bill’ Sutherland in 1918–22.
There were personal setbacks, as when her close political confidant, Cecil Parkinson, had to resign from the government in October 1983 after a sex scandal involving his former secretary.
But this caused little permanent difficulty for the  government.
Parkinson's successor at Trade and Employment, Norman Tebbit, a working-class Tory and former trade-union official, emerged as a key performer in this high noon of renascent Conservatism.
He urged the unemployed of the north to ‘get on your bike’ and look for work, as his window-cleaner father had done in the thirties.
No social compassion here.
The Thatcherite band-wagon rolled on relentlessly, though with crises, errors, and ‘banana skins’ aplenty littering the route.
In many key directions the new radicalism now showed itself in full.
Much the most notable of these novelties was the policy of the privatization of industries and utilities.
After 1983, the ‘frontiers of the state’ were, in this respect at least, rolled back as they had not been since 1945.
There had been only piecemeal policies of denationalization in 1979–83, and indeed the Conservatives had been reluctant to replace state monopolies with privately-owned ones.
The turning-point came with the triumphantly successful privatization of British Telecom in 1984 for almost £4 billion.
This was not argued particularly in terms of service to the consumer.
Indeed, the efficiency of a denationalized, deregulated British Telecom somewhat declined thereafter, and led to complaints about poor service and rising telephone bills.
It was rather a huge success in sociopolitical terms, in vastly expanding the range of the shareholding classes.
It made privatization part of a wider cultural shift among the British people, including wide swathes of the working class.
Many hundreds of thousands of trade unionists were among those who became shareholders for the first time.
Even more important, the sale of public assets made possible large cuts in taxation in the 1985 and 1986 budgets.
There followed the privatization of British Aerospace and Britoil, and finally the huge sale of British Gas for £5,434 million in December 1986.
This was another enormously successful sale.
The government's cartoon publicity telling the British public to ask ‘Sid’ made its point.
Rolls-Royce and British Airports followed, and there was talk of electricity and even coal being privatized in due course.
The legacy of the Second World War and the Attlee government, the very notion of the mixed economy as familiarized by ‘Butskellism’, was being dismantled.
On the other hand, the thrust for privatization somewhat lost its appeal as the  public came to realize that share values could fall as well as rise.
The aftermath of the stock market crash of October 1987 was to make the sale of British Petroleum shares (over £7 billion in all) much less successful.
Many of the share purchasers now were large institutional buyers rather than the small saver or investor, the ‘little man’ or aged widow beloved of government propaganda.
Even so, the advance of privatization was a notable shift in public debate, a great reversal of the growth of corporatism as it had rolled on, government after government, since the centralization of the First World War.
It chimed in with a mood of anti-étatisme in many countries, notably in France where the Chirac government used the Thatcher policy as a model in its privatization of state banks and other enterprises in 1984–6.
It is notable, too, how few tears were shed for nationalization and state control.
Trade unionists seemed reluctant to defend the ‘bureaucratic monoliths’ that Herbert Morrison had created after 1945.
The Labour Party, under a youthful new leader, Neil Kinnock, elected in October 1983, was significantly hesitant in proclaiming its zeal to renationalize, even in cases such as British Gas where state-run industries had been clearly successful.
Down to the 1987 general election and beyond, nationalization on the old pattern played an increasingly smaller role in Labour's priorities.
Even the Euro-Communists of Marxism Today welcomed the end of the old order.
There were few to oppose the pattern of denationalization and deregulation on strict efficiency grounds.
Here the Thatcher revolution was considerable, almost complete.
Financial policy, which deviated increasingly from monetarist orthodoxy, also pursued a more distinct course with Nigel Lawson as Chancellor.
Finally abandoning M3, the medium-term financial strategy, and other totems, he strongly urged major cuts in public expenditure and extensive cuts in personal taxation to offer incentives for the rich or the would-be rich.
Under his aegis, the gulf in personal resources between rich and poor became very much wider than it had been in the period 1945–79.
By 1985 it was recorded that the top 6 per cent of the population in income terms now received 25 per cent of national income, while for the poorest 20 per cent their share had actually fallen from even the 5.9 per cent they enjoyed in  1979.
As it happened, largely because of a world-wide expansion in trade, the British economy advanced considerably down to 1987.
There was an annual growth rate of some 4 per cent, while inflation continued to fall.
The balance of payments, much helped by oil of course, was comfortably in surplus down to 1986.
It could be claimed that Lawson was the custodian of success, however risky his strategy appeared to be.
Unemployment remained high by historic standards (a peak of 3.2 million being reached in April 1985); but somehow it appeared to have been defused as a major political issue during the eighties, partly through redundancy payments.
Despite much popular resentment at the effects of cash restraints on public services, the government's continuing popularity largely rested on its claim to have been the architect of new prosperity, based on finance, credit, and consumer pump-priming rather than on mass manufacturing industry as in the past.
How long it would last, however, when precisely inflationary pressures would build up, and how much the entire façade rested on Britain's possession of North Sea oil and associated export revenues, were unanswered questions.
Lawson remained confident and buoyant in his commitment to tax cuts.
His budget of March 1987 took the standard rate of income tax down to 27p, and in all a huge budget surplus of over £16 billion was recorded.
Less noted was the fact that taxes other than income tax were, in fact, rising steadily under the Conservatives.
The main reason for buoyant government revenues lay in the increasing returns from VAT and other taxes on the consumer, and on increasing Corporation Tax returns from business profits.
Lawson ran a high-risk strategy at the Treasury.
It rested, in part, on an ability to neutralize international pressures.
At various times, notably from midsummer 1985, these threatened the value of sterling and seemed likely to cause an old-fashioned ‘run on the pound’.
By 1987 there were clearly long-term problems emerging for the balance of payments.
But, in his distinctly supply-side programme of aiding the wealthy and ‘achievers’ in general with tax cuts, his relative disregard for social inequality and the mounting costs for the unemployed and other socially disadvantaged groups, and his hedonistic endorsement of private gain, Lawson's financial methods became the pivot of government policy.
Social commentators noted, in a  transatlantic usage, the rise of the ‘yuppy’(young upwardly-mobile professional) whose girl-friends and families took over older working-class areas such as Limehouse, Islington, or Hackney.
Lawson himself, while neither tactful nor popular, was astonishingly successful for a long period.
He came to be regarded as the major reason for the government's post-Falklands electoral strength, its reputation for competence, enterprise, and success.
The government's new abrasiveness showed itself especially in industrial policy as it related to the trade unions.
After 1983, Norman Tebbit's Act of 1982 on strikes and other industrial practices came to be much used.
Strikes rapidly disappeared as union after union either found their members unwilling in union ballots to risk strike action which might mean unemployment, or else felt wary of running up huge costs through fines in the courts.
The TUC itself contributed to a mood of defensiveness.
Thus, in December 1983 it was made very clear that other unions would not encourage the small National Graphical Association when it defied the law over Eddie Shah's nonunion printing operations in Warrington and insisted on conducting a strike deemed by the high court to be illegal.
The outcome was huge financial damages for the NGA and a sharp defeat for the restrictive practices by which traditional craft-workers such as the printers had hamstrung British newspaper and book publishing.
The stranglehold of ‘the closed shop’, the ‘British disease’ of strikes, official or unofficial, prolonged or ‘wild-cat’, seemed under Mrs Thatcher to have been finally loosened.
There was one supreme test of the government's resolve in ‘standing up to the unions’, as the phrase went.
This was the miners, whom Harold Macmillan had once bracketed with the Catholic Church and the Brigade of Guards as institutions with which no Conservative government ought ever to tangle.
In April 1984 the National Union of Mineworkers called a national strike against pit closures, including that of the lately closed pit at Cortonwood in south Yorkshire, and in favour of a vastly increased basic wage.
Whether this momentous event, the first national coal strike since 1926 was the result of  accidental circumstances or a long-term conspiracy between the National Coal Board and the Department of Energy was subsequently fiercely debated.
Much attention focused on the aggressive personality of the virulent Marxist, Arthur Scargill, a Yorkshireman who had succeeded the moderate, Joe Gormley, as president of the NUM in 1982.
There was also much emphasis on the personality clash between the youthful Scargill and the new chairman of the NCB, Ian MacGregor, an elderly Scots-American of Thatcherite persuasion.
But the miners' sense of anger at the prolonged destruction of their industry is also worthy of note.
Support for the strike was virtually solid not only in old militant areas such as South Wales, Scotland, Yorkshire, and Kent, but also (at first) in traditionally moderate Lancashire, Durham, and Northumberland.
The deep disillusion of the mining community (including miners' wives who played an unprecedently prominent role in the strike) at the erosion of their pits, their villages, and their way of life since the 1950s was spontaneous and genuine.
The strike lasted for virtually a year, ending in April 1985.
It was a battle that Mrs Thatcher, recalling Heath's humiliating climb-down in 1972 (and her own in 1981), was determined not to lose.
The government, indeed, had made careful preparations, both in conserving fuel stocks and protecting the power network with the aid of other European nations, and also in building up the co-ordinating powers of the police nationally to deal with mass picketing.
In 1972, at the time of the Saltley flying pickets mobilized by the young Scargill, the miners had held the upper hand; not so this time around.
There were violent clashes between police and pickets, notably at the Orgreave coking depot in Rotherham in the summer of 1984.
Britain seemed at times to be close to open class war; Mrs Thatcher denounced ‘the enemy within’.
There were several times in 1984 when the government seemed fairly near to defeat, notably in November 1984 when the pit deputies’ union, NACODS, seemed likely to strike also.
This would mean that safety procedures would not be carried out and all the nation's pits might have to be scrapped in a mass act of collective suicide.
There was much public sympathy for the miners in general, however rebarbative the personality and creed of Arthur Scargill himself.
In October 1984,The Economist , remarkably enough, committed itself to the view that ‘Mrs Thatcher  is not now going to win the miners’ strike outright.’
It based this false judgement on the need for conciliation and for restoring the fabric of industrial relations.
But there could be only one winner, in 1985 as in 1919.
The miners themselves were deeply divided, not least because Arthur Scargill had refused to carry out a ballot prior to calling a strike.
In Nottinghamshire and adjacent Warwickshire and Leicestershire, pits continued to operate, despite physical intimidation by mass pickets.
The eventual result was the breakaway from the NUM of a new union, the Union of Democratic Mineworkers, with a membership of close to 30,000.
After the turn of the year, with victory nowhere in sight, more and more miners returned to work in Lancashire and Scotland.
In early January, 71,000 out of 187,000 miners were back at work.
The personality of Arthur Scargill, with his apparent willingness to receive money from the terrorist regime of Colonel Qadaffi's Libya and his condoning of violence, alienated many, including the leader of the Labour Party, Neil Kinnock.
Himself the son of a South Wales miner, Kinnock compared Scargill with a world war general who wanted ‘another Gallipoli’.
The police were far better organized than ever before, with the National Reporting Centre to co-ordinate police movements and intelligence and a high degree of latitude given to police in the handling of pickets, however violent the methods used.
The government, in the confident person of Peter Walker, the Energy Secretary, had a carefully worked-out policy of safeguarding power supplied through the national grid.
He forbade the Electricity Board to order voltage reductions, since this would give comfort to the NUM leadership.
A major turning-point came at the start of 1985 when Peter Walker announced that there would be no power cuts at all in the coming year, however long the strike lasted.
It was a kind of public dethroning of King Coal.
The winter was mild, which also told against the miners' cause.
The trade-union movement was reluctant to help, and there was relatively little sympathetic action from the railwaymen, dockers, or others.
Imported coal continued to be unloaded, some of it from Communist countries.
A general strike was  never remotely on the agenda, especially after the harsh treatment received by Norman Willis, the new TUC General secretary, from miners' meetings in militant areas.
Coal no longer dominated the national economic scene.
The industry employed barely 150,000 men.
It supplied only a fifth of the nation's energy supplies, far behind oil, and was now challenged by nuclear power.
No longer had the miners, the shock troops of the British working class, the power to dictate to a British government or to hold the community to ransom by sheer industrial muscle.
Nor, in truth, had they done so often in the past.
The era of class confrontation in Britain's coalfields had been confined mainly to the short period 1910–26.
In early April, in fine spring weather, the miners went back to work, ‘their heads held high’, with brass bands blaring and ancient banners on display.
There was proud talk of Tolpuddle, Tonypandy, and Jarrow.
But they knew that it was a humiliating defeat.
Mrs Thatcher, who had routed President Galtieri of Argentina, had achieved a similar defeat of another president nearer home, Arthur Scargill of the miners.
Further contraction, pit closures, and industrial erosion would certainly follow.
The membership of the NUM, already attenuated by the defection of the UDM, fell drastically to total a mere 60,000 by the end of 1989, and they even lost their automatic right to a seat on Labour's national executive.
There was talk of the NUM being absorbed by the Transport and General Workers.
By late 1989 the labour force in the Welsh pits, once a quarter of a million men in those proud valleys, had fallen to less than 5,000.
In both Scotland and Lancashire it was barely 3,000, while the militant Kent coalfield had been totally wiped out with the successive closures of Snowdon, Tilmanston and Betteshanger pits.
As in 1926, so in 1985 the old legend of the impact of workers' solidarity and union power had been exploded.
It was the climax of a long, and indeed largely popular, campaign by the Thatcher government to undercut union monopoly in the labour market, and to exorcize memories of the ‘winter of discontent’.
Along with privatization, supply-side finance, and ‘union-bashing’, the government expressed its radicalism with a series of assaults on major segments and institutions within British society.
In effect, the security and strength of major professions were undermined for ever.
This meant in particular a direct attack on public-sector institutions and their custodians.
The enclosed world of the ‘quango’, the public board, and the corporation came under fire in various guises.
Thus, in the Bank of England a series of clashes between the premier and the governor, Gordon Richardson, resulted in his replacement in 1983 by Robin Leigh-Pemberton, a banker of enterprise outlook and, politically, a known Conservative.
The stock market was fundamentally reformed by the ‘big bang’(27 October 1986) which ended old restrictive practices.
Henceforth the old spectacle of brokers milling around on the Stock Exchange floor was replaced by silent, almost invisible, computerized networks for dealers, reflecting the new internationalism of the stock market.
In the Treasury, Keynesian critics such as Sir Douglas Wass were winkled out of their positions of influence, and new monetarist advisers such as John Hoskyns, Alan Walters, and Brian Griffiths emerged elsewhere, with the Policy Unit under first Ferdinand Mount and then, in 1985, John Redwood, assuming greater prominence.
The civil service found itself penetrated and politicized in the mid-1980s in a manner unknown since the days of Lloyd George.
The Civil Service Department, invented by Lord Crowther-Hunt in the Wilson years, was merged into the Treasury scheme of things in 1981.
A popular television series, ‘Yes, Minister’(later ‘Yes, Prime Minister’) openly parodied the consensual, complacent ways of the permanent secretaries and under-secretaries.
It was said to be Mrs Thatcher's favourite television programme — indeed, she actually took part in a rehearsal.
A particularly important sacred cow to slaughter was local government, to which the Thatcher government devoted much attention.
Since 1945 there had been repeated inquiries into the structure and finance of British local government, but until the 1970s no reform at all.
In the Wilson — Heath period of corporatism, local government had swollen in power and importance, especially after the massive eight metropolitan authorities set up by the Heath-Walker reforms in 1973.
Local authorities like the Greater London Council were spenders on a massive scale.
They were employers of a huge new group of middle-class employees, lecturers, social workers, local-government personnel of all kinds; local-government unions such as NALGO had expanded massively since 1970.
More, the major local  authorities were usually in Labour hands, frequently those of the far left.
Thus, men like Derek Hatton, the leader of Merseyside, and Ken Livingstone, who led the Greater London Council (after a brutal coup which removed the previous Labour leader, Andrew McIntosh) became symbols of ideological extremism and financial extravagance at one and the same time.
Of all the local authorities, however, it was, above all, Liverpool which marked out the challenge.
Once the happy city of the Beatles and ‘pop’ permissiveness, home of the most consistently successful football team in the land, Liverpool was now a visibly decaying city.
Its massive cathedrals towered over a community whose port and commercial infrastructure had collapsed as investment declined and union power encroached.
Some of the least attractive features of Liverpool society emerged in May 1985, when a riot of Liverpool football supporters at the Heysel football stadium in Brussels led to the death of many Italian football fans at the European Cup Final between Liverpool and Juventus of Turin.
It was Liverpool's housing and employment problems which had sparked the Toxteth race riots, and which led Michael Heseltine to launch a much-publicized new initiative at inner-city regeneration through more inward private investment.
The far left totally controlled Liverpool's city council, with Militant Tendency figures like Derek Hatton and Tony Mulhearn in command.
(Militant was a group of far-left activists working with constituency parties since the late 1970s.)
Liverpool inevitably became the centre for disputes about rate-capping for excessive expenditure, and then for surcharging when it tried to defy the government over expenditure cuts.
In the end, the government's 1986 Local Government Act ended the problem by, in effect, abolishing the metropolitan authorities, and indeed greatly curbing the power of local councils in general.
Despite popular laments for the great days of Herbert Morrison and ‘municipal socialism’ on the LCC, such Tory bugbears as the Merseyside authority and the Greater London Council disappeared from the scene.
A story of local democracy and participatory initiative dating from the reforms of the later 1880s came to its sad close.
It was a victory for Mrs Thatcher — though a debatable one since it largely snuffed out the power of British local government at a time when many other European countries were trying to decentralize  and devolve.
It was also a problem which enabled Labour's new young leader, Neil Kinnock, to make his mark, perhaps for the first time since his election in October 1983.
His passionate onslaught at the 1985 party conference against the Militants of Merseyside (whom he accused of hiring taxis to hand out redundancy notices to their workers) appealed to the unions and gave him new public stature.
But the longer-term victory was one for central government and its determined custodians.
Other public institutions were put to the sword elsewhere.
The Arts Council found its ability to provide patronage made more selective — perhaps rightly so, though the effects proved a serious blow to many theatres and galleries.
Its new chairman, Lord Rees-Mogg, showed an enthusiasm for applying the market approach to museums, art centres, and the like.
The American model of private funding of the arts was much cited.
In effect, this meant a steady decline in public funding, problems in finding support for artistic experimentation, and financial crises for such famous museums as the Tate Gallery in London and the Ashmolean in Oxford.
Some theatres had to close, though the opening of the Barbican Centre in the city of London provided yet another boost to musical and dance performances in the metropolis — which hardly needed it.
The BBC found itself embroiled in a long series of disputes with the government, partly over its financing, partly over alleged anti-government reporting of such episodes as the Libyan bombing raids in 1986 (covered by an able woman reporter, Kate Adie).
There were frequent clashes over the reporting of Northern Ireland, ending with a ban on interviews with members of Sinn Fein.
The BBC found itself increasingly demoralized, the proud corporate ethic of the days of Lord Reith under constant challenge.
Once again, a chairman sympathetic to the Thatcher regime was chosen, in this case ‘Duke’ Hussey, while a policy of supplying franchises to a variety of new commercial television and radio companies, exploiting the potential of satellite transmission, again threatened the BBC's position.
Many observers were disturbed by the way in which the high standards of service and integrity associated with the BBC as a public corporation were being compromised.
The commercial ethic meant some deterioration in standards, while the cutbacks in the Overseas News department, one of the glories of Bush House, caused much dismay in the public communications world.
The press was another estate of the realm cut down to size.
This  was partly by governmental pressure and the constraints placed on it by Bernard Ingham of the Prime Minister's press office.
More, it was the result of the involvement of large multi-national concerns like the newspaper empire of the American-based Australian, Rupert Murdoch, which took over not only the downmarket Sun but also The Times .
The partisanship of both organs was not in doubt.
Whether press standards declined after this was a matter for debate.
What was clearer was that the range of opinion in the press tended increasingly to favour the government.
In both the 1983 and 1987 general elections the government had strong press support, with only the erratic Maxwell-owned tabloid, the Daily Mirror , to support Labour, along with the Alliance-inclined Guardian and the Observer on Sundays.
An impressive newcomer was the Independent , a centrist newspaper which emphasized finance, higher education, and other middle-class concerns.
The prospects of significant dissent from Fleet Street no longer existed.
Indeed, ‘Fleet Street’ itself was a misnomer from 1985 onwards, as modern technology and high unit costs led major newspapers to move out of central London to the eastern inner suburbs, to avoid the unions' stranglehold.
The long, sometimes violent, dispute with the print unions over the relocation of The Times plant at Wapping marked a notable step both in the new financial and technological independence of the press and its ideological separateness from the union-corporate approach of the past.
The Church of England was also, to some degree, a victim of the Thatcherite attempt at hegemony.
The Church had continued to lose members in the 1970s and 1980s, yet it remained a powerful source of social criticism.
Its 1985 report on the inner cities,Faith in the City , was attacked by government ministers for its allegedly ‘Marxist’ inspiration.
The implied condemnation by Archbishop Runcie of the jingo spirit of the Falklands War, and the open, if confused, critique of the government's handling of the miners' strike by the Bishop of Durham, David Jenkins, caused a widening breach between government and the established Church.
The latter, it was claimed, was now in effect ‘the SDP at prayer’.
Mrs Thatcher herself made appearances at Church and Methodist assemblies to rebuke bishops and nonconformist leaders for their hostile approach towards material gain, their over-involvement with issues such as poverty and urban decay, and their over-zealous support for black African nationalists in South Africa.
She rapped their collective knuckles (along with those of the Church of Scotland, which showed nationalist tendencies  as well) for their inability to see wealth creation as an essentially Christian act.
The good Samaritan with his non-mercenary values, it seemed, was not ‘one of us’ either.
In return, the Church cut a somewhat uncertain figure.
It was hesitant about its role, and indeed divided within itself over doctrinal issues like the significance of the Resurrection, and over such indicators of change as the ordination of women.
Wags commented on a search for ‘closet Christians’ among the bishops.
But here again was a major institution in the land in clear conflict with the determined woman who bestrode government — and actually appointed bishops and archbishops as well(though they often disappointed her).
The doctors, the architects, and, after 1987, the legal profession were all to face the same mood of antagonism.
No group in society, however, symbolized the alienation of key institutions from the government more clearly than did the university teachers.
The wheel had come full circle since the heady days of expansion after the Robbins Report in 1963.
In the sixties, the universities acquired a public esteem unique in British history.
Now, in the bitter 1980s they found themselves facing the impact of annual cuts in real funding, and pressures to apply new codes of managerial techniques and short-term profit-making out of tune with the traditional practices of British universities.
They also faced a loss of morale, with the drain of talented staff to the United States and Canada.
No group in Britain better illustrated the gulf between the old professional order and the new Thatcherite ethos.
To Mrs Thatcher, the universities were an enclosed, complacent guild, managerially incompetent, with little interest in wealth creation and lacking in accountability to government.
The University Grants Committee had acted as a buffer against change.
She herself, though a product of Oxford University, identified with wealth-producers and businessmen rather than with academics and intellectuals.
They in turn responded with incomprehension and then with anger.
In a famous episode in February 1985, Oxford University congregation voted by a 3 to 1 majority to deny the Prime Minister an honorary degree, a rebuff previously extended only to the late President Bhutto  of Pakistan.
The cause, it was stated, was the ‘systematic damage’ she had wrought on higher education — and indeed education in general.
It was a vigorous gesture, but also a risky one, since it emphasized the yawning gulf between the traditional pattern of autonomous free institutions within a plural culture and the new centralizing regime.
Universities continued to languish through the eighties.
Research programmes, especially in medical and other science, continued to be under-funded.
A revamped University Funding Council, directed by a former Cambridge don, Sir Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, threatened to impose much more severe financial disciplines on universities that were already struggling; on the other hand, the 1985 Jarratt Report resulted in complex new structures of planning, resource management, and managerial accountability.
Partly by way of compensation, the government lent its favour increasingly to the allegedly more cost-effective polytechnics (now made independent of local authorities), and to more practically or vocationally orientated institutions such as business schools.
They were more in tune with the thinking of a managerial government than were the traditional scholarly citadels of unproductive, useless learning.
In all these areas — the unions, the local authorities, the Church, the media, the universities and schools — the paradox was that a government notionally dedicated to extending individualism and the private ethic became a champion of greater centralization and state control.
Indeed, the central state built up its authority, directly and indirectly, in the Thatcher years more decisively than in, say, the Attlee period, which was by comparison a model of high pluralism, evidence by the retreat from ‘planning’ in 1947–50.
This new centralism was in part because the Thatcher government perceived these institutions as potentially so damaging that they needed the maximum of intervention to suppress them.
It was also the case that the conversion of the population to the market philosophy needed direction on a massive scale.
Thatcherism was philosophy teaching by encroachment rather than by example.
It was thus the very strength of the state, the power of major government departments such as the Environment or Education and Science over the somewhat ragged army of local-government officials, dons, bishops, editors, and men and women of letters that contemporaries noted.
In the universities, where in the sixties rioting students and the educated tele-celebrities of the ‘chattering classes’ had commanded public attention, there were now dormant, apolitical students anxious only for their future employment, and embittered lecturers suffering a crisis of morale and lamenting the bureaucratic invasion of time traditionally left for teaching and research.
The freedom and autonomy guaranteed for universities by the old University Grants Committee were no more.
It was a centralization that was not only institutional in its forms.
It was also highly personal in its focus.
The Thatcher Cabinet after 1983 radiated from the woman at the centre.
It was personalized and identifiable in a way unknown since Lloyd George's heyday.
The Thatcher Cabinet had become crystallized as a system of conviction politics all on its own.
The Prime Minister relied in part on private advisers like Charles Powell, Robin Butler, and her press secretary, Bernard Ingham, a ‘garden suburb’ no less than in 1918.
Indeed, she had a talent for implying that somehow she did not belong to her own Cabinet.
She communicated instead with a small group of trusties like Lord Young, and advisers within her policy unit.
Her relations with both her Foreign Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer became somewhat cool, not least because she attempted to run both foreign and financial policy herself.
The dangers to the Thatcher regime, it appeared, came not from revolts or putsches on the back benches.
Dissidents like Francis Pym came and went; his banner of revolt,The Politics of Consent (1984), a cool, rational argument in favour of‘consensus’, failed to spark a Heathite revival.
Still less did the danger lie in overthrow by Labour or by assorted dissidents or intellectuals.
It lay rather in its rigidity, in the way that centralization was hardening, some felt, into something approaching personal dictatorship.
Like Louis XIV before her, Mrs Thatcher might provoke an eventual revolution.
It was this growing tendency after 1983 which almost brought the government to its knees.
The crisis arose from an extraordinarily  parochial subject, namely whether the small Westland group of helicopter manufacturers, situated in Yeovil in the West Country, should be purchased by a European consortium or by the US-dominated Sikorsky — Fiat group.
There were thus foreign-policy implications as well as business issues at stake.
There was a furious row over the negotiations in Cabinet between Michael Heseltine, Minister of Defence, and Leon Brittan, Secretary for Trade and Industry, which soon became embarrassingly public.
By November 1985 it became apparent that the real antagonists were neither the Westland company nor British Aerospace, but Michael Heseltine, as a vigorous champion of the European link, and Mrs Thatcher.
On 9 January 1986 Heseltine dramatically walked out of a full Cabinet and resigned in the full glare of televisual attention.
He accompanied his resignation with biting public criticisms of the dictatorial style of the Prime Minister.
Nor did the matter end there.
In increasingly bizarre circumstances the Attorney-General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, discovered that a letter of his, partially rebuking Heseltine, had been selectively leaked to the press without his permission or knowledge by a young female official in the Department of Trade, one Colette Bowe.
After denying knowledge of the leak to the House, apparently to protect the Prime Minister, Leon Brittan, the Secretary for Trade, also resigned on 24 January.
Whether Mrs Thatcher herself was implicated in the leak is not known, but it was widely believed that Brittan resigned to save her skin.
It was also known that Mrs Thatcher's closest advisers, Charles Powell and Bernard Ingham, were implicated in the leak, and it seemed improbable that the Prime Minister should have been totally ignorant.
There was a real threat that she might have to resign.
In the event, she just survived, partly because Neil Kinnock made an inadequate speech in the Commons debate, but perhaps really because helicopters were really too parochial an issue to involve the fall of governments.
But the Westland affair lingered on for some time to come.
It showed up the Achilles heel of the government — its excessively dictatorial tendencies.
Collective responsibility seemed to be disappearing.
At this time Mrs Thatcher looked somewhat less in  command, with coded criticism of her style coming from such ministers as Douglas Hurd and, more surprisingly, John Biffen, a previous admirer of hers.
Younger men like Kenneth Clarke, Kenneth Baker, and John MacGregor were less identified with the Prime Minister personally.
In the summer of 1986, the legacy of Westland and local-government losses led to a relatively low point for the government.
A defeat by an Alliance candidate in the Ryedale by-election confirmed this.
As in the autumn of 1981, it seemed to be losing its way, with doubts over government support for British Leyland, ministers attacked over repeated strikes by secondary school teachers, and criticisms also over Britain's support for President Reagan at the time of bombing raids on Libya.
The government had to retreat over a plan to sell British Leyland trucks to America's General Motors — partly because of a rooted popular affection for Britain's ‘Land Rovers’, partly because it had the air of a Westland mark II.
The very parliamentary strength of the government and its consequent lack of accountability, were proving its weakness.
For most people, unaware of the implications of an obscure West Country helicopter firm, it was in other ways that the government's problems showed themselves.
One of the notable features of the mid-Thatcher period was a revival of the civil liberties movement, as governmental pressures against individual right of expression impressed themselves on the public consciousness.
There was some pressure for a Bill of Rights, notably from the ‘Charter 88’ group.
The use of the Official Secrets Act against government employees and others became more widespread.
One civil servant, at least, managed to escape the net when Clive Ponting, a Ministry of Defence official who had leaked documents about apparent ministerial lies on the sinking of the Belgrano during the Falklands War, was acquitted by a jury when the case came to court.
A Guardian journalist, Sarah Tisdall, was not so fortunate.
Otherwise, the pressure exerted by the security services, aided by the police, caused much concern.
The free-ranging behaviour of the police during the miner's strike, for instance, provoked some alarm, since it appeared to negate the traditional approach to freedom of movement around the country.
That the police should stop law-abiding Kent miners at the Dartford tunnel on the grounds that they were thought to be destined for the Yorkshire coalfield two hundred miles away was remarkable indeed.
More concern was caused by the abolition of free trade unionism in the GCHQ security establishment at Cheltenham; this appeared to  equate trade unionism with disloyalty, even treason.
There was also a strange security operation against a journalist following disclosures about espionage devices (‘Zircon’) in the New Statesman .
In addition, there was the matter of John Stalker, the Deputy Chief Constable of Manchester, who was flagrantly obstructed within the police service when he attempted to inquire into abuses by the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
In disgust, Stalker left the police force altogether.
Aspects of the Westland case also showed the dangers of a government monopoly over the dissemination of information and its resultant debate.
One, more entertaining, episode was the lengthy attempt to suppress the publication of the book Spycatcher , the memoirs of an elderly ex-member of MI5, Peter Wright, an emigrant to Tasmania.
Among other things, he alleged that MI5 had tried to destabilize the Wilson governments.
The Secretary of the Cabinet, Sir Robert Armstrong, who had stonewalled successfully on Mrs Thatcher's behalf during the Westland inquiries, was sent to Australia in a vain attempt to stop the book being published there.
Armstrong's patrician Oxbridge performance was not very successful in the brash atmosphere of the Australian courts — significantly less so than his performances before House of Commons committees.
In a near-fatal aperçu , Armstrong's comment on the civil servant's need to be ‘economical with the truth’ seemed to set the seal on a growing process of encroachment on individual freedoms by a strong-minded, centralist government.
Meanwhile, travellers abroad found no difficulty in buying Spycatcher in airport bookstalls.
Whether civil liberties or freedom of expression really languished in this period is open to debate.
The Thatcher government's strong stance on many issues won much popular support amongst a people weary of attempts to defy the law by left-wing local authorities, strike pickets, or disaffected journalists.
The emotion roused by the murder of a policeman in late 1985 during racial disturbances at Broadwater Farm, a dismal sixties high-rise housing estate in Tottenham, north London, confirmed much public endorsement of the role of the police in a public-order capacity.
It also showed up the disasters of previous patterns of so-called neighbourhood planning.
The Labour Party seemed to sense that it had gone too far in criticism of the police, perhaps in response to the far-left, middle-class activists of sociological inclination, and had been too tender towards violent criminals and other deviants.
It turned its attention to ‘victim support’.
of  children especially.
From 1985 onwards, ‘law and order’ became a watchword for the British left, too.
Artists of various kinds complained of the restrictions under which they laboured.
Yet, compared with the literary censorship of the sixties, these were in most areas miniscule.
The long moralistic campaigns of Mrs Mary Whitehouse directed at BBC television had not made much headway.
It was lack of funding rather than lack of freedom that was the main burden for British writers and artists in this period.
For all that, the Thatcher high noon seemed to show the balance between state power and individual self-expression, in some key episodes, tilting against the individual or the dissenting minority.
The police and the security services grew stronger; the press and media generally were more subject to control.
It made dissent, social criticism, and alternative scenarios more difficult to articulate.
The image of the government was one of strength in domestic affairs.
So, too, was it overseas, though in a less belligerent mode as time went on.
Mrs Thatcher herself emerged with greater international stature now, in large measure because of her relationship with President Ronald Reagan.
This went through some crises, as when the Americans dispatched marines to put down a left-wing government in the British island of Grenada in 1984, without communicating their intentions to the British government.
But on the main episodes, Anglo-American collaboration stood firm.
During the Falklands War, as has been seen, American support, including missiles, materially assisted towards a British victory.
In the bombing of sites in Libya in April 1986, in the face of much criticism at home, Mrs Thatcher strongly defended the right of the Americans to use British bases such as Upper Heyford for long-range attacks.
The bombing was, she argued, intended to dislodge the Qaddafi regime in Libya-even though it was civilian property as much as air-bases that were bombed, with much loss of life amongst children and others.
One major result was the confirmation of a long-term American commitment to maintain the British nuclear deterrent, including the use of Trident missiles.
Mrs Thatcher had emerged with much more confidence on the world stage by 1987.
On the one hand, she was able to temper President Reagan's willingness to engage in long-term negotiations over intermediate-range and other missiles based  in western Europe.
She remained dedicated to the American nuclear umbrella over the west.
At the same time, through a somewhat unlikely relationship with the emergent Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, she was able to present herself as no longer an ‘iron lady’ but an instrument of greater international co-operation.
She ‘could do business with Mr Gorbachev’, she told the world.
She also appeared more convincing in a European role.
The old abrasiveness over the community budget had for the moment disappeared.
The British Prime Minister emerged as a much more accommodating personality; at the Fontainebleau summit in June 1984 she was deemed to be now ‘a good European’.
But on longer-term issues such as membership of the European Monetary System she remained hostile.
The British attitude to Europe remained as functional and piecemeal as it had been in the time of Ernest Bevin after 1945.
One symbolic breach with age-old insularity came with the decision, confirmed in a ceremony in Canterbury Cathedral in February 1986, for Britain and France to build a channel tunnel to provide a rail link between the two countries.
The ceremony in this Anglo-Norman setting was replete with references to Charlemagne, Napoleon, and Churchill.
But in fact it rested on more pragmatic considerations of Anglo-French trade common to both Mrs Thatcher and President Mitterrand, along with the need to boost employment in south-east England and along the Pas de Calais.
Despite this, Mrs Thatcher's European sympathies remained distinctly moderate.
In time, both Howe and Lawson were to prove more sympathetic to the notion of monetary and economic union with the Community.
But at least since 1984 the major flashpoints of conflict between Britain and her European partners had disappeared, while Mrs Thatcher found, with the departure of Schmidt and Giscard d'Estaing, a greater eminence as both a European and a world statesman.
This image of statesmanship also held true nearer home.
In Ireland the tide of murder and violence continued, though the IRA felt increasingly desperate in the stranglehold maintained by the security forces.
In one terrifying episode, Mrs Thatcher and her ministers came close to being collectively murdered in the bombing of the Grand Hotel, Brighton, in October 1984.
Many felt that a grand gesture of statesmanship was required in relation to Northern Ireland.
It was Mrs Thatcher who appeared to supply it.
The situation  in Ulster in 1985 was as bleak as ever.
In addition to the background of violence and sectarian division which had ruined Prior's plan for ‘rolling devolution’, there was growing economic decay.
Northern Ireland's was heavily a public-sector economy; its rate of unemployment, at 21 per cent, was the highest in Britain.
In Catholic working-class areas like Newry, Londonderry's Bogside, and parts of West Belfast, it rose to even 30 or 40 per cent.
Major giants in the Ulster economy like Shorts Aircraft were in difficulties, while the Harland and Woolf shipyards were making heavy losses.
Without a political initiative, however, it was hard to see how economic progress could be made.
Much was owed here to the new Northern Irish Secretary, Douglas Hurd, and to Robert Armstrong on the British side, and to the genial presence of the Fine Gael premier, Garratt FitzGerald, in Dublin.
But Mrs Thatcher, too, lent her moral support to what resulted.
The outcome was the Hillsborough agreement of 15 November 1985.
Under this Mrs Thatcher and Dr FitzGerald agreed that Northern Ireland would remain a part of the United Kingdom according to the wishes of its majority, but that ministers from Britain and the Republic would meet regularly to review political and security aspects.
In effect, for the first time since 1922, the direct interest of the Dublin government in the internal affairs of Northern Ireland was explicitly set out.
It caused uproar in Ulster Unionist ranks where all fifteen Unionist MPs, among them Enoch Powell (South Down), decided to resign their seats in a mass protest.
The Prime Minister's personal secretary, Ian Gow, also resigned.
The agreement, however, passed the House of Commons by 473 votes to 47 and received a similar endorsement in the Irish Dáil.
As a symbolic act it was of much importance since it offered the prospect of a framework for a wider Anglo-Irish settlement and provided a hope of genuine political involvement for the Catholic minority in Northern Ireland, not in a failed local assembly but through their co-religionists in the south.
But the question remained whether it could really mean much in practice.
The Protestant majority in Ulster totally refused to acknowledge, let alone operate, the Hillsborough Agreement.
The truth, indeed, was that the agreement was conceived essentially in a British context.
It marked a fresh stage in the process of the isolation of  the Ulster Unionists from the British political scene — and indeed from the Conservative Party itself which had once proudly named itself ‘Unionist’ in the days of Balfour and Bonar Law.
The security problem remained acute, not least because the Royal Ulster Constabulary, which had suffered grievously in various shootings and bombings, was clearly seen as a Protestant ascendancy force.
Only 3 per cent of its members were Catholic.
But the Hillsborough Agreement made Mrs Thatcher look credible and constructive over Northern Ireland in the eyes of world opinion, and especially in the United States.
In this, at least, it succeeded, however limited its success as a settlement for the endemic, historic problems of Ireland.
In this period there was much journalistic talk of Britain's world reputation having recovered after decades of decline.
Mrs Thatcher herself claimed to have ‘renewed the spirit and solidarity of the nation’.
There was, indeed, some truth to this.
Her varied responses in the North Atlantic alliance, in the European community, in Irish affairs, and in attempting to mediate in the Middle East as broker between the Arabs and Israel added to this impression.
At the same time, this belief in British national strength owed much to short-term factors.
Military victory in the Falklands gave Britain a new stature for a time, but by 1987 the impact of this had disappeared.
The strength of the British economy in the mid-1980s, the signs of growth and rising prosperity, helped dispel the old image of ‘the sick man of Europe’.
As long as the balance of payments remained boosted by North Sea oil and the pattern of growth continued, so Britain's international credibility would continue to grow.
Above all, there was Mrs Thatcher's uniquely close link with President Reagan — but this, too, could only be a temporary phenomenon.
Even in this area, notably over the Americans ‘Star Wars’ defence system, there had been rifts as well as accord in the transatlantic relationship.
The Reykjavik summit, when President Reagan met Mr Gorbachev for the second time, led to a notable strain between Washington and London.
The world reputation of the Prime Minister provided grist for the mill of the Conservative Party managers by 1987, but it was invariably presented in terms of the traditional imagery that Thatcherism meant strength, secure defence, and freedom from the defeatism of socialism and the unilateralists.
Mrs Thatcher's approach to world affairs remained in key respects significantly insular, her approach to full European collaboration notably hesitant.
To the extent that her position was based on a reputation as a  creative world leader or participant in great events, it was a partial deception.
In the spring of 1987, with the economic omens still cheerful, Mrs Thatcher decided to call another general election.
The campaign was not without its strains, not least because of tactical disagreements between Lord Young and the Party Chairman, Norman Tebbit.
The latter also diverged from the Prime Minister, with whom he had latterly differed over Westland, Libya, and other issues.
For all that, the result as in 1983 was not in doubt.
Neil Kinnock fought, personally, a highly effective and energetic campaign.
He succeeded amply in Labour's main objective of defeating the Alliance as the main alternative to the Conservatives.
Yet Labour still operated against a background of long-term decline.
It was based essentially on the old industrial areas of Scotland, Wales, and the North, on the public-sector unions, and on client electors on council housing estates and in the local-government services.
It had less and less to say to a home-owning, share-owning, bourgeoisified population, at least so it seemed.
Labour seemed happiest when proclaiming its undying support for the National Health Service and the state education system of the post-Beveridge era.
It continued to celebrate the glories of the Attlee years.
On the issues of the future, especially on wealth creation and technological change, Labour had little to say.
It was muffled on trade-union reform and taxation policy.
It was confused on Europe, and on defence still caught in the grip of an unpopular unilateralism.
The spectre of Bennery haunted it still.
In much of southern England, Labour hardly existed.
Outside parts of inner London, it held only two seats now in the south and east, below a line drawn from Bristol to the Wash.
In the metropolis, its seats were largely dilapidated older boroughs; it held none of the thriving suburban seats or commuter constituencies.
The movement begun in 1945 had indeed come full circle.
If Labour offered only a feeble challenge, the Alliance was scarcely more than a rabble.
The Alliance campaign, with the differing emphasis posed by Liberals' David Steel, who was of the centre-left, and the Social Democrat, David Owen, who contemplated a possible coalition with the Tories, was a disaster.
At no stage did the Alliance make any serious impact or strike any distinctive note.
In the end, the Tory majority remained virtually intact.
The Conservatives, with 42.3 per cent of the vote, won 376 seats; Labour, with 30.8 per cent, won 229, only a small improvement on the débâcle of 1983; and the Alliance won a mere 22 seats, with 22.6 per cent of the vote.
Election experts could legitimately point to the fact that a system of proportional voting could have given a very different result.
Once again Mrs Thatcher won a huge majority with the support of well under half of the British people.
But this was, in every sense, academic.
After another successful campaign, apart from some setbacks in Wales and near-disaster in Scotland, the Thatcher regime seemed as impregnable as before.
The new mood established in 1979 seemed amply confirmed.
The 1987 election marked the high noon of the government of Margaret Thatcher.
All its major innovations — the sale of council houses, the reform of the unions, privatization of industry, tax reform — had met with popular acclaim and substantially added to the Conservatives' constituency.
There was a genuine public image of national strength and rising prosperity, though the latter was distinctly variable in its regional impact.
Even though opinion polls might show that ‘Butskellite’ or ‘Labourish’attitudes prevailed among the people on such issues as health, housing, education, and pensions, the main thrust of the election was clearly to give backing to the anti-socialist, anti-planning revolt which had gathered momentum since 1979.
For several years, a sustained attempt had been made to inject the institutional and cultural life of the nation with market philosophies and business values, to galvanize national complacency with the short, sharp shock of enterprise.
One after the other the main adversaries, local authorities, the miners, the universities, the bishops, dissidents of various shades, had retreated in disarray.
As Mrs Thatcher reflected on her sweeping victory in the aftermath of the polls, urging her weary troops to yet more frenetic endeavours in the future, with the inner cities (and their Labour-led councils) as the next target, she could contemplate a major seachange in the national consciousness.
No less plausibly than Attlee and his colleagues in 1945, Mrs Thatcher was entitled to declare: ‘We are the masters now.’
After the 1987 election, the battle went on with new intensity.
Radical measures heralded by the Queen's Speech proliferated as the momentum of change was kept up.
No one by 1989 could doubt the Prime Minister's stamina as, politically, a long-distance runner.
The question now was whether she was going too far, straining the responses of an ancient nation beyond what was acceptable or practicable.
Indeed, in the very aftermath of the elections, a series of government initiatives all ran into some difficulty.
They suggested perhaps that more remained of the pre-1979 order than Thatcherite zealots had imagined.
There were limits to the extent to which the post-1945 consensus could be overturned.
Thus, in local government, attempts to curb the spending and pretensions of local authorities from Liverpool to Lambeth, especially when they could be designated ‘loony left’, were widely acceptable.
Much less so were efforts to remodel the existing rating system by a new local tax, imposed without regard to the ability to pay.
The proposal for a community charge — or ‘poll tax’— put forward by Nicholas Ridley in 1988 ran into furious local opposition, not least among the Scots who were to be the first to pay this new imposition, After all, freeborn Englishmen, led by Wat Tyler, had revolted against a poll tax as long ago as 1381, and its bluntness and social inequity helped fuel a considerable popular protest, including in the Conservative shires.
The advent of the poll tax in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales in 1990, with its heavy burden on working-class families in urban areas, enormously added to the government's unpopularity.
Again, the relatively popular policy of the privatization of industry fell on stony ground when it was proposed for extension to the electricity supply industry and to water services.
The case for efficiency in each case was not made out, and there was a clear prospect, at a time of rising inflation, of large increases in charges for both, especially for water supply, with privately metered arrangements likely to increase the cost to the domestic consumer.
The environmental advantages of privately-run water supply services were also far from clear, with European reports drawing attention to the pollution of Britain's rivers and beaches.
There were early signs that the proposed £7 billion flotation of water shares was going slowly.
Some felt Mrs Thatcher was now denationalizing out of dogma, without making out a case on managerial or cost grounds.
Labour recovered its confidence here and firmly promised that a future Labour government would return both electricity and water to public ownership and control.
Privatization was losing its magnetism with the public, as the government's decision to delay the electricity measure until late in 1990 seemed to confirm.
Aspects of the government's attempts to infuse the welfare state with the spirit of competition and the market-place also ran into difficulties in both education and health.
Kenneth Baker, the Secretary of State for Education, met with opposition to his proposals to weaken the structure of state education, notably by allowing comprehensive schools to opt out of the secondary system, and by giving more powers to parents in running schools, a latent veto for the middle-class.
The 1988 Education Act was much criticized.
So, too, were its features relating to universities and higher education generally.
The government found itself having to make concessions to normally docile bodies like the House of Lords and the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, over such matters as security of tenure for academics and the universities' powers to raise their own finance.
Government ministers now boasted of having increased spending on higher education and struck an expansionist note in calling for doubling student numbers over the next twenty-five years.
It was increasingly difficult for the government to rely on popular hostility towards the teachers' unions in getting through what many saw as a direct attack on quality in the schools.
The attempt to achieve a national core curriculum, while widely supported as a way of improving literacy and numeracy amongst schoolchildren, was also feared as yet another turn in the ratchet of state control over local experimentation.
It was also a comment on years of underfunding, by international standards, in the nation's schools.
Perhaps the most strongly opposed of all the government's innovations was its challenge to the National Health Service in February 1989.
The NHS had long become a totem of bipartisan welfare provision, Bevan's conflict with the BMA long forgotten.
Mrs Thatcher had been constrained to observe in 1982 that the NHS was ‘safe’ with her.
Labour's attack on the under-funding of hospitals and long waiting lists for patients awaiting operations had been effective in its otherwise ineffectual 1987 election campaign.
Kenneth Clarke, the Minister of Health, now proposed to introduce the market  mechanism, to give doctors more control over their own budgets and, perhaps more alarmingly to many, to allow hospitals to contract out of the health service altogether if they wished.
This seemed to many privatization run mad.
A notable feature of the resultant controversy was that the British Medical Association, the virulent opponent of Aneurin Bevan in 1946, was now most forceful in defending the health service, in denouncing the government for threatening its existence and failing to fund it as was properly required.
Clarke engaged in a vigorous debate with the doctors but found public sympathy running against him.
Despite years of Thatcherism, both deep-rooted sympathy for the NHS as a bulwark of the welfare state, and the professional strength and influence of the doctors as a pressure-group were still remarkably strong.
It was widely believed that the Conservatives' heavy defeat in the Vale of Glamorgan by-election in May 1989 was partly due to the campaign of local general practitioners against the government's health plans.
Labour had now the most natural of themes, invoking the almost sacred name of Nye Bevan.
Conservative attempts to find new radical impetus seemed to have backfired.
Other unpopular new measures were the deregulation of private rented housing and the ‘targeting’ of social security benefits, with disadvantage to many.
There seemed grounds for believing that the Thatcher government was, at least for a time, losing direction.
The loss of William Whitelaw, who suffered a stroke and had to leave the government, was a blow to the Prime Minister.
He had chaired major Cabinet committees, including that for home affairs and the ‘star chamber’ on public expenditure cuts.
More, he was almost the last representative of Tory paternalism of the old one-nation type, an important source of consolidation within the Cabinet.
Mrs Thatcher had no one else like him.
All the old Heathites, save for Peter Walker (a highly individualist and most effective leftish Secretary of State for Wales) were on the back-benches.
Norman Tebbit had also fallen out with Mrs Thatcher and left the government, while Leon Brittan, recently knighted, found a new niche at Brussels.
A symptomatic problem came with a ministerial wrangle over salmonella in egg production which cost the government the presence of Mrs Edwina Currie.
By early 1989 the Prime Minister was at odds with several colleagues, not only Nigel Lawson with whom she quarrelled incessantly, but also with Sir Geoffrey Howe whose sympathy for European monetary union and generally benign approach to foreign affairs came increasingly to jar with her.
She had no Cabinet intimate and seemed increasingly isolated on her lofty eminence.
Another former confidant, John Biffen, in effect removed himself from the government after coded criticism of the Prime Minister's strident, dogmatic style.
The administration became more and more centralized and the civil service enmeshed with it, notably after Robin Butler became Secretary to the Cabinet in 1988.
Something more fundamental than the ‘banana skin’ of Westland seemed to be happening.
The government was plunging on into uncharted waters without a pilot or perhaps a map.
But the main reason why the tide of Thatcherism seemed to ebb after the 1987 election was that its main claim to popular support, the apparent revival of the economy and the stimulus to productive growth, was beginning to lose credibility.
There was a huge stockmarket crash in October 1987 which wiped 24 per cent off stock prices.
Yet Nigel Lawson continued with a vigorous supply-side policy of tax cutting.
This reached a climax in the budget of March 1988 which reduced the rate of income tax to two bands only, 40 per cent for the rich and 25 per cent for all other income-tax payers.
This was hard to justify on either monetarist or public equity grounds.
Left-wing critics furiously attacked the Chancellor's cynicism and blatant inegalitarianism.
More orthodox critics feared that he was only stoking up a consumer boom which would reap the whirlwind in a vast price inflation.
Mrs Thatcher tried to respond to social critics by emphasizing the government's caring image in help for the elderly and programmes for schools.
But the latter charge concerning domestic inflation appeared to be correct.
By the summer of 1989 the old evils of ‘stagflation’ seemed to have returned to haunt the government.
Non-oil imports had been rising steadily throughout 1987 and 1988.
The current-account deficit in the year following the March 1988 budget was to reach nearly £20 billion, easily the largest figure  on record.
The pound came under pressure and fell steadily against the dollar and the deutschmark in the spring of 1989; in the autumn the dollar and the deutschmark in the spring of 1989; in the autumn, the slump in its value became far more alarming.
Worst of all, the conquest of inflation, the government's main boast, seemed undone as inflation rose to reach 8.3 per cent by June 1989.
Nigel Lawson, it seemed, was neither holding the pound steady abroad nor keeping down prices at home.
This time it was a consumer-credit and spending boom, not government borrowing, that was causing the problem.
Critics dated this from the controversial tax-cutting budget of 1988.
Lawson's chosen weapon was the most politically damaging that he could have selected — successive increases in interest rates, to reach a minimum lending rate of 15 per cent by October 1989, on the eve of the Tory party conference.
With Britain a nation of mortgage-holders who operated in an economy based in large measure on the credit system, this brought home the immediacy of the government's difficulties with the economy to almost every householder in the land.
Indeed, as the indices stubbornly refused to improve, there seemed little prospect that interest rates would not remain at this historically high level for a long period to come.
Hope of a ‘soft landing’ for the economy were at least deferred, and the stock-market plunged downwards that troubled autumn.
The crisis deepened when Nigel Lawson resigned as Chancellor in October after a disagreement with Professor Alan Walters.
John Major replaced him.
The main Conservative claim to national support, therefore, namely that they had worked an economic miracle, seemed increasingly shallow.
Monetarism had run into the sands long before Lawson himself effectively buried it, along with the medium-term strategy, in 1985.
But his alternative, more flexible approach had proved fallible also.
Evidently he had rejected the Keynesianism of the past, though the course of economic debate now suggested that apostles of the old orthodoxy were beginning to recover their confidence.
It would be hard, though, to call Lawson a strict monetarist either.
Control of interest rates loomed far larger than control of money supply.
On balance, it was his wish to defend sterling by interventionist methods, to check activity at home and keep down the sterling price of imports, rather than curb the flow of money, that dictated much of his policy.
But what kind of post-monetarism he was espousing was uncertain, too.
This uncertainty was reflected in  unprecedented levels of argument within the government, conducted in the full glare of public attention.
The Prime Minister came close to accusing the Chancellor of starting the inflationary spiral by an attempt to link the rate for sterling with the value of the German deutschmark.
Nigel Lawson rebutted this with some vigour.
It seemed that the Prime Minister was unable to dismiss her Chancellor, but was unable to invest him with full confidence either.
On the approach to the European monetary system, Prime Minister and Chancellor were more at odds.
Mrs Thatcher, in effect, did not anticipate being linked to the monetary system of an increasingly interventionist Europe in her political lifetime.
Nigel Lawson, by contrast, saw the EMS as a potential brake against violent fluctuations in the rate of exchange.
The debate between them oscillated, sometimes violently.
Britain was indeed committed to entering a free and open European market in 1992, but it could well do so with the highest inflation rate in western Europe, the worst balance of payments, and the sharpest contraction in the manufacturing base.
Whether or not Britain joined the EMS in due course, it would be operating against a background of some endemic weakness.
Without exactly being in the ‘stop — go’ cycle of Selwyn Lloyd or the ‘hard slog’of Roy Jenkins in years gone by, Britain's posture in the later Thatcher period still seemed to reflect the historic structural weakness of former years.
The Prime Minister, after all, had been unable to change everything ‘totally and utterly’.
Arguments over the EMS confirmed that in overseas affairs the country had not really recovered the proud international stature that had been proclaimed.
The nation's foreign policy remained highly personal, with Downing Street bypassing the Foreign Office time and again.
Mrs Thatcher was still highly visible at international summits, but often now as an obstructive, quarrelsome figure.
Her main claim to influence had been her close association with President Reagan.
His retirement in January 1 989 left, inevitably, a much more indirect relationship between London and the new incumbent, President George Bush.
The special relationship looked more formal and detached, with Mrs Thatcher in danger of being sidelined, with her suspicion of long-range missile agreements that might mean the end of Trident and a potential British nuclear presence.
Instead of her more bellicose approach, the somewhat more neutralist stance of the  West Germans loomed larger in NATO, and indeed it was Bonn rather than London that seemed to have the closer relationship with Washington in 1989.
Mrs Thatcher's international stature also rested on the curious chemistry of her relationship with President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, but the rigour of the Prime Minister consorted somewhat uneasily with the fluid world of perestroika , democratization throughout eastern Europe, German reunification, and moves towards international disarmament.
It seemed, in the wake of rival expulsions of alleged spies from London and Moscow, that Anglo-Russian relations were not as buoyant or as important as the British Prime Minister had claimed.
Meanwhile in the European Community, even with old arguments over the budget and farm policy removed, the British government looked like a somewhat negative force.
The Prime Minister argued strongly against any form of federalism that would undermine the sovereignty of the nation-state.
Her Bruges speech in the autumn of 1988, drafted by Charles Powell, which attacked the notion of ‘a United States of Europe’, aroused much controversy, though the ‘Bruges group’ of right-wing historians and others declared their support for Mrs Thatcher's stand.
The irony was that it was the British Labour Party which now responded more sympathetically towards Europe, since the social charter of the Community, drafted by its French socialist president, Jacques Delors, was in most respects highly congenial to the British left.
On the other hand, Mrs Thatcher was wont to see in the Delors Charter the kind of creeping state socialism and patronage of the trade unions which she hoped to have dispelled in Britain itself.
Within the Common Market, Britain in 1989 seemed as much the odd nation out as it had been in 1979 at the time of the rancorous Dublin summit, unable to prevent major changes within the Community by responding in a negative, bad-tempered way.
Britain as a committed member of the European world was not a wholly credible concept at the time of the Madrid summit in June 1989, or in the Strasbourg conference that November.
Ten years of vigorous overseas promotion, therefore, left Britain somewhat isolated in Europe and outweighted in NATO.
Within the Commonwealth, Mrs Thatcher's hostility towards trade sanctions on South Africa had long weakened ties with the African and Asian states so fruitfully built up at the time of the settlement in Zimbabwe in 1979.
As Dean Acheson had commented back in 1962, Britain had indeed lost an empire yet failed to find a post-imperial role.
The  years of decline had not really been reversed.
In 1989 the agreement concluded some years earlier with the Chinese government for the peaceful winding-up of the 1 50-year lease on Hong Kong suddenly seemed hard to defend.
It was clear that the free-enterprise (indeed, Thatcherite) peoples of Hong Kong were likely to be swallowed up in a huge Marxist empire of uncertain direction.
But there was nothing Britain could do.
It could expect to defeat a lesser power like Argentina, but taking on Communist China was unthinkable.
With the British government unable to contemplate much immigration of Hong Kong holders of British passports to these shores either, the posture struck was a weak one.
Abroad, therefore, as at home, the future of ‘Thatcherism’ looked in some doubt, and the vision of ‘the strong state’, based on free enterprise and nuclear defence, that much feebler.
The replacement of Geoffrey Howe by the little-known John Major at the Foreign Office in July 1989 added to the uncertainty, as did Major's replacement by Douglas Hurd three months later.
Much of the electoral strength of the Thatcher government was based on the claim that ‘there was no alternative’.
In the summer and autumn of 1989 it seemed possible that this might no longer be true.
The threat from the Alliance had evaporated since the division of the Social Democrats in 1987.
Two of its five MPs (the Scots, Kennedy and Maclennan) joined the Liberals in the newly named Social and Liberal Democrats, while the other three, headed by Dr David Owen, remained independent.
By the time of local elections, it was apparent the SDP of ‘claret and chips’ mould-breaking fame at the time of the Limehouse Declaration in 1981 was disintegrating.
It still had some major figures but no broad base.
Three of the ‘Gang of Four’(Jenkins, Rodgers, and Mrs Williams) had left front-line politics.
The Democrats had yet to attain anything like the rooted strength of the old Liberal Party.
In the Euro-elections of June 1989 they polled disastrously, and actually did much worse than the new and untried Green Party concerned with environmental issues.
The Democrats now seemed in much disarray, and presented a dismal prospect for their new leader, Paddy Ashdown, who had succeeded David Steel.
The centre ground of British politics remained the same uncertain terrain it had been ever since 1918.
One major Democrat theorist, David Marquand, a former Labour MP, wrote an  important book,The Unprincipled Society in 1987.
In this he argued powerfully for a revival of social citizenship and the ‘developmental state’.
With the Tories moving on to more radical positions, and the Labour Party now much more centrist, logic seemed to dictate that this kind of Alliance supporter should move back to a Social Democratic outlook identical with that of old Gaitskellites.
Much of the intellectual élan of the Alliance moved with him.
One sign of the times was that Lord Young of Dartington, a founder member of the SDP in 1981, moved back to rejoin the Labour Party.
He had been the head of Labour's Research Department at the time of the 1945 election.
His odyssey thus brought the history of an important part of the British intellectual left full circle.
The mould thus stubbornly remained unbroken.
The real and only alternative to Thatcherism, at least for the foreseeable future, was a return of the old two-party system, with Labour moving back towards credibility.
Neil Kinnock had by now established his leadership strongly in the party.
He dominated the National Executive with his ‘soft left’ allies.
In 1988 he crushed a vain attempt to challenge his leadership by the veteran Tony Benn, with an 8 to 1 majority, while Roy Hattersley comfortably held on to the deputy leadership.
In the 1989 party conference, Ken Livingstone was thrown off the NEC.
There were many signs of the so-called ‘new realism’ now.
Labour's economic programme accepted the thrust of the market in allocating social goods and advocated an obviously mixed approach towards economic planning in place of the stereotyped nationalization of 1983.
On Europe, as has been seen, Labour was by 1989 much more committed to developments within the Community.
Jacques Delors actually was warmly received at the Trades Union Congress as ‘frère Jacques’.
Labour also moved towards more concern for the consumer, towards an acceptance of the need for legal curbs on the power of the unions, and the party's need to confirm itself as the defence of the law and order sought by working-class citizens.
After all, it was they who tended to be the main victims of burglary, assault, and other forms of violent crime.
Roy Hattersley's testament,Choose Freedom (1987), emphasized Labour's commitment to equality as the  guarantee of pluralism, tolerance, and personal freedom.
Above all, over a unilateral nuclear policy, a stance previously adopted with fervour by Kinnock and Michael Foot before him, it was now accepted that this was a programme unpopular with the mass of the British people, and actually rejected by the glasnost of President Gorbachev as well.
Labour's foreign-affairs spokesman, Gerald Kaufman, was anything but a unilateralist.
In 1989, therefore, Neil Kinnock made it explicit that he was rejecting the unilateralist approach of his youth.
Labour, in effect, was reverting to Gaitskell's (and Bevan's) stance of 1959 and going multilateralist once again.
On this basis Polaris, and even Trident, could be retained as at least a bargaining counter.
Unilateralism was formally renounced at the party conference in October 1989.
There were real signs that Labour's new strength, confirmed by a growing lead in the polls, was more solidly based now.
The unions, so dormant in the 1980s, were now more positive in their approach, through leaders such as Gavin Laird (Engineers), Tom Sawyer (NUPE), and John Edmunds (Municipal Workers), representatives of the older craft industries and some of the newer high-tech, white-collar workers, too.
There were signs that the onward march on which Labour prided itself would be replaced by something differently constituted but no less rooted in British society.
In the autumn of 1989, therefore, the evidence for a permanent revolution in British public and private attitudes as a result of ten years of Mrs Thatcher's rule was far from conclusive.
The comparatively muted way in which the Thatcher decade was celebrated in May 1989 suggested some hesitancy amongst the Conservatives themselves.
Over ten years the market philosophy had undoubtedly penetrated the social services, education, the professions, and a whole range of public institutions.
Changes such as extensions of working-class home- and share-ownership had been accepted as part of the norms of British life.
Much of Britain in the Midlands and the south relished the new prosperity the Thatcher years had brought.
The glossy shops and building societies of towns like Swindon and Basingstoke, the proliferation of ‘leisure centres’ and recreational amenities in much of the south, appeared to be firm signs of the enjoyment of the good life.
The reaction against ‘society’ voiced by the Prime Minister herself was also in evidence, from the disappearance of a  once influential weekly like New Society to the criticism of social workers resulting from the 1987 Cleveland cases of alleged child sexual abuse.
On the other hand, the despair and decay of much of the northeast or Merseyside had left their mark, too.
In Scotland, especially, the rejection of the Conservative Party and the Thatcherite ethic was almost total.
In the Euro-elections of June 1989 the Tories were wiped out north of the border.
The revival of the campaign for Scottish devolution — indeed, for Scottish nationalism, as shown in Jim Sillars' by-election victory in Govan — was a notable feature of the later phase of Mrs Thatcher's regime.
Here and elsewhere, the government strove to identify itself with new themes.
In particular, the ‘green’ argument advanced by environmentalists, fanned by the importance of themes such as land conservation, acid rain, and the protection of the ozone layer and ‘the greenhouse effect’in the 1989 Euro-elections, suggested that the message of Thatcherite consumption and wealth creation failed to mesh with wider concerns for the quality of life.
The rise of ‘green’ issues, indeed, was more naturally appealing to Labour or Alliance politicians, and a powerful reminder of the rich variety of resistance to Thatcherism that British society could release.
It led to Nicholas Ridley's removal from the Environment department in July 1989, in favour of the notoriously ‘wet’ Chris Patten.
The government was not omnipotent after all.
A surrender to the farmers over the egg controversy, hesitancy in confronting the brewers, and some retreat in the face of the judges' opposition to legal reform indicated that there were lobbies and vested interests which even the all-conquering Prime Minister could not challenge with impunity.
In the summer and autumn of 1989, Labour led strongly in the opinion polls again.
By-election victories for them in the Vale of Glamorgan, Glasgow Central, and Vauxhall confirmed the trend, with black pressure from an ethnic candidate in the last-named constituency failing totally.
The European elections saw Labour capture forty-five seats to the Conservatives' thirty-two, the first major defeat for Mrs Thatcher in ten years of premiership.
The Democrats, significantly, finished well behind even the Greens and won no seats at all.
There appeared to be some similarity with the decline of Macmillan's regime in the early sixties — Cabinet reshuffles; acute balance of payments' difficulties, a shaky pound, and high interest rates; a renewal of strikes on the railways, the docks, and in  local government services; a somewhat disaffected public apprehensive at Britain's declining power in the world.
The truth or otherwise of this diagnosis would be revealed in the future.
The electoral and sociological omens favoured the Conservatives still, with their entrenched position in the prosperous and populous southern half of Britain.
It seemed unlikely, however, that a more abrasive or divisive programme would be the way for them to recover their position.
The enduring strength of post-war social and economic policy, for all its frequent and perceived failures, still commanded enough allegiance for the Conservatives to fight it with only danger to themselves.
A series of appalling disasters in the public services, notably the Kings Cross underground fire and the rail crashes at Clapham and elsewhere underlined the damage that could result from the public sector being run down.
As the Conservatives themselves hesitantly took up the theme of citizenship in response to opposition challenge, it was argued that only a more flexible, compassionate style of Toryism could be their route to safety.
Mrs Thatcher herself remained an imperious figure, respected, perhaps feared, but rarely viewed with affection.
In December 1 989 an obscure Welsh member actually challenged her as party leader, gaining 33 votes.
For all her professed populism, she was seen as remote from ordinary people, hardly ever catching a train, watching a film, or relaxing in a British holiday resort, turning instinctively to privileged private treatment in educating her children or adopting health-care systems for herself.
She was unduly prone to use of the royal ‘we’.
As a phenomenon, the most triumphant premier since Lord Liverpool in 1812–27, she was unique.
But the essence of the nation, its temper, its geology flowed on beneath her.
The basic logic of her programme since 1979 had been to reverse the main lines of her country's history as it had developed since the Second World War.
Through ceaseless activity and a triumph of will-power, she had by 1987 come as near to success as was possible for one, self-sufficient human being.
The nation had formally rejected neither her nor her policies by the end of 1989.
But, below the surface, it may have been defeating her, just the same.
Conclusion
IN assessing the course of recent British history, the historian encounters a clear gulf between the perceptions of public commentators and the responses of ordinary people.
Commentaries written in the 1970s and 1980s on the British experience since 1945 were full of cliché-ridden observations on the decline of an ailing titan, and a fall from imperial and industrial greatness.
Any alternative view, it seemed, would imply a fatal lapse into Whiggism and a naive belief in progress.
The successive supplements of the Dictionary of National Biography down to 1971–80, in their way, provided a development of this theme, as they recorded the past achievements of a Churchill, a Bevin, a Montgomery, a Shaw, a Russell, a Rutherford, all that race of former giants who had once trodden England's green and pleasant land.
In all areas of British society, it seemed, from science to sport, the quality of leadership and performance was steadily diminishing.
Not only were there no great causes left, as Look Back in Anger would have it.
There were no great men or women either, as Britain settled down resignedly into the second or even third-class status enjoyed by Venice, Spain, Sweden, Holland, and other failed empire-builders of the past.
The anxiety that this process of eclipse produced, however, was strangely removed from day-to-day experience.
All the findings of opinion polls and other surveys suggested that the overwhelming majority of ordinary citizens were convinced that the period of their nation's history through which they had lived in the forty-odd years since the end of the war in 1945, was a time of comfort and content.
It was after all, a time of peace.
The last of the great classic European wars ended in 1945, and by 1989 seemed most unlikely  to be succeeded by another.
There had been several local, peripheral wars in which Britain had been engaged, notably that in Korea in 1950–3, and a long series of conflicts to resolve colonial problems — Malaya in the late 1940s, Kenya and Cyprus in the 1950s, Suez (most traumatically) in 1956, Aden and Southern Arabia in the sixties.
By 1970, with the passing of the old empire, these were all over, and only the totally unexpected war with Argentina over the Falklands in 1982 interrupted what was one of the longest periods of unbroken peace that Britain had known since the later middle ages.
While British defence expenditure was consistently high by comparative international standards, and while many idealists agonized over Britain's possession of nuclear weapons, the vast bulk of British citizens, outside Northern Ireland, neither experienced military conflict nor ever expected to do so.
Montgomery (a very outdated figure at the time of his death in 1976) had been Britain's last military hero, and he seemed as remote as Wellington or Marlborough.
Peace abroad was accompanied by peace at home.
While there were periods of internal stress, notably the emergence of the various racial, Irish, and student troubles of the late sixties, and the concern over the alleged ‘ungovernability’ of the unions at the time of the ‘winter of discontent’in the late seventies, Britain was a relatively stable society internally throughout these forty-four years.
Compared with the regional and social tensions that disrupted so many European countries from Portugal to Greece, compared even with the events in France in 1958 and 1968, British institutions and social cohesion stood firm.
Allegations by American commentators that the land was ‘as ungovernable as Chile’ seemed to be wild exaggerations.
Rumours of putsches , paramilitary fantasies by Colonel Stirling, destabilizing activities by MI5, the theatricalities of the National Front — all these seemed relatively insubstantial, even a joke.
The great exception, of course, was Northern Ireland.
A comparatively tranquil province until 1968, the liberal attempt to reform the inbred Protestant ascendancy and extend civil rights to the exploited Catholic minority led to a revival of the unbridgeable schisms and endemic violence in Ulster.
No governmental initiative, from Heath's abolition of Stormont in 1972 to Mrs Thatcher's Anglo-Irish agreement of 1985, appeared likely to resolve it.
But as always, Ireland was a land apart.
For the remainder of the United Kingdom, this was a time when social or political upheaval seemed comparatively remote, and society appeared relatively orderly.
It was also, for most ordinary citizens, a time of prosperity.
After the travails of austerity in the late 1940s — when, in fact, Cripps and his associates were laying the base for a new export-led recovery — the land entered new affluence in the 1950s.
National income doubled between 1948 and 1976.
The average citizen's standard of living rose accordingly, as income and social expectations mounted steadily.
In the 1950s, the purchase of a car, along with electrical consumer durables, became the aspiration of most citizens, along with holidays overseas.
Take-home pay rose persistently during the inflation of the 1960s and early 1970s.
By the late 1970s, the average self-respecting British household expected to have its video recorder or microwave oven; in a variety of occupations the computer was taking over.
Twenty million people took overseas holidays in 1986, many in the Americas.
By the eighties, affluence was expressed, to a growing degree, in the purchase of a second home, often by city-dwellers whose alternative residence hastened the endemic decay of village life — or open political hostility in Wales where a campaign of house incendiarism by some cultural nationalists, the ‘Sons of Glyn Dŵr’, punctuated the otherwise peaceful history of the principality from the 1960s to the 1980s.
Two features were especially notable.
One was the growth of house purchase.
It spread rapidly first in the 1950s as the private-house market was decontrolled and building societies vastly extended their operations.
By 1961 there were 7 million homes owned by their occupiers; by 1987 the total was 14.5 million, as against about 6 million rented from local authorities, and under 3 million privately rented.
By 1990, over two-thirds of the occupiers of all dwellings in the British Isles would own them.
There were also many more shareholders, though this was a much more recent development stemming largely from the privatization policy conducted by the Thatcher government after 1983.
Over a fifth of the adult population owned shares in late 1988, contrasted with only 6 per cent in early 1984.
It appeared that prosperity was being spread around according to classic distributist models, and that the Conservative aspiration of a ‘property-owning democracy’ had largely come about since 1945.
And yet, this relatively peaceful country, moving out of the stagnation of the 1930s to the growing affluence of post-1945, was  seldom contented or placid for long throughout these forty-four years.
On the contrary, for all the general flow of tranquillity and prosperity, a number of specific themes consistently emerged which made this a time of anxiety, even torment.
Surveys of opinion invariably revealed that, while attachment to Britain remained strong, patriotic emotions still flourished, and very few people ever wished to live anywhere but in Britain, estimates of national progress and decline were progressively more gloomy.
Most British people believed that, whatever their own prosperity, the fortunes of their country were bad and getting worse.
First of all, the economy was seldom under effective control at any time after 1945.
Of all the Chancellors of the period, only Cripps, Butler, Jenkins, and (briefly) Lawson seemed to have matters under secure direction.
In the immediate post-war period down to the mid-1950s there were endless external difficulties as the economy tried to recover from the strains of the war; balance-of-payments crises of a severe kind in 1949, 1951, and 1955, often accompanied by pressure on sterling, were endemic.
In the early 1960s, a more long-term series of pressures, associated with comparative and well-publicized industrial decline, took root, with a new sense that the economy had not really regained its balance.
The attempts to enter ‘Europe’ in 1961, 1967, and finally in 1973 were always accompanied by a sense of economic weakness and the perils of isolation.
The Wilson years of 1964–70 saw the trauma of the monetary crisis of 1966 and the devaluation of 1967, with the nation ‘blown off course’ in a mood of some panic.
In the 1970s ‘stagflation’ set in apace, as external forces such as the 1973 oil-price explosion was accompanied by intense inflationary pressures at home, many of them associated with the rise of trade-union power.
The Thatcher government, after a period of rapid decline in manufacturing and a sharp rise in unemployment, which reached 3.2 million by mid-1982, appeared to have conquered many of the major difficulties in the mid-1980s, and there was talk of a ‘British miracle’ comparable to those of Germany and Japan.
But by the end of the 1980s record balance-of-payments deficits, rising inflation, a weakened pound, and failure to impose the monetary disciplines on which the government had prided itself, suggested that most of the old problems were still present.
Only the fortunate existence of North Sea oil, as a boost to exports, appeared to have mitigated their effects.
Naturally, like all developed countries, Britain showed a rise in  economic growth from the 1950s to the 1980s, but it was usually patchy and sluggish by international standards.
The reason for the failures of the British economy led to a wide variety of diagnoses by economists, sociologists, and other soothsayers.
The failures of British industrial relations usually loomed large, with some blaming backwards-looking trade unions defending antique work practices, and more finding consistent weaknesses in British management in both the private and public sector once the immediate post-1945 boom had spent itself.
Others looked back further in time, perhaps to the late-Victorian era, with the long-term failure to invest, to engage in industrial or technical training, to develop new industries, or perhaps to create an industrial or business-minded culture at all.
It was noted that the apparent recovery of 1983–7 rested heavily on finance, banking, and credit, rather than on a genuine revival of industry or manufacturing.
The share of manufacturing in British GDP fell from 25.4 per cent in 1979 to 19.5 per cent in 1986.
Many people anticipated the coming of the European single market in 1992 with apprehension.
One way and another, the problems of the British economy, with unpleasant side-effects for individuals such as the ‘austerity’ of 1948–9, the ‘pay pause’of 1961, the deflation after the 1976 IMF crisis, or the rise in personal indebtedness after 1986, were a persistently gloomy theme after 1945.
So, perhaps less visibly, was a decline in the confidence, perhaps the very legitimacy, of the state and its instruments.
In 1945 there was immense confidence in the civic and administrative institutions of government.
The gentleman from Whitehall not only knew best; he was the unacknowledged legislator of the world, who had (indirectly at least) won the war.
Abroad, he had his counterpart in trained imperial administrators from India to Jamaica.
The Attlee government in some ways is a final commentary on the deep-rooted strength of this faith in the institutions of the state.
The partial reaction against it in the Tory 1950s —‘setting the people free’— did not lead to the contraction of the government service.
On the contrary, as Professor Northcote Parkinson noted at the time, the civil service expanded as never before, locally as well as nationally, and the prominent place of central-government expenditure (consistently over 40 per cent as a proportion of gross national product  in this period) is an outstanding feature of the period 1951–64.
By the time of the Wilson government in 1964, it was clear that the old confidence in governmental planning was, for a variety of reasons, in some disarray.
In part, it was part of a wider decline in the authority of national institutions from the monarchy to the police; satire and culture criticism reflected the process and took it further.
But it was also clear that the governmental machine had failed to revive the economy or reform social institutions in the 1950s.
Its Keynesian ethos was running out of steam.
The feebleness of the Wilson government's attempts to deal with national economic growth or industrial relations in the 1960s discredited the ideals of the planner and central state still further.
The National Plan and In Place of Strife both led to nothing.
So did efforts at civil service reform.
Meanwhile, the average wage-earner noted that, whereas in 1960 tax and insurance took 8 per cent of his or her earnings, in 1970 they took nearly 20 per cent.
In 1950 the average wage-earner had paid no income tax at all.
Heath's revived corporatism in the early 1970s crumpled with the miners' strikes and the OPEC price explosion, while the Labour government of the late 1970s was able only to breathe intermittent life into a system of corporate direction which powerful producer-groups and multinational companies in the so-called ‘meso-economy’ were both undermining.
A major prop for the Thatcher government in the 1980s was a strong reaction against central government, the world of the quangos and over-mighty metropolitan authorities — although, ironically, that administration was also to take centralization still further, especially in its crusade against local government and the vested interests of the professions.
If there is one supreme casualty in British public life between 1945 and 1989 it is the ethos of planning.
Its advocates, from Gaitskell in 1955 to the SDP in 1981, all fell by the wayside.
Planning had failed; perhaps, compared with the French Monnet Plan or the ‘reform bureaucracy’ of Scandinavia, it had not even been tried.
Of course, these developments were part of a wider process common to many countries.
The European world in general saw a flurry of enthusiasm for planned reconstruction in 1945.
Equally, it went through many of the same traumas as Britain in the 1960s and 1970s while the Thatcher crusade for the market-led economy  found an echo not only in Reagan's America, but in France, Australia, Spain, and even social-democratic Sweden.
Even the moderate left had become devotees of the enterprise culture and the regime of the market, albeit a ‘social market’.
But in Britain, with its strong governmental impulse as created in the Victorian period in the aftermath of the 1855 Northcote-Trevelyan report, with the British faith in the educated, patrician ‘expert’ which kindled the support of American progressives and ‘genteel reformers’in the previous century, the decline of planning and the loss of confidence in the effectiveness of social engineering had a deep cultural impact.
It had a special message for the Labour Party, and was surely a major reason for Labour's growing loss of confidence between the 1950s and 1980s, including the failure to produce any convincing successor to Crosland as a theorist of democratic socialism.
It was ironic that 1989 saw the centenary celebration of the Fabian Essays of Webb, Shaw, and their comrades; this came at a time when Britain seemed in more complete reaction against the imperatives of Fabian rationalism than at any time for a century.
Intellectually, too, one notable feature was the steady demise of British Marxism as an influential body of ideas and doctrine.
By 1989 there were very few significant Marxist philosophers, critics, or film directors in Britain.
There were still celebrated Marxist historians, such as E. P. Thompson, Eric Hobsbawm, Christopher Hill, and John Saville, but they were all at the veteran stage, and there appeared to be no significant youthful successors, as their creed withered throughout eastern Europe.
Another gloomy feature of post-war Britain was the prevalence of endemic social inequality.
Britain was and remained a notably unequal country in terms of income, capital, and social opportunity throughout this period.
Even more did this apply to economic power — witness the failure of repeated attempts to build up copartnership or anything resembling profit-sharing in industry.
Britain was divided (very approximately) between a thriving high-tech ‘south’ and an ageing industrial ‘north’, between Celtic fringe and southern English heartland, employed and unemployed, waged and salaried employees, average earners and low-paid, in a rigid, predetermined pattern almost without parallel in the industrial world.
On these rooted distinctions of wealth and social class (masked by  the apparent growing classlessness of dress and speech, especially among the young) were superimposed other, more specific inequalities.
The limited opportunities in terms of employment, housing, or social mobility for Britain's urban black community, following the Commonwealth immigration of the 1950s, was one unresolved feature of the period.
Another was the comparative economic weakness of the Celtic nations, especially felt with passion in Scotland where a continuous nationalist upsurge from the mid-1960s threatened a major disruption of the United Kingdom.
Divisions of colour and region/ nation were accompanied by those of gender.
The feminist movement of the 1970s highlighted the restricted opportunities and expectations for women, especially for mothers.
Some headway was made as a result.
But, by the end of the 1980s, while a larger and larger proportion of the female population was in employment, it was seldom employment at a level of high command, and often not of a permanent kind.
In 1987, 3,430,000 part-time women workers fell below the Council of Europe's ‘decency threshold’ for pay.
Under a female Prime Minister in 1989, Britain was still very much a man's world.
Incidentally, the divorce rate, at 12.9 per cent per 1,000 existing marriages in 1986, was the highest in the EEC.
Decrees granted for divorce, which had stood at only 27,000 in 1961, and 80,000 in 1971, reached 175,000 in the mid-1980s, from which women suffered most.
These various divisions were superimposed on a deeply rooted inequality between different groups and occupations which modified other apparent signs of social progress.
Thus, the great advance in literacy over the period and the expansion of the young population.
receiving secondary education was checked by the presence of a divisive system of private education with few parallels in other countries.
Indeed, the proportion of children attending ‘public’(ie. private) schools rose throughout the eighties.
The great gains in public health, following the establishment of the National Health Service in 1948, was modified by, among other factors, the existence of class attitudes towards health which meant, for instance, that older working-class communities in the industrial north were still marred by the health problems of a poor diet, excessive beer drinking and smoking, and a prevalence of heart and lung disease in consequence.
The passion for ‘health’ foods and mineral water, and exercises such as‘jogging’and aerobics, were largely middle-class enthusiasms.
The Second World War, apparently a halcyon era for popular  unity and ‘pulling through together’ was, as noted, a time of social division, which wartime experiences such as evacuation or the pattern of female employment intensified.
This continued to plague Britain as a society after 1945.
In the 1980s, under the Thatcher regime, most of the indices of social equality seemed to show that things were not improving.
The redistribution of wealth, erratically pursued by successive governments since 1945, was markedly reversed in the 1980s.
Especially did this structural inequality apply to older working-class people, by now a huge under-class.
As a growing proportion of an ageing population lived on into their eighties or even nineties, the disparity between their life chances and those of the able-bodied employed became more and more apparent.
The overhaul of superannuation policy in the late 1960s never really happened.
For decades, as the Royal Commission on Wealth and Income demonstrated in the late 1970s, those disparities were modified by the social benefits available under the welfare state.
By the end of the 1980s, partly as a result of deliberate government action, more perhaps because the unduly optimistic assumptions of Beveridge and other founders of the British welfare system were being falsified by financial and cultural factors (such as the breakdown of the old nuclear family of fabled tradition), the welfare state was far less able to temper the asperities of a harsh and divided society.
The beleaguered ranks of social workers and investigators of the 1980s documented a society more unsettled, more helpless, and to some degree more violent than at any period since the century began.
Finally, there was constant angst about Britain's world role.
The direction of Britain's post-imperial policy was unclear after 1945.
There was a general belief that the nation should remain ‘strong’ and have that strength publicly acknowledged — hence the relative failure of CND and other anti-nuclear groups.
Not until the early sixties did it seem to be generally acknowledged that Britain was no longer a great power as previously understood.
Until then, its leaders continued to reflect the ascendancy they enjoyed at the time of the 1945 Potsdam conference.
In the Middle East especially, British power was still a decisive factor down to 1956, however illusory its basis.
But in which direction its strength and influence should be pointed thereafter, once the Suez crisis and subsequent Bermuda Conference of 1956–7 showed up Britain's basic weakness in the Atlantic relationship, was not apparent.
Only during the 1960s did it become generally appreciated that the cosy ‘special relationship’ of the war years and of the period of Oliver Franks's distinguished tenure at the Washington embassy in 1948–52 had changed, and to Britain's disadvantage.
In response, Britain made a series of halfhearted, and finally somewhat desperate, attempts to become ‘European’ instead.
In the end, Britain entered the Common Market in 1975, but with weary reluctance.
Even at the end of the 1980s, while the British left was now largely reconciled to membership of Community, the British remained hesitant Europeans.
Mrs Thatcher was far from alone in condemning any thought of a ‘United States of Europe’ in her Bruges speech.
Britain's role in the world, which had generated a series of transient late-imperial crises between 1956 to 1982, remained decidedly obscure, as Dean Acheson, Nicholas Henderson, and others had long forecast.
On the other hand, there was much to be commended in the way Britain relinquished the reins of empire.
Beginning with the transfer of power in India and Pakistan in 1947, through the retreat from Egypt, and the rapid withdrawal from Africa in the Macleod period in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the rapidity and lack of tension with which Britain shed her imperial domain is perhaps the most notable of tributes to national stability and, possibly, maturity in the post-war world.
There were few outcries by settlers, as in France with regard to Indo-China and Algeria, no crisis comparable with the chaotic fate of the former Belgian Congo, no agony approaching that of the United States over Vietnam.
The curtain went down in dignity and tranquillity.
The Commonwealth remained in large measure a ceremonial affair after 1960, with a role for the Queen as figurehead, with cricket matches and Rhodes scholarships to preserve links with the older dominions, and little effectual attempt to exert collective pressure on the apartheid policy within South Africa.
After Britain's entry into the Common Market in 1975, trading links with the Commonwealth countries loomed much less large, as did defence considerations after the Wilson government withdrew Britain's presence from ‘east of Suez’ in 1968–70.
Yet all this led to comparatively little public outcry.
Kipling and Elgar need never have been.
Old-fashioned advocates of a cohesive empire like Beaverbrook's Daily Express seemed purely eccentric.
Equally, Enoch Powell's speeches in the 1960s which might have been designed to stir up racial animosity between the various Commonwealth communities, had only a limited impact, with Powell himself becoming politically marginalized.
Compared with its problems at home, Britain shed her  imperial role between 1947 and 1970 (Rhodesia excepted) with much skill and humanity.
It was decolonization without traumas and without tears.
Throughout these forty years, the British increasingly believed that they were badly led.
Public figures suffered a collective loss of esteem.
Prime Ministers from Eden to Wilson left office with their prestige lower than when they had entered Downing Street.
On Mrs Thatcher, the jury was still out in 1989.
The old enthusiasm for governments and the governing classes — anatomized with much effect by Anthony Sampson and others in the early 1960s — evaporated into a more cynical disillusion.
Certainly, the components of Britain's élite of leadership changed considerably in this period.
The patrician planners of the late 1940s were in some retreat a decade later.
The Tory paternalists of the 1950s seemed dated by the time of the Heath government in 1970–4.
The corporate ascendancy of the trade unions and employers' groups, with their many offshoots in the world of the quangos, was dismantled after the 1970s.
This was partly through economic failure, partly because of structural changes like the growth of plant bargaining as opposed to national agreements, and the extreme difficulty industrial and administrative bodies had in imposing settlements on local wage conventions and work practices.
In the Thatcher era, the nation's leaders seemed now to reflect the ‘enterprise’ outlook of finance, banking, and credit rather than that of traditional manufacturing or other industries.
Both the TUC and CBI went into decline.
The old planners, with their Keynesian nostrums, were isolated.
The universities were in visible retreat.
Intellectuals were dismissed as uncreative and unproductive.
University students, once anxious to become civil servants or perhaps teachers, now became stockbrokers or market researchers as the public service lost its charms.
An older regime, based variously on deference, status, and structure, had been dismantled, but with no obvious replacement in view.
In the Attlee era, the British people knew by whom they were led.
The direct chain of command, in central and local government alike, related both to recollections of wartime victory and older notions of authority embodied in the public-school, cricket-loving Edwardian philanthropist who occupied 10 Downing Street.
Churchill, in a very different, romantic fashion, appealed to some of the same values, with free use (and abuse) of history in the process.
By the 1960s, partly through its own inner uncertainties and weakness, partly  through a torrent of satire and journalistic exposure, the stable base of British public leadership, the pivot of civic culture for generations, was being undermined in government, industry, religion, neighbourhood, and family life.
In the later phase of Mrs Thatcher's government, Britain was in danger of being rudderless as nothing very obvious came to succeed this older source of authority.
At the dawn of the 1990s, with the European single market looming ever closer, most British people still seemed to feel content with their identity.
They were still proud to be British with powerful national variants in Wales, Scotland, and especially Northern Ireland.
But the nature of that identity, the ultimate sources of British national awareness, remained obscure.
In part, the sense of Britishness seemed to rest on an often sentimental obeisance to the past, as shown in the flourishing ‘heritage’ industry of the eighties extending from Chaucer to Churchill, to the delight of tourists and the scorn of social critics.
In its fashion, the Labour Party also subscribed to this nostalgia, albeit directed towards Labour's alternative ‘people's history’.
But the main institutions which the British had adapted in keeping their nation together — the Crown, Parliament, the forces of law and order, civil and commercial institutions — had all in different ways turned sour with the progressive disillusion of the years after 1945.
More than most Europeans, the British were still a lively, distinctive people at the end of the twentieth century — and not only for geographical reasons.
They had survived the trials of imperial retreat, economic decline, and industrial conflict, and remained cohesive and intact.
British ‘exceptionalism’, like American, was still a major force in the world.
The British still believed themselves to retain ‘shared values’ which the debate over a national educational curriculum in the 1980s helped stimulate anew, as it had done in the French Third Republic after 1875.
But British particularism too often meant an unwillingness to experiment and a yearning for a quiet life.
There remained an inherent lack of energy, initiative, and perhaps ambition, a kind of public exhaustion.
Legends of the nation ‘standing alone’ in 1940 had been damaging and illusory, contributions to ‘the glamour of backwardness’.
In forty-four years the British had yet to recover fully from victory in the Second World War, even though the Germans and Japanese had so manifestly recovered from defeat.
It is rash indeed for the historian to turn prophet.
But the record since 1945 suggests that it is highly improbable that the British people will play anything like  the major role in the affairs of mankind in the twenty-first century that they have done so frequently, if often unavailingly, in the course of the twentieth.