

The Royal Air Forces Association For year ended 31st December, 1990
Annual Report & Accounts
The Royal Air Forces Association
Annual Report & Accounts 1990
Foreword
by the Chairman of the Central Council Air Vice-Marshal D G Bailey CB CBE
It was fitting, in the 50th anniversary year of the Battle of Britain, that the Association should have engaged in a full range of activities aimed at meeting its responsibilities towards former members of the Royal Air Force, both men and women.
The Association's main activities continued to be welfare, housing and fund-raising to enable us to provide the facilities, the support and the companionship that a caring membership has always regarded as of paramount importance.
These areas of activity are dealt with in detail elsewhere in this report but I am very pleased in this foreword to highlight a most successful year of achievement — a year which owed so much to the inspiration given to use all by those who saved the Nation in 1940.
One highlight of the year was the major extension to Sussexdown in the form of a new Therapy Wing.
This offers physiotherapy and occupational therapy facilities to all residents and also provides a beautiful sun lounge with views of the South Downs.
A legacy from Flying Officer D J L Andrews, who had been a Flight Engineer on Stirling and Lancaster aircraft and who remembered Sussexdown in his will, provided a major source of funds for the project.
Many others also contributed towards the costs including Royal Air Force Stations, charitable trust, Association Branches and individual donors.
We are grateful for all these contributions which have substantially enhanced the quality of life of the residents at Sussexdown.
A futher highlight was the opening of the first Eagle Lodges: Wexford House near Melton Mowbray and Woodford in Southport.
These shared residential houses for single elderly persons provide an important new welfare resource for the Association at a time when increasing numbers of those who served in World War II, and their dependents, are reaching an age when they need the support of a housekeeper.
A third Eagle Lodge, at Bexhill-on-Sea, was under development during the year and will be ready for occupation in early 1991.
The Association began the year wondering how the Royal Air Force Benevolent Funds's ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal could best be supported.
The Association was also concerned that its income from various sources, but in particular from Wings Appeal, should be maintained in a year when the public might feel confusion over the two appeals.
It is, therefore with considerable pleasure that I can report that the Association was able during 1990 to contribute directly more than £250,000 to the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal, and was able to see the income generated by its own Wings Appeal increase by 47%.
Clearly much of the credit for this is due to a very generous and grateful public.
Another factor contributing to the success of the two Appeals was the Battle of Britain Parade and Flypast on 15 September.
This national event aroused such emotions and nostalgia that people everywhere responded with magnificent donations.
We also acknowledge the tremendous response from our members and our Branches, for without their enthusiasm and organisation we could not have made this 50th anniversary such a financial success.
We are very pleased to be able to point to increased co-operation and liaison with other Service charities.
Apart from working closely with the Benevolent Fund, The Association is contributing to the work of The Council of British Service and Ex-Service Organisations.
Already we are providing, through the Association's War Pensions Officer and Area Welfare Officers, support to our sister charities, and in turn we have benefited from co-operation in the design of training courses.
We have made a sound start in 1990 to achieving the degree of co-operation and mutual aid that we know the Government and Public expect to see more in evidence throughout this decade.
As the year ended the events in the Gulf reminded us sharply that we cannot take peach and freedom for granted, and that substantial risks continue to be faced by those serving in the Royal Air Force.
In turn these may lead to welfare needs extending well beyond the year 2000.
It is for the Association to continue to build a sound foundation of welfare facilities and support that will enable both today's and the future's needs to be met — in meeting this objective we are deeply indebted to the continuing dedication of our members and the support of our many friends.
My grateful thanks go to them all.
 D G Bailey 
Welfare
The 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain provided an opportunity to pay a tribute to ‘The Few’ who flew in the Battle and the many who supported them.
The Anniversary also served as a reminder of the sacrifices made during the wartime years by those who gave unstintingly to preserve the freedom we now enjoy.
Proudly and thankfully the Association will remember them.
Even more importantly the Association will do this in the most practical way possible — by helping those who are now in welfare need.
Honorary Welfare Officers
The Association's Branches, numbering over 630 worldwide and comprising a membership of over 103,000, provide a network of Honorary Welfare Officers.
These are available to help men and women, and their dependants, who serve of have served in one of Her Majesty's Air Forces.
They provide welfare support ranging from hospital visits to helping with the completion of applications for financial assistance for a variety of needs, such as rent, gas, electricity, telephone arrears, purchase of essential household equipment, clothing and travel costs to visit sick relatives.
They arrange convalescence, specialist accommodation such as Eagle Lodges and, in exceptional circumstances, holidays including those financed by the Swiss Branch under their Welfare Holiday Scheme.
The incidence of indebtedness continues to rise due to redundancy, unemployment and inflation.
These cases require frequent visits and continuing follow-up by the Honorary Welfare Officers.
Central Council would like to record its grateful thanks to them all for their work throughout 1990, and especially for the way they have accepted the increased work load.
Central Council is also grateful to their spouses who often support the welfare work of their partners, and to the many other volunteers who also help.
The success of two trial Training Courses held in June and October at Birmingham and York confirmed the belief that the wider demands being placed on the Honorary Welfare Officers meant that some formal training was essential.
It is important that they should know about changes in Department of Social Services benefits, how other Service charities and voluntary agencies work, how to help people to cope with bereavement, the steps to take regarding the increasing problems of debt, and how to meet the special needs of the elderly.
These courses, designed to provide this information, were over-subscribed and the feedback from those who attended was that they wished they had been available earlier.
It is intended that they will be run on a regular basis.
Central Council would like to thank SSAFA for their help in establishing these courses.
The Royal Air Force Benevolent Fund
The Association continues to work in close co-operation with the RAF Benevolent Fund.
The Association's Honorary Welfare Officers disbursed some £1.8m in 1990 on behalf of the Fund.
The Association is pleased to continue this work to maintain these close ties for the benefit of the Royal Air Force ‘family’.
Medical and Legal Panels
Central Council would like to record its grateful thanks to the members of the Medical and Legal Panels.
Their advice and assistance offered to those seeking help through the Association during 1990 has been very much appreciated.
Links with other Ex-Service Organisations
This year The Council of British Service and Ex-Service Organisations (COBSEO) endorsed the major proposals made by Sir Greville Spratt in his Report of July 1989 that still closer co-operation and mutual aid is needed in all aspects of benevolent work.
The Association continues to work with its sister charities to achieve this.
Sussexdown
The new Therapy Wing together with improvements and refurbishment of the Lord Tedder Wing were completed during the year.
The opening ceremony was performed by the Rt.
Hon.
Nicholas Scott, MBE, JP, MP, the Minister of State for Society Security and Disabled People at an Open Day on the 14th July.
The event was attended by those who generously contributed to the project, by representatives from the RAF and by local dignitaries.
Sussexdown looked at its best in the summer sunshine and a marvellous day was enjoyed by guests and residents.
A two-seat Spitfire, operated by Mrs Carolyn Grace in memory of her husband, gave an exciting aerobatic display during the afternoon.
Music was provided by the Chichester City Band.
The Therapy Wing has provided much improved facilities for occupational therapy and physiotherapy.
A light, airy sun lounge with delightful views of the garden and South Downs greatly improves the quality of life for the residents.
The reinstatement of the Lord Tedder Wing has enabled a total of 63 beds to be available for permanent residence, convalescence and respite care.
During 1990 a review of the quality and appropriateness of the nursing and residential care at Sussexdown took place.
With the help of specialilst consultants the policy and organisation has been reviewed.
Organisational changes have been introduced and a policy statement has been formulated that provides the blueprint for care for the future, and ensures that it will be conducted in accordance with the latest and best practices of the nursing profession.
The year was a busy one for the residents with an increase in the number of outings, many in connection with the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain.
Holidays were provided at Pontins near Weymouth by the ‘Not Forgotten’ Association, and in Jersey by the Jersey Branch.
The generous support given by Branches of the Association, organisations and individuals to enable residents to enjoy outings and holidays is very much appreciated as they are so important to the well-being of residents.
The average bed occupancy for the year was 90.5%, indicating that the accommodation was well used.
The average number of permanent residents throughout the year was 43 and 250 people benefited from periods of convalescence and respite care.
In a new project with the local community the pupils from Rydon School, Storrington, undertook a community programme whereby they were allocated a Sussexdown resident and visited them twice a month.
Their teacher has said that the project ‘has opened their eyes to the problems that have to be met by the elderly and disabled.’
The visits have been much appreciated by the residents.
Sussexdown The new Therapy Wing, opened by the Rt Hon Nicholas Scott MBE, JP, MP on 14th July.
PPP Beaumont Nursing Homes
To relieve the periodic overload at Sussexdown, the Association has used a contract scheme for nursing beds with Private Patients Plan Beaumont Nursing Homes.
This has worked well for both permanent and respite care.
The scheme is based primarily on the use of beds at a Nursing Home near Oxford but a number of other Homes have also been used.
Central Council would like to thank PPP Beaumont's management and staff and the Oxford Branch of the Association for their contribution to the success of this scheme.
Richard Peck House
Richard Peck House was named after Air Marshal Sir Richard Peck, President of the Association from 1949–1952.
He is still remembered with great affection within the Association and his widow, Lady Peck, continues a most welcome interest in the House.
Central Council sends its good wishes to her.
The House, at Lytham St Annes, provides convalescence for 23 guests, and is situated a short walk from the sea and promenade.
Guests can enjoy trips to local beauty spots, dancing at a local hotel, and visits to local theatres.
During 1990, 450 guests benefited from convalescence at the Home, and the Association has received many letters of appreciation of the good food, the good company and the kind care of the staff.
Central Council would like to express their gratitude for the many generous donations and gifts which help to maintain the high standard of care given to the Home's guests.
Sussexdown ‘Working Out’ in the new physiotherapy department 
War Pensions
The following two cases illustrate some of the work of the War Pensions Officer and the Area Welfare Officers:
A young SAC developed a nervous state that resulted in his discharge from the RAF.
His claim for a War Disablement Pension was rejected by the Department of Social Security.
Twenty years later he decided to lodge an Entitlement Appeal against the decision, and nominated the Association to represent him.
The Tribunal decided that the mental condition was attributable to service and allowed the Appeal.
A Flight Lieutenant underwent surgery to repair a broken blood vessel in the brain.
After the operation his personality had changed, his memory was impaired and he was discharged from the RAF.
The War Pensions Branch assessed the degree of disability at 40% which he appealed against.
He was represented at the hearing of his Appeal by the Association and the Tribunal increased the assessment to 80%.
Many claimants and appellants are in a poor state of health, and are often not able to present their cases unaided.
1990 saw an increase in the number of Tribunal hearings when the Central and Area Headquarters' representatives attended 127 Entitlement and 86 Assessment Appeals.
Chateau Holidays
Once again the Association is most grateful to Mr and Mrs Frank Cannon and their fellow trustees for their generosity in providing superb holidays for Association members at the Chateau de Monviel in France.
A party of ten visited between 25th May and 8th June, whilst a similar number went there between 7th and 21st September.
The visitors were invited to an RAFA Battle of Britain banquet organised by the Sud-Ouest Branch.
For one couple this happily coincided with their Golden Wedding Day.
Letters that have been received show that Mr and Mrs Cannon are most excellent hosts.
Their great kindness has helped members enjoy a holiday they will never forget.
Charity Shop
The Wales Area has opened a charity shop at its headquarters in Cardiff.
The aim of the shop is to raise funds for an Eagle Lodge in the Principality.
Eagle Lodge Wexford House situated in Melton Mowbray
RAFA Housing
Sheltered Housing
An increasing number of ex-Service personnel and their dependants are now reaching the age when they require some form of supportive housing, and this number will continue to grow over the next decade.
At present the Association administers 80 sheltered flats.
There are schemes at Storrington, West Sussex, at Moffat, Dumfriesshire and at Bolton, Greater Manchester.
This latter scheme is administered by Norwest RAFA Housing Association.
Waiting lists for all three locations bear witness that demand exceeds supply.
The Association is grateful for the help and advice in connection with the Storrington scheme that has been received from Orbit Housing Association.
The Association was also pleased to learn that Dowding House at Moffat had received a ‘Special Mention’ in the 1990 Civic Trust Awards.
Eagle Lodges
The Eagle Lodge concept, which is to provide supportive housing for elderly single persons, has proceeded with increasing momemtum throughout 1990.
By the end of the year, the Association had two Lodges with residents in occupation, and a third in the final stages of conversion.
Considerable enthusiasm has been shown by the Association's Areas, and some have initiated fund-raising to develop further Eagle Lodges.
Wexford House.
Situated in a quiet, residential area of Melton Mowbray, Wexford House was the first Eagle Lodge to open.
Purchased by the Association in May 1989, extensive alterations were necessary to convert it to provide for eight residents, the first of whom arrived in September 1990.
It is gratifying that the initial residents have built up a very happy family atmosphere, and have expressed their thanks to the Association for providing them with what they now regard as their home.
Wexford House has demonstrated that the Eagle Lodge concepts should be a success.
Woodford.
Located in Southport, Woodford is the Association's second Eagle Lodge, and can accommodate nine residents.
Formerly a private hotel, it has needed only a little work to convert it to its new use.
Six residents are currently living there and enjoying the comforts of a very homely atmosphere.
Woodford was developed as an initiative by the North Western Area.
The White House.
The Bexhill-on-Sea Branch identified The White House as a potential Eagle Lodge in January 1990, and its first resident will shortly move in.
Although it had been a rest home for British Telecom, alterations were necessary to provide the ten individual bed sitting rooms and the Housekeepers flat, whilst at the same time some safety improvements were needed to meet the Fire Officer's regulations.
The Branch has formed a local Management Committee to operate the Lodge on behalf of the Association within agreed guidelines and, judging from the number of applications specifically for The White House, Bexhill-on-Sea will retain its reputation as the retirement centre of the South.
Appeals
Achievement
The celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain provided a magnificent opportunity to achieve new records in fund-raising.
The Association is both pleased and proud to report that the opportunity was, indeed, seized and that the target for the Wings Appeal was comfortably surpassed.
A £2,000,000 target had been set for the Battle of Britain Wings Appeal in the full knowledge that our sister charity, the RAF Benevolent Fund was launching its £20,000,000 ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal, and that the Association would be offering as much support as possible to that.
In the event the Association's Honorary Wings Appeal Organisers, together with enthusiastic and voluntary helpers, set about the challenge with such determination and energy that a total of £2,437,637 was reached, an increase of 47% on the pervious year.
On top of that, the Association was able to contribute over £250,000 to the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal through events and undertakings run by both Branches and Central Headquarters.
Other fundraising continued with the Dowding Housing and Eagle Lodge Appeals, both receiving significant sums.
In addition, support continued for the Association's welfare homes at Sussexdown and Richard Peck House.
In all, over £3,000,000 will have been raised in what has been a record fund-raising year.
Central Council is indebted to the Honorary Wings Appeal Organisers, members and friends who worked so hard to achieve this huge success.
On behelf of all those who the Association will now be able to help, the Association sends its sincere thanks.
Battle of Britain Wings Appeal Gross Proceeds 1984/1990
Battle of Britain Wings Appeal Trophy Winners
Almost all Branches were winners in 1990.
Substantial increases on the previous year were made by 446 Branches, 138 Branches sustained their last year's contribution, which in many cases had already been a record, and only 43 were significantly down.
The list of the champions is headed once again Bexhill-on-Sea, who beat their own record to win the Sir Thomas Pike Trophy with a net total of £28,497.
A new name will appear on the Buckhurst Hill Trophy for the runners up; after being in the top ten for some time Solihull made a quantum leap to a net total of £27,015.
The success of the year can be measured by the number of Branches that deserve special mention.
The Association normally publishes a list of the 12 Branches with the best Wings Appeal total, but in 1990 a new club was formed, ‘The 10,000 Club’.
The 37 Branches listed below all achieved totals of £10,000 or more; the include Branches both large and small, with and without Branch Clubs, from all parts of the country and continental Europe.
The Association congratulates all of them.
Girls Venture Corps Members of the Downham Market Unit set off on a 100 mile walk for Wings Appeal.
The Wings Appeal total divided by the number of members gives an average of £21.56 per member, well up on last year.
Because the number of members who took an active part in the fund-raising is comparatively small, the true amount contributed by everyone who was actually involved was more than £200.
Many Branches exceeded the national per capita average, and the top twelve are given below.
In the UK the Stock Exchange and Roe Valley Branches win trophies, while the overseas per capita trophies go to the Luxembourg and the St Germain and District Branches.
Northern Ireland excelled as usual, with an area total of £58.70 per member, well ahead of the national average figure and also that of any other single area.
While sending hearty congratulations to the trophy winners, Central Council also offers sincere thanks to all the Branches whose extra endeavours led them to beat their own previous records.
The Royal Air Force Family
In spite of becoming very busy from August onwards, because of heighened international tension and a heavy commitment to the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal, RAF Stations and personnel managed to give substantial help to Wings Appeal.
Overseas stations actually managed to increase their contribution.
Record crowds were the reward of RAF Abingdon, RAF St Athan, RAF Finningley and RAF Leuchars for their hard work in preparing and running their ‘At Home’ days.
The Association benefited from their endeavours in 1989 by a valuable contribution of £135,000.
Among the RAF Trophy winners RAF Stornaway deserves a mention, it will this year receive the very handsome Sir Charles Wheeler Trophy for the ninth consecutive year — a record that will be hard to beat.
The RAF Trophy winners are:
It becomes more difficult each year to find words that will reflect the invaluable help given to the Association by the young people of the Air Training Corps and the Girls Venture Corps Air Cadets.
Very few Branch collecting sheets appear without the names of many cadets, and it is a great encouragement to know that so many are prepared to give up so much of their time to help the Association.
The Sir Douglas Bader Trophy has been won by No 1143 (8th Edinburgh) Squadron with an astounding figure of £290.76 per cadet.
They were chased quite hard by no 2423 (Treorchy) Squadron, which became the first Welsh Wings Appeal National Trophy winner with the award of the Sir Gus Walker Trophy.
The second GVCAC recipient of the Sir Andrew Humphrey Trophy will be No 1095 (Rotherham) Unit.
The Association is most grateful to the AOC Air Cadets and the Director of the Girls Venture Corps for permitting their respective Corps to provide this much appreaciated help.
Cinema Industry
Even though the long, hot summer took its toll on audiences, the generous support of Cannon Cinemas still provided the Association with the substantial sum of £88,358.
In addition, this company also contributed to the Association's efforts on behalf of the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal by helping to arrange a Royal Film Gala night at their Shaftsbury Avenue cinema.
The film of the Douglas Bader story ‘Reach for the Sky’ was shown on the big screen for the first time in many years, and the Association was able to contribute £20,200 to the RAF Benevolent Fund as a result of this effort.
Branches report from all over the UK on the interest and help provided by the management and staff of Cannon Cinemas, and the company's support is gratefully acknowledged by Central Council.
Tesco Stores
Many Branches have been fortunate in making successful collections in their local Tesco stores for several years.
The company is famous for its generosity and support for charitable causes, as indeed are its employees who have record of practical help to charities that is second to none.
In 1990 Tesco made the Association the beneficiary of one of the six nationwide collections that it allows in its stores.
The collection took place on 15/16 June and resulted in the most valuable contribution of £125,903 to the Association.
The excellent interest and co-operation by Tesco store management and staff, and the practical help given to the Association's Branches in carrying out collections is much appreciated.
Charitable Trusts, Corporate Donors and Private Donors
Substantial donations, in cash and kind, have been received from charitable trusts, commercial and industrial concerns, and many kind and generous individuals.
When there are such considerable demands on the Nation's generosity to support many worthy causes, the Association feels privileged to receive their considerations.
At Appendix D is a list of donating Trust and Corporate Donors.
The individuals who have contributed are far too numerous to mention.
Central Council extends its sincere thanks to them all.
Canon Collection Our President, Marshal of the Royal Air Force, Sir Keith Williamson accepting a cheque from George Lennox (Cannon Cinemas) and Robert Garofalo (Film Director) for the 1989 collection .
Home Collecting Boxes
In 1990 the income from Home Collecting Boxes (HCB's) increased by 15.9% to £26,848.
However, only 308 Branches managed to raise income from this very cost effective method, and of those only 60 achieved a rate of £1 or more per member.
To put things into context, if half of the membership were to put up 10p a week into an HCB, they would make a total yearly contribution of £260,000.
The Andover Branch have again shown how it can be done and wins the Anna Neagle Trophy with a contribution of £1,466.54 — or £10.40 per Branch member.
Central Council congratulates the Andover Branch, and recommends that other Branches seek their advice on methods.
Royal Air Force Yearbooks
Sale of Yearbooks by both the Association and RAF Stations have again declined.
However, the book remains popular with a large increase in sales fron commercial outlets being recorded.
The Association's partnership position in this endeavour will be reviewed in 1991.
RAF Benevolent Fund's ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal
At the 1989 Annual Conference in Bournemouth it was resolved to support the RAF Benevolent Fund's 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain Appeal, and Branches were asked to provide support at local level for what became known as the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal.
A number of central activities were initiated to provide a core contribution to the Appeal.
In March, a limited edition of the Frank Wootton fine art print ‘Adlertag, 15 August 1940’ was signed at RAF Biggin Hill by the artist and six Battle of Britain pilots.
The prints were produced by the American company ‘The Greenwich Workshop’, which also produced a video of the signing and of the pilot's recollections of their wartime experiences.
By the end of 1990, £15,000 had been raised from the sale of the prints for the Appeal with more to come when the project is finished.
Annual Conference — 1990 Sir Peter Harding, Chief of the Air Staff, presenting a cheque for £50,000 from the Royal Air Force to our President, Marshal of the Royal Air Force, Sir Keith Williamson .
April saw the launching of the 370 page commemorative publication Against All Odds , which had been produced by the Rococo Group.
The book was ‘A Tribute to 'The Few' who flew in the Battle of Britain, and to the many who supported them’.
Contributors included Dame Vera Lynn, Sir Richard Attenborough, Sir Edmund Hilary, Rt Hon Norman Tebbit, Cliff Michelmore, Max Bygraves and Warren Mitchell.
By the end of 1990 £50,000 had been raised from the sales of the book and donated to the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal.
The Association is most grateful to the Rococo Group for their work in producing an excellent book and to all those who contributed to it and supported its sales.
Other centrally sponsored events, including a Film Premier and the Battle of Britain Ball, raised substantial sums for the Appeal and the Association's links with the Rugby League led directly to a donation to the Appeal by the League of £10,000 at the Rugby League 1990 Challenge Cup Final at Wembley.
The South Eastern Area supported the Appeal through public collections at events in the London area and also at a special street collection in Central London on 10 July.
There were widespread fund-raising activities by Areas and Branches throughout the Association, both in the UK and Overseas.
Dances, buffet suppers, flower festivals, supper shows, poetry reading, craft shows, sales stands, aircraft model making and flying, car treasure hunts, boat cruises and sponsored sports events of many types were among the fund-raising efforts reported.
Central Council thanks all those Branches and individuals who worked so hard to ensure that the Association's contribution to this Appeal was so substantial.
Dowding House Appeal
The joint Royal Air Forces Association and Royal Air Force Benevolent Fund Appeal for Dowding House remained open for donations during the year.
Support continued to come forward for the Appeal from Branches, individuals and organisations.
Particularly noteworthy support came from the Joint Services Philatelic Consortium which has now raised £100,000 for the Appeal through the sale of philatelic covers.
The Appeal will benefit by a share of the profits of the ‘Adlertag’ fine art print project and some other commercial initiatives.
The full costs of the project have now been covered by the Appeal and a modest maintenance reserve set up to help sustain the future of the House.
Any continuing contributions received will be put to this reserve but active fund-raising for the Appeal has now ceased.
Central Council is most grateful for the generous support that has led to this successful outcome.
‘Adlertag’Wing Commander Unwin, Frank Wootton (Artist), Group Captain Carey and Group Captain Cunningham signing the prints .
General
The Links with the Royal Air Force
With a membership at the end of 1990 of 103,000, there exist the closest family ties between those who have served in the RAF and those who serve today.
In particular, Central Council appreciates the help, guidance and continued support of the Director General of RAF Personal Services and his staff throughout the year.
The RAF/RAFA Consultative Committee is the culmination of this support which continues behind the scenes from Station Commanders onwards.
The year has seen continued support of the Association by the RAFA Liaison Officers (RAFALOs) with membership from the serving RAF continuing to increase.
RAFALOs work hard in promoting the Association on their Stations and supporting the local Branches.
At least one RAFALO has been elected to an Area Council.
Central Council appreciates the contribution made by the RAFALOs and thanks them for their efforts.
Air Displays
The Association was represented at the ‘At Home’ Days at RAF Leuchars, RAF Finningley, RAF Abingdon and RAF St Athan.
In addition, Association branches sponsored air displays in Guernsey, Jersey, and the Isle of Man.
British Aerospace generously sponsored an Air Display at their Woodford, Cheshire, airfield which was promoted by the North Western Area.
National Ceremonies and Services
The Association participated in the following national services and ceremonies during 1990:
The Annual Service at St Clement Danes, Central Church of the RAF, to commemorate the formation of the RAF.
The Service of Rememberance at the Commonwealth Air Forces Memorial, Runnymede.
The Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary Commemorative Parade.
The Wreath-laying ceremony at the RAF Memorial on the Embankment.
The Battle of Britain Service at Westminster Abbey.
The Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Alber Hall.
The Remembrance Day Parade and Service at the Cenotaph in Whitehall.
The opportunity to participate in the Parade on 15 September to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain was a particular honour for the Association.
It was a perfect Autumn day as the Association's Flight led the parade down the Mall to form up in front of Buckingham Palace.
Mr F B Brisley was the Association's parade marshal, Air Marshal Sir Ivor Broom, President of the Wales Area, was the Right Marker and Group Captain the Earl Ilchester, President of the South Eastern Area was the Left Marker.
The Standard of the Association was paraded by Mr J Kirkpatrick.
A Flypast of representative Squadrons and aircraft of the Royal Air Force, including the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight, started the formal ceremonial.
The Association's Flight was subsequently honoured to be inspected by Her Majesty The Queen and to march past Her Majesty.
It was a great honour for the Association to take part in this National occasion, an occasion which provided an opportunity to pay a tribute to those who fought the Battle of Britain, and to remember the welfare needs that exist today as a result of that Battle.
Air Vice-Marshal N S Howlett, Chairman of the Executive Committee and Mrs Howlett were present when 91 Branch Standards were paraded on the evening of 13 July at the Royal Tournament.
Throughout the period of the Royal Tournament the Association stand, sponsored by British Telecom, was staffed by members from branches in the South Eastern Area, to whom Central Council extends its grateful thanks.
The President, Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Keith Williamson and Lady Williamson were present when the Standard of the Association was paraded at the Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall.
Special Events
The annual Greyhound Race Meeting at Wimbledon Stadium in July was, as usual, well supported by RAF Stations, and raised some £4,000.
TV stars Peter Dean and Wendy Richard supported the event and presented trophies on behalf of RAF Akrotiri and RAF Aldergrove.
On 15 September some 80 guests were present at an Overseas Reception at London Weekend Television House, where they had a first class view of the flypast from the eighteenth floor.
Those unable to attend the parade watched it on television, and were joined later by some of the overseas visitors who had proudly paraded before Her Majesty The Queen outside Buckingham Palace.
This reception was kindly sponsored by Martin Brothers International.
The Annual Battle of Britain Ball took place this year on 28 September in the Grosvenor House.
Over 1,480 guests came from around the world to celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Battle.
Dancing was to the Johnny Howard Orchestra and to Tony Charles and his Trinidad Steel Band.
During the evening, the Central Band of the RAF entertained the assembly with their marching display, and Dame Vera Lynn enthralled all present with songs from the war years.
As an outcome of the Ball, a donation of £15,000 was made to the ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal.
The Grand Summer Draw, the first prize for which was a Nissan Sunny car provided through AFG of Sevenoaks, raised £44,100 for the Association's work.
The keys were presented at RAF Biggin Hill to the winner, Mr J D Fletcher of Biggleswade, by Bob Ogley, author of Biggin on the Bump .
Central Council is very grateful to all those who donated prizes or sold tickets to help reach this excellent result.
Flight Lieutenant T.E.
Jonsson, DFM Finally retired after 36,000 hours of military and civil flying, Flt Lt Jonsson from Iceland attended the Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary reception after representing the Luxembourg Branch on the Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary Parade .
Awards
In the 1990 Queen's Birthday Honours List Mr C A Blachford, Chairman of the North Western Area Council, became a Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, and J T Jones from the Cheltenham Branch was awarded the British Empire Medal.
In the 1991 New Year Honours List, Mr W J Chignell, an Elected Member of Central Council, became a Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, and Mr E F Jackson from the Storrington Branch was awarded the British Empire Medal.
Presidential Certificates to coincide with the 1990 Queen's Birthday Honours were awarded to:
Presidential Certificates to coincide with the 1991 New Year's Honours were awarded to:
A special Presidential Certificate was awarded at Annual Conference to Mrs C W Crawford, the Administrator at Richard Peck House.
Central Council records its thanks to the recipients of Honours and Presidential Certificates for their support of the work of the Association, and extends its congratulations on their awards.
The Branch Efficiency Competition
The judges for the 1989 competition were Air-Vice Marshal N S Howlett, Mr A R Kendrick and Mr F C Pegg.
The results were as follows:
Annual Conference
Annual Conference was held in Blackpool from 11–13 May, and was attended by 381 delegates from 347 branches and some 2,240 visitors.
No 1855 (Royton) Sqn ATC provided a Guard of Honour for the arrival of Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Harding, Chief of the Air Staff.
The President, Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Keith Williamson, took the Chair, and Conference was opened by The Worshipful The Mayor of Blackpool, Councillor Mrs Mary A Barnes JP.
The silent tribute was led by the Venerable B N Halfpenny, Chaplain in Chief of the RAF.
First Leisure Gift at Blackpool Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Harding, handing the keys of the coach to John Ray, Administrator at Sussexdown.
The Chinook and crew which delivered the coach to the airport, came from RAF Odiham .
Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary Parade The Hurricane and Spitfire from the BBMF over the Mall on September 15th .
The Chairman acknowledged messages of greeting from Her Majesty The Queen, Patron of the Association; Her Royal Highness Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, Vice Patron; Their Royal Highnesses The Duke of Edinburgh and The Prince of Wales, Past Presidents and from some eighty organisations throughout the Commonwealth.
Mr Jack Price, National President of the Air Force Association of the United States of America then addressed Conference, extending his Association's fraternal greetings to the Association in Conference and presenting an inscribed plaque to the Chairman.
In a stimulating address, the Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Harding enlarged upon his theme of last year, and described how it was planned to improve Service life.
There was every reason to believe that the new modern, but smaller RAF would be well able to meet any demands upon it.
Sir Peter acknowledged the part that the Association played in the RAF family, with its support of members past and present which was highlighted with the continued development of Eagle Lodges.
Sir Peter then presented the Association with a cheque for £50,000 to help further development of this concept.
Formal business opened with the adoption of the Standing Orders Committee Report, and the presentation of the Annual Report and Accounts for 1989.
Conference then looked at 31 Resolutions covering Service Liaison, Welfare and Pensions, Homes, Appeals and Fund-raising, the Rules, Byelaws and Regulations, Standard Club Rules, Organisation and Annual Conference itself.
Following a resolution supporting the RAF Benevolent Fund's 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain Appeal, the Chairman invited Air Chief Marshal Sir Thomas Kennedy to address Conference.
In his address, Sir Thomas Kennedy spoke of the enormous communications gap that had to be bridged if the Appeal was to be successful, and sought delegates' help in publicising the Fund and the Appeal especially through the medium of provincial and local newspapers.
In gratefully acknowledging the Association's support of the Appeal, Sir Thomas outlined the progress made to date and gave details of planned events for the immediate future.
In concluding his address, Sir Thomas said that while the Appeal was under way the Fund would continue to support welfare work in its usual fashion, recording that a cheque had earlier been presented to the Chairman of Conference for the Association's Eagle Lodge project.
In thanking Sir Thomas Kennedy for his address, the Chairman of Conference announced that the cheque for £50,000 had been received from the RAF Benevolent Fund.
Royal Salute The Association's flight passing Her Majesty The Queen outside Buckingham Palace on September 15th .
On Saturday afternoon the RAF Presentation Team, which normally attends one of the Area Conferences each year, gave their presentation to Conference for which they received the grateful thanks and applause of those present.
Conference provided a focus for Telethon 1990, when delegates and visitors donned blue ‘ears’ to raise money for this charity.
At the same time, the First Leisure Corporation presented the Association with a £17,000 coach which had been specially customised for use at Sussexdown.
The Chief of the Air Staff and a crew from RAF Odiham with a Chinook helicopter lifted the coach from Blackpool beach providing useful publicity for First Leisure and the Association.
The Rendezvous Dance on Friday evening and the Civic Reception hosted by the Mayor on Saturday evening provided an opportunity for delegates and visitors to relax and renew old friendships.
The Band of the RAF Regiment, Catterick, provided an orchestra for both evenings.
The RAF Halton Gymnastic Display Team showed how well they are trained when they performed their sparkling routine in the Empress Ballroom on Friday evening.
The Parade along the Promenade on Sunday morning was led by the Band of the RAF Regiment, supported by the Band of No 2193 (Prestatyn) Sqn of the Air Training Corps.
The salute was taken by the Mayor of Blackpool.
The Service of Dedication at the War Memorial was led by the Chaplain-in-Chief.
Central Council
Air Marshal Sir Charles Soutar completed his term as Chairman of Central Council and remains a Vice President.
Air Vice-Marshal D G Bailey has been elected Chairman to succeed Sir Charles.
Air Chief Marshal Sir Joseph Gilbert was elected Vice Chairman of Central Council in place of Air Vice-Marshal N S Howlett.
Mr F W Lindgren, a Life Vice President of the Association, whose service on Central Council extended o0ver 45 years and who is now permanently living overseas resigned at the end of the year.
South African Tour Vic Duggan, Area President, Bernard Ramsbottom, Area Director and David Green, CHQ's Overseas Director .
Air Commodore P G Naz (HQ Air Cadets) left Council on retirement from the RAF, and was replaced by Air Commodore R P Skelley, Sergeant D Greenfield joined the Council as the SNCO representative, and left at the end of the year on retirement from the Service.
Mr R A Owens lost his seat as an Elected Member of Council and was replaced by Air Vice-Marshal D Whittaker.
Central Council welcomes the new members and extends its thanks to all those whose membership has ended.
Executive Committee
Air Vice-Marshal N S Howlett was elected as Chairman and Mr H Dickinson was re-elected as Deputy Chairman.
Mr D Pugh was elected to the Committee, replacing Mr A J Taylor.
The Chairman welcomes Mr Pugh and thanks Mr Taylor for his efforts over the years past.
Overseas
The number of Overseas branches has remained steady despite the inevitable decline in membership.
The average age of the overseas membership is somewhat higher that the UK average as there are very few younger members to join these branches.
There are still some very active branches, however, and their efforts are very much appreciated by Central Council.
In October, the Overseas Director visited South Africa accompanied by a group of members from the UK.
The party met many of the Branch Officers, and received hospitality from both Civic authorities and the South African Air Force.
The visit was very much appreciated by the South African Area and enjoyed by those who went.
The South African Area continues to work hard in support of both the Association and the RAF Benevolent Fund, and has made a special effort this year, the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain.
The problem of continued support in the face of declining membership is being addressed.
The European Area has made another considerable contribution to the work of the Association during the year.
As well as looking after their own members, the Branches have supported the efforts of the Association within the UK.
The support from the RAF in Europe continues to be strong.
The support of Air Chief Marshal Sir Anthony Skingsley, Deputy Commander-in-Chief Allied Forces Central Europe is warmly acknowledged by Central Council.
This year the Autumn meeting of the European Area was held in Athens where, at a simple but moving ceremony, a memorial was unveiled to commemorate all those Greek and RAF aircrew who lost their lives during the battle for Greece.
This memorial was raised by the joint efforts of the Athens Branch and the Hellenic Air Force.
The Independent Overseas Branches continue to support the Association both locally and in the UK.
The Channel Island Branches, Guernsey and Jersey, again lead the list of winners in the Battle of Britain Week Appeal.
Branch Clubs
The Association has continued to clarify the legal relationship between Branches and Branch clubs through the introduction of formal leasing arrangements.
This has been done to demonstrate that the charitable assets of the Association are being utilised within an appropriate framework that is acceptable to the Charity Commission.
The Branch Clubs have continued to receive the support of the Committee of Registered Clubs Association and to benefit from the work of the All Party Parliamentary Committee for Non-Profit Making Members Clubs.
One useful change has been the restoring of parity of permitted hours for clubs opening with those enjoyed by public houses.
Public Relations
During 1990 the Department worked together on several projects with the RAF Benevolent Fund's ‘Reach for the Sky’ Appeal.
The Association proved once again to be a formidable field force when helping the appeal, and provided an excellent point of reference for the media in respect of both the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain and the work of the Association.
Many valuable contacts were made and several projects that could not be implemented during 1990 will be followed through in the future.
Support for the Association's work continues to come forward and the Association is increasingly benefiting from working with other organisations on mutually beneficial projects with the Association often achieving both publicity and financial assistance.
Branch Welfare Officer profiles have been featured in the local press and the Association's new welfare facilities have also served to provide a focus of interest for the media.
In 1990 the Association's Annual Conference achieved nationwide television coverage because of its involvement with ITV's Telethon and the First Leisure Corporation.
Air Mail
Air Mail has continued to follow the format that was developed in 1989, and which seeks to maintain a balance between Association policy, news and items of historical, Service and general interest.
It remains very conscious of the need for advertising revenues.
The Autumn issue marked the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain with articles on the Battle and those who fought in it.
The Editorial staff much appreciate the keen interest in the magazine shown by the membership, and thank all who send information on activities and who contribute articles.
Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary Fly Past Spitfires and Hurricanes over Nelson's Column on September 15th .
Staff
Mr T F Connolly, the former Chief Welfare Officer, has retired from the post of Welfare Adviser.
Mrs C W Crawford has retired from the post of Administrator at Richard Peck House and has been replaced by Mrs A Mulvey.
Mr W I Paterson has retired as the North Western Area Director and has been replaced by Mr D M MacInnes.
There were two new appointments during the year.
Mr I J Stephen was appointed Assistant Area Director and Welfare Officer for the North Eastern Area, and Mr G M Halloran was appointed Assistant Area Director and Welfare Officer for Scotland.
Central Council records its appreciation for the hard work, dedication and enthusiasm of all staff throughout a very busy and demanding year.
Westminster Abbey Service Mr F B Brisley leads the Association's Standards from Westminster Abbey after the Annual Battle of Britain Service on September 16th .
European Area Conference The Marquis of Amodio, President of the European Area with some of the trophy winners in Blackpool .
RAFAMACS Limited
RAFAMACS, the Association's trading company, had a busy year in 1990.
The primary business of gaming machines provided a valuable source of income although there is growing pressure of competition in this area.
The centralised trading operation also had a busy year, particularly with sales of commemorative items to mark the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain.
Even though substantial orders were placed well in advance with the trade for some of these items the general pressure of demand was such that deliveries to RAFAMACS were delayed.
This was disappointing for some of RAFAMACS customers.
In all some 7,200 trading invoices were dealt with during the year and 1,500 stationery orders.
Trade prices increased during the year and this will need to be reflected in customer prices for 1991.
The Company continued to act as a trading agency for Commemorative Promotions Ltd during the year.
The Company covenents its profit from its trading operations plus the proceeds from the Grand Summer Draw to the Association.
RAFA ADS Limited
RAFA ADS, the Association's company to deal with the selling of advertising space and the production of Air Mail, completed its third trading year.
Sales of Air Mail advertising increased by25% during the year and the company was able to covenant a useful profit to the Association.
Battle of Britain 50th Anniversary Fly Past Spitfires and Hurricanes flying up the Mall on September 15th .
Accounts
Treasurers Report
1990 was a year of substantial achievement for the Association in terms of development of welfare facilities and in fund-raising.
Income for the year increased by £1,411,384 to a total of £3,622,386.
The net proceeds of the 1990 Wings Appeal provided £618,637 of that overall increase: a remarkable achievement thanks to the generosity of the public and the magnificent ‘collective’ efforts of members, friends and associates from RAFA Branches throughout the world.
Legacies increased by £538,154 to a record £634,736 with the estate of Cyril and Stella Green providing £250,000 of this amount.
General donations increased by £219,882 and subscriptions income by £34,439.
The trading companies had a mixed year.
RAFA ADS achieved a small increase in profits of £3,257 by RAFAMACS' profits were down by £33,929.
The activities of both companies were affected by the general economic recession prevailing throughout 1990 and the loss of some machine sites on RAF stations has also reduced RAFAMACS' revenue.
Capital expenditure amounted to £1,307,571, mainly for the purchase, modification and furnishing of the three Eagle Lodges and the completion of the new Therapy Wing at Sussexdown.
This expenditure was funded from a surplus of income over expenditure of £876,208 with the balance coming from specific donations to the Eagle Lodge and Therapy Wing projects and from the Association's general funds.
Looking to the immediate future, the Association will need to conserve and build up its reserves to fund further projects and to provide sufficient investment income to meet rising costs.
Operating expenditure increased by £295,048, an increase of 12.0%.
Welfare expenditure was up by £78,842 (8.6%); Air Mail costs by £24,470 (16.6%); administration and publicity by £17,132 (2.6%) and Annual Conference by £5,202 (11.6%).
The increase of £68,908 in interest paid on Branch deposits was partly due to high interest rates and partly because more Branches put their surplus funds on deposit with Central Headquarters.
This is a welcome and encouraging trend which not only ensures that the investment of Branch funds complies with the Trustee Investment Acts, but provides Branches with an excellent return on their money and assists management of the Association's cash flow.
The costs of running the Welfare Homes, after taking into account accommodation fees and sundry receipts, were £622,478 for Sussexdown and £129,642 for Richard Peck.
After donations to the Homes, the net costs amounted to £501,415 and £106,875 respectively.
The overall increase in the net costs of the two Homes for the year was £75,789.
The net costs of Eagle Lodges appear for the first time in the income and expenditure account and are largely attributable to setting up costs as there was little income from occupancy during 1990.
The Dowding House Appeal was brought to a close on 31st December 1990, having achieved its objective of covering the costs of the scheme and of the Appeal.
The Association can be justly proud of this project which has provided a fitting memorial for Lord Dowding and a long term investment in much needed welfare accommodation.
The debt which never appears in any balance sheet or account is that owed by the Association to the fund-raising efforts of its supporters and the generosity of the public.
We will continue to depend heavily upon their help for the foreseeable future and gratefully acknowledge their invaluable help.
Finally, I wish to record the Association's sincere thanks to Sam Churchman, the Financial Secretary, and his staff for their work during a very busy year.
Their dedication and support have been invaluable in both accounting for the Association's funds and managing them effectively.
Notification of Specific Receipts from Public Funds
In accordance with a request from the Association of Charity Officers, it is confirmed that an amount of £5,000 from public funds provided through the Association of Charity Officers has been received by the Association and utilised for provision of physiotherapy equipment for the new Therapy Wing at Sussexdown.
 J.P. Wood Honorary Treasurer 27th March 1991 
Report of the Auditors to the Members of The Royal Air Forces Association
We have audited the financial statements on the following pages in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Association at 31st December 1990 and of its result and source and application of funds for the year then ended.
 Whitehead & Aldrich Chartered Accountants, Preston, Lancashire.
 27th March 1991 
air mail
Journal of the Royal Air Forces Association
Air Mail
Winter 1991 Volume 44 Number 3
Journal of The Royal Air Forces Association
In this issue
2
Secretary General's Desk
4
Target — Berlin!
6
Welfare Matters
8
What's the food like here?
16
Royal Tournament '91
17
Area and Branch News
22
Bill Berry's Diary
26
Wexford House
28
Berling Bale-Out — and Escape!
32
The Structure of Remembrance
36
Letterbox
40
Album
42
Books
48
RAF Benevolent Fund
50
Calling Old Colleagues, Reunions, Help!
55
Obituaries
63
Tailfin
Editor Stan White
Assistant Editor Shirley Gelderblom
Advertisements David Batt
RAFA Ads Ltd (a subsidiary company of The Royal Air Forces Association) 43 Grove Park Road, London W4 3RX Telephone 081–994 8504
Air Mail ISSN 0002–2446 ABC Member of the Audit Bureau of Circulations Jan-Jun 1991 103,894
Tysetting & Colour Origination LazerType 5 & 6 Oyster Park, Greenstead Road, Colchester CO1 2SJ Printing Pindar Graphics Print, Thornburgh Road Eastfield, Scarborough YO11 3UY
Our lifeblood
If our membership is our strength, then our subscriptions are our lifeblood.
Each January the Association gets a transfusion with the payment of the annual subscriptions, but our corporate health is not all that it could be.
For a start, that transfusion is always late in its completion.
Many of you, of course, make your contribution in good time, and deserve the cup of tea that helps you to recover from donating your ‘blood’!
Latecomers, however, do make life difficult — and unnecessarily expensive.
While the Association will never pursue members with the determination of a Time-Share salesperson, it doesn't like to lose members, particularly those who are just too forgetful to get subscriptions off in good time.
Postage and paperwork is a waster of the Association's valuable resources which the membership does so much to create in the first place.
Please be sure, therefore, that the Association's heart still has something to pump and doesn't miss a beat every January.
Send us your subscription now — there is a form included on page 37 of this issue of Air Mail — before all the New Year's bills become a distraction!
Our Cover Interior, looking east, St Clement Danes, Strand, Church of the Royal Air Force.
Secretary General's Desk
Remembrance
Reading the article in this issue on Remembrance led me to reflect on the statement in our Royal Charter which says that one of the objects of the Association is to:
‘…preserve the memory and honour the example by charitable means of comrades or members of the Association who have died in our Service…’
The Key words in this are ‘by charitable means’ and we acknowledged this recently when we appealed for funds for Dowding House under the theme ‘We honour the dead by helping those who live’.
This example of practical remembrance is paralleled in our other welfare facilities — at Sussexdown and Richard Peack House and the Eagle Lodges — and perhaps most importantly as we reach out through our Honorary Welfare Officers and out members to find and to help individuals in need.
That help could not be provided without the fund-raising efforts of the Association members together with the work of all those who sustain our membership and the comradeship of the Association.
It is through this team effort that we are able to match the words of our dedication ‘We shall remember them’ with the practical reality of care and concern.
Remembrance is thus able to move further into our lives than visits to memorials, was graves or churches — important as these are as symbols and as a focus of personal and public remembrance.
Annual Conference Resolution No 25
A considerable amount of my time since Annual Conference has been spent in following up Resolution No 25 which called for a specialist review of administration and expenditure.
Preparations are now well advanced for this review and it is intended to seek views from all levels of the Association starting this winter.
It is also intended that a survey of a sample of the membership is carried out by questionnaire as well as consultation meetings at Area and Branch level.
The review is important for the future of the Association and we hope that the process of wide consultation will lead to recommendations based on a considered analysis of the needs and views of the membership.
Area Presidents
Air Vice Marshal J Morris recently assumed the Presidency of the Scottish Area from Group Captain G P Marvin who retired after some 32 years as the Area President.
We wish them both well.
Recording this news reminded me of the valuable role played by Area Presidents in guiding their Area and representing the Areas at a variety of events and functions.
Members may be interested in who fills those positions and I therefore list the other Area Presidents below.
South Eastern
Group Captain The Earl of Ilchester
South Western
Air Vice-Marshal Sir John Severne
Eastern
Air Commodore E G P Jeffery
Midland
Air Commodore B W Opie
Wales
Air Marshal Sir Ivor Broom
North Western
Mr E F Woodruff
North Eastern
Mr F T Wilson
Northern Ireland
Air Vice-Marshal D Whittaker
European
The Marquis of Amodio and Moya
South African
Mr V G T Duggan
Our grateful thanks go to them for their support of the Association.
Staff Matters
Simon Martin has taken up the new post of Membership Officer based at Malvern.
He also takes over the responsibilities of Overseas Director as well as managing the membership on the CHQ roll.
Ken Hollands has taken up the appointment of North Western Area Director from David MacInnes.
John Hartley will shortly take up the position of Deputy Secretary General following a restructuring of responsibilities within CHQ.
David Green who held the combined post of Overseas Director and Senior Administrative Officer is leaving us for other employment.
We will them all well.
PR Report
The Association was once again well supported by the media during Wings Appeal.
Free newspaper groups in particular welcomed the opportunity to provide their readers with interesting features about both the Battle of Britain and the work of the Association, whilst at the same time encouraging their regular advertisers to support the Appeal by purchasing space on the feature.
Some newspapers even donated a proportion of the advertising revenue to the Association.
This year for the first time, we mailed a pre-recorded tape cassette to all radio stations in the UK.
On the tape Dame Vera Lynn is interviewed talking about the work of the Association.
This proved quite a successful intiative and was an inexpensive exercise because Air Vice-Marshal Bill Bailey kindly arranged for us to make use of the recording facilities at Services Sound & Vision Corporation.
In April this year the Association helped with a USAFE Band Tour, providing standard bearers and ATC Cadets and members to sell programmes and make collections.
Although we had little notice of the tour, branches were keen to help and the Association will receive £6,628 representing 50% of the total profits.
Another tour is planned for next year starting on 27 March and nine venues have been chosen, including Bournemouth, Newport, Hove, Stoke and Manchester.
I have a new assistant in the PR department and her name is Susie Gandar.
If you need to contact us, please telephone: 0684 573665.
Target — Berlin!
The infamous Berlin Wall now has only a few vestiges remaining.
In 1945 one could have been excused for believing that scarcely a wall could be left standing in the German capital after years of night raids by the RAF.
But many were still standing after five years of air attack, and although German civilian morale was largely unbroken, it was the psychology behind the attacks which yielded valuable dividends.
One of the most significant air raids of the entire war was against Berlin.
True there was not the drama and deceit of the Japanese raid against Pearl Harbour, but the raid on Berlin of the 25/26 August 1940 proved to be an event that very likely affected the course of history.
Last year we were reminded of those epic days when Fighter Command denied the Luftwaffe air superiority in the skies over Britain.
We were reminded, too, how narrow the margin was, and how the RAF's airfields were reprieved through the German High Command's decision to switch the attack to London.
That raid on Berlin of the 25/26 August pulled a psychological trigger in Nazi minds, and produced results that were entirely out of proportion to the military resources employed on that particular raid.
The raid was approved by the War Cabinet in retaliation for an inadvertent bombing of London.
81 Hampdens, Whitleys and Wellingtons from 3, 4 and 5 Groups were given targets in Berlin.
One must remember that these were times when each crew had to find their own way to the target, nearly always having to use dead reckoning to do so, and when moonlight or a fortuitous flare might illuminate the target.
On this occasion, Berlin had a thick cloud cover that went down to 2,000 ft and made accurate bombing impossible.
On the night in question there were also strong headwinds on the return flight.
29 aircraft claimed to have bombed the city, 21 brought their bombs back having failed to locate their targets and six jettisoned their loads in the sea.
The remaining aircraft attacked alternative targets.
The aircraft that claimed to have attacked Berlin were from 44, 49, 50, 58, 61, 83, and 99 Squadrons.
The only bombs that fell within Berlin's city limits destroyed a summer house in the suburb of Rosenthal, other bombs falling on farmland to the south of Berlin.
Berliners could afford to joke that the RAF was aiming to starve them to defeat!
Six Hampdens were lost, three of them through running out of fuel on the return.
The raid had profound effects on both Goering and Hitler.
Goering had boasted that no enemy 'plane would fly over the Reich and here they had shown that they could not only do this but could attack the capital itself.
Hitler was to convinced that the advantages of drawing the RAF's fighters into combat to protect London now outweighed the political advantages of not bombing Greater London.
A result of the Berlin raid of 25/26 August was the planning and execution of the Luftwaffe raid on London on 7 September which started a new phase in the Battle of Britain, and a turning point in Fighter Command's fortunes.
Bomber Command's immediate priorities after this raid switched to bombing the concentration of invasion  barges in the Channel ports, but raids on the German capital were to follow for the rest of the war.
The first noteworthy example came about a month after this August attack.
Martin Middlebrook and Chris Everitt's excellent book,The Bomber Command War Diaries tell us that on the night of 23/24 September Bomber Command for the first time concentrated its main bomber strength on one city — Berlin.
18 individual targets, comprising seven railway yards, six power stations, three gasworks and two factories involved with aircraft production.
The attacking force was 129 Hampdens, Wellingtons and Whitleys, all but 17 claiming to have bombed the target.
Unfortunately there are no German records in existence (perhaps something may now turn up after the reunification!) but we can assume that the result of the raid fell short of causing significant damage to the German war machine.
In the following year the Poles of 300 and 301 Squadrons bombed Berlin, as did the Russians, but it was not until 1942 that the first of the four-engined ‘heavies’ made the long flight to this target.
The ubiquitous Mosquito (in its PR) role) had appeared early in the year and was recording details of damage inflicted by the night raids.
It was still only relatively light damage, however.
The German Air Ministry building in the Leipzigstrasse, for example, which had been a target since September 1940, remained unscathed until it suffered slight damage in a US daylight raid in 1944!
How much ‘Bomber’ Harris would have appreciated Gulf War laser technology if it had been available then!
By 1944 the air war against the German capital was hotting up further.
The Fortresses and Liberators of the USAAF, escorted by long-range fighters, were penetrating the defences — which were now much more formidable than they had been in 1940/41.
Heavy losses were sustained by both sides.
The night raids were almost non-stop, with Mosquitoes sometimes carrying out two sorties in a night thanks to the quick re-arming and re-fuelling at bases such as Marham, Upwood and Bourn.
The Lancaster was now the mainstay of Bomber Command, each aircraft delivering a bombload that would have needed four aircraft of 1940 vintage to have lifted it.
But all this is a different story, for the bomber aircrews not only had better aircraft to take the war to Berlin, they had better navigational aids, better weaponry, the Pathfinder Force, radio counter-measures, better planning and a host of other factors to make them more effective.
We should remember, however, two facts in particular.
The first is that Luftwaffe defences became better, too, and that caused a high price to be paid in terms of casualties.
No aircrew ever thought Berlin was an easy op.
The second fact is that those crews that took off on 25/26 August 1940 from bases like Waddington, Scampton, Lindholme, Hemswell and Newmarket, ill-equipped though they were to inflict any real damage on the enemy, achieved an impact on the course of the war that none could have truly appreciated at the time.
Air Mail is grateful to Leslie Hunt for undertaking the research on which this article is based.
Welfare Matters
Motability
I read with interest an article in the Summer '91 issue of BLESMAG and felt the subject could be usefully mentioned in Air Mail .
Brenda McLaren, Chief Welfare Officer .
WHAT IS THE MOTABILITY SCHEME
Motability was set up in 1977 on the initiative of the government to help holders of mobility allowance and war pensioners' mobility supplement use their allowance to obtain a vehicle.
Motability Finance Ltd was established with funds from the major banks.
The sole qualification for obtaining a vehicle is that you receive mobility supplement for a long enough period to cover the length of the agreement.
For new cars the length of the agreement varies according to whether you buy on contract hire (commonly known as ‘lease’) which is for a period of three years, or on hire purchase which can be between four and five years.
Motability is not connected with the allocation of mobility supplement, which is controlled by the War Pensions Directorate of the Department of Social Security at Blackpool.
Any questions relating to the length of the award, or refusal to grant one, must be addressed to them.
The contract hire scheme is by far the most popular and it attacts over 90% of new car applications.
A wide selection of cars are available, and all manufacturers try to include a range to suit varying disabilities.
The fact that the car must be returned at the end of the hire term means that the range of adaptation is limited to those that can be easily attached and removed, eg hand controls, wheelchair hoists, rotating seats, etc.
If you wist to alter the car struturally, eg raise the roof to take a seated wheelchair passenger or change the doors to ramps, you would have to obtain a car through Car Chair, Gowrings or Widnes Car Centre Ltd, or buy the car on hire purchase.
For most cars you will have to give up the whole of your mobility supplement for the three year period.
You may need to make an advance payment (the difference between the total cost of the three year hire for the vehicle selected and the amount of finance available from mobility supplement), but for smaller cars there may not be anything to pay.
Choosing a suitable vehicle
Important points to consider when choosing a vehicle are:
•
Can you get in and out easily?
•
Can you reach and operate all the controls?
•
If you have a wheelchair, will it fit behind the seat, in the boot, etc. and can you manage it yourself.
•
Look ahead — is your disability likely to get worse in the next few years?
Would it be better to go for an automatic or power steering now?
•
Will the rest of the family fit as well as all your requirements?
•
What sort of adaptations would be required?
There are many ways in which a car can be adapted.
These include fitting an automatic gearbox, hand controlled brakes and accelerator, extending seat runners and moving foot pedals.
The application form asks if you require adaptations, and you must say what you need and why.
Motability forwards the form to Blackpool and within 4–6 weeks will inform you how much they will pay towards the costs.
It is important to realise that if you decide to get a car without using the Motability scheme you will have to pay the full costs of adaptations.
What is included in the contract hire scheme?
•All maintenance and servicing apart from repair/replacement for damage caused by punctures.
•
AA cover, including home start, relay and relay plus.
•
Off the road insurance.
•
The whole of the insurance premium.
The only running cost you will have to pay is for petrol.
What does the insurance cover?
It is fully comprehensive and covers the mobility supplement holder and two drivers nominated by the holder,so you don't have to be a driver to run a Motability car .
The only condition is that the driver has a clean licence and has the permission of the mobility supplement holder.
Only people with a good driving record may drive a contract hire car, and any driving conviction (other than for parking) must be reported to the insurance company.
What can the car be used for?
Many people are worried that it can only be used for the disable person.
Obviously in many cases the car is a ‘family car’ and as long as it is generally used for the benefit of the disabled person it can be treated as any normal family car.
It should also be noted that there is a mileage restriction over the three year period of 12,000 miles a year.
The Hire Purchase scheme
Almost any vehicle from an approved manufacturer can be supplied under this scheme.
You should understand, however, that under the Hire Purchase scheme all you are buying is the car itself.
Motability Finance Ltd provides a set of finance tables over 4–5 years, taking into account the rate of mobility supplement and current interest rates.
The top rate of finance, giving the whole of your mobility supplement for five years will not cover the cost of most cars, so you will have to find a substantial deposit.
Fully comprehensive insurance, maintenance and servicing costs etc. are also not included.
The range of adaptations possible on a hire purchase car, however, is greater that those available on the hire scheme.
Severely disabled people who need major adaptations to a car or van that is not available on the contract hire scheme are exempt from a car tax and VAT on both the vehicle and the conversion.
Further information
If you would like further information please write or telephone Motability Finance Ltd, Gate House, West Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 1HR.
Telephone 0279 635666.
There is also a booklet ‘New Cars for War Pensioners’ for those in that category, and a scheme for the provision of used cars and powered wheelchairs.
A copy of the fuller article on Motability that appeared in the BLESMAG can be obtained from RAFA Area Headquarters on receipt of a sae.
RAFA is grateful to BLESMAG for permission to quote from and reproduce this article.
What's the food like here?
A quick taste of the RAF's food in 1991
I bet we all have some special memories of how RAF food tasted in OUR days!
Indeed, many will recall what it was like to prepare RAF food.
May own efforts at making custard, on what I think was called a Hydra Burner, may have been forgotten by those who subsequently had to eat the awful stuff, but I am not likely to forget the watery culinary disaster!
There was not a lot of style about the way food was served either.
A Brooklands Museum friend recalled that while staging through Toulon in 1947, with eating irons and mess tins packed in their kit, they were served scrambled egg with a sausage stuck in it in their cupped hands!
Many will recall what wartime rations meant, and even if we never were eligible for an ‘Ops egg and bacon’, we have all read about them.
‘If you don't come back, can I have your egg?’ the aircrew are said to have joked.
How times changed — now someone would express their concern ove whether the thing had been cooked long enough to annihilate any salmonella!
To find out what the food was like in the RAF today I asked the Catering Branch to tell me how things were different from my days (the 1950's, I'm not that old!).
Well, just about everything is different.
For a start ‘Standard rate food charges are payable on a continuous basis by people in Marital Categories 3, 4 or 5 when they are occupying single accommodation, and also by personnel who are in receipt of Special Messing Allowance, Retail Messing Allowance or are accommodated under the Approved Board and Lodging Scheme.
Food charges at the Married Unaccompanied Food Charge Rate are payable by personnel in Marital Categories 1 and 2 when occupying single accommodation and also by those in receipt of the special allowances mentioned above in relation to Categories 3, 4 and 5’.
Got that?
Well, never mind!
It seems that the Catering Officer gets £1.43 per day per man or woman, and that each airman (or airwoman) contributes £2.35 per day.
SNCO's and commissioned officers pay a bit more because they have a few gourmets amongst them!
So there is £1.43 per day to feed an adult, and to ensure that a sound nutritionally-based diet is available with its appropriate calories and vitamins, and £0.92 for associated heating, lighting and other administration charges.
With this kind of budget you don't have to ask whether the Catering Branch are doing a good, professional job — if it wasn't they would be having to organise domestic famine relief drops!
It would be impossible, of course, to offer the quality standard and the variety without the financial benefits of bulk purchasing.
Nowadays the Army and the RAF identify the food items and the quality standards they require for their menus (they work to a three or four week menu cycle to give them flexibility), and their requirements are then purchased on their behalf by the NAAFI purchasing organisation.
Standard specifications have been agreed for some products like hamburgers and meat pies, for example, and the NAAFI have the task of sourcing supplies for these and for all other items such as fruit and vegetables.
The Royal Navy, of course, does things differently!
Ration accounting is now a computerised orperation.
The computer programme (Carafe — Computer Assisted Ration Accounting and Food Evaluation) allows a wide range of management information to be available so that the efficiency and performance of staff and systems can be monitored.
The programme can tell the operator the costs  of menus and ingredients enabling better planning and budgetary control.
Following government policy on market testing, and so as to ensure that the MOD operates within the agreed financial and manpower budgets, some catering facilities on RAF units have been transferred to contract catering operations.
RAF Swinderby was ‘contractorised’ as far back as the 1960s because the ending of National Service led to a shortage of cooks and stewards and now ther are probably about a score of units which work a mainly 9–5 day, or where the numbers are fairly small, that may be most suitable for ‘contractorising’.
Those that need round-the-clock support generally stay with the MOD.
All are kept under constant review to ensure that Service personnel (and the taxpayer) get the best value for money.
Various recent legal enactments covering food safety and the environment have required the Catering Branch to set up continues review procedures.
In under a year's time the Services will also lose Crown Immunity, so that will add to the vigilance that will be necessary.
The practical implications of these matters are very real and may escape some of us microwave aces, for example.
Frozen meals and a microwave oven may sound the answer to a quick meal for someone on shift work or nightflying.
If, however, the food or the equipment is not handled with professional care not only are people open to a health risk, but someone can get prosecuted!
Large quantities of frozen food are nowadays delivered regularly to stores and the Service must ensure that the temperature of the stock at the time of delivery is correct before it goes into the cold store.
Environmental Health Officers could soon be an even greater hypertension threat to the Catering Officer that this Orderly Officer ever was!
So there are some new facets to catering in the RAF today compared with even a few years ago.
Chips with everything there is not.
Healthy eating is in, and there is plenty of advice available about what is healthy eating.
The needs of vegetarians, or those with special diet requirements are met, and a reasonable variety of menus is provided.
The proof of the pudding as we all know is in the eating, and I thought where better to sample the pudding than at RAF Uxbridge.
RAF Uxbridge is the current holder of the Jolliffe Trophy, which is awarded to the unit that is judged to provide the best standard of catering for all three messes.
Clearly the RAF would be happy to show me their trophy-winners — while my cunning instincts told me that this would be the best place to do food-tasting!
Readers will appreciate that even if a combination of Sgt Bilko and the Roux Brothers was running the Cookhouse, with only £1.43 to feed an adult with three meals a day it is not possible to challenge the Savoy Grill.
Uxbridge did me proud, however.
Their hospitality would doubtless have extended to me sampling the food in each of the three messes — but not wanting to risk either myself or the computer's Carafe programme developing hiccups, I enjoyed visiting each mess and settled for eating in the Sergeant's Mess.
In each mess the menu was sufficiently wide to make one dither a bit because there were several options that looked appetising.
I picked an individual Cottage Pie, because that is something I sometimes prepare at home and I think I know how good (or terrible!) it can be.
There must be quite a number of readers who have had Uxbridge Cottage Pie at some time — and I obviously cannot tell how the 1991 version compared with earlier versions — but I can say that I enjoyed this particular dish and that the taste and texture were very good.
It was nicely presented, moreover, and since I hadn't taken any eating irons with me I am pleased to report that nobody asked me to cup my hands together to take my Cottage Pie a la Toulon?
Nor was tea or coffee served a dollop of condensed milk for those who wanted it ‘au lait’!
There is healthy eating available in today's RAF, and with messing committees to ensure that everyone has an opportunity to contribute their views and ideas, there seems wider appreciation of the skills of today's cooks and of the results that they achieve with their limited financial resources.
We all know how Service morale is closely related to the standard of food, so it is comforting to conclude that the RAF looks in pretty good shape in 1991.
The Editor is grateful for the help that was given to him by catering personnel at MOD Stanmore who supplied the photographs and RAF Uxbridge .
Scene from the Past 1 — Balloon Site Catering
Scene from the Past 2 — A Canadian Orderly Officer tentatively tastes the food while others watch with amusement.
A training session in progress
USAFA Visit
Mr John E Kittelson, National Vice President of the United States Air Force Association, visited the Headquarters at Grove Park with his wife Marcia on 19 July 1991.
During his visit he was briefed on the work of the Association by the Financial Secratary Sam Churchman and Mrs Wyatt, and took great interest in the Welfare work that we do.
After the briefing our visitors were entertained to lunch and presented with a plaque to commemorate the visit.
Mr and Mrs Kittelson live in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
The photograph shows (l-r) Mrs Kay Wyatt, Mr Sam Churchman, Mr John Kittelson and Mrs Marcia Kittelson.
Wartime WAAF's become Hon F-16 pilots
A dozen wartime WAAFs this Summer paid a flying visit to the USA, attracting in the process some good publicity for the RAFA — for their hats which bore the RAFA Battle of Britain logo were much in demand!
Veterans of many WAAF reunions, the group decided to have a holiday together, and with kind help from Richard Branson and Virgin Airlines, spent two weeks in Florida.
Two US Air Force bases were visited — Homestead, Miami, and Patrick at Cape Canaveral.
At Homestead they were guests of the 482 Tactical Fighter Wing which recently had seen action in the Gulg, and It was here that each was given a certificate making them Honorary F-16 Fighter Pilots.
At T/Sgt John E Smith wrote: ‘You wouldn't have known these ladies served as mechanics and armourers in the Women's Royal Air Force beginning 52 years ago by the way they climbed up and the down the stairs at the control tower or scrambled up to the cockpit of an F-16’.
The group managed to find time to visit Disneyland, the Epcot Centre and MGM Studios as well!
Three of the ‘Dainty Dozen’(as the 482nd christened them) who had been MT drivers during the war drove the party around in a 12-seater minibus that flew Union Jacks to warn the unsuspecting American public that they were not used to driving on the wrong side of the road.
Two of the party, Katie Ball and Dorothy Smith also wrote and asked Air Mail to give their exploits a mention.
Who could refuse the request of such ladies?
They are pictured at Gatwick before their Grand Tour.
Remembrance in Florida
Our thanks go to Mrs Margaret (Peggy) Kaye, a member of the Fareham Branch, and an ex-pat WAAF, who writes to us from Orlando, Florida to tell us of a moving memorial service that took place at Arcadia, Florida on 27 May 1991.
It is a story that fits in well with our article on the Structure of Remembrance in this issue of Air Mail .
The arrangements for the service were made by the Rotary Club of Arcadia, the service being held at the graveside of the British Plot in Oak Ridge Cemetery.
May organisations take part in this annual event, including Canadian Clubs, British and American Clubs, Scottish/American Clubs and many more to honour the young men who dies while serving at Flying Training Schools at Riddle Field, Clewiston and Carlstrom Field, Arcadia.
A great welcome was given to all the visitors by the Rotary Club, by the K-Post 11 of the American Legion Auxiliary, by the British Ceremony Committee and by the Mayor.
Floral tributes came from HM The Queen (The Royal Yacht was cruising in the Florida Straits), HM Government as well as many of the British and Canadian organisations in the US.
The Transatlantic Brides and Parents Association of Orlando also proudly laid a wreath.
With the Union Jack and the RAF Ensign at half-mast, with an aircraft flying overhead in salute while the Last Post was sounded, it was an emotional and meaningful moment for those participating in this act of remembrance.
…and Northern Ireland
The 50th anniversary of the death of the crew of a 50 Sqn Hampden was marked with a Service of Remembrance for the four who died and the dedication of a granite marker at the crash site.
At the memorial service at Blessington, Sir Nicholas Fenn, the British Ambassador, unveiled a plaque; also well represented were RAFA Branches, the British Legion and the Irish Army Air Corps.
Relatives of the four airmen had been traced by air historian, 14 travelling from England for this special occasion.
Paddy Sutton of the Lisburn Branch kindly send us this story which demonstrates that remembrance is a continuous process.
‘Sailor’ Malan
On 17 September 1991, the Secretary General, Mark Tomkins represented the Association and its South African Area at the unveiling of a print of one of Gp Capt ‘Sailor’ Malan's air battles during the Battle of Britain.
Sailor Malan was one of many South Africans who served with great distinction in either the RFC or the RAF — including such names as Andrew Proctor VC, ‘Boetie’ Venter and S M Kinkead from World War I and ‘Pat’Pattle, John Nettleton VC and Edwin Swaley VC from World War II.
The Association remembers with gratitude the contribution of South Africans in preserving the freedom we enjoy today.
HAUTE-SAVOIE RESISTANCE MUSEUM OPENS
HRH Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, visited the Resistance Museum at Morette, shortly before its opening on 18 June.
Jeff Noble arranged the display sections illustrating SOE and RAF support.
Shown here is the Queen Mother looking at the display relating to Frank Griffiths, the sole survivor of a Halifax that was shot down on a supply mission, and who was successfully hidden by the local Resistance.
Group Captain Griffiths was a most welcome guest at the opening.
Also present was the Chairman and a number of members of the Swiss Branch who paraded their Branch Standard.
BLESS THE DOG!
Flt Lt Helen Brown and Sgt Norman Drake present the owner of ‘Bless’, winner of the Locking Bolt Stakes with her trophy at the RAFA Charity Greyhound Meeting on 9 July at Wimbledon stadium.
£5,000 was raised for the event.
(Photo David P Poole)
…and the Albatross Flying Club, too!
At the same venue that saw Bless performing for our benefit, the Albatross Flying Club of Berlin donated £1,750 to the Association.
The sum was raised at a model aircraft flying display that was all but washed out through appalling weather.
The Club, however, made the best of it and handed the Station Commander RAF Gatow a cheque for DM10,000 that was to be split between SSAFA and RAFA.
The RAFALO at Gatow, WO C R Oliver presented a cheque for the Association's share to AVM Bill Bailey, Chairman of Central Council on the occasion of the Wimbledon meeting.
ROYAL TOURNAMENT '91 — A PHOTO RECCE BY AIR MAIL 
WE are the Back Markers!
It's no more difficult that walking a tight-rope, sonny!
Arena rehearsal, with the Central Band of the RAF.
With the band too, being in mufti, one can pick out some of the five ladies who have recently joined the band.
A professional photographer really gets down to it…
The big moment arrives and everything is a spectacular success.
WELL DONE EVERYONE!
AREA and BRANCH News
Luxembourg
The Branch was recently visited by a Victor tanker of 55 Sqn.
This aircraft, which was much admired by the many members and friends of the Branch who came to see it, had been active during the Gulf conflict.
The crew was warmly welcomed, and promptly ‘mucked-in’ to help sell RAFA fund-raising goods.
They got so much satisfaction from helping the Association, in fact, that as this photo shows, they signed application forms for Life Membership!
Luxembourg thanks (l-r) Sqn Ldr R Druitt, Flt Lts P Jackson and D Mannion, F/Sgt J Dearden and Flt Lt E Billings, and looks forward to their next visit.
Abbots & Kings Langley
This small branch — it has only 42 members — showed that something that is a little‘out of the ordinary’ can prompt a very good public response to Wings Appeal.
Wings Organiser Bill Osgothorp arranged a 25-mile bike ride, two of the bikes being ‘penny-farthings’ and a third being a 1906 BSA.
The reward for the exersions of these intrepid cyclists was that they raised more than £200.
Pictured left are Bill, his wife, the vehicles that made up the Antiques Roadshow and their energetic and skilful riders.
Beverley
At the end of WWII, the Beverley, East Yorks firm of Richard Hodgson's Tannery had a Memorial to those employees who lost their lives in the two world wars displayed on the outside wall of their social club.
Subsequently Jack Cooper, a member of the Beverley Branch fround that the name of his twin brother, Ernest, had been omitted.
Ernest had been killed in 1940 in an aircraft accident when on duty as a Drogue Operator.
The Branch decided, of the social club building had been acquired by the Beverley Borough Council, that the marble memorial should be cleaned, re-gilded and the name of E Cooper added.
The cost of the work was met by donations raised through the efforts of Branch Vice Chairman John Wortley.
At a ceremony on 17 August, the Mayor unveiled the renovated memorial, and it was re-dedicated by the Revd H A Hall of St Mary's Church Beverley; branch members of the RAFA, Royal British Legion and of the Green Howards Association attended with their standards.
Bangor
Earlier this year the Branch decided to make very substantial donations to the RAF Benevolent Fund and to Richard Peck House.
These two worthy causes are seen as being particularly close to Welsh hearts as Welfare Officers in the area appreciate the support that the RAF Benevolent Fund has given to persons in Wales, and as Richard Peck House is the nearest RAFA convalescent facility for people in North Wales.
The sum of £25,000 was donated to each, the total of £50,000 being possibly a record.
It should also be remembered that the Branch had already made a donation some 10 years ago of more than £13,000 to Richard Peck House.
Norwich
At a well-supported social evening, attended by the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress of Norwich, the Officer Commanding RAF Neatishead and representatives from RAF Coltishall, RAF Swanton Morley and RAFA Diss Branch, the Branch was pleased to receive the Senior Branch Efficiency Trophy from the hands of AVM N S Howlett.
Photo show l-r Brian Fish, Hon Treasurer, AVM Howlett, Brian Marston, Chairman, and Frank Bennett, Hon Secretary.
Sydney
John Hopley writes of the RAFA participation in the Anzac Day parade and march-past.
This photograph shows the contingent after it passed the Cenotaph, with Jerry Jones DFC leading, John Higham, President of the Sydney Branch and Don McComish bearing the Standard.
Parade marshal Harry Foster is to the right of the unit.
Don McComish travels 1,000 miles from his home in Adelaide to perform the standard-bearing duty each year.
That is surely leading by example!
Newsletter competition
Entries for the Branch Newletter Competition should be received at Central Headquarters by December 31.
These should be either printed or duplicated and state how many issues are produced during the year.
Trophies will be presented at Annual Conference to the winning branch runners-up.
Swiss
The Swiss Branch, on the occasion of the 700th anniversary of the Swiss Confederation and the Branch's own 40th anniversary celebrated in style with Sussexdown's residents.
The Branch supported the running costs for this special day when they were to be hosts at Storrington.
Three committee members drove from Geneva to be present and in all some 17 Members and Friends of the Swiss Branch gathered at Sussexdown in the late morning of 1 August.
They were joined by Chief Welfare Officer Brenda McLaren and four guests, including Sir John Saverne, President of the South Western Area.
Everyone joined in to serve Swiss wine to the residents and then enjoyed a superb buffet prepared by Faye and her catering staff.
Hong Kong
Receiving a copy of the AGM Minutes from the Branch prompts Air Mail to give a little space to describe the activities and efforts being made by the Branch Committee, a committee which has been virtually unchanged since the Branch was re-activated six years ago.
Such stalwarts as Chairman Peter Harris, Hon Treasurer and Welfare Officer Tom Smith and Hon Secretary Roger Draper continue to serve in spite of all the pressures of work in this uncertain environment.
Anyone who knows Hong Kong will appreaciate that spare time is at a premium there, and the efforts of those members who ensure that a successful branch exists deserves recognition and thanks.
The main event of 1990 was a programme of three concerts by the Central Road of the RAF.
These were organised by Roger Draper, and took place at The Hong Kong Arts Centre (17 Nov), The City Hall Concert Hall (21 Nov) and the Hong Kong Cultural Centre Concert Hall (25 Nov).
Clearly these involved Roger in a considerable amount of work, and at a time when Roger's wife was giving birth to their daughter in the UK!
What it is to have an understanding wife!
Profits from the concerts went to the RAF Benevolent Fund amd tp RAFA Welfare Funds.
A Sword of Excellence was presented to the Central Band through private donations by Branch members.
Understandably, the great issue in members' minds is what will the changes due in 1997 mean to them as individuals and to the Branch as an organisation.
The Branch is determined to take a positive approach and plans a full range of social and fund-raising activities for the year ahead.
Branch recruitment is of key importance, and it is good to report that Flt Lt C Harris, RHKAAF, has volunteered to help in this area.
May the Hong Kong branch find inspiration in the mottoes of both the RAF and the RAFA in the years to come.
Carlisle
The Carlisle Branch disposed of its Club and Branch premises during 1990.
As a result it has been possible to provide donations to both RAFA and other local charitable causes until a major RAFA project in the area is identified.
The Eden Valley Hospice is nearing completion in Carlisle; the Branch therefore decided to donate 10,000 to the Hospice Appeal for the purpose of furnishing and maintaining a room in the hospice and ensuring that the RAFA Club at Harraby is not forgotten.
At the same time donations were also made to the Eagle Lodge project and Dowding House, Moffat, with a further donation promised to the Cumberland Infirmary for extra portable X-ray equipment.
Pictured below are Carlisle RAFA Branch Treasurer John Watson (centre) presenting an Association plaque for the Harraby Room to Peter Whitley (left) the Chairman of the Eden Valley Hospice Appeal Fund, while Ken Dewar, Fund treasurer holds the £10,000 cheque.
North Cornwall
The Branch recently presented a picture of a Bristol Blenheim to Launceston's twin town of Plestin-les-Greves.
Photographed above Branch President, Ben Crawley, hands over the picture to Mme Christianne Lagadec, the President of Plestin-les-Greves twinning association.
The event commemorated the courage of the villages of Plestin who helped the crew of an RAF aircraft to escape on 27 September 1941.
The village priest was arrested and later executed and deportation and death for other villagers also resulted.
The Branch PRO, Stuart Voden, would like to learn more about this particular story and the fate of aircrew — Englishman Francis Reece, Irishman William Smith and Canadian Douglas Appleyard.
Diss
For the second year running Diss & District Branch have been awarded the Frank Larner Trophy for efficiency and a Wings Appeal £1,000 break award.
Air Commodore Jeffery, President RAFA Eastern Area was at the Annual Dinner on 7 June to congratulate the branch on its achievements.
It is good to report that branch membership has increased by 46% over the last four years.
Bridgwater
On an evening in April, the Branch gave 65 Sqn ATC a plaque to mark the 50th anniversary of their inauguration.
Parents, friends and members of the Association were present, including AVM Sir John Severne and his wife.
Sir John presented cadets with a number of trophies, and Mrs R Webber presented WO Frank Crane with the Bill Webber Memorial Cup.
The photo shows Sir John flanked by Flt Lt Jim Lampard (CO of 65 Sqn ATC), WO Crane and trophy-winning cadets.
Stanley
The first Certificate of Appreciation to be awarded in the North Eastern Area was presented to Sam Parker earlier this year at the Branch AGM.
The presentation was made by Ken Richardson, the Branch President.
Sam has served the Stanley Branch for more than 30 years, filling such positions as Branch Secretary, Branch Treasurer, Membership Secretary and Entertainment Officer.
In leaner years, the branch might have folded without the hard work put in by Sam Parker, and the award of this certificate will be applauded by all who know him.
Airdale and Wharfedale
The Branch recently received the Wings Trophy, awarded annually to the branch which has made the most consistent progress in the Wings collection over the past 10 years, from North East Area Chairman Brian Wilkie.
Last year the Branch collected £89.67 per head of membership.
Shown below is Branch Chairman Alan Furze receiving the trophy from the Area Chairman.
Bill Berry's Diary
Far East POW Appeal
With the approach of the 50th anniversary of the start of the war in the Far East, a special appeal has been launched.
Member Les Stubbs, who is also newletter editor of the Birmingham Far East Prisoners-of-War Association, has begun compiling a list of the 3,388 RAF personnel who survived captivity by the Japanese.
He already has about 700 of the names.
Les, with the active support of his wife Pam, has spent several years listing the 1,000 prisoners, 600 of them RAF and himself among them, who were drafted to Ambon from Java in April 1943.
His original appeal in Air Mail reached no fewer than 40 of the 250 survivors of that grim episode in Far East war history.
In the course of their researches, Les and Pam discovered that the Ministry of Defence (Air) had no list of Far East survivors nor even a complete list of those captured by the Japanese.
The appeal now is for names, service numbers, squadrons or other units, country in which taken prisoner, countries in which held, and country of release.
Les lives at 143 New Road, Bromsgrove, Worcs, B60 2LJ.
His phone number is 0527 73452.
Ploesti raid
A planned remembrance reunion to mark the 50th anniversary of the low-level raid on the Ploesti oilfields in Romania in August 1943 has interested R G Crick of Welling, Kent.
He was then a flight sergeant with 104 Mobile Signals Unit in the Middle East.
‘We were sent to a landing strip on the coast near Bardia to set up a listening post on a wavelength contained in sealed orders.
We were given three weeks to make ready and our curiosity was heightened when four American cypher sergeants from Headquarters Squadron, Middle East US Forces, were attached to our unit.
‘On reaching our destination and opening the sealed orders, we discovered that other RAF units would provide refuelling, mechanical and medical services.
A landing strip was organised to provide emergency services for any of the aircraft that suffer damage or be short of fuel.
‘Ours was a humble part of the operation but we were all full of admiration for the crews that carried out the raid in such difficult conditions.’
Mr Crick has sent a full account of his involvement to Lt Col William Feder who has made an appeal for information to anyone concerned with the mission.
Col Feder is curator of the International B-24 Museum at Pueblo International Airport, Colorado.
Fitters Reunion
Eight engine fitters had their own reunion within the 1661 Heavy Conversion Unit reunion at Newark Air Museum.
All LACs, they were all from B Flight and all were billeted in Hut 107 (known as Goon Palace) at RAF Winthorpe.
Seen in the accompanying picture, they are: Back row, from left, Stan Cape, Ken Munday, Harry Eccles, Albert Daubney and Bill Sammonds; front, Ray Darney, Charlie Chase and Don Clarkson.
About 50, some from Canada, Australia, South Africa and USA, attended the reunion which was graced by a fly-past by the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight's Lancaster,City of Lincoln .
The reunion is held every two years and although this year's was intended to be the last, organiser John Gray of Plymouth, said: ‘Every time I say I'm not going to do it again, they twist my arm to plan another.’
In fact, the attendance was better than that in 1989.
Lone Grave
While on a tour of Normandy earlier this year, I made a point of visiting and photographing the grave of Battle of Britain pilot Seageant H R J Barrow.
His is the only war grave in the churchyard adjoining the 11th century church at Colleville-sur-Mer.
It is within sight of the huge US military cemetery at Colleville St Laurent near Omaha Beach where 9,300 American soldiers and airmen are buried.
Sergeant Barrow, who came from Isleworth, Middlesex, died on 28 November 1940 aged 21.
He was reported missing on a wing patrol with 602 Squadron while flying Hurricane V6691.
His body was washed ashore on what was to become Omaha Beach.
His grave is not forgotten.
As reported in the Winter 1990 issue, it is cared for, beautifully I can report, by Pierre Regnault, a pre-war French airman who escaped to England in 1940, and enlisted in the RAFVR.
Pierre, who has a summer cottage at Colleville, looks upon the grave as part of his own family.
Honour at last Three of our gallant Polish allies, two of them airmen and RAFA members, have been awarded the Polish Cross by the present Polish Government in recognition of their war efforts.
All from Exeter, where they settled after the war, the three are Joe Wasniowski, who was a flight mechanic with 317 (Wilenski) Hurricane and Spitfire Squadron; Ted Wijaszko, a radar techician with 307 (Lwowski) night fighter Squadron, which flew Defiants, Beaufighters and Mosquitos; and Stan Kadzielski, a naval gunner who came to Britain as a crew member of the destroyer Burza .
Joe was serving with the Polish Air Force when the Germans invaded his homeland and escaped to Britain via Romania, Lebanon, France, Casablanca and Gibraltar.
He says: ‘Although the medal has only recently been created, it was a proud and memorable day when we went to the Polish Embassy in London to receive it.’
The medals were presented by Polish Foreign Minister Zdzislaw Rapacki accompanied by Ambassador Kochanowski.
Ted also received the Polish 1939 Defence Medal which Joe received at a ceremony last year.
Stan already holds the Norwegian Defence Medal, awarded for service in the Battle of Narvik.
Crete Memorial
News now of the unveiling of a fine memorial commemorating the 30 men of 30 Squadron and 20 men of 33 Squadron who died in the defence of Maleme airfield, Crete, in May 1941.
Forty-four of them have no known graves.
The memorial is on the slopes of Hill 107 where the few remaining officers and 200 men of both squadrons including mechanics, armourers, clerks and cooks, fought as infantry alongide New Zealand soldiers.
The memorial was unveiled on 25 May, the 50th anniversary, in the presence of 24 veterans, including the then squadron commanders.
Money for the memorial was subscribed by former members of both squadrons, friends and relatives of those killed and by a Cretan friend.
The 50 names are engraved on three granite tablets.
The memorial itself was designed by present and former members of the squadrons and the plans were drawn by students of the Reading College of Technology.
Air Vice-Marshal A D Dick, chairman of 30 Squadron Association, in an appeal for relatives to be made aware of the memorial's existence, recalls that Squadron Leader Edward Howell, the 33 Squadron commander, was critically wounded in the battle and nearly died.
The Germans evacuated him to Athens then to Salonika.
Some months later, though still very weak, he managed to escape to Turkey, mostly by walking.
Relatives can contact Air Vice-Marshal Dick at 44 St Peter's Avenue, Caversham, Reading.
More ‘dreams’?
Member Johnny Day of Bexhill, envies the other member who after complaining to the Diary that his service must have been a dream, was subsequently contacted by old colleagues.
‘I have never found any of my old friends, despite scouring the columns of Air Mail ,’ he says.
He was a wireless operator of AMES 15063, served with other units and was also seconded to the Royal Corps of Signals and other Army units.
‘I even found myself very briefly attached to the US 8th Army Air Force!
Maybe the frequent shifts were due to my having BO,’ Johnny suggests.
Anyone who can rekindle a friendship should write to him at Flat 11, Grove Court, Cooden Drive, Bexhill, Sussex or ring him at 0424–212456.
In similar vein, Stan Twigg, of Wigan, asked what happened to the wartime personnel of 105 Squadron.
‘Surely a squadron with Hughie Edwards, VC, DSO, DFC as commander and the first squadron to have Mosquitos hasn't just faded away,’ says Stan who was an ‘erk’wireless operator at Marham from July 1942 to April, 1943, and now lives at 46 Ingram Street, Springfield, Wigan.
It is from South Africa that Marjorie Pearson, No 8833346, writes to complain that there is never any mention of WAAF dental or medical orderlies.
Marjorie, who joined up at Sheffield in September 1939, joined Sheffield RAFA in 1946.
She and her husband are members of the Hottentots Holland, RAFA and now live at 23 Columbine Street, Nerina, Durbanville 7550, Cape Province.
While still on this theme, a friend who was a cook bemoans the lack of stories from or about those who kept us fed.
Perhaps some of the cooks who fought as infantry at Maleme, Crete, could drop us a line.
Appeal sequel
Two years ago I published an appeal by Mrs Mary Marsden, of Church Stretton, Shropshire, for news of any relatives of six airmen of 57 Squadron killed when their Wellington crashed at Staplefore, near Cambridge, on 3 September 1941, when returning from a raid on Frankfurt.
A memorial to them was unveiled in St Andrew's Church there 22 years ago, Mrs Marsden being then a member of the memorial committee.
The airmen were Sgt L T Hutchinson, RAAF, captain; Sgt F McNeill, RAF, second pilot; Sgt F K Crossley, RAF observer; Flt Sgt L T Lawson, RCAF, first W/T operator; Sgt A C Turgeon, RCAF, second W/T operator; and Sgt D E Soles, RCAF, air gunner.
Mrs Marsden tells us that by chance, Sgt Lawson's sister, who now lives at Beckenham, Kent, was in the church last Remembrance Sunday when, to her surprise, her brother's name was read out.
She had no idea there was a tapestry plaque made by the parishioners.
After the appeal in Air Mail , Mrs Marsden had calls from men who had known members of the crew.
She also sought the help of the Canadian High Commission and her appeal was forwarded to the Canadian Veterans Affairs Department, which has provided information on the three Canadians in the crew.
In the case of Sgt Soles, the Department said that Mrs Marsden's inquiry had resulted in the discovery that his widow, who had remarried by was now very ill, was entitled to have her widow's pension reinstated under new legislation and this had now been done.
Her husband said the extra 1,100 dollars a month would enable her to go into a private nursing home.
She would never have received the money but for Mrs Marsden's inquiry.
Brenner Mural
Another version of the story behind the mural on a covent in the Brenner Pass, first mention in the Summer Diary , has been provided Dick Bailey, of Credenhill, a serving member, also say the mural while on a coach tour last year.
He was told that soon after the official ceasefire in Europe in 1945, a Nazi of some notoriety was escaping through the pass and it was decided to try to annihilate him, the only means available being bombing.
There were civilian casualties followed by protests and condemnation of what was seen as a violation and atrocity.
‘Maybe this is folklore/legend but it's another version and I too would be interested to hear the authentic account,’ says Dick.
Maybe some member can provide it?
French Pilgrimage
One of our members with his own special interest in the area has visited and photographed five RAF graves in the village churchyard at Gouesnou, just north of Brest.
Freddie Crewe, of Maidstone, who left the RAF as a squadron leader in 1962, flew Hurricanes and Spitfires in the war and was shot down near Brest on 3 August 1943.
He went to Gouesnou during a recent visit to meet friends who helped him to evade capture for a time.
Four of the graves are those of a 98 Squadron Mitchell bomber crew who died on 24 June 1943 and the other is that of a Typhoon pilot of 266 Squadron who crashed the same day as Freddie Crewe.
The five are buried in adjoining graves, the Typhoon pilot, Plt Off R K Thompson, just a little apart from the others.
Next to him is the Mitchell observer, Flt Sgt E L Reed, then the pilot, Fg Off J P Toeg, the wireless operator, Flt Sgt T Ellis and the gunner, Sgt J Glover.
Mr Crewe will be pleased to provide photographs for any next-of-kin or relatives.
His address is 2a Birchwood Road, Poplar Grove, Maidstone, Kent ME16 OBB.
Belgian Ceremony
Through the initiative of a Belgian, Cynrik de Decker, seven members of 90 Squadron Association have attended a ceremony of remembrance to the seven crew of Stirling EH907 (WP-O) which crashed on 4 July 1943.
The crew were Flt Sgt M Morrison, pilot; Sgt A P McGinley, navigator; Sgt C Reddell, air bomber; Sgt W MacGuire, wireless operator; Sgt A Leonard, mid-upper gunner; Sgt C H Fenton, rear gunner; and Sgt M Scheddle, engineer.
The bomber, one of 10 from Wratting Common assigned to a raid on Cologne exploded over the village of Moortsel and fell in pieces in fields.
Six of the crew were found dead in the fuselage and the rear gunner, Sgt Fenton, was found in the tail some distance away, barely alive.
He died soon afterwards.
Cynrik has spent some years researching the crash and succeeded in tracing Sgt Fenton's younger brother, Raymond.
A local committee was set up to organise a remembrance weekend, publish a book telling the story of WP-O and arrange a small exhibition.
Raymond Fenton joined the seven from 90 Squadron Association, who were accompanied by our Eastern Area standard bearer, R Pearson.
The party first visited the Mariakerke Cemetery at Ghent, where the crew are buried, then attended a service at Moortsel church.
A memorial plaque was then unveiled by Raymond Fenton and the group walked across the fields to where WP-O fell.
A Union Jack flew over the exact spot and George Jeffery, of Bury St Edmunds, laid a poppy wreath on behalf of the squadron.
Belgian veterans also laid a wreath.
George praises the hospitality and warmth of welcome extended by the Belgians.
The recent picture shows the ceremony at the crash site, the other was taken secretly on the day of the disaster.
Are you here?
Also from Belgium comes an appeal for any information about the six men seen in this picture.
They are believed to have worked in the officers' mess of a signals unit posted to Moortsel, a village near Tervuren, 10 miles east of Brussels, in September 1944.
They left the following month.
The picture belongs to M de Bijser, of Langestraat 53, 30400 Neerijsen, Belgium, who says the six were entertained in his family's home at Moortsel.
Unfortunately, their names are not known.
Through a member of our Belgian branch, he was advised to seek Air Mail' s help in tracing any of the six.
‘We are grateful to them for helping to liberate Belgium,’ he says.
Station mags
My item about station magazines in the Summer issue has prompted Clifford H Frost of Torquay branch to send a copy of The Tiger Rag , the official magazine of No 5 Air School, Witbank, Transvaal.
Clifford says that when he and Flt Sgt L Lewis suggested the idea of a magazine to the station commander, Wing Commander Leslie Bennet, MC, he gave them every encouragement and support.
Lewis was the first editor and the first issue appeared early in 1943.
The venture was well supported by local advertisers.
‘It so happened that No 5 Air School was not far away from the mine where Churchill hid during the Boer War,’ Clifford recalls.
‘The mine manager showed us a gold watch which Churchill gave to his father for hiding him.
An article about this appeared in The Tiger Rag and a copy was sent to Downing Street and duly acknowledged.
When John Colville, Churchill's secretary, joined the RAF, he was sent to Witbank for flying training.’
Harrogate branch member H Sawyer still has a February 1945 copy of Delta, published in Calcutta for 180 Wing, South East Asia Air Forces.
He also has an April 1945 copy of Victory , published by the Government of India in New Delhi.
‘I did have a copy of Boost , a monthly magazine published from late 1942 for 212 (Catalina) Squadron based at Korangi, south of Karachi.
I handed it to a former flight engineer of 213 when I visited him in Toronto some years ago.
He came over to last year's boat reunion at Pembroke Dock.’
BB 
Wexford House
Formal Opening
In October 1986 Central Council approved a proposal made by Air Vice-Marshal Bill Gill that Eagle Lodges should be developed as welfare facilities for the Association.
On 24 June 1991 Air Chief Marshal Sir Michael Graydon, Air Officer Commanding in Chief Strike Command, formally opened the Association's first Eagle Lodge at Wexford House, Melton Mowbray.
It was most appropriate that Bill Gill and his wife Mary were present at the ceremony.
On his arrival the AOC in C inspected a Guard of Honour mounted by No 1279 Squadron Air Training Corps and was met by our President Air Chief Marshal Sir Joseph Gilbert, the Chairman of Central Council Air Vice-Marshal Bill Bailey and the Chairman of RAFA Housing Ltd Roy Kendrick.
In their speeches both our President and the AOC in C drew attention to the close links between the Association and the serving Royal Air Force.
With Wexford House situated in what was the heart of Bomber Command during World War II it is very fitting that it will honour in particular the men and women of that Command.
It was equally fitting that following the opening, the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight Lancaster flew over Wexford House in salute.
After the ceremony Sir Michael and Lady Graydon circulated amongst the guests and met the residents before partaking of an excellent buffet lunch provided by RAF Cottesmore — another example of the support given by the serving RAF.
Because of the constraints of space, the number of guests had to be severely limited but during the afternoon more visitors were invited to look around the Lodge and see for themselves this latest jewel in the Association's welfare crown.
Tea was served and a Tornado flew past — both events again thanks to RAF Cottesmore.
The Association has a total of three Eagle Lodges in operation, the others being Woodford House in Southport and The White House in Bexhill-on-Sea.
Top: Carly Bowes the eight-year-old daughter of the Relief Housekeeper, presents a posy to Laydy Graydon.
Above: Air Chief Marshal Sir Michael and Lady Graydon with some of the residents.
Back row (l-r) Ken Jeffries, Sam Mann, Alf Rippin, Lady Graydon and Sir Michael.
Front row (l-r) Mary Wilson, Doug Park, Edith Holder.
Left: RAFA President, Sir Joseph Gilbert, welcomes the guests.
Berlin bale-out — and escape!
As told to Leslie Hunt
The night of 31 August/1 September 1943 say Berlin heavily bombed.
A Halifax of 158 Sqn Lissett had both its port engines and fuselage set ablaze by night fighters.
Ken Ward gave orders to bale out saying how sorry he was that he'd got his crew into this mess!
Flight engineer Harry Simister followed wireless operator, bomb aimer and navigator through the hatch, feeling a terrific pull on his legs as he fell through space, and realised his harness was not properly adjusted.
He was reliever to feel a slight tug as the parachute eventually opened; it was bitter cold but fortunately he was being blown away from the capital's fires, and after drifting for a time, hit the ground ‘like a wet sack’.
Harry knew he'd been hit in the aircraft, feeling now the wetness of blood inside his shirt and trousers, although the wounds didn't hurt, only causing numbness.
He was in a field, and picked out what he thought was a wood, to which he headed and placed his unwanted gear in a ditch, covering it with tufts or grass.
Within a clump of trees he lay down, trying to sleep.
Dawn came and he, determined not to be taken prisoner, removed his brevet, stipes and badges, plus his battledress pockets, using his escape-kit knife.
Burying the ‘evidence’ he smeared the telltale marks on his blouse with mud, reluctantly cutting off the tops of his flying boots, hoping that the small holes in his uniform, from shrapnel, would pass unnoticed.
Startled by a sudden noise he looked out to see a Junkers Ju 88 flying low but, luckily, into mist.
Skirting the wood he walked for hours, resting after spotting potato-pickers and distant houses.
When darkness came he ventured out, selecting a large potato — which tasted awful although he ate it all.
Smoking the first of five cigarettes from his case which had been undamaged in his rear pocket (matches from escape kit) Harry made up his mind to head for a port, walking north-westerly to avoid Potsdam.
Coming into a village he brazenly replied to a child's ‘Heil Hitler’ with something entirely different!
For his second night Harry used his helmet and legs of his flying boots as a pillow, and woke up with uncontrollable shivering.
At dawn he walked again, and coming to a boating lake he drank from it like a horse, and filled his rubber bag.
Now with the bag in one side of his blouse, and helmet and leggings in the other, he felt (and looked!) like a woman.
Some 30 miles from Berlin he comtemplated hitch-hiking, but rejected it, trudging along and coming upon allotments with apple trees.
Risking everything he grabbed two tomatoes and the biggest apples before bedding down for another night under cover of trees.
Next day, footsore, he saw a bicycle beside a house and, with nobody in sight, he quickly mounted it and rode ‘like the clappers’, feeling that every time a car passed him, it might be the police.
After two or three hours, Harry say a sign indicating that Hamburg was 300 kilometres away, and he took this road as he knew Lubeck might be an alternative if no vessels for Sweden were berthed in the larger port.
That night he was woken by planes and saw flares over Berlin, bringing a moment of ‘homesickness’ that he wasn't up there too.
Next day, in Schwerin, after drenching rain, he listened to a band, German soldiers ignoring him, and restocked with apples, standing on the cycle's crossbar to reach them.
By nightfall he believed he was 30 miles from Lubeck, so next morning he headed for the port along with workpeople.
Most ships had the German flag, but one with a blue cross on white Harry thought must be Swedish or Finnish.
German soldiers guarded the coal wagons into which this ship was unloading, but Harry attracted the attention of crew members on deck and, nodding to the German nearest, boldly strode up the gangway, showing his RAF-decorated cigarette case to the crew and asking if any spoke English.
One who did listened intently to Harry's story and told him that the Germans inspected all sections of the vessel before sailing.
In the galley, Harry had his first meal for six days, before being given some bread and butter and cigarettes and being advised to return in two days, just before the ship sailed.
Retrieving the cycle, Harry found the time passing slowly to nightfall, but next day, needing water, he went into Lubeck, passing by an aircraft factory where Dornier 217 fuselages were being worked on.
Heading for the same ship again, he was once more ignored by the guards and was fed by the crew before being told to return the next day.
One can imagine his dismay when he returned to the port and found the ship had gone — either earlier than planned or because the crew didn't want to be caught helping him.
His spirits sank, but after trying another non-German ship without success, he remembered being briefed that Rostock was worth trying.
So, with a tail wind, he began the 130/140 miles, picking some carrots and apples en-route, and noticing the barrage balloons that were protecting the factories.
Rostock's Heinkel works came into view as darkness fell, and in the small docks Harry could see swastika-flagged vessels and a couple of U-boats.
Half awake, he was hailed by a guard for, inadvertently he'd cycled through the entrance gates, so he quickly turned and pedalled away with heart churning.
That night he slept in an old cardboard box that he'd found, and that gave him some protection from the chilling morning dew.
Finding no neutral ships on the eighth day, Harry risked entering a cafe, proferring a French note from his escape kit, for cigarettes.
He was asked for ‘coupon’ which caused his  hasty retreat.
A second cafe also refused the French note but gave him drink and black bread.
That night he boarded a small ship flying a Finnish flag and fell asleep in the deserted wheelhouse.
He was awakened by a seaman who told him that the ship would not be leaving for seven days, and there would be no place for him to hide as timber was being loaded under German supervision.
After a night in a shelter, very wet and depressed, Harry got out his maps and decided to try to cycle to Holland where patriots might help him.
Going via Hamburg, Harry now had troubles in the form of a punctured front tyre, and ‘tummy-trouble’ resulting from a surfeit of apples and vegetables.
He made good use of every piece of newspaper that he could pick up and every convenient hedgerow!
He continued through Bremen to Osnabruck.
A derelict house was ‘home’ for the eleventh night; next day wayside milk churns and orchards compensated for his saddle-sore state.
Panic set in on the twelfth day when, after ‘lifting’ milk, a lorry picking up the churns stopped, the driver beckoning Harry.
‘Papers’ the man said — to which Harry replied ‘Dutchman’.
Just as Harry was preparing to aim a kick at this driver where it might hurt, the man offered him more milk, saying that he was a Frenchman doing forced labour and had recognised Harry's RAF uniform — by now extremely unsuitable for pay parade!
Now near the Dutch frontier, Harry felt it might be an idea to cross from Germany by climbing into a wagon in a marshalling yard, but after a tedious wait when nothing moved he returned to his cycle and was soon in sight of the red and white border posts.
As cyclists ahead were made to dismount and show documents, Harry left the road, took a cart track into woods and crossing fields rejoined the main road again.
In minutes he was, at last, in Holland, riding through sleepy Oldenzaal, and shortly afterwards in Hengelo.
Seeing a youth of about 17 about to cycle away, Harry whispered that he was RAF and did he know anyone who could help.
Luckily the lad spoke a little English, telling Harry to cycle on and he would overtake for Harry to follow at a distance.
At some allotments he went to a shed, with Harry following.
Inside he asked many questions, before telling Harry that he would be safe there that night, and that he would bring food and, if possible, soap and razor.
Over the next two days, Harry cycled through Zutphen and Arnhem to Eindhoven, where a cafe owner gave him coffee and rolls, and a priest, who was a friend of the cafe proprietor advised Harry who was now headed for the Dutch/Belgian border.
At Borkel-en-Schaft, in another cafe, Harry showed his RAF cigarette case and notes that Dutch friends had prepared for him, and he was taken to a back room for food, and to have his blood-stained shirt and vest washed.
Soon he was in Belgium and facing a committee of patriots who knew only too well how the Gestapo had infiltrated supposed POWs into organisations.
Whilst Harry's replies were being vetted, his photo was taken for a false identity card, and his uniform and shoes exchanged for a civilian outfit.
Space does not allow a full description of Harry's successful progress from Brussels (as Jean Henri de Smat, a deaf and dumb basket maker) and then through France, to Switzerland, which Harry eventually reached on 14 October 1943.
Here he could have seen out the war, but he, and Reg Wallace, another RAF evader, ‘escaped’ into France and joined the Maquis.
After the Americans landed in the south, Harry and Reg ‘hitched’ a flight via Corsica to Naples, found the British Army, and then flew to Tunis, Algiers, Oran and Casablanca before arriving back at St Eval, Cornwall courtesy of RAF Coastal Command.
It was a year and ten days after bailing out over Berlin!
Harry Simister was awarded a well-merited Military Medal and flew with Transport Command, dropping food and bringing back POWs.
He was able to re-visit many of his helpers.
He later joined British European Airways and the RAF Escaping Society.
Perhaps one day the full story of Harry's epic journey from the skies over Berlin to St Eval's runway will be told.
Rough map showing Harry Simister's long return leg from Berlin.
The Structure of Remembrance
How do we remember?
What process is it that goes on in our brains that enables us to recall people and past events?
None of us can remember everyone we've met, everything we've done, and yet most can store away in their memory the things that we want to remember.
Things that we don't want to remember may be indelibly engraved on the mind, little eroded even by time, but million of unimportant things are blissfully forgotten — which is just as well for our mental health!
Our society and culture, together with our spiritual awareness, has built a structure over the years to help us remember those people and events that have done much to determine the kind of lives we live today, and that part of the structure that relates to the Royal Air Force has, of course, a special interest for our Association.
The main features of the structure are the cemeteries and memorials of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the Air Forces Memorials by the Thames at Runnymede and on the Embankment, and those within the Church of St Clement Danes in the Strand.
There are, of course, many other important memorials in the UK and in ‘foreign fields’, a number of which have been mentioned in earlier editions of Air Mail .
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission was established by Royal Charter in 1917 — while the First World War was still being fought.
Its duties are to mark and maintain the graves of the members of the forces of the Commonwealth who died in the two world wars, to build and maintain memorials to the dead whose graves are unknown, and to keep records and registers.
The cost is shared by the governments of Australia, Britain, Canada, India, New Zealand and South Africa in proportions based on the numbers of their graves.
In fact there are 141 countries in which there are Commonwealth war graves and memorials, and the Commission is responsible for 1,694,930 commemorations.
Almost all of the cemeteries and memorials are maintained by the Commission's own staff.
The care of the war graves in civil cemeteries and churchyards is generally entrusted to local and church authorities who maintain them in agreement with the Commission.
The work is founded on the principle that each of the dead should be commemorated individually by name either on the headstone on the grave or by an inscription on a memorial.
Each headstone is 32in high and of uniform appearance (no distinction is made on account of military or civil rank, race or creed).
In some cemeteries, particularly overseas where there may be a risk of earth movement, stone or bronze plaques on low pedestals are used instead of headstones.
Two monuments are common to the cemeteries: the Cross of Sacrifice, usually on an octagonal base and with a reversed Crusader's sword on its shaft, and, in the larger cemeteries, the Stone of Remembrance upon which is carved ‘Their Name Liveth for Evermore.’
With cemeteries to maintain all over the world it is nor surprising that a variety of arrangements, contracts and agreements have had to be set up to ensure proper care and maintenance.
In many far off lands the Commission's gardeners have no knowledge of the English language, while their supervisors are not fluent in the native tongue; the result has been, so the Commission reports, that a form of hybrid speech has developed in certain countries that would be incomprehensible to other natives of the country and to ordinary English-speakers, but which is ‘very eloquent’ on matters relating to cemetery maintenance!
The Air Forces Memorial at Runnymede, Surrey, is also one of those memorials which is a responsibility of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission.
In recognition of the enormous contribution that their Service had made to the successful conclusion of WWII, the Air Council set up after the war a war memorial committee.
In memory of the fallen, the RAF decided to rebuild a London church — St Clement Danes — but more of that later.
Such a memorial, however, was not likely to satisfy Catholics, Jews and members of other denominations so the RAF sought the help of the CWGC.
It was decided to build a separate memorial to the airmen who were lost in WWII during operations from bases in the UK and North West Europe, and who have no known grave.
The included not only airmen from the Commonwealth, but also those from Europe whose countries had been overrun but whose airmen  fought in the squadrons of the RAF.
Runnymede offered a most appropriate site for such a memorial on account of its historical associations and its closeness to London and Heathrow.
The Principal Architect of the CWGC, Sir Edward Maufe, conceived the design of the Runnymede memorial.
He was deternined to use the dramatic location and its views to make a powerful memorial rather than to build a lofty edifice that would dominate the skyline.
His objective was to create an atmosphere of quiet and intimacy, so he made a garden, then a cloister and a shrine.
The cloister includes panels that list the names of 20,435 airmen, grouped according to the year of death.
The structure is in Portland stone with Westmoreland green slate roofs, while the Shrine itself is a square tower that is, coincidentally, slightly reminiscent of an airfield control tower.
Without doubt, Sir Edward achieved his objective, and the Air Forces Memorial at Runnymede is a beautiful tribute.
The Royal Air Force Memorial on the Victoria Embankment was built in 1923.
The Royal Air Force Memorial Fund (later to become the RAF Benevolent Fund) had originally hoped to erect a memorial on ground between Westminster Abbey and St Margaret's Church, but they had been unable to get permission.
It was the Office of Woods and Forests which offered the RAF the site at the head of the Whitehall Stairs on Victoria Embankment, and the Memorial Fund gratefully accepted the offer.
The monument is fortuitously under the windows of the Ministry of Defence and under the gaze of Lord Trenchard whose statue was placed in Whitehall Gardens in 1956.
Furthermore, as the gilded eagle seems poised for take-off to do battle with enemy hordes coming from the south-east, the memorial seems to have anticipated most aptly the events that followed 17 years after its unveiling.
It is entertaining to learn, therefore, that the original design had the eagle facing inwards, ie to the north-west!
The Portland stone bears a few battle scars from the Blitz as well as the inscription from the Book of Exodus:
‘I bear you on eagles wings
And brought you unto myself.’
The Blitz reduced the ancient church of St Clement Danes to gutted and smoking ruin on the night of 10 May 1941.
Thus was begun another chapter in the extraordinary history of St Clement Danes — a history that goes back until the time of King Arthur, who expelled the Danes from the city of London but allowed those with English wives to settle just outside the city walls.
St Clement, chosen by the Danes as the Patron Saint of their church, was martyred by being tied to an anchor and dropped in the sea — which explains why the symbol of today's church shows an anchor surmounted by an eagle.
Work was started on the restoration of the bombed church in 1956, substantial funds being raised by the RAF, Commonwealth and Allied Air Forces, as well as from civilian benefactors.
The church was reconsecrated in the presence of HM the Queen in October 1958 as the Central Church of The RAF.
A Latin inscription on the ceiling high above the chancel tells how this church was built by Sir Christopher in 1682, was destroyed by aerial bombardment in 1941 and was restored by the RAF in 1958.
Books of Remembrance record the names of over 125,000 and women who gave their lives in the Service, and Roll of Honour commemorates over 19,000 US airmen who died on active service while serving in the UK.
Nearly 800 Unit and Squadron badges are embedded in the floor; they are of Welsh slate, many the work of Madge Whiteman.
The church is full of exquisite works of craftmanship which have been donated by individuals and by air forces.
Standing high in the nave is the pulpit attributed to Grinling Gibbons.
During the war it had been stored (for safety!) in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, where it suffered from the effects of high explosive.
The pulpit was marvellously restored restored to its former glory and is further evidence that the powers of creation can surmount even the most destructive forces of mankind.
In the crypt is a simple chapel, the stone altar was the gift of the Netherlands Air Force, the black granite font the Norwegians, the candelabrum came from the Belgian Air Force.
St Clement Danes is a place of pilgrimage for many who come to see the incribed names in the Memorial Books of those whom they have lost.
Fresh pages are turned each day, keeping memories alive.
Each year the Royal Air Forces Association pays homage to this Church of the RAF to all of the RAF family who have died.
The church of St Clement Danes, the RAF Memorial on the Victoria Embankment, the Runnymede Air Forces Memorial and the thousands of graves carefully tended by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission provide us with a structure of remembrance.
To this framework people may add their own memorials to their loved ones, while the Association can ensure that memorials can benefit the living through undertaking projects such as Eagle Lodges and providing homes for the sick and elderly.
Both individually and collectively we are given many opportunities to achieve that part of the Association's Dedication that announces ‘We shall remember them.’
The Shrine of the Air Forces Memorial, Runnymede, Surrey.
Floral tributes decorate the cloisters at Runnymede.
The Royal Air Force Memorial on the Victoria Embankment, London.
The organ of St Clement Danes, donated by the USAF.
Regroup and remember
1993, 1994 and 1995 will mark the 50th anniversaries of some of the greatest, most notorious battles and victories of this century.
The Allied Bomber Campaign, the Dambusters Raid, the liberation of Rome, the Battle of the Bulge and of course D-Day to name but a few.
All were momentous events that will never be forgotten, least of all by the men and women who fought in them.
To commemorate these key events in world history, Saga is looking into organising various reunions and commemorative tours, gathering together those who fought so gallantly to revisit and remember those events of nearly 50 years ago.
Saga has been specialising in quality holidays for the older generation for 40 years now.
Over this time we have continuously expanded and developed our range, with the highest priority always placed on value for money and customer care.
Our Group Sales Department specialises in organising holidays, reunions, weekend breaks and conferences specifically tailored to individual group requirements.
Our buying power with major hotel chains means that we can put together an excellent package, complete with rail and coach fares, and we also look after all the administration of the holiday.
If your group or association would be interested in a tour based around any of the events listed opposite, please tick the coupon appropriately.
However if there is a particular occasion we have missed, we would be happy to organise a special tour to your specifications.
If this is the case, please indicate under ‘Others’ on the coupon.
Individuals who wish to travel alone or in small groups may refer to Saga's latest brochures, whick contain details of holidays to all of these countries, though obviously not to the specific locations.
Our UK Hotels and Short Break brochures feature resorts and hotels which are particularly suitable for reunions and conferences.
You may use the coupon to indicate which of these brochures you are interested in.
All Saga brochures are free.
If you would like further details of our reunions, conferences and holidays, simply cut out and return the coupon to Gloria Nielsen, Group Sales, Saga Holidays Ltd., FREEPOST, Folkestone, Kent, CT20 1BR.
No stamp is required.
Alternatively if you would like to speak to someone about your specific requirements, freephone Gloria Nielsen on 0800 300 666 and she will be able to answer any questions you many have.
Yes!
I would be interested in receiving details on the following:(please tick )
1942
St. Nazaire Raid
Award of George Cross to Malta
Dieppe Raid
Battle of El Alamein
Allied Bombing Campaign
1943
Allies enter Tunis
Dambusters Raid
Sicily landings
Allies land at Salerno
Allies take Naples
Monte Cassino
1944
Glider Assaults on Burma
Rome liberated
Allies break out at Anzio
D-Day
Arnheim
Battle of the Bulge
British recapture Rangoon
Berlin falls
Others (please specify)
INDIVIDUAL TRAVEL
Europe and Mediterranean
Traveller's World
REUNIONS AND CONFERENCES
UK Hotels
Short Breaks
Mr/Mrs/Miss/Mr & Mrs Address Postcode Telephone Number Sqn/Ass Other
SAGA 
Letterbox
Canadian Reunion
In 1941 I was trained as a Navigator/Radio in the RAF and was eventually sent to an OTU where I crewed up with a Canadian pilot, Bob Tidy of Toronto.
We were trained in nightfighter techniques, using airborne radar.
We were then posted to 406 Sqn RCAF where we converted to Beaufighters.
We stayed with 406 Sqn for 18 months, a normal tour of duty at that time for nightfighter crews, and were then posted to an English squadron on Bomber Support work.
We left 406 in October 1943, and that was the last I heard of them until I received my Spring 1991 issue of Air Mail when I spotted that 406 Sqn were having a 50th Anniversary Celebration and Reunion in earlyh May at Shearwater Forces Base, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia.
I phoned the squadron at their base and immediately booked a flight to Halifax NS.
I flew over on 6 May.
I will not try to describe everything that went on.
I would take too long and use too much paper, but it was fantastic!
I was treated like a long lost brother!
About 150 former squadron members attended the official banquet (I had earlier been asked to propose the Toast the the Squadron), there was a Squadron Parade, the dedication of a cairn to mark the 50 years and a flypast of present day aircraft.
I was the only Englishman present, but if any English members of 406 Sqn should read this I hope they will contact me.
Leonard (Tiny) Giles, 1 Eaton House, Priesty Court, Howey Lane, Congleton CW12 4AH.
OZ Hospitality
My wife and I returned recently from a visit to our son in South Australia, and whilst there we paid several visits to the local RAFA branch.
The Chairman, Charles Holmes, Vice Chairman Frank Scott, Secratary John Potter, their wives and all the other members we met gave us an exceptionally warm welcome and instantly made us feel at home.
It was in April when we arrived and I was invited to join branch members in the Anzac Day Parade in Adelaide.
Prior to the parade, RAFA members joined ex-service and serving members of the RAAF at a memorial service at Adelaide Airport.
Gp Capt Gilbert, Commanding Officer of the Base Support Wing of the local Edinburgh RAAF Station was present, and wreaths were laid by the various association and units represented in front of plaques of squadrons and units of the RAAF which served in WWII.
After the service we were taken to the centre of Adelaide for the main parade.
In the region of 8,500 serving and ex-service members of the Forces marched that day, and I felt privileged to be among them.
Later we returned to the RAFA Branch HQ, where ladies of the branch had been very busy preparing food for members, and this was followed by a Tea Dance.
We were made so welcome that the evening of our last visit to the Club was a sad one, but we have happy memories of our time with the 1200th Branch.
Any members who find themselves in the Adelaide area can be assured of a warm welcome there.
Howard Cload, Newton, Swansea, W. Glamorgan.
Battle of Britain Memorial
There have veen ‘snippets’ in the national press of a possible impressive memorial to be sited on the cliffs above Dover to commemorate the Battle of Britain.
As an ex-member of 64 Squadron I would appreciate this recognition of a memorable period of RAF history.
However, as we ex-Service members are constantly involved in appealing to the genral public for financial donations to our appeals, would it not be prudent to keep the expense of any such memorial to the minimum?
A well-equipped sheltered housing scheme or rest home, suitably named ‘Battle of Britain House’ could well serve the same purpose.
Any comments from our members?
H W (JB) Priestley, Morecambe 
I'm alive and to prove it I'm here
You may be interested in an event that happened to me after our Remembrance Service at East Kirkby early this July.
In 1944 our Lancaster of 57 Sqn, piloted by Flt Lt Bulcraig was shot down on a raid on Revigny, Northern France, killing the pilot, Bomb Aimer Fg Off Robson, Flt Eng Sgt Gale and W/Op Sgt Loughlin.
Sgt Taylor, the mid-upper gunner and myself, the rear gunner, were evaders for three months until liberated by the Americans.
Our navigator, Fg Off Ruston was taken prisoner.
You can imagine my surprise when looking around the Lancaster hangar at the display boards, I came across a copy of Flt Lt Bulcraig's DFM citation, with a typed caption stating that our pilot had been killed with all his crew!
Fred Panton who owns the East Kirkby museum will be correcting this error with the complete story of what happened.
He said I was the healthiest ghost he'd ever seen!
L E S Manning, Sudbury, Suffolk.
Wings Co-operation
Your editorial on page one of the Summer 1991 issue prompted me to record the following thoughts which have a direct bearing on the subject of active participation.
Having collected for Wings Appeal at a number of sites (railway stations, house-to-house, town centres, London) over the years it is apparent that the collection rate per hour varies quite significantly from point to point.
The prime site out of the above-mentioned locations is, in my experience, London, and the worst the railway stations, but there are far better places than even the City of London and I have been made aware that the airports are an example of sites that fall into this category.
The organisation that is demonstrated by the London collection deserves a marking of 10 out of 10 but there must be many more collection points in the country that deserve similar consideration by ‘the centre’.
The initial setting up could be carried out by them and then circularised to the nearest branches some time before September in order for the most capable branch to make an offer for the franchise.
The contracting branch could then, if necessary, seek the support of smaller neighbouring branches/organisations who are not able to mount a major collection project.
There are many members who are uncomfortable shaking a can in public but would be more than willing to man a City of London style distribution, counting and recording centre while the enthusiastic collectors stretch themselves to the limit.
A greater co-operation between branches to units in covering prime sites should increase collection returns and at the same time remove any parochial attitudes.
Peter Harper, Hitchin, Herts.
ALBUM
The de Havilland Mosquito T MkIII (G-ASKH) that belongs to BAe.
During its service life it served in Egypt, Aden and Nairobi as well as in the UK (eg at No 204 AFS, Driffield).
The code letters are spurious, dating from this aircraft's film star days with ‘633 Sqn’.
(photo Darryl Cott ).
The de Havilland Mosquito MkIV, DK 338, photographed December 1942.
The de Havilland Hornet.
TT202 was, in fact, a Sea Hornet used in manufacturer's trials and at RAF Farnborough.
The Hornet could reach speeds of about 474mph and was the fastest piston-engined aircraft to serve with the RAF.
This fine portrayal of the Short Stirling is by John Young.
It is one of the 12 excellent pictures by this artist that is featured in the 1992 RAF Museum Calendar.
BOOKS
The Battle Re-thought.
A Symposium on the Battle of Britain.
Joint Editors: H. Probert & S Cox.
(Airlife Publishing £15).
To mark the 50th Anniversary of the Battle, the RAF Historical Society and the RAF Staff College convened a joint seminar at Brackness in June 1990.
This book (103pp) contains the edited texts of the main talks, and a digest of what was said in the discussion groups.
These groups addressed The System, The Tactics, Intelligence, The Commanders, The Strategy and Writing the History.
Reading the book gives you a picture of wiath number of BoB participants think about these topics, and also what a number of learned air historians have concluded on the same subjects.
Inevitably the symposium brought out some conflicting opinions (there were 300 people present!) but that is what makes the book interesting.
This is recommended reading for all those who think the interpretation of facts is simple matter!
The Green Fields and the Sky.
The History of RAF Cottesmore.
Norman Roberson & Jack Talliss.
(Obtainable from RAF Cottesmore, Oakham, Leics LE15 7B1 £10.99 + £1.95 p&p.
Cheques payable to RAF Cottesmore Nonpas).
Written by two RAF officers this 127pp book provides an interesting ans well illustrated history of this airfield which was opened in 1938, and which was home to such units as 14 OTU, 1668 HCU as well as various squadrons of Canberras, Victors and Vulcans.
Since 1981, Cottesmore has accommodated the Tri-National Tornado Training Establishment.
The station featured in a number of important historical events, such as the 1,000 bomber raid on Cologne, and Operation Market (the use of airborne troops to take the bridges over the Meuse, Waal and Rhine).
Five appendices add useful historical date to the commentary.
Proceeds from the sale of the book go to the RAF Benevolent Fund.
The Bomber Battle for Berlin.
John Searby.
(Airlife Publishing £13.95)
The late John Searby was very well qualified to write this story for he commanded 106 Sqn and 83 (Pathfinder) Sqn in nightly raids over Germany, and was the Master Bomber on the Peenemunde raid.
He describes two raids on Berlin at different stages of the conflict, but, more than that, he puts them into the general context of Bomber Command's war over Germany.
There are nicely balanced views about the great commanders — Harris, Cochrane and Bennett — with careful avoidance of the temptation to be smart after the event.
This is surely a slice of history shown as it really was, and all who served with Bomber Command will be delighted that John Searby recorded their courageous efforts so well.
Middleton VC.
Stuart Bill.
(Published by S & L Bill, 18 Pollina Street, East Bentleigh, Victoria, Australia 3165. ($31.60 inc postage)).
This is the story of Flt Sgt R H Middleton, RAAF, who was posthumously awarded the VC following a raid on Turin while captaining a Stirling of No 149 Squadron.
Well researched, the book covers Ron Middleton's life from his schooldays in Australia to his gallant death off the coast of Kent in November 1942.
Vivid pictures are presented of Middleton's training in Australia, Canada and the UK, and of life on wartime bomber airfields.
It is a moving story that leaves one marvelling not only at the bravery of Middleton himself but that fate had brought so many courageous men together in the one crew.
Further Along the Path.
H A Owens.
(Published by the author, and obtainable from him at 1, Eva Road, Cheadle Heath, Stockport, Cheshire SK3 OSX. £6.25).
This sequel to the author's ‘Nightmare Towards the Path’ deals with his experiences while with the Desert Air Force in WWII.
There is a thread of spiritualism and mysticism.
Eagle's Wings.
The Autobiography of a Luftwaffe Pilot.
Hajo Herrmann.
(Airlife Publishing Ltd. £15.95).
The style and the political and military viewpoints of Hajo Herrmann are what might be expected from one who was an officer cadet in the German army of 1934, a founder member of the Condor Legion in Spain, a proposer of suicidal ramming of Allied bombers and a confidant of Herrmann Goering.
A patriot or a fanatic?
Who knows.
There have been relatively few books written by senior officers of ‘the other side’, and this certainly provides a commentary that will interest historians of the 1939–1945 air war.
Beyond the Dams to the Tirpitz.
Alan Cooper.
(Goodall Publications Ltd. £3.50).
This is a paperback edition of a book that first appeared about eight years ago, and it tells the story of 617 Sqn after the dams raid had taken place.
It is a well-researched book — it lists hundreds of sources (including Air Mail!) at the back, and there are some interesting appendices.
While I would have liked to have seen a bit more about 9 Sqn's contribution to the Tirpitz attacks, I appreciate that this is a book about 617 Sqn.
Three Stripes and Four Brownings.
Bill Jackson.
(Published by Turner-Warwick Publications, Box 1029, North Battleford, Saskatchewan, S9A 3E6.
(Canadian $25.95)).
This book came out about a year ago but merits a mention because the subject matter will interest quite a number of our members.
Bill Jackson was a rear gunner of 218 (Gold Coast) Sqn operating Stirlings out of RAF Downham Market.
This is more than a book about a rear gunner, however; it is a factual account of a bomber crew, and, written with an unpretentious style, it is both easy to read and hard to put down.
Ironically, bearing in mind the casualty statistics of rear gunners, ‘Jacko’ was the sole survivor of the crew — perhaps because the aircraft crashed while flying too low over enemy territory.
Rear gunners have written some good books — remember ‘Revs’ Rivaz' ‘Tail Gunner’?
I am glad that Bill Jackson's wife (an ex-Waaf) persuaded him to write the book, and that her beautiful little poem about P-Peter's crew is included.
The Forgotten Bomber.
Graham Warner.
(Patrick Stephens £17.50).
This is the story of the Bristol Blenheim that was so painstakingly restored by Graham Warner and his team of enthusiasts, only to be destroyed so soon afterwards in a crash.
All the drama of this tragedy is told in a book that is always interesting, and which is exceptionally well illustrated.
There are enough accounts of Blenheim operations to put things into historical perspective, while the detailed description of the restoration project enables one to understand how mortified all felt when human error undid years of endeavour in a few seconds.
The second restoration is underway, however, and there can be no greater tribute to the determination and resilience of Graham Warner and his team than that fact.
It seems most fitting that the qualities of the Blenheim's wartime crews are being perpetuated by such people.
Aircraft for the Few.
The RAF's Fighters and Bombers in 1940.
Michael J F Bowyer.
(Patrick Stephens £17.50).
This is an invaluable new reference book, listing the serial numbers, by squadron, not only of the fighters and bombers of 1940, but of such lesser favourites as the Lerwick and Botha, for example.
There are some very good photographs and some intriguing snippets of information — Michael Bowyer tells how the Operational Requirement that led to the Hampden and Wellington specified that the aircraft should have folding wings for hangar storage!
The book provides a nice blend of information and entertainment, and gives the reader a broader appreciation of RAF aircraft of 1940 than other publications.
The American Airman in Europe.
Roger Freeman.
(Arms & Armour £16.95).
Roger Freeman is a most knowledgeable writer on all things to do with the machines, units and  campaigns of the USAAF in WWII.
This latest book turns the spotlight on the human aspects and it offers excellent entertainment.
Well-chosen stories are illustrated with some interesting photographs.
While this is not a reference book, it complements well those that Roger Freeman has written — and should interest an even wider audience.
Aftermath.
Along the Way…
One Man's War and Peace (1940–1990).
Graham Burrell.
(Published by A.H.
Stockwell Ltd. £9.50).
Graham Burrell was a Wop/AG with 114 Sqn (Blenheims), then he was posted to India, serving with 152 OTU and 215 Sqn.
In 1949 he crashed at Tangmere in a Wellington, suffered burns, and after treatment at the East Grinstead Queen Victoria Hospital, left the RAF to become a night time telephone operator and union Branch Secretary.
The story is not an easy one to follow, particularly as it goes back and forth in time, and locations change quickly.
The Guinness Book of Military Blunders.
Geoffrey Regan.
(Guiness Publishing £11.99).
A book with a title like this has to be full of choice bits of information that confirm what most of us who have been in the Services have always known — that high-ranking officers can do the daftest things.
This has been so for centuries, and afflicts all nations.
Could we not have all guessed that Lt Col Custer (he gave himself the rank of general) came 34th out of the class of 34 at West Point.
Sir Kinsley Wood, Secretary for Air, is reported to have responded in September 1939 to a plan to burn the Black Forest with ‘Are you aware it is private property?
Why you will be asking me to bomb Essen next.’
This book should appeal to all with a sense of humour and an appreciation of the ridiculous.
Possibly a good choice for a Christmas gift for it will amuse a wide readership.
The War That Never Was.
AVM A G Dudgeon.
(Airlife £16.95).
This is an excellent book about the defeat of the Iraqi army that was sent to capture the RAF base at Habbaniya in 1941.
This army, with German backing, and supported by the Iraqi Air Force, was defeated by the men of No.4 FTS, which was the unit stationed at Habbaniya, and which was equipped with Audax and Oxford aircraft.
It is a story of courage and of improvisation that made a nonsense of the enemy's numerical and material superiority.
There are no photographs to illustrate this important victory achieved over five days — presumably because everyone was too busy working at staying alive to take pictures — but the Frank Wootton dust jacket is evocative.
Journeys Into Night.
Don Charlwood.
(Hudson Hawthorn £9.95).
The author of No Moon Tonight (which was about 103 Sqn at Elsham Wolds) has just produced another most interesting book.
It is a factual memoir of 20 young Australian airmen who trained in Canada as navigators before most went to Bomber Command.
Three quarters of the group were killed.
Their letters and diaries have been threaded together to provide a fresh perspective on the lives of young airmen during times when their survival statistics were grim.
Don Charlwood survived 30 ops and is well qualified to bring their stories together.
Wings of War Over Gwynedd.
Aviation in Gwynedd during WWII.
Roy Sloan.
(Published by Gwasg Carreg Gwalch, Capel Garman, Llanrwst, Gwynedd, Wales LL26 0RL. £5.00).
If you served at RAF Valley, Mona, Bodorgan, Llandrog, Penrhos, Hell's Mouth, Llanbedr or Tywyn, or if you would like to know more of the aviation heritage of North Wales, you might well find Roy Sloan's researches to be of special interest.
A considerable amount of detail covering the war years is contained within the 190 pages of this book, which also has a number of illustrations.
And We Thought the War Was Over.
David Lee.
(Thomas Harmsworth £15.95).
It does not seem generally known that for more than a year after VJ Day more than 120,000 Allied POWs were kept in internment camps in Java.
Indonesian opposition to their release was intense, and, to make matters worse, the exact locations of many camps was not known.
Air Chief Marshal Sir David Lee, then a Group Captain commanding 904 Wing, took over the airfield at Kemajoran which was to play a key role in the repatriation of POWs and internees.
This book sheds some light on events that deserve to be better known as for many the months that elapsed proved fatal.
Wings — and Other Things…
Hugh Lynch-Blosse.
(Square One Publications.
£8.95).
The author says in the Foreward that this is the story of a very ordinary RAF General Duties Officer and Pilot.
That may be self-effacing, but the honesty and humour with which this autobiography is laced make it entertaining.
Who, anyway, would want to read an autobiography of someone who saw himself as God's gift to aviation and the RAF in particular?
Digressions are numerous, but never irritating and the story is entertaining.
Flying Aerobatics.
R T Bowring.
(Aviation Theory Centre, 131 Nelson Place, Williamstown, Vic.
3016, Australia.
£15).
Written by an ex-Halton apprentice/RAF Central Flying School graduate, this manual explains the basic manoeuvres in simple language and with many diagrams.
It is a practical guide for the beginner — or for those who have never been taught the proper way!
Difficult to read without moving hands and feet!
Voice From the Stars.
Tom Scotland.
(Published and distributed by T & L Scotland, 18 Eastbourne St., Lynwood, 6155 Western Australia.
£11 inc postage, £14 airmail).
Tom Scotland flew 62 ops from Italy with a Pathfinder squadron (614); his autobiography is a story of his search for truth, for something that would enable him to make sense out of all the destruction and chaos that was a part of wartime life.
It is also an emotional story, notably when Tom revisits Devil's Glen, near Leeds, which was where he crash-landed a burning Halifax in 1943.
Pilot Officer Prune's Picture Parade!
Bill Hooper.
(HMSO £7.95)
This is a colourful and amusing 56 pages of cartoons and anecdotes.
Indeed, even if you find Prune a bit of a bore you could find the stories behind the character and the ‘finger’ awards entertaining and funny.
Colourful and with good artwork, this would make an appropriate Christmas present for anyone who has laughed with the RAF at some time.
Bob Doe — Fighter Pilot.
Wg Cdr Bob Doe DSO DFC.
(Spellmount Ltd. £15.95).
One of the highest scoring fighter pilots of the Battle of Britain, Bob Doe has written an interesting book that goes a good deal further than describing some of his exploits in the Battle.
One of its five chapters is about those epic times, while others describe Bob Doe's experiences in the Middle and Far East.
Finally he talks of the trials and tribulations of garage management.
It adds up to a picture of a man in a wider context that just as a fighter pilot.
Happy Is the Day.
A Spitfire Pilot's Story.
Tom Slack.
(United Writers Publications Ltd £9.50).
Quite different from any other Spitfire pilot's story, this ex-41 Sqn pilot has written a racey and humorous account of his 1940–45 experiences — which has also illustrated with his own skilfully drawn cartoons.
Tom Slack's sense of fun effectively camouflages the dramas and dangers he endured as a pilot, as an escaper and ultimately as a POW.
The reader is never bored — but could be disappointed that the book does not go beyond its 120 pages.
Good value.
Videos…
Red Nine.
The Red Arrows.
RA2 Aviation Video Library.
This is about the pilots who make up this famous aerobatic team, and it focuses on the three new pilots who join it each year.
It is an excellent video that does much more than just show the superb display that the public expects from these professionals.
The photography and commentary are of high standard.
Wings of Thunder.
Simitar SUK60022 (£10).
Excellent filming of precision aerobatics feature in this dramatically titled video.
Included is the US Navy Flight Demonstration Team, The Blue Angels, flying their F-18 Hornets in characteristically very tight formation.
There is, however, an ‘original sizzling rock sound track’— you have been warned!
Hell in the Skies.
Simitar SUK24002 (£10).
The Italian Air Force's display team suffered a terrible accident in August 1988 while performing over the Ramstein Air Force base in West Germany.
The accident happened when the team was carrying out the ‘Arrow through the Heart’ manoeuvre.
This video shows a typical display and a part of the Ramstein performance, together with ‘computer enhancement’ of the accident.
The pictures of the disaster are not, however, very clear.
Talking books…
Durban's Lady in White.
We have had early notification from Sam Morley of Aedificamus Press that plans are in hand to publish this excellent book, the autobiography of Perla Seidle Gibson, as a Talking Book.
Thousands who heard her singing to the troopships passing through Durban remember ‘The Lady in White’, and there will be many who will appreciate the opportunity of hearing her story through the medium of audio tape.
A review will be undertaken when a copy of the recording is available; Sam Morley (0707 872720) can provide more information.
Seeing Life from A New Angle.
R C Bowers.
(Courtney Books, Road End Cottage, Stockland, Honiton, Devon EX14 9LJ. £6.95).
This is the tale of 575237 Bowers R C, an ex-Halton apprentice who served for 38 years with the RAF before retiring as Wing Commander Engineer.
It is a tale full of interest, and it reveals an attitude to work and to the Service that makes pleasant reading (unhappily some authors give the impression they had a less than fulfilling time while in the RAF).
Was service as an airman in the Middle East and India is graphically described, as are a number of post war assignments of great variety covering a multitude of aircraft from Meteors and Javelins to rocket-assisted Valiants!
Probably unintentionally, Ron Bowers has written an excellent recruiting bookk for the RAF Engineering Branch, but it will interest all ex-brats…and many more besides.
Royal Air Force Woodvale.
The First Fifty Years.
Aldon P Ferguson.
(Airfield Publications Ltd. £10).
It is fifty years since this ‘temporary’ RAF station became operational — and it is still in use.
Aldon Ferguson tells the Woodvale story with affection, and his bood is particularly well illustrated.
Irvin Caterpillar Club
There has apparently been some misunderstanding about the future of this Club and we have been asked to reassure members that the Club is continuing and that eligibility remains as before.
The authorised Secretary of the Club is Mrs J Adams at Irvin Great Britain Ltd, Icknield Way, Letchworth, Herts SG6 1EU.
News from the RAF Benevolent Fund
The Great Haggis Shoot
The ‘Glorious Twelfth’ signalled the start of the first ‘Haggis Shoot’of the season — a kindly alternative to the usual grouse.
The competition between three teams — local sportsmen, the 15th Parachute Brigade and RAF Leuchars took place in the Kingdom of Fife and raised money for the RAF Benevolent Fund and The Airborne Initiative Appeal.
The day continued with six haggis and six bottles of famous Grouse Whisky being flown to RAF Leuchars, then whisked to RAE Farnborough in a Tornado.
Standing by, were six Red Devils from the Parachute Regiment who were flown by helocopter to their drop point above the Thames, close to the Savoy Hotel in London.
After parachuting into the Thames with their precious cargo, the Red Devils were quickly recovered by members of the MOD Police Marine Unit and escorted to the Savoy by a Shetland pony, Sgt Pegasus, the Regimental Mascot of the Parachute Regiment!
Waiting the meet them were ACM Sir Brendan Jackson, RAF, Lt Gen Sir Michael Gray, Col Cmdt, Parachute Regiment and Maitre Chef des Cuisines Anton Endelman.
Sponsors and guests were invited to estimate the exact time of the flight of the Haggis from the Sandford Hotel, Fife to The Savoy.
The correct answer — two hours and 30 seconds and the final amount raised is expected to be in the region of £11,000.
‘Battle of Britain’ Wins
In 1990 the Sunday Mirror and Sporting Life ran a competition to win a racehorse for a year; the horse was a two-year-old colt by the name of ‘Battle of Britain’.
The competition raised nearly £4,000 for the RAF Benevolent Fund.
‘Battle of Britain’ made his racing debut at Wolverhampton in April 1991 and since then, the colt trained in Lancashire by Jack Berry, has certainly proved to be winner as the photograph shows.
Supersonic Strength
A Concorde tug was the brainchild of PC Bob Gilbert based at Maidstone, Kent who also happens to be a member of the Vulcan Association.
Teams from RAF Manston and Kent policemen pulled a Concorde along the runway at RAF Manston, to raise funds for the Vulcan Association and the RAF Benevolent Fund.
The pull was made on to a slightly uphill gradient and into the wind, in spite of this a record breaking 100 metres was reached in 40.8 seconds at a speed of 4.5 mph.
The 95 ton Concorde's usual air cruising speed is 1,340 mph!
Alan Munro powers ‘Battle of Britain’ to victory in the EBF Saffron Maiden Stakes at Lingfield in June 1991.
(Photo Ronald Frain)
Dutch children at Arnhem (Oosterbeek) War Cemetery, the Netherlands.
Tailfin
Now go round and try that again!
Gp Capt R C Hockey sent Air Mail the excellent photograph of what happened at Kinloss on a dark night in October 1943 when an Anson was approaching to land at the same time — and on the same bit of field — as a Whitley was just starting its take-off run.
The photograph was found in an album made up by the late Sqn Ldr G Beeby.
Apparently nobody was injured in this freak accident.
Whitleys must have had pretty strong undercarriages and Ansons unbending props.
Any similarities with the picture above…are purely coincidental, but P J Ferry of the Penarth Branch through we should meet the latest recruit to 1148 (Penarth) ATC.
This is a goat, who because her main duty is to keep the grass in check around the HQ has been named ‘Flymo’.
Cadet Diana Grant is not playing the part of a Whitley, but would have us believe she is playing the part of a mountain.
CWO Simon Grant holds Flymo's lead which seems to be tied to the HQ drainpipe.
One fact we do know about this versitile act is that 1148 (Penarth) ATC each year provide tremendous help with the branch Wings Appeal.
Keep up the excellent work — but don't let Flymo eat the money!
After the auction Joint Services Public Relations, HQ British Forces Cyprus have thoughtfully sent us information about those recently retired Shakletons.
Four of the five remaining were auctioned off by Sotheby's, two going to Cypriot businessman Savvas Constantinides (who paid £110,000 for the two and who plans an aviation museum in either Pathos or Nicosia) and two (WR963 and WL790) are now in Coventry, owned by the Shackleton Preservation Society.
The fifth (W756) is at RAF St Mawgan where it will be broken up.
Cpl.
Bob Stonehouse, JSPRS, took the photograph of WL747 flying along the coastline near Episkopi on its way to say goodbye to the RAF and to join WL757 at Paphos.
On each flight to Cyprus six groundcrew were on board to cope with any problems encountered en route and to remove the avionics not included in the sale.
It may seem early for Air Mail to wish readers a happy Christmas!
This, however, is what we do, together with a big ‘Thank you’ for all the news and views that you've given us in 1991.
We look forward to hearing from you in 1992!
Central Headquarters 43 Grove Park Road, Chiswick, London W4 3RX Telephone: 081–994 8504
R.A.F.A. Residential Home — Sussexdown
Sussexdown is situated nine miles from Worthing and stands in seven acres of grounds.
It was originally built as a private residence and the Association bought the home in 1962.
It has been converted to provide accommodation for up to 60 chronically sick or severely disabled residents.
A small number of convalescent cases can also be accommodated.
Sussexdown is a happy place, run by caring staff who provide a full 24-hour nursing service, physiotherapy and occupational therapy.
The aim of Sussexdown is to enable the residents to enjoy as full, varied and independent a life as is possible given their disabilities.
Although the DSS is able to assist in meeting some of the costs of residents, the large part of the costs is met from welfare funds raised by the Association.
No one is turned away because of a lack of means.
R.A.F.A. Convalescent Home — Richard Peck House
Richard Peck House was opened in 1958.
The house is situated in the seaside resort of St. Anne's-on-Sea in Lancashire and is only a short walk from the beach.
Richard Peck House provides a convalescence not readily available through the NHS for serving or ex-Service personnel or their dependants.
Convalescents can be accompanied by their spouse who can also benefit from the rest and relaxation provided.
The House can accommodate up to 22 persons and offers a very high standard of comfort.
Richard Peck House has earned a reputation as one of the finest convalescent homes in the country and those who stay there return home rested and restored to good health.
The costs of convalescence are normally met in part by individual or Branch contributions and in part by the welfare funds raised by the Association.
No one is turned away because of a lack of means.
R.A.F.A. Sheltered Housing — Storrington, Bolton and Moffat
The Association's sheltered housing schemes at Storrington in Sussex, Bolton in Lancashire and Moffat in Scotland enable residents to live independent lives but with support from an on-site warden should they have any difficulties.
The sheltered housing is close to local amenities to allow residents easy access for shops and other facilities.
The residents are able to enjoy the privacy of their own accommodation together with the communal facilities offered within these projects.
Importantly, the comradeship of Service life can be continued into retirement and the welfare support of the Association and other Service charities can be readily and swiftly available.
Eagle Lodge
The aim of an Eagle Lodge is to provide supportive housing for single, elderly ex-Air Force persons, encouraging independence within a caring environment, thereby overcoming the problem of loneliness which affects so many in old age.
The Association has recently purchased a large, detached house in a residential area of Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire.
Within easy reach of the town centre and on a frequent bus route, Wexford House stands in a large garden which will afford a pleasant area for future residents.
The house will be converted, to provide eight single flatlets with private facilities together with communal rooms and a self-contained flat for the housekeeper.
Residents will be provided with two main meals each day and a ‘Care-Call’ alarm system will be installed.
The intention is that the housing will be self-funding once initial capital costs have been met.
DSS support of individuals will be sought where applicable.
The Royal Air Forces Association
This leaflet is designed to tell you about the Association and how to join.
The Association is a registered charity incorporated under Royal Charter.
Its primary aims are comradeship and welfare.
The Association has over 100,000 members and some 600 Branches worldwide.
Nearly 200 of these Branches have clubs.
Membership is open to serving and ex-Service men and women of all ranks who serve or have served in one of Her Majesty's Air Forces.
The Association's welfare support is not confined to its membership but extends also to serving and ex-Air Force non-members and their dependants.
The Association has its headquarters in London and nine area offices in the UK.
It maintains a residential home for the disabled, a convalescent home and sheltered housing developments.
The Association has both full-time and voluntary welfare workers who assess individuals in need of help, referring many to the RAF Benevolent Fund for financial support.
In this way, the Association provides a field force of welfare workers for the Benevolent Fund and the two complementary organisations work closely together.
The full-time welfare workers of the Association also represent individuals at War Pension Tribunals.
We Need You
Over recent years both the Association and the RAF Benevolent Fund have experienced an increase in welfare casework and this is also reflected by the other ex-Service charities.
It is expected that this trend will continue at least until the turn of the century: indeed forecasts suggest that between now and the year 2000, the 70 year old ex-Service population will nearly double, while by the end of that period some 500,000 ex-RAF personnel will be over 80 years old.
At the same time, recent Social Security legislation reflects a shift in Government policy which places a greater responsibility on the community and on charities.
We therefore have to assume a future of substantially increasing welfare need combined with a decrease in government support.
The key issues for the future of the Association are sustaining the number of voluntary welfare workers and their helpers and giving them the financial and other support they need to deal with both increasing and more complex welfare needs.
We need your help and support in this vital work.
Joining the Association
If you have served for 3 months or more in Her Majesty's Royal Air Forces you are entitled to apply for membership of the Royal Air Forces Association.
If you wish to join, you should complete the membership form below and send it to The Royal Air Forces Association, 43 Grove Park Road, Chiswick, London W4 3RX,together with your remittance for the appropriate membership fee.
If you wish to pay by Bankers Order then please complete the form below and send that to the RAFA with your membership application form.
The application form provides an opportunity for you to join your local Branch.
If you are unsure which branch is nearest to you, just put in your local town and your name and address will be passed to your nearest Branch.
If you do not wish to join a Branch you may join the Central Headquarters membership roll.
Please indicate your choice on the form.
The Association needs you and can help you.
It needs you to sustain its welfare work and it can help you by providing comradeship and support.
Join your Association now.
The Royal Air Forces Association
The Royal Air Forces Association is a Registered Charity with a membership of 110,000 and over 600 branches worldwide.
Its welfare activities extend to all serving and ex-Air Forces men and women and their dependants, backed by full-time and voluntary helpers working closely with the RAF Benevolent Fund.
The Association maintains a Home for the disabled, one for convalescents and three Sheltered Housing schemes.
The full time Welfare Officers of the Association represents individuals at War Pension Tribunals, and offer professional advice on legal matters and housing, as well as handling day to day welfare problems.
Last year only voluntary Welfare Officer alone, made over 102 domiciliary visits.
He is just one of our 600 voluntary Welfare Officers in this country and overseas who help us with our work.
The Association is becoming increasingly involved in welfare work, as the needs of those who survived World War II become more urgent.
Welfare trends
Over recent years both the Association and the RAF Benevolent Fund have experienced an increase in welfare casework and this is also reflected by the other ex-Service charities.
It is expected that this trend will continue at least until the turn of the century; indeed forecasts suggest that between now and the year 2000, the 70 year old ex-Service population will nearly double, while by the end of that period some 500,000 ex-RAF personnel will be over 80 years old.
At the same time, recent Social Service legislation reflects a shift in Government policy.
In considering priorities for the future it would be sensible to assume a substantial increase in welfare need combined with a decrease in government support.
The key issues for the future are how to sustain the number of voluntary welfare workers and their helpers, and give them the support they need to deal with both increasing and more complex welfare needs.
RAFA residential home — Sussexdown at Storrington
Sussexdown is situated at Storrington, nine miles from Worthing, and stands in seven acres of grounds.
It was originally built as a private residence, and the Association bought the home in 1962.
It has been converted to provide accommodation for up to 60 chronically sick or severely disabled residents.
A small number of convalescent and recuperative holidays can be arranged.
Sussexdown is a happy place, run by caring staff who provide a full 24-hour nursing service, physiotherapy and occupational therapy.
The aim of Sussexdown is to enable the residents to enjoy as full, varied and independent a life as is possible given their disabilities.
Although the DSS is able to assist in meeting some of the costs of residents, the larger part of the costs are met from welfare funds raised by the Association, and from donations to the Home.
No one is turned away because of a lack of means.
Extract from a letter received from a disabled resident at Sussexdown ‘It really is a privilege to be in such a lovely place, and to be so well cared for, there can't, I'm sure, be another Home like it in the whole of Britain.’
RAFA Convalescent Home — Richard Peck House
Richard Peck House was opened in 1958.
The House is situated in the seaside resort of St Annes-on-Sea, in Lancashire, and is only a short walk from the beach.
Richard Peck House provides convalescence not readily available through the NHS, for serving or ex-Service personnel or their dependants.
Convalescents can be accompanied by their spouse, who can also benefit from the rest and relaxation provided.
The House can accommodate up to 22 persons, and offers a very high standard of comfort.
Richard Peck House has earned a reputation as one of the finest Convalescent Homes in the Country, and those who stay there return home rested and restored to good health.
The costs of convalescence are normally met in part by individual or Branch contributions, and in part by the welfare funds raised by the Association.
Again, no one is turned away because of a lack of means.
Extract from a letter received from an ex-member of the Womens Royal Air Force after a period of convalescence at Richard Peck House ‘It was my good fortune to be given a period of convalescence at Richard Peck House after major surgery.
It was so nice and restful there with everyone being so kind.
I have returned home feeling much better and of course, will be ever so grateful to the Association.
I find it very comforting to know the Association is there when I need help and advice.’
R.A.F.A. Sheltered Housing — Storrington, Bolton & Moffat
The Association's sheltered housing schemes at Storrington in Sussex, Bolton in Lancashire and Moffat in Scotland, enable residents to live independent lives, but with support from an on-site warden should they have any difficulties.
The sheltered housing is close to local amenities to allow residents easy access to shops and other facilities.
The residents are able to enjoy the privacy of their own accommodation, together with the communal facilites offered within these projects.
Significantly, the comradeship of Service life can be continued into retirement and the welfare support of the Association and other Service Charities can be readily and swiftly available.
Eagle Lodge
The aim of an Eagle Lodge is to provide supportive housing for single, elderly ex-Air Force persona, encouraging independence within a caring family environment, thereby overcoming the problems of loneliness which affects so many in old age.
The Association has recently purchased a large, detached house in a residential area of Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire.
Within each reach of the town centre and on a frequent bus route, Wexford House stands in a large garden which will afford a pleasant area for future residents.
The house will be converted, to provide eight single flatlets with private facilities together with communal rooms and a self-contained flat for the flatkeeper.
Resident will be provided with two main meals each day and a ‘Care-Call’ alarm system will be installed.
The intention is that the housing will be self-funding once initial capital costs have been met.
DSS support of individuals will be sought where applicable.
Why you should make a Will
THE IMPORTANCE OF LEGACIES TO THE ROYAL AIR FORCES ASSOCIATION
The income we receive form legacies is used to support our extensive welfare facilities which include a residential home for the disabled, convalescent homes and sheltered housing.
Recently we have developed supportive homes for elderly and frail ex-R.A.F. men and women.
The need for these continues to grow.
SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Why make a Will?
There are many good reasons.
Peace of mind, adequate provision for family and friends, and the knowledge that one's wishes will be carried out.
Ensure that you are the one to decide what will happen to everything you own.
If you consult a Solicitor, making a will is a simple procedure.
What will happen if I don't make a Will?
If you die entestate, the law decides how your Estate will be sorted out.
This can be an expensive and lengthy business.
The legal costs will be paid from your Estate so there will be less to divide between relatives and other beneficiaries.
But I haven't anything worth leaving!
Many people imagine this.
Just sit down for few minutes, you are probably worth more than you think.
Could I save money and write my own will?
‘Home-made-Wills’ can create more problems than they solve.
Unless you have legal experience you may find that what you have written is open to misinterpretation.
Can I change my Will?
Yes.
You can change your Will, or made a new one, as often as you wish although your Solicitor will have to charge a fee each time.
This is especially important if you marry, divorce or re-marry.
A change is added to your will as a Codicil.
This is a separate document which must be signed and witnessed in the correct legal manner.
The Tax Advantages
Reducing Tax Liability
Legacies made to a registered charity are free from inheritance tax.
This can reduce the tax liability on the estate, and can mean that money which might otherwise go to the taxman will be used instead to support a worthwhile cause of your choosing.
For example, supposing your estate is worth £10,000 more than the tax threshold.
If Inheritance Tax is 40% at the time of your death, normally £4,000 (40%) would be payable in tax.
But if you were to make a legacy of £10,000 to the Royal Air Forces Association or any other registered charity, the notional value of your estate would be reduced by that amount — so in this case there would be no tax to pay.
You would have put £10,000 towards a good cause — but it would only have cost you £6,000, because you would have saved the rest in tax.
A LEGACY MADE OUT IN FAVOUR OF A CHARITY COULD WELL BE THE ANSWER.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO HELP THE ROYAL AIR FORCES ASSOCIATION WITH A LEGACY?
Further advice can be given by completing and posting the coupon below.
The Royal Air Forces Association Appeals Department Portland Road, Malvern Worcestershire.
WR14 2TA
I am interested in leaving a bequest to RAFA and would like to obtain further details of how I can help.
Name
Address
Forms of Bequest
There are different ways of helping the work of The Royal Air Forces Association.
You may bequeath your Entire Estate, a Specific Sum of Money, Specific Property, or all or part of the Residue of your Estate — or even make a Conditional Bequest in the event that another potential beneficiary pre-deceases you.
All these can be covered quite simply by writing into your Will wording such as:
Bequest of Entire Estate
I GIVE my estate free of all taxes and duties to the Royal Air Forces Association (Registered charity No. 226686) whose Central Headquarters is at 43 Grove Park Road, Chiswick, London, W4 3RX and I declare that the receipt of the Treasurer or other proper officer for the time being of the said Association shall be sufficient discharge to my executors or trustees.
You can of course also:
A —
Bequest a sum of money
B —
Bequest specific property
C —
Residual Bequest (after providing for your family and friends)
D —
Conditional Bequest
All these can be covered by a simple set of wording in your Will which we would be happy to provide.
You many also direct your Legacy to a specific R.A.F.A. project or purpose
Many benefactors, especially those remembering lost loved ones, like to leave property, money or other possessions for the benefit of a particular Royal Air Forces Association home, project or fund.
We are onluy too pleased to respect such wishes whenever possible, and will gladly advise on the best way of wording a Will to ensure that the bequest is used for
*
Endowing a room or flat in a loved one's name
*
Providing extra amenities in a particular home
*
Funding mobility aids.
— or for some other specifically preferred purpose.
You may be interested to know that the name of every legator in recorded in a Book of Commemoration kept at our Headquarters.
Royal Air Forces Association
The Association has over 600 voluntary welfare workers throughout the U.K. who are able to help ex-serving R.A.F. personnel or their dependents.
A broad scope of care is available through the Association, which falls into three main categories:
residential and convalescent homes, housing and general welfare.
Full time welfare officers represent individuals at pension tribunals, and are able to offer professional advice on legal matters and housing.
The Association is experiencing an increase in welfare casework, particularly from those who served in the Air Force during the Second World War, and who are now elderly and in need of our support.
At the same time, the Association is finding it increasingly difficult to meet the requirements of all those who need our assistance.
Can you help us?
RAFA All Enquiries to:The Royal Air Forces Association Appeals Department Portland Road, Malvern, Worcestershire.
WR14 2TA Telephone: 0684 892505
Incorporated by Royal Charter Registered under the War Charities Act, 1940 & Charities Act, 1960 Charity Registration Number 226686
We need your help with tomorrow's world
Yesterday and today the Royal Air Forces Association provided care for elderly and disabled ex RAF men and women.
Please give your financial support to help them continue their work tomorrow.
RAFA BATTLE OF BRITAIN WINGS APPEAL
Please help by giving all you can for an emblem during Wings Week or send a donation to:
THE ROYAL AIR FORCES ASSOCIATION APPEALS DEPT.,(DS) PORTLAND ROAD, MALVERN, WORCESTERSHIRE.
WR14 2TA
I enclose a donation of — for the Wings Appeal.
Please debit my Credit Card no:
Name
Address
I am ex RAF, please send me details about membership (tick if required).
REPLY FORM
We are prepared to help by advertising your Wings Appeal and will use the following design:
Design A
Design B
Design C
Design D
Please supply final film/artwork in the following format:
Positive Film
Negative Film
Bromide
(Please tick one box)
100 lpi Screen
120 lpi Screen
133 lpi Screen
(Please tick one box)
Publication — Insertion Date — Copy Deadline —
We would/would not* like a full Press Pack to enable us to feature further details about your work in our publication.
(*Please delete as appropriate)
Please send the film/artwork to:
We will forward a voucher copy of above issue, showing the insert, as soon as possible.
Further requests…
Wings Appeal Publicity — Donated Space Appeal
We shall be grateful if you will donate space for any of the enclosed adverts in any of your publications, or ask advertisers to insert them as part of their own publicity.
If you require final, one piece film for any of the designs, then please fill in the attached reply paid card or telephone 0684 573665.
APPEALS DIRECTOR The Royal Air Forces Association FREEPOST Malvern Worcs.
WR14 1BR
Battle of Britain Wings Appeal
Hope is not enough
We need your help
‘Dramatic events in the Middle East proved once again the importance of the Royal Air Force as a fighting service.
Our RAF men and women have, as before, shown great spirit and courage.
Many RAF veterans are now fighting against the effects of disablement and illness.
Isn't it your turn to help them?
Please make a donation.’
 Patrick Moore CBE 
How last years donations were spent
How the money was spent from the 1990 Wings Appeal collection
A
RAFA Welfare Aid and Advisory Services
1.
Assistance in dealing with Pensions, Legal Problems, Housing, Employment Grants and General Welfare to ex RAF men, women & their families irrespective of membership
2.
Convalescent Homes and Home for the Permanently Disabled
3.
Returned to Branch Welfare Funds for Local Branch Welfare cases
B
Administrative
1.
Administrative and Publicity costs of the Appeal throughout Great Britain, Northern Ireland and Overseas
2.
Costs of Emblems and Equipment used, Printing etc. and Branch Expenses
TOTAL EXPENDITURE
Gross 1990 Wings Collection
Surplus*
*The surplus of income over expenditure will help to neet the heavy expenditure planned for the development of further supportive housing facilities for the elderly and frail.
If we are to continue to meet our welfare task, our target for the Wings Appeal must increase year by year.
How can you help the 1991 Wings Appeal
1.
Become a Member — If you have served in the Royal Air Forces you are eligible for membership.
Annual Membership costs only £5.00.
2.
Send a Donation — I enclose a donation of £—payable to the Royal Air Forces Association.
I would like to pay by Access/Visa Please debit my Account Signature
3.
Help the Appeal by — House to house collections during September Street collections during September Cinema collections Organising a fund raising event Providing Publicity opportunities Provide other assistance.
NAME ADDRESS
Please tick the relevant boxes if you require further details, or would like to make a donation or feel that you can help us and return this form to the appropriate address below.
Thank you.
FOR DONATIONS, DETAILS ON MEMBERSHIP AND GENERAL ENQUIRIES:
Appeals Department, The Royal Air Forces Association Portland Road, Malvern, Worcestershire.
WR14 2TA Telephone: 0684 892505.