

13 Doing it the Right way
HORACE TRUBRIDGE is the Musicians' Union Careers Adviser.
previously having been the project co-ordinator of the Hackney Agency for Music Marketing Action (HAMMA).
London's only free music business advice and information agency.
As a founder member, songwriter and saxophone player, Horace played in the 1950s-revivalist band Darts from 1975 to 1985. in the early 1980s he also ran an independent record company.
worked as a session player and appeared in West End shows.
From my experience in many areas of the music business, I offer my ‘gameplan’ for a band's success.
If this is followed, it should let bands progress as far as their creativity will allow.
This involves a lot of hard work.
But although graft is indispensable, it is no replacement for raw talent.
Along with luck, this is the scarce commodity which no one in the music business can manufacture and which everyone in the industry is looking for.
I wish you lots of both.
The Right Stuff
The British music business is extremely competitive and only the bands who are prepared to commit themselves totally to their careers will succeed.
When you are forming a band, try to make sure that everyone involved shares the same commitment and dedication.
You don't want to work hard for a year establishing your act, get offered a tour, and then find that your drummer won't give up his milk round.
Many bands break up because of personality clashes between musicians.
For instance, if there is a conflict between the vocalist and guitarist, you can't ignore it hoping that it will go away.
The chances are it will blow up into a huge row, or even a fight, just as you are about to go on stage at the Marquee.
If you all get on well and are prepared to make the same sacrifices to succeed, you might just be ‘the right stuff’.
Equipment and Band Economics
Adequate equipment is essential.
So often there is an imbalance in the quality of a band's gear.
For instance, the keyboard player may be using £5,000 worth of state-of-the-art technology while the bass guitarist is playing through a tired old AC30.
This shows that this band isn't working as a unit.
The keyboard player obviously cares more about advancing his or her career than the future of the band.
To buy the equipment you need, open a band bank account and put in whatever you can afford every week.
Probably, some band members will contribute more than others.
As long as proper written accounts are maintained, everyone can be paid back when the band begins to make money.
Also, keeping band accounts is useful to familiarize you with the practicalities of money coming in and going out.
If you never lose sight of this information, you should be able to guard against extortion by unscrupulous industry entrepreneurs.
Finally, try not to go wild with the amount of equipment you buy, because you can use money for other things.
For example, if you hadn't spent so much on a ‘super duper ’ multi-flange guitar pedal, you could have made a profit by having more band T-shirts on sale at your gigs.
The Band Sound
Every successful band has its own sound.
Whatever music they play, you always recognize the band's unique style.
This is the elusive quality which record companies look for.
To develop your band ‘sound’, you have to identify it.
If you rehearse in different rooms, setting up the equipment randomly, then it will take you a very long time to achieve this (the chances are you never will).
It is worthwhile to choose a rehearsal room which suits your music, and stick to it.
The first time you use the rehearsal room, spend as long as necessary setting up your equipment until each member of the band can hear themselves and everyone else clearly.
Then draw diagrams showing exactly where the gear is positioned, where the musicians and vocalists are standing, and what the levels are on the amps and the instruments.
From now on, every rehearsal should be arranged and set up in this way, so that your band will sound the same every time you rehearse.
With this method, you should be able to identify your band's strengths and weaknesses quite quickly, and to write and arrange accordingly.
Tape every rehearsal on a portastudio or cassette machine, and distribute copies of the tape amongst the band well in advance of the next rehearsal.
This gives each musician time to practise so that you all arrive at the rehearsal ready to try out new, revised musical parts.
Taping rehearsals also reduces the likelihood of arguments about who played what at the last rehearsal.
If you need someone to do the taping, either make it one musician's responsibility, or try to find    someone who would like to mix your sound at gigs.
At this stage you don't need an experienced sound engineer.
Enthusiasm and a willingness to learn are far more important, because working with a portastudio and a mixing desk in the rehearsal room will teach a novice engineer a lot about sound mixing.
The advantage of this is that when you start gigging, you have someone out front who knows your songs, and who can either mix your sound or at least keep an eye on the house engineer.
The Smiths
The Team around the Band
Ideally, your basic team should be a roadie and a sound engineer.
Your sound engineer should mix the out-front sound at every gig and attend rehearsals regularly to keep up with new material.
Your roadie should organize transport to gigs, getting your equipment in and out of venues and also attend to any on-stage problems which may come up when you are playing.
You may also have a manager who organizes the arrangements for gigs as well as developing new areas of work like contracts for recording, publishing, with an agency or for merchandising.
If all goes well, you may eventually sign an agency deal so that you have someone booking your gigs and possibly arranging tours for the band.
If you reach the stage where you are playing national tours, then you will also have a lighting crew, more sound technicians and maybe even wardrobe staff.
As soon as any contracts are offered you will have to engage a lawyer to negotiate on your behalf.
And when the money starts rolling in, you will need an accountant to handle all of your financial affairs.
As a general rule, it is a good idea not to choose the same accountant as your manager.
Style and Image
The UK has the most fashion-conscious record buyers in the world.
Although some bands achieve success without considering their clothes and haircuts, these aesthetic qualities have an important influence over a band's commercial potential.
Often, bands are naturally pushed into the style and image that is associated with their music, like heavy metal, gothic, hip-hop, punk and ragamuffin.
All of these have an accepted code of dress which the people who buy these records also adopt.
If your band's sound is less strongly defined, then you may need some help to dream up a style and image Libraries are a good source of inspiration, and by browsing through the books and magazines on fashion you may get some ideas.
Try the local charity shops as well.
Many bands have taken on a style of clothes which they bought second-hand.
Making the Demo
Once you have rehearsed, you will need to record a demo, especially as many venues won't consider you for a gig unless they have heard you on tape.
Ideally, you should record the three strongest songs in your set.
Go to the best studio your budget will allow and remember that studios will often drop their price if you haggle.
The most common mistake that bands make on their first recording session is to be underrehearsed.
Usually that results in a lot of wasted time and money as you sort out problems which should have been dealt with before you opened the studio door.
Also, uncertainty on your part can lead to the risk of you surrendering all control over the session to the engineer, who will be more than happy to move into the producer's chair.
Try to meet the engineer before your sessions.
Play him or her you can explain the results which you want from the session and the engineer can advise you on any extra equipment which you may need to hire.
This gives the engineer a chance to hear your music and assess how to record your band.
All of this saves valuable and expensive studio time.
Never combine mixing tracks with recording sessions.
If you try to do it all in one go, you will almost always be dissatisfied with the result.
Probably, you will end up paying for a remix.
If you can afford it, spend two or three days recording your tracks, take away a rough mix and then go back to the studio after a week or so.
Then you have time to fix on a definite idea of how you want the final mix to sound.
Getting Gigs
The main thing to remember when looking for your first gigs is that promoters, bookers and pub landlords aren't bothered whether you are going to be the next U2.
Apart from a few notable exceptions, all they care about is feet through the door and selling beer.
With that in mind when you approach them, stress that this is one of your first gigs and you are going to get all your family and friends along to support you.
This should be enough to convince someone to give you a chance.
However, you can't rely on your family and friends forever.
You are going to need to develop a following if you want to move on and play bigger and better venues.
Some bands think that just playing gigs will be enough to attract a following.
The trouble with this attitude is that there are just too many bands around for that to happen.
To give your band a better chance, you will have to do some marketing.
The secret of attracting more people to your gigs is to get your band's name better known.
Currently, most people won't go and see a band who they haven't heard of.
Similarly, people tend to assume that if they have heard of a band, then they are probably worth going to see.
If you can come up with an interesting band ‘logo’ or visual image, that can be a cheap way of self-promotion on stickers and badges.
Just think of how many people will walk past and subconsciously absorb your band's name on a sticker which is on a high street lamp post, even if it only stays there for a couple of days.
If only one of those people is wondering what to do on a Friday night, thumbs through the listings, spots your band's name, and thinks ‘I've heard of that band, they must be worth seeing’, that sticker, which cost you less than a penny, has been very cost effective.
T-shirts are worthwhile and can be very cheap to produce.
Everyone wants an original T-shirt, and they are walking advertisements for your band.
Also, you could put your regular fans on a mailing list, writing to them every month to inform them of your next gigs and urging them to bring more of their friends along, in return for a back stage pass to Wembley when you play there!
Contact the local press and encourage them to write about the band and advertise or review your gigs.
Put together leaflets listing your forthcoming gigs and distribute them around colleges, street markets, other people's gigs, and trendy clothes shops.
If none of this works, maybe the band is just no good.
Doing the Gig
It is essential to have written confirmation from the booker or the venue of all the arrangements about your gig.
The most important of these are the gear ‘get-in’ time, sound-check start and finish times, on- and off-stage time, the guest list allowance, the food and drinks allowance, dressing-rooms, PA and lighting details, and the fee.
Arrive punctually to be ready for the sound check at the agreed time.
If you are in the support band, you will almost inevitably have to put up with delays in your sound check as well as other inconveniences.
In this situation, it hardly ever helps if you start shouting or losing your cool.
The best approach is to be patient and philosophical.
If you arrive late, raise merry hell, and insult the stage crew you will certainly be remembered.
However, if you are charming and efficient you may actually get booked again by the venue: Similarly, all sorts of things often go wrong on stage, and the golden rule here is not to communicate mistakes to the audience.
The chances are that the punters only know an error has been made if the drummer decides to smirk at the guitarist, or the guitarist turns away from the audience to have a good laugh at the keyboard player.
If you learn to keep your emotions in check until you are all back in the dressing-room, then at least you will leave the punters thinking that they have seen a professional band who might not be quite ready for a week at the Hammersmith Odeon.
Spare guitar strings, picks, and drumsticks should always be on hand so that any equipment breakdowns can be solved quickly and efficiently.
When you finish your set, get your equipment off stage quickly.
If you leave your gear on stage, you may find that someone else has moved it for you, and they won't be as careful as you.
No matter how badly your set goes, if you have a professional attitude to your work and a friendly disposition, you will find that people will want to work with you again.
Doing a Showcase
The purpose of a showcase is to perform in ideal conditions to an audience mainly of music business professionals whom you have invited.
This can be expensive and you are always gambling with the possibility that the people who you want to hear your music won't come.
Usually showcases are paid for by management companies in an attempt to ‘open the bidding’ on a new act.
Due to the cost and unpredictability of showcases, few bands without management arrange them.
If you want to chance it, the first thing to do is book a venue.
This will cost you anything from £200 to £1,000, depending on the hall's size, equipment and location.
It is impossible to guarantee that anyone you invited will turn up, so you could try to guard against wasting your time and money by sending courtesy cars to pick up the more important people.
If you go to those lengths, you are obviously taking a big financial risk.
There are a number of showcase venues around London, most of them connected to studios.
often, showcases take place in the afternoon.
To create more of an atmosphere, you could invite some of your ardent fans to indulge in the free drinks and snacks which are generally provided for the guests, along with a band publicity pack.
This should contain band photos, a demo tape and a biography.
successful showcases can create substantial industry interest in a band, but if you are going to pull out all the stops, you have to spend a lot of money with no guarantee of a positive result.
Get to Know the Biz
By now, you should have reached the stage when your potential as a successful recording artist is evident.
In this situation, you may only need to wave your tape under the right A&R person's nose to be offered a recording contract.
But who is the right A&R person?
Currently, major record companies' A&R departments are a lot more efficient than musicians realize.
If you are regularly attracting a big audience at your gigs, then you have probably been seen by A&R personnel, whether you live in Camden, Cardiff or Carlisle.
If you have worked hard to develop a solid gigging career and no one is offering you a deal, the time may have come to approach record  companies directly.
sending tapes to the A&R departments is almost a total waste of time.
Instead, you need to wise up about how the industry works and which people in recording companies are the most influential when it comes to signing and selling musicians, work.
Reading the popular music press helps build a picture of which record companies deal in the different styles of music, but only by reading the trade papers will you identify the key individuals in each company who should be invited to your gigs and sent your tape.
The trade papers are expensive, but you could ask your local library to order them.
Then, someone from your band can take charge or reading them through every week, taking notes on anything which might be useful.
This way, you can make up a ‘hit list’ of personnel within companies to whom you want to send your tape.
once you have mailed out your tapes, it becomes somebody's job to phone all of these people everyday until you make contact and you get some feedback.
When you do speak to your target people, it is important to emphasize that all you want is the person's opinion and that you will phone back in a couple of weeks to find out what they think.
This process rarely runs as smoothly as I have suggested.
often, it takes months of phone calls before you have completed your ‘hit list’, and I would suggest that whoever takes on this job should have a very carefree and optimistic attitude.
Eventually, you should have collected the opinion of everyone on your ‘hit list’ and, if no one has shown any interest in your music, you need to consider their reactions very carefully.
If certain criticisms have cropped up consistently, you must decide either to correct these problems or to soldier on in defiance of market opinion.
Protect Yourself
Young songwriters are often worried about record companies and other artists stealing their songs.
The instances of this happening are few and far between.
Nevertheless, it makes sense to take a few simple precautions.
Always mark your demos clearly with the copyright symbols (a letter ‘c’ in a circle) followed by the year in which the songs were written and the writers' names.
In Britain, copyright exists as soon as a song is recorded on to tape or written on manuscript.
It is easy to protect your songs' copyrights.
The best ways are included in the ‘Copyright and performing Right’ article in this book.
Any musician who is seriously embarking on a career in the music business should join the Musicians' Union.
The union will fight your case through the courts if someone tries to rip you off, it will check over contracts for you and offer cheap instrument insurance (see the Musicians' Union article for details).
If you are offered any work on television or radio you will need to join the union.
The Buzz
The most effective way to attract record company interest is to create a buzz.
Everyone has heard that there is a big buzz going around about one band or another, but what does that mean?
Usually, a band creating a ‘buzz’ is doing very successful gigs and totally ignoring the record companies.
If you go to one of their gigs, you will see row upon row of A&R men standing at the back in their black leather jackets, all ready to make an offer to record the band.
Don't think you have to be based in London to create a buzz, as recent history has shown that new music movements rarely originate in the capital.
You are probably much better placed in your home town or nearest city.
The main ways to produce a buzz are by being brilliant live and by winning over the media.
If the popular music press start raving about you, people will flock to your gigs.
If you are a great live act, they will keep coming back and so will the record companies.
You should always keep the press up to date with what the band is doing and where you are playing.
It may be worth sending them your demos, as well as pictures and biographies, and hope that someone takes an interest in you.
Like most of your career, starting a buzz depends on the success of your gigs.
Any number of things can create your buzz — a much touted line of original band T-shirts, well-attended ‘happening’ gigs, or something as basic as an unusual band name.
It is by no means unheard of for a band to be offered a deal on nothing more than a ‘concept’.
Your job is to go out and create as large a market for your band as is possible for an act without industry representation.
If you achieve this, then a record deal is just around the corner, and you will have earned yourself a strong negotiating position which should enable you to sign the deal you want and not the first deal that is offered.
It is important to realize that a deal's merits should not be judged solely on the size of the advance and the royalties being offered.
You may feel that only a major record company can offer your band the right level of investment and promotion.
But you have to balance that with the way a major won't allow you the same freedom of artistic licence and influence over your promotion and development that an independent company can offer.
There are innumerable instances of bands signing large deals to major record companies only to find that the aim of the record company is to try and push the band in a totally unsuitable direction.
When that happens it is rare for the band to win the resulting battle and emerge unscathed.
In fact, months of wrangling between the band's manager and the record company usually ends with the band being dropped, by which time the other record companies who initially showed interest have gone cold.
As in any large money-making industry there are crooks and con men masquerading as successful industry figures, and there is an  understandable temptation to sign a deal with absolutely anyone after years of rejection.
That is precisely what these crooks play on.
As a rule of thumb never sign a recording/publishing/production deal where you are expected to invest your money in the recording or promotion of your material.
This is certainly not a mainstream industry practice and the instances where this has occurred have largely proved to be cases of cleverly couched extortion.
Single Release
Releasing a single is probably the most effective way to promote a band.
Initially, you only need five hundred records, the total cost of which can be less than £500.
Once you have recorded your music, the first step to releasing it is to make the cuts.
These are soft lacquer discs which record your ‘A’ and ‘B’side from your studio master tape (these discs can be either 7″ or 12″, depending on your chosen format).
The next process turns these soft, lacquer discs into metal stampers, and all your records will be pressed from these.
There are lots of companies who will take charge of this whole operation, including the printing and fixing of the labels.
Alternatively, you can sometimes save money by using different firms for each process.
Look in the trade press to find them.
If you want a printed sleeve for your record, you need them before the discs are being made so that they can be delivered to the pressing plant and bagged up.
Five hundred picture sleeves can cost from £200 to £500 depending on the number of colours and the thickness of the card.
It is worth trying to get a distribution company to take your record on.
Their cut will be around 30 per cent of the ‘dealer’ price, which is what the shops pay for your record, bearing in mind that your record will only reach the shops if the dealer asks for it.
That is where the plugger and press officer come on the scene.
If you can't afford them, you will need to do both jobs.
send your record to every DJ and radio producer in the country who you think might give it a play, and follow up your mail-out with a phone call.
Also, send your record to journalists on all of the popular music press and phone them as well.
If you can get some coverage, that may encourage the dealers to respond to the media's interest in you.
If that doesn't work, you can always sell the record at gigs and get back your investment that way.
Pluggers and Press Officers
If you can afford it, hiring a press officer and a plugger will maximize the impact of your record.
A press officer should try and gain exposure for your record through the media.
He or she should have good relationships with music press journalists and also have contacts within radio and television.
He or she should mail out your  single with a press release and photo to all their contacts.
The press release will include information about the music and the band which you hope will be used in reviews.
A plugger's job is to get your record played on the radio.
BBC Radio 1 is the most influential radio station in Britain and it is every plugger's dream to get their records regularly on to Radio 1's ‘A’ list.
However, there are many other radio stations around the country that can influence the success of your record, albeit only on a regional basis.
Your plugger should contact all the DJs with whom he or she has a good relationship, trying to persuade them to play your record.
To hire a plugger and a press officer, will cost you anything from £100 a week each, depending on their track record.
Unless you have a personal recommendation, you can find professional pluggers and press officers listed in industry handbooks and advertising in the trade press.
Three weeks is usually long enough to see whether your single is going to be a national success.
If your record starts to pick up air play and get reviewed just after three weeks, it may be worth keeping your plugger and press officer on for a bit longer.
If the record isn't happening in any of the media, it is probably best to cut your losses and pay the bill.
When you approach pluggers or press officers, bear in mind that this is how they make their money, and the amount of enthusiasm which they show for your product may not be a true indication of the coverage which they can secure.
Indies
The rise and fall and rise again of independent record companies is a topic of great debate within the industry.
What makes a successful indie label?
Everyone has their own idea but history shows that certain elements are essential to the long term success of an indie.
It may take several releases and many months before the company starts to see a return on its investments, so it is essential for an indie to have a relatively solid financial base to see it through the difficult early stages and to sustain the levels of promotion until an act on the label breaks.
some of the most successful of the small indies have achieved success largely by catering for specialist markets (generally ignored by the majors) and developing a good reputation for its product with the fans of particular styles, so much so that some indie labels enjoy instant sales of a new release on the strength of the quality of their past product.
This is called niche marketing which is a familiar concept in all forms of retailing.
situation Two, 4AD, Creation and Factory are good examples of this practice.
These companies realized at an early stage that there is no point in trying to compete with the majors in releasing daytime radio or ‘Top of the Pops’ material, and that it would be better to find acts who have    proved popular on the live circuit but who are considered too left field for the majors.
This approach has paid dividends for some indies and has helped to establish the following companies as real market forces: Mute with Depeche Mode, Rough Trade with the Smiths, stiff with Madness, and more recently silvertone with the stone Roses.
Depeche Mode
Whether you sign a deal with an indie label, or release your own records, the success of your records will depend on the amount and quality of their promotion.
A distributor won't take your record unless he or she can see a demand for it.
Likewise, a dealer won't want a record taking up space in the racks of his or her shop unless he or she thinks the public will ask for it.
People aren't going to request your record unless they have heard of it, and finally, they won't have heard of your record unless it has been promoted properly through the usual channels of TV, radio, music press, national press and live shows.
Your record doesn't have to be picked up by all these routes for promotion, but if you enjoy Record of the Week in NME at the same time as receiving good reviews of your live shows and the occasional play on Radio 1, this should allow you to make impression on the Indie charts or even the national top 100.
This would be considered a success for a first release from a fairly new act.
It is rare for an Indie band to take off big on the strength of a first record.
The process is more gradual than can be the case on a major.
The timing of your promotion in relation to your record's release date is crucial.
The idea is to try and develop a steady build up of air play before the record is released so that on the week of release there is a good demand for the record and this reflects in your chart position.
The real trick is then to sustain a high enough level of air play, press and TV to allow the record to ‘cross-over’ and appeal to people other than the band's fans.
When this happens it is time to celebrate and consider all the various offers raining in from the major labels.
Don't Delay, Start Today!
I want to underline the biggest mistake which I believe bands make when they are starting out.
Bands spend too much time chasing A&R personnel and other industry figures, and not enough time chasing punters, developing a following and creating a ‘buzz’.
If you can do those three, then the music business will soon be chasing you.
Further Reading
These are some sources of useful information about who's who in the industry.
Those listed with addresses aren't always easily available in the shops.
A. Jenkins and O. Smith (eds.),
The Town and Country Music Guide (Penguin).
Music Week magazine (bi-weekly)The British Music Yearbook (Rhinegold Publishing).
The Making Music Handbook (Track Record Publishing).
The Music Week Directory (Music Week Publications, 40 Long Acre, London WC2E 9J2).
The White Book (Birdhurst Ltd., PO Box 55, Staines, Middlesex TW18 4UG).
Rock Journalists and How to Use Them
DAVE HILL began his career as a contributor to the NME in 1981, moving swiftly on to become music editor at London's City Limits listings magazine.
By 1986 he had reverted to freelancing on several national newspapers and magazines before joining the newly launched Independent as rock critic.
He now works as a general freelance feature writer for the Guardian, Independent on Sunday and Arena among others and has published several books including a biography of Prince.
Who do They Think They Are?
There was a time when rock journalists were easy to characterize or, at least, to caricature.
Wan and red-eyed, and nearly always male, they wore rebel chic regalia and communicated in either a hyperactive babble or a laboured monotone.
They could be found, posing madly, directly adjacent to whatever was going free at any bohemian hostelry in town.
They wrote for a small range of specialist titles, some of them bright and poppy, others resoundingly self-important, and all of them perfectly arcane to anyone outside a specific, like-minded clientele.
In this, the rock hack fraternity unerringly reflected the culture it documented.
As a bizarre amalgam of egalitarianism, rebellion, idealism, moral sloth and wanton self-indulgence, rock generated the literati it deserved, from the early-1960s generation of giggly pop scribes (who pushed the old-school showbusiness correspondents aside) to the ‘serious’ boy obsessives who stumbled from the 1970s' underground, wielding big neuroses and even bigger words.
The post-punk era has made these convenient stereotypes if not redundant, at least seriously limited.
Even apparently subversive convulsions like punk ended up encouraging rock's incursions into all sectors of modern consumerism, and so the music's press coverage has altered accordingly.
Today, the specialist pop and rock rags  no longer have the subject to themselves and only the most conservative publications on the news-stands fail to acknowledge that some subsection of the now sprawling rock field is of interest to their readers.
Indeed, the music industry can reasonably claim its market to include anyone from 5 years to 50, taking in both sexes and every social class.
As a result, it is hardly surprising that everything from Patches to the Daily Telegraph employs at least one rock correspondent, from a teenage school-leaver in doorstep Nikes and a back-to-front baseball cap to some affable dilettante with a plum in his mouth and old school tie.
Elvis has a lot to answer for.
Where do I Begin?
Aspiring rock artists should remember one golden rule when dealing with the press: there are no rules.
Winning the favour of this curious breed is largely a lottery.
Those with any degree of power and influence are already deluged with promotional material, atrocious records and pre-release cassettes, the vast majority supplied by the generously resourced press offices of major record companies.
only the most conscientious (and, frankly, those with nothing better to do) dutifully plough through everything that flops out of a jiffy bag and on to their desk.
The few communications which do receive full attention normally achieve this through a combination of chance, inside information and relentless harrassment.
As an unknown you can't rely on the first, and very likely have no hip London friends or business connections to facilitate the second.
That leaves only the third, and even then any serious nagging offensive requires careful planning and execution to stand a chance of success.
First, select your target publications.
The national dailies can be dismissed quickly, especially the tabloids.
Unless you can promote yourself as a bit-part player in some concocted yarn involving Madonna, outlandish sexual indiscretions, wilful substance abuse or, better still, all three, they aren't going to be interested.
At the snob end of the market, the Independent , the Guardian , and the Observer offer the most serious critical coverage of the rock world, tending to employ writers with some previous pedigree.
However, editorial priorities are inevitably slanted against the exposure of new acts.
When it comes to profiles and interviews, familiar names usually get the nod over the up-and-coming, partly because they are the ones the powers-that-be have heard of, and partly because the famous and/or notorious are what a less obsessive and more catholic readership wants to know about.
This inclination to celebrate the established rather than unearth the unknown is also echoed by many of the specialist titles.
Smash Hits , easily Britain's biggest-selling pop magazine, is completely geared to  reflecting the mainstream.
You need to be either in the charts or heading that way to earn space in those gossipy pages.
The same goes for its imitator,Number One , and also the reams of general interest glossies aimed at girls and women.
In the end, the print media offer only very limited avenues to the exposure of bands and artists without industry backing or friends in the right places.
What hope there is resides primarily in the same section of the news-stands as it has for several years — the ‘serious’ and ‘specialist’music press.
Covering the broad territory of rock and pop New Musical Express ,Sounds, Melody Maker and RM (formerly Record Mirror ) are the longest-established weekly titles.
still blessed with a scent of what used to be called the counter-culture, they are also the most responsive to music generated from outside the mainstream corporate structure.
Most of their readers are young, white and male and their interest in the music scene is intense.
These four publications tend to reflect the range of musics which fit most neatly into the category of ‘rock’(white music as opposed to the primarily black forms, ‘soul’, ‘funk’, ‘reggae’ and so on), although the emphasis varies from one magazine to the next.
NME , for instance, has always included substantial coverage of black popular forms — soul, reggae, hip-hop — although this has not always met with their readers' approval.
Sounds , on the other hand, is strongly orientated towards guitar-based white rock.
Today's Melody Maker concentrates on pop's more adventurous independent fringes, while RM remains a likeable dog's dinner, differing from the others in its A4 format, its glossy colour pages, and content which veers from a left-field feature style to consumer-guides for club DJs.
All four are united by a healthy disrespect for dominant tastes and the remains of a reputation for exposing new talent before the industry finds it.
The bad news for small-time acts is that this exploratory role has diminished significantly over the last ten years.
In the period beginning just before the punk explosion and ending around 1982, the rock press played a decisive part in the making and shaping of a succession of trends from punk itself to Two-Tone, the so-called new pop phase and the emergence of quasi-mystical underground acts like Echo and the Bunnymen.
The tight links between journalists and the flourishing independent label scene, local entrepreneurs and key grass-roots venues meant that they all helped to form tastes rather than simply reacting to them.
However, as the industry became more organized, the rock papers have declined in importance.
This is reflected in the pre-eminence of the smart, highly professional and rather conservative rock monthly Q , launched in 1986.
With little of the didactic or combative attitude which characterized NME during the late 1970s,Q concentrates  most successfully on giving its affluent, young male readers what they already know they want.
Currently,Melody Maker , written by a verbose array of excitable young ideologues, is the most dissenting and innotative of the four general titles and the one most inclined to put some avant garde confection like the sugar Cubes on the front page before anyone else has heard of them.
The other group of music papers which aspiring acts should look to are those catering to some very specific style and its devoted audience.
The most successful title of this type is the heavy metal bible,Kerrang .
Founded by a breakaway group of journalists from Sounds , it has gone on to outsell its progenitor and, though primarily star-oriented, considers it has a duty to reflect the grass-roots scene as well.
It is an obvious place for young hard rock/heavy metal acts to make themselves known.
In a similar way, exponents of anything fitting the nebulous description New Acoustic Roots (and its variants) should keep a keen eye on Folk Roots magazine (monthly) for potential sympathizers; jazz practitioners should get the studious Wire (monthly) and those operating in the more popular black fields of soul, funk, rock or rap should follow the perennial Echoes (weekly, formerly Black Echoes ) or Blues and Soul (biweekly).
There is also a steady turnover of smaller, and often short-lived, black music mags reflecting underground phenomena like hip-hop.
Regular perusal will make clear which journalists might be most sympathetic to your particular style.
Finally, don't forget the entertainment pages of your own local papers or the arts coverage of college magazines.
Their patronage may not launch you to instant international attention, but they might help to raise the takings at your next gig in the junior Common Room or village hall, simply by listing the date, time and place.
You now know who it is you want to impress.
The next stage is to take a long, hard look at yourself.
Who Are You?
Except in the most arid and scholarly publications, your value to journalists can never be measured simply in terms of the quality of your music.
so before you embark on your campaign of harrassment, put yourself in the shoes of your prospective target.
First, ask: ‘Why should he or she want to write about me?’ second, and just as important, consider: ‘Why should his or her editor want to publish an item about me?’
The crucial point is that having a great sound is one thing, but being a good subject for an article may be something else entirely.
For that reason, it is worth thinking about what is interesting about you from a journalist's point of view before trying to woo him or her with your beautiful noise.
It is no coincidence, for example, that stars like Boy George and Morrissey enjoy so much front-cover exposure.
It isn't only that they enjoy commercial success and critical acclaim, but because they are, in the jargon of the trade, ‘good copy’— talkative, controversial, witty and opinionated on a whole range of topics.
Journalists just pop them a question and let them get on with it.
The subsequent article almost writes itself.
But you don't have to be as colourful a performer or as vivid a personality as these two to make an interesting subject.
From the journalist's position, any sign that you have put some thought into your music, your look or your lyrics, is welcome.
stock responses like ‘well, you know, we don't really think about it that much, actually’, send the hearts of even the least demanding interviewer plummeting into their boots.
so before you start trying to make contact with the press, try to figure out what is engaging or unusual about you.
It could be your background, your experiences, the audience you attract or anything that smacks of idiosyncrasy.
Whatever else you do,please avoid musicianly prattle about your favourite brand of guitar strings.
Such an exercise of critical self-analysis will not only help make you a more appetizing prospect as a subject, it will probably benefit you artistically as well.
The Leisure Process
Once you have decided which of your manifold assets to emphasize, you need to get practical.
Rock journalists receive far more unsolicited material than they know what to do with.
The bulk of it, though, is just standard major record company dross which is greeted with a yawn and propelled directly into the nearest rubbish bin.
To avoid this routine ignominy, you need to turn the journalists' boredom to your own advantage.
1.
Printed Matter
The staple mode of communication is the press release.
This comprises, quite simply, one or more pieces of paper on which are typed details of forthcoming gigs, record releases or just general bits of news and information relating to individual artists.
With new acts, a brief biography is also often included by way of introduction.
Record companies generally send these out some time before an event or the release of a product in order to whip up a bit of advance interest from the press.
The reasons for this are obvious.
Firstly, the bare details find their way into the news sections of all relevant publications so the artist's fans can place orders at record shops, apply for concert tickets and generally help to build up the (ahem)‘buzz’.
secondly, it gives individual journalists due warning that they should plan any prospective coverage to coincide with the artist's activities, simultaneously responding to public interest and amplifying it further.
The trouble with most biographies and press releases is that they are boring — very, very boring indeed.
The press officers who compose them aren't employed for their outstanding literary flair and their missives routinely come replete with weak jokes and dismal puns.
What a joy it is to find a press pack that is genuinely unusual, interesting, witty, self-deprecating or even just plain mad.
since unknown, unsigned acts have no one to compose such epistles but themselves, there is a great opportunity to bring a little sunshine into a cynical hack's life.
Economy is the key.
Get to the point, tell people what they need to know and do it with as much style, clarity and substance as possible.
The corporate communiqué can be set out on anything from regulation A4 paper with a staple in the corner, to grandiose box presentations containing ‘sampler’ cassettes or compact discs previewing the alleged highlights of a forthcoming release.
However, any sceptical correspondent worth their salt will show far more respect for a personalized, do-it-yourself presentation with a touch of imagination rather than all the glitz in Hollywood.
2.
Cassettes
Naturally, any prospective support from a journalist will depend most of all on what you sound like.
Ultimately, if people don't want to hear you, they don't want to know you.
once again, many rock critics receive enough tapes — and, for that matter, video promos — to build a model village.
As ever, the knack is to make yourself stand out from the corporate crowd.
Obviously, the way you sound is up to you, but it is worth deploying all the resources you have to ensure a decent quality of recording and to present the cassette in an appealing way.
It is a dull dictum, but true, that if you give the impression you care about what you do, then others are more likely to care about it too.
Again, economy is important.
A C30 tape is usually quite long enough and, assuming your songs are of average length, three of the best will do nicely.
And make them your most accessible.
If they are listened to at all, it will probably be in the bath, on a car stereo, or in some other environment where the music is competing for the listener's attention.
If journalists are going to like you, they will make their minds up quickly and it is a positive advantage if they like what they hear, but haven't got enough.
It means they have to get  in touch with you to ask for more.
on the other hand, if they are unmoved by the first track or two, it is unlikely they will bother with numbers three to fifteen anyway.
But whether they love you or loathe you, never expect to get your property back.
Just think of it as a loss leader and keep your fingers crossed.
3.
Gigs
Folklore insists that the best way to lure a usually male journalist to a gig is to offer him a drink.
Certainly the kind of modern-day would-be Kerouac who survives entirely on the proceeds from trading-in free albums and indulging in the fine art of ‘ligging’— tagging along to any show in town where the record company picks up the catering bill — is not extinct.
However, aspiring unsigned acts with a reputation to make aren't likely to be in a position to sweeten up the hordes of sceptical scribes in the West End of London who spend their days loafing from one free lunch to the next.
In fact most young bands aren't based in the capital at all and it is a long-standing complaint of artists with their souls in the provinces that the concentration of the national media in London obliges them to abandon their regional roots.
That said, one of the best chances an unknown has of national music press exposure is in the live review section.
There are several reasons for this.
One is simply that you don't need to have made a record or done anything very much except earned a local reputation as a watchable band playing original material.
This alone can make it worth a reporter's time to come along.
Artists based outside London should certainly make it their business to locate each publication's local ‘stringer’ whose job it is to reflect the scene in their own city or town.
Very often the live review section's smaller items are written by junior reporters who are more willing to make their way to obscure gigs if it means getting their by-line in the paper.
Keep your eyes open for the names of new writers on the magazines you read regularly and try to make contact by letter or telephone.
Convince them you are worth a look and, almost out of the blue, you might end up with 300 words in Kerrang or Echoes or the NME .
If they are favourable words, it could be the first write-up of many.
4.
Nagging
All the press releases and all the triumphant pub gigs in the world will amount to nothing unless you are prepared to nag.
As a species, rock journalists are often dedicated free spirits, either too young or just too immature to believe that the normal responsibilities of life — good manners, for instance— might apply to them.
This means that  the thankless task of nagging is of an elevated importance in the unknown band's armoury of skills: the less notice they take, the more you need to pester them.
When you have sent off your pristine cassette, your witty biography and your complimentary tickets, the next thing you need to do is make a follow-up call: ‘Oh hello.
I was just calling to make sure you received our tape/tickets/press release
…
Yes, it is in a turquoise envelope with a silver band insignia and a Grimsby postmark…
You've found it? good.
I'll call in a couple of days to see what you think.
Bye.'
The voice at the other end may be sullen, bored and indifferent or else cheerily superficial, but don't let that put you off.
Remember, in five years, time, most of these people will either be press officers (doing the same as you are, but with less loving care) or they will have been kicked upstairs to edit a page instead of writing on it, thereby saving readers from any more of their insufferable prose.
obviously, go with your instinct, but as a basic approach, try simply to be polite.
Don't give them a sales pitch because there is nothing more irritating.
Just make friendly noises and go away.
This is the best way to lay amicable foundations for your more concerted efforts in the days and weeks to come as you try to prise a response out of your carefully selected target hack.
Lastly, don't expect too much.
If you can get them to absorb your material at all, that counts as an achievement.
If they like it, that is rare.
If, finally, you get any column inches out of it, buy yourself a drink, cut out the precious words carefully and make a pile of photocopies.
Even if you have been made the target of naked literary abuse, it will make satisfying reading when you play your first sell-out show at Wembley!
Eye of the Tiger
For freshly signed artists as well as unknowns, encountering the press is a new and sometimes uncomfortable experience.
Rock isn't the art form of the chattering classes and only a minority of its practitioners have any expertise in elucidating a rigorous conceptual rationale for their work.
Meanwhile, those garrulous starlets who utter a quotable phrase almost every time they open their mouths are few and far between.
This means that interviews are often an ordeal for inquisitor and subject alike.
The trick here is to know what you want to say and make sure that you say it.
Politicians do this all the time, turning any given question into a cue for making the point they think is important and never mind what their questioner wants to hear.
There is no need to go quite that far with the pop scribes of this world, but the principle is worth keeping in mind.
often, the journalists are far more neurotic and insecure than you are.
After walking in and setting down their  pocket tape recorder, they soon reveal themselves as inarticulate and badly prepared and the whole encounter is punctuated with long, awkward silences.
On the other hand, some writers take a more interrogative approach, grilling their beleaguered subjects from a prepared list of queries  ike a policeman in search of a conviction.
From a personal point of view, the best interviews are the ones which become conversations, discussions which proceed on an equal basis, that are informal but still retain some kind of shape.
Ideally, all that needs to be said can be said in an hour, and if you think the journalist is genuinely interested in your work, try to give him or her as much time as required — it is appreciated.
It takes the co-operation of both parties to pull this off and all artists would be wise to give their general interview method some thought in advance.
One obvious, important factor is to consider which publication the journalist is from.
A sweet young thing from Smash Hits isn't going to be after the same kind of material as some cerebral haircut boy from Melody Maker or a hack from your local paper.
Plainly, individual journalists have individual styles but ultimately they have to turn the result of meeting you into the type of article their publication requires.
Smash Hits will want to know about your make-up or your boxer shorts,Melody Maker leans towards aesthetics and primal therapy and the local Argus might just want to know a few biographical details and where your next gig is.
It is also worth working out how to create the best conversational chemistry.
Many bands feel that each member should be present at every interview.
This is commendably democratic and can work perfectly well, but sometimes the intimacy of one-to-one conversation yields more interesting results for both parties.
Usually, one or two of the band are more chatty, outgoing or just plain pretentious than the rest.
These are the people to let loose on the press.
Remember, your value to a magazine isn't only your prowess or popularity as a musician.
People can enjoy reading about you even if they don't like your music and if enough of them do, it improves your chances of more coverage the next time you need it.
The End
Although the total press coverage of pop music increased dramatically over the last ten years, the quality hasn't improved and the power of music papers to make and break an artist has greatly dissipated.
As a medium through which to secure your fame and fortune, even those publications for whom discovering new talent is an important role aren't the force they were.
Record companies have become far more adept at monitoring and exploiting new acts, and  their links with the smaller labels — who they once only heard about by way of the left-field rock press — are now thoroughly institutionalized.
Though they would hate to admit it, the rock press was once the most important stepping-stone on the way from obscurity to celebrity.
There are now other routes to follow.
But although, in career terms, it may currently be more effective to woo record companies rather than journalists, the rock press isn't a completely spent force, nor is it a worthless one.
What decent journalists have that most people in the pop industry don't, is a proper critical faculty.
spiteful, verbose and stupid though rock hacks can be, they are at least sometimes driven by something other than the logic of the balance sheet.
If you take your music seriously and arouse the interest of a committed writer, the resulting article can make a genuine contribution to people's understanding of your work and of popular culture in general.
With more and more people getting their pop information from our squalid popular press and with most modern magazines covering music using only the language of consumerism and gossip, it is increasingly difficult to feel optimistic about rock journalism's values.
At its best it remains one of the few areas of the modern press where imagination, honesty and idealism, however fatuous, can still, occasionally, be found.
A positive interaction with these characteristics can only be to the benefit of artists and their followers alike.
It might even make you a star.
Management
ED BICKNELL is manager of Dire Straits who he says that he wanted to represent within five minutes of seeing them live.
Before his management career Ed worked as a drummer.
had been Hull University's social secretary and was a successful agent representing British and international artists.
This is an edited version of an interview with Ed at Damage Management's London offices.
Managers and Artists
The most important relationship in any artist's career is with their manager.
A manager tries to co-ordinate, push and stimulate everything concerned with the music business to get the artist's product in front of the public.
To achieve this, the manager needs a knowledge of the record industry, music publishing, concert promotion, tax and of how to run a business; as well as how to keep the act's family happy.
A complete job description almost defies definition.
The best I can do as a manager is a combination of threatening, cajoling and being nice to everyone who can help to give my act the best possible shot.
However, the artist must play an active part in their business career.
When the record is finished and the studio door is finally shut, the artist has to get out and sell.
They have to do the tedious promotional work, the dodgy TV shows in Belgium and the interviews at American radio stations where no one knows who they are.
It is a treadmill, but if an artist isn't prepared to do it, there are two or three hundred others just waiting for their chance.
There are certain things I won't do as a manager.
I didn't get into music to be a travel agent, have people's gardens done, or to arrange their mortgages.
That is a trap which people get into with acts and it is very dangerous for both sides.
Managers are focal points in the music business.
They co-ordinate the production and promotion of an artist's music, making it possible 
for the music industry to have a success.
For instance, this can mean persuading record companies to spend money on adverts and employing pluggers.
Even with a band like Dire straits that can be quite hard, because there is sometimes a certain complacency surrounding a big artist's release.
The music business marries art and commerce.
However, the artist's aims may not be the same as a record company's. so the manager has to vet what big business wants musicians to do.
Managing a New Band
Ideally, the manager should be there at the beginning of a band's professional career because he or she is going to operate the various deals which are set up.
Generally, it is best for him or her to have some input into the management and other contracts instead of inheriting them from a lawyer.
Lawyers mainly deal with the theory of things whereas an experienced manager is concerned with practicalities.
I have seen clauses in record contracts which are absolutely meaningless and which I would happily have traded for a defined amount of money for a tour support, video, or promotional commitment.
A manager has to create an environment in which a new act can get on with their music as free as possible of worry about business.
The first thing to do is sort out the basis of the young artists’ business.
The manager has to organize their companies, hire them an accountant and a lawyer (if they haven't already done that), get them VAT registered, and do a lot of simple administration like applying for passports.
This organization is very important because the business structure with which the act starts ought to be the one they have forever.
Next, the manager would want to find the act a record contract, even before getting a publishing deal.
Most publishers won't pay artists any money until a record has been released in a major market because the publisher has no other way of recouping any investment.
Currently, getting a record deal for a new act is difficult.
This is partly due to the increasing technological influence on songs.
A lot of records are broken but not many careers are established.
There is a difference.
For a new artist to progress, the most important management role is allowing the act to develop its songwriting potential.
Ultimately, it doesn't matter how well a band's guitarist plays, if an act doesn't have good songs they will go nowhere.
That is what it takes to become internationally popular and to have a longlasting career.
If a band don't write their own songs, the manager has to find the right    songwriters.
The best thing Tina Turner's management ever did was to find the songs for her Private Dancer album.
one happened to be by our client Paul Brady, and ‘Private Dancer’ was written by Mark Knopfler.
The only difference between Tina Turner today and a few years ago is her material.
she has always been great, but she made a tremendous jump when she started recording decent songs instead of versions of old R'n' B tracks.
Songs are the lifeblood of pop music, and all the artists I have represented have been heavily involved in songwriting.
Tina Turner
A manager has to believe totally in a new act.
If that isn't why he or she gets involved, the manager shouldn't be doing the job.
The manager must work to ensure everything is in place so that the band's product comes out in time for the public to make up its own mind.
If the talent which the manager believes in is recognized by the public, then hopefully they will go and buy the record.
But if the act doesn't get success, two things may happen: the record company will probably drop the act, though they may try one more record; and the finances of running the band will probably cause the act to go bust.
The manager can manipulate some things to stave that off, but pop music is about being popular.
You need to have hits.
If musicians want to do jazz albums or make obscure folk records there are routes for that.
However, a band would be doing incredibly well to sell 15,000 jazz LPs throughout the UK.
For pop and rock artists, success has to be measured by records selling in millions.
Artists need time to develop.
once the rollercoaster of success gets going, the most common problem in pop music is the second album.
An act can make a successful first LP which may have taken five or seven years for a band's songwriters to create.
suddenly, the music industry is demanding album number two within four months.
To cope with this, the manager has to try and stave off time pressures without losing the momentum of gaining popularity.
This is an extraordinarily difficult balancing act, particularly with new artists.
After their successful first record, they can go into the studio without proper preparation.
They might jam a bit and produce substandard material because they are trying to satisfy the record industry's mania for following up success.
Often this situation doesn't allow the artist enough time to write good new songs.
My attitude is that if a band manages to release a second album of poor songs four months after their first album left number one in the charts, it isn't worth the rush.
If Mark Knopfler took five years to produce another record, and it was a classic, I don't have any worries.
I have to allow the songwriting people within this operation to have the time and security of mind to get on with their art.
However, it can be dangerous when an artist becomes very established.
He or she can go to seed having bought a mansion and put a million pounds in the bank.
part of a manager's responsibility, with new and established acts, is to keep the stimulus going which makes the artist want to write, record and perform.
Live Work
Live gigs are the most interesting and enjoyable part of my work.
I have a great live band, probably one of the best in the world.
However, there are lots of acts who can't work live very well.
Despite this, it is amazing how many managers put inadequate live bands on tour.
It is self-defeating.
The problem with a lot of acts is that they don't realize their limitations.
As a result, they go on tour without knowing how to produce a good live show.
If I were taking on a new act, their ability to perform on stage would be second only to the quality of their songwriting.
Of course, I am leaving out the personality element.
If the manager doesn't get on with the band, the whole thing collapses.
I have to like the act and their music.
If one of these things were missing, I couldn't do it.
To set up a new band's live work, a manager needs to organize things like equipment, crew, trucks, boats and planes (given the constraints of economy), and get a decent agent and promoter.
For a new act, I would have to pitch them at the right venue for their type of music.
It is part of the manager's brief to make sure the artist isn't put into the wrong level or type of venue.
For instance, people have booked white country bands into rap clubs.
Having worked as an agent, I always take care of Dire straits' concert bookings and I have made that sort of mistake with them.
I booked them into a working men's cabaret club in South Wales.
I didn't know what it was, and they had to play in-between bingo sets.
Fortunately, they were professional enough to do the gig, but it served no useful purpose.
It is very difficult to marry up the sale of a record with a live show.
An established live act will almost certainly play to people who have bought their records.
This doesn't necessarily apply to new artists.
As a band's career develops, by album two or three, most of the concert audience will own at least one of the band's records and probably all of them.
In that situation, the band isn't using the live gig to plug their current record, like an appearance on the ‘Wogan’ show.
Instead, they are establishing a relationship with the audience, not by promoting the current record, but by securing a future audience for the one they haven't even made yet.
As long as a band can physically and economically do it, I would want to take their music to the people wherever they are.
Dire straits have  persistently played in Belfast, Tel Aviv and Auckland, not just London, Frankfurt, New York and Los Angeles.
That has made their tours very long and everyone needs enormous stamina and commitment.
If I were interviewing a new act, I would try to ascertain their sheer punishment factor.
During a tour, the straits' live show is three hours a night, but they travel for at least three hours a day, as well as doing interviews, a sound check, eating, and phoning home.
As a manager I have to judge whether a young band's professional tail is wagging the domestic dog or the other way round.
This is something a lot of people ignore.
I need to find out how my acts view their lives.
Do they want a family?
If so, when?
It is important to realize an act isn't a robot.
There are plenty of people in the music business who would like it that way, but I have to bear in mind that people get ill, home-sick and miserable.
For instance, touring is very boring.
The show is great, but after a three-hour musical high, it is back down to sandwiches on the bus, trying to find somewhere to eat after 2 a.m., or getting into the hotel when the night porter has locked up.
Touring is so important.
I would never take on an act who couldn't perform live.
It would have no interest at all.
Live work is the one area where the artists and audience meet face to face.
In most other circumstances, the public is one step removed from the artist, holding a record or watching a TV show.
At a concert, the band actually meet their fans.
The straits make a point of having autograph-hunters back stage in the dressing-room so they can stay in tune with their punters.
There is an idea which creeps in, particularly among younger musicians, that after a few hit records they are somehow better than other people.
They aren't.
They happen to do something where there is an enormous organization geared up to pushing them on to a pedestal.
I have never mollycoddled any of my artists.
I don't use limousines and the straits have only needed a security person once.
If I meet a new act, I always try and assess their maturity in order to judge whether they might go off the deep end as soon as they have success.
Fan Clubs
Fan clubs are a situation where a band can't win.
For most people, music is just a part of their leisure, although inevitably there are some who want more from it.
For the very young pop acts, there are very large numbers of teens and schoolchildren writing to them.
With the straits we get a fair amount of mail each year, most of which is easily categorized.
They want information about what the band is doing; or they want to know where they can get T-shirts, sweatshirts, concert tickets and other merchandise.
To deal with  this, we established an information service.
This isn't a fan club.
Members get newsletters, the option to buy tickets first and some fans have met the band.
If I were managing an act like Bros, I would run a professional fan club.
However, one of the problems with fan clubs is that they tend to operate for very young people.
There is an exploitative element to them.
You are unlikely to offend the teenage punter, but you may disturb their parents.
This is a very narrow line.
Often there are letters in the papers from parents who have sent off for T-shirts and pictures from a band's fan club, only to have their cheque cashed and to receive nothing for months.
I believe that if an act wants to run a fan club, it should be a service rather than a profit-making enterprise.
Ours regularly loses money, as do those of many other major artists.
My attitude is that if somebody has taken the trouble to write a letter, they deserve a reply.
To be very hard-nosed there is also a vested interest in running an efficient information service for a band.
If we can write back to somebody, or send them the CD or shirt they want, we will almost certainly have them for life.
Most people are amazed to get an answer from the band at all, so it is good business and public relations to try and answer these enquiries.
Finding Bands
Most acts who approach me fall into two categories: new and established.
The new acts can be divided into those with and without a record deal.
Those still looking for a record deal usually send a tape, some photographs and a biography.
I play the tape and make my judgement.
I don't know any more than other people what is likely to succeed.
I just have to react to what I like and what I can believe in.
After twelve years in management, I haven't yet had a tape arrive which I thought I could do anything with.
statistically, I get far more phone calls from record companies, lawyers and very occasionally from publishers telling me about a new act they have just signed.
They send me exactly the same as unsigned bands except the tape is invariably a finished master of high quality.
Again, I have only rarely heard anything which has interested me.
With established acts the same thing happens.
I often get calls from their lawyers, sometimes from their record companies, and extremely rarely from the artists.
For most major managers the problem is time.
The music business works in cycles.
Bands and their managers tend to have periods of relative quiet, maybe for six months, after which they are in a fever of activity.
This means managers have to be careful when considering whether to take on a new act.
If I were to begin to manage another major artist, and Mark Knopfler were to ring up and ask me to get the band back together for an album and a world tour, something would    have to suffer.
probably it would be the efficiency with which my artists' careers are dealt with, and my brain.
Ed Bicknell
In the UK, we have a tradition of management firms with only one or two clients.
In the UsA, there are massive companies which have fourteen or fifteen acts.
They operate by using fourteen or fifteen tour managers with fourteen or fifteen acts going to fourteen or fifteen gigs in fourteen of fifteen trucks.
Vast amounts of money are made and I find it all very boring.
Having tried it both ways, I am more comfortable with the single act approach, and in the history of rock management, that has generally been the most successful route.
Management is a very personal service.
A new act's problem is that if they approach an established manager, he or she will already be representing at least one major act.
New acts are attracted by First Division managers because we are visible and our addresses are in Music Week.
What new acts really need is the embryonic version of these people.
All of us started from a very low position.
Quite a lot of top managers had been in the agency business.
Although young bands can find the established people in Music Week , they are probably a waste of time.
They may get to one of these people if they get a record deal without a manager, and if their record is a mega hit, but that is very unlikely.
With most young bands, the manager is often the guy who owns the van.
He or she may even be the local greengrocer who hears a band rehearsing down the road in the village hall.
sometimes that works, though problems can arise when the band gets down to London.
suddenly the greengrocer/manager has to choose between a safe livelihood and dedicating often sixteen or seventeen hours a day to the hurdle race of the music business.
The reason it worked for me and the straits was threefold.
I genuinely liked them as people, I loved their music, and I was in exactly the right place at the right time.
If it had happened two years earlier, I couldn't have coped.
However, when I first encountered the straits, I was a successful agent, thinking about leaving the agency business.
I didn't have it in mind to go looking for a four-piece group.
Like most managers, I don't seek out groups, even at showcases.
The Artists, Their Money and Their Manager
Most top managers are very honest Amongst these people the idea of ripping off an act is offensive.
Paul McGuinness (U2), Roger Forrester (Eric Clapton), Roger Davies (Tina Turner), Bill Curbishley (The Who, Judas priest) or myself don't concoct ways of conning our acts.
Most of us have been with our artists a very long time.
We regard our work as a team effort.
It may not be a legal partnership, but it ought to be one ethically.
My golden piece of advice is not to have the manager handling the artist's money.
In the history of litigation in rock ‘n’ roll it is almost always about money.
Any artist I represent could tell me I am useless, but no one will ever be able to claim I stole from them, because I have never had the opportunity.
There is one exception to that with the straits.
For purely practical purposes, I deal with the artists' money for recording and touring expenses.
It is too complicated to send large numbers of bills over to their accountant every day.
To cope with this, I set up separate clients' accounts with the bank with some funding from the band's accountants.
All the bank statements and back-up bills go to the band's accountants to be audited, together with a complete statement of income and expenditure.
on the 248 dates of the ‘Brothers in Arms’ world tour, the entire accounts were only £4.04 out of balance.
However, I don't handle the band's royalty income from records and publishing.
Those cheques and statements arrive here, made out to the band's companies.
We check the statements, file them and send them on to the band along with our commission invoice.
Any manager who does handle the artist's money is taking a foolish risk, as well as letting themselves in for an enormous amount of unnecessary work.
Management Commissions
The commission arrangement shouldn't leave either side resenting what the other is getting.
Traditionally, management commission rates have ranged from 15 to 25 per cent of the band's gross income.
The manager's commission doesn't have to be the same on everything, and my initial rates with the straits were set by their lawyer at the beginning of our relationship.
At various times I have altered my charges on particular areas.
on radio, television, sponsorship, sessions and producer work I take 20 per cent because those things are often rather fiddly, involving quite a lot of work and not producing very much of a financial return.
The commission on records is between 15 and 20 per cent, while on publishing I got 15 per cent until Mark Knopfler voluntarily put it up to 20 per cent .
on live work I used to get 20 per cent.
They were losing money on their early tours so to help them I dropped the touring commission to 10 per cent.
When the band became profitable on the road, it went back up.
In fact, the straits raised this an extra 5 per cent just before the ‘Brothers in Arms’ tour in recognition of the agency service which I have always provided.
This sort of relationship is ideal!
When working out commission rates the most important factor is the artist's ability to pay.
If an act is starting out and the manager immediately takes 25 per cent of their money, the band are almost certainly going to be in financial difficulties.
That doesn't mean the  manager shouldn't take a considerable share of the act's income at the beginning.
The manager will have business overheads which make sure he or she can do the job properly.
My office costs £5,000 a week to run, employing four people.
That has to be paid before I or my partner get anything.
There is no point in the act giving the manager only 5 per cent and then complaining he or she doesn't turn up to their shows.
The manager probably can't afford to get there.
When a band starts out, they could pool everything with their manager.
Also, some people do deals on the net income.
There are cooperatives in which the manager gets the same as the band members and the manager's office expenses are treated as a band cost, along with the trucks, boats and recording.
However, the subject of commission rarely crops up with major artists.
I have probably discussed it less than five times in twelve years with the straits.
Good Management
The manager is the manager because he or she takes the job on.
As Colonel Parker said ‘I'm Elvis's manager because I say I am, and Elvis says I am’.
Most people get into management because they find an act they want to work with.
They don't necessarily need to know what management is, they can learn all that.
Managers have to believe in their act because the low points can be very low, even though the high points are exhilarating.
If I have ever had any doubts about my work with Dire straits, I pull out one of their albums and play it.
That is enough, I am back up straight away.
The manager has to be honest, competent and use common sense, while getting on with the artist.
I have been lucky enough to have almost the perfect relationship with my act.
We have a very similar Northern background, are roughly the same age and have the same sense of humour.
Apart from the music, that has really helped us to stay together.
The greatest compliment Mark Knopfler ever paid me was in a magazine when he was asked to list the members of Dire straits.
He said that apart from himself, the band would be John, Ed and Paul.
I thought that was great.
Working with Dire straits has always been a vocation for me.
The others have just been a job.
Booking Agents
CARL LEIGHTON-POPE runs Prestige Talent agency.
part of the Bugle Group of companies which includes IRS records.
He began in the music business running a recording studio and in band management.
Carl moved into agency at NEMS in the late 1970s and after a few years was instrumental in the formation of the PAN agency.
In the 1980s Carl has managed several successful artists and has run his own companies.
Bonair Records and Bonair Songs.
This is an edited version of an interview with Carl at his Prestige Talent offices and in the back of a taxi en route to a band's showcase.
An agent deals with live gigs, concerts and touring.
To that end, the agent meets with an artist's management and its record company to decide the best touring period.
This is usually linked with an album release date.
Together, we assess when the album should reach the market place, and from that the agent books the territories where the band is to play.
From talking to local promoters we decide the level at which the band is to work.
That is measured by the size and capacity of the halls in each territory.
Deciding on the right level for a band depends on the policy ideas which characterize different agents.
I favour the approach that if the band is worth 2,000 people in a town, then it is smart to book the 1,500-seat venue.
If there are two or three hundred people left outside trying to get in, there is a certain excitement surrounding the gig.
Other agents would choose a 2,500-seater for the same band.
They put pressure on the record company and the promoter to sell those extra 500 seats.
However, I believe that particular gamble is often lost by negative press coverage.
Instead of reporting the number of people at the gig, journalists query the 2 or 300 empty seats in the hall and question whether the band is really gaining popularity.
If there are 2 or 300 people outside, the gig is sold out, and that term still has a certain magic in the music industry.
The Ticket Price
Having decided the touring period and the size of halls a band will play, the agent's job is to work with local promoters to determine the ticket price.
After agreeing the hall's capacity, this is the most important decision during the tour.
To set the ticket price, the agent has to look at what is happening in the industry, what an average ticket price is, and what the touring artist is worth as an attraction.
A ticket price directly affects a concert-goer.
When it is set, the artist is immediately linked with an amount of money in the public's mind.
In the UK, there is still something magic about the £10 figure.
If an artist's concert can be priced at £9.50, people don't consider it especially expensive.
The aim with pricing is not to sell your act cheaply and not to leave the audience feeling ripped off.
Having decided on the capacity of the venue and the ticket price, it is simple to multiply one by the other to ‘gross the hall’.
Most halls are one ticket price.
If the ticket price is £10 and there are 200 people in the hall, that is a £2,000 gross.
After VAT has been paid, the rest of the money is split three ways: to the act, to the promoter, and to the cost of the event.
Costs
While planning the gig, the agent works with the promoter and looks at the event's costs.
These include security, staging, promotion, marketing, radio adverts, catering on the night for the artist, carrying the equipment in and out of the hall, the PRS percentage, the hall hire, as well as the printing and distribution of posters.
The list is very long!
Once these expenses have been fixed, the agent goes to the record company and tries to reduce the event's costs.
The agent may suggest a joint postering campaign, advertising the band's album on the gig's posters.
Another idea is to split the cost of radio adverts.
The record is played during the advert while the gig's details are broadcast.
The reason for reducing the event's costs is that the less money which is spent on the gig means that more money goes to the artist.
Having deducted the costs after VAT, 50–60 per cent of the money taken from ticket sales is left to share between the promoter and the artist.
Depending on the reputation of the artist, the agent makes a deal to split this percentage of the ticket money from 70:30 up to 90:10 or 95:5 in the artist's favour.
If the artist is a major attraction, whose concert tickets are certain to be at premium, a 90: 10 deal is likely.
In that case, the promoter receives 10 per cent of the net and the band gets 90 per cent.
However, a 90:10 deal after costs also means that every expense is borne in that proportion.
If the band spends a lot of money in the venue (with a big stage extension, an early ‘get-in’ to the venue, playing very late, or running up an  enormous catering bill), all of these costs are paid mainly by the artist.
Every pound spent on these extra expenses is one less pound which can't be split between the artist and the promoter.
For each pound of these costs, the artist pays 70, 80 or 90 per cent in lost revenue, depending on the percentage split between the artist and the promoter.
The agent also has a vested interest in keeping the event's costs at a minimum.
The agent is paid by commissioning the artist.
Whatever money the artist leaves the venue with is the amount which the agent can commission.
This is around 10 per cent.
I he exact commission figure is a matter for negotiation between the artist's manager and the agent.
The art of making a good deal as an agent is to keep the promoter's costs down, while allowing him or her a sufficient budget to make sure the event is successful.
Guaranteed Fees
Most bands work on a guaranteed fee against a percentage.
For instance, if the not gross is £10,000, and £4,000 of that pays the event's costs, there is £6,000 to split between the promoter and the band.
The agent's trick is to persuade the promoter to guarantee as much of the artist's share as possible.
This is the moment when the promoter has to demonstrate faith in the act's ability to do good business.
If an 80:20 deal is negotiated, the £6,000 should be divided with £1,200 going to the promoter and £4,800 to the band.
The ultimate deal is for the promoter to guarantee the band the whole £4,800.
This proves the promoter's confidence that every ticket will be sold, committing him or her to paying the artist a fee as if the event is a sell-out, however many people actually attend the gig.
When there is a certain amount of risk involved in an event, most promoters opt for paying the minimum amount of guarantee possible against a larger percentage for the artist.
In this situation, the onus is on the band to sell all the tickets and to come out with the extra money.
If the band don't attract a sell-out crowd, the promoter's risk has been minimized.
Then the promoter only has to pay the band the guaranteed fee plus costs.
The ‘Gross’ Deal
The agent can also make a deal with the promoter on the gross and not the net figures.
The agent would agree with the promoter that for every pound taken on the door, the artist will receive a certain percentage.
As an example, this could be 50p of every pound.
The agent and artist don't care what happens to the other 50p, whether it is spent either as the show's costs or as the promoter's profit.
The promoter simply has to guarantee the artist's 50p.
In this case, the  agent only needs to see a ticket manifest (a government-stamped document showing how many tickets are printed for the venue) and a box office statement from the hall (stating how many tickets were sold) when checking the promoter's expenses.
If 1,000 tickets were sold at £1, the promoter would take £1,000.
If the deal were 50 per cent of the gross, the artist takes £500 and that is the end of the matter.
If the agent cuts this type of deal tightly enough, the promoter is forced to think twice about spending money.
However, if the deal were, for instance, a 90: 10 split and not a gross deal, the promoter would realize that for every pound he or she spends on costs, 90 pence of that pound belongs to the artist.
This could lead the promoter into spending more money on advertising than may be necessary because only 10 per cent of these expenses are his or her costs.
But if the deal were a gross deal, then the promoter would look to save as much money as possible.
The disadvantage of this is that some promoters underadvertise, underpromote, and undermarket the gig to try and put more pounds in their pockets by reducing their expenses.
Here the artist can often suffer by not selling a lot of tickets, while the promoter loses money as well.
Promotion
The result of good promotion can be a sell-out.
It is great to drive through a German city and see full colour posters for your band with a ribbon across the poster which reads: AUSVERKAUF (sold-out).
This raises the status of the ticket in the public's mind.
Kids walk along the street, look at the concert poster, see the band's name and read ‘sold-out’.
They realize they may have missed an event.
By doing that, an advance ticket-buying market is created.
The next time the band plays in that town, kids will run out early and buy tickets.
They won't want to be the one in their class, group or gang who missed buying a ticket having known the show was sold out last time.
This is just one way a band can build up its market in the territories it tours, from a 500- or 1,000-seat club up to a 10,000-seat arena.
Talent Acquisition
As an agent my strength is in my clients.
I can't rely on people coming into my office and booking artists.
In my early years, I set out to find a roster of acts who I would represent.
one of my first artists came through a very old friend called Richard Ogden who now manages paul McCartney.
Then Richard managed a band on Virgin records called the Motors.
Richard played me their record and invited me to the end of recording party.
I met the guys, loved the songs and they asked me to be their agent.
Richard wanted me to book thirty shows in the clubs and I did.
I had also been very friendly with Jeff Jukes and Max Hole (Max is the managing director of Warner  Brothers and Jeff manages the Fixx and Rupert Hine, a very established producer).
Max and Jeff managed a group called Camel.
This band were doing very good business in the town halls.
They had just done a big concert at the Albert Hall with an orchestra for an album called Snowgoose .
They came to me because they were unhappy with their agent and wanted to change to me.
Richard Ogden was working on the Motors with a lawyer in New York, Charles Levison, who later became the managing director of Arista records in the UK and managing director of Warner Brothers.
While he was at Arista, Charles and I got to know each other well.
I impressed him with my work on the Motors and Camel.
He had Patti Smith on Arista who had released a big hit, ‘Because the Night’.
she wanted to do some concerts in Europe and I booked the tour.
Andrew Bailey, an A&R man also at Arista, asked me to look after a young guy named Roy Hill.
This is the typical career pattern of a lot of agents.
Apart from demo tapes, agents find new acts from four sources within the business.
The main source is record companies.
Young A&R guys are out every night looking at bands.
They sign an act whose manager is inexperienced and asks for advice on choosing an agent.
Record companies look at agency rosters, like mine, or those of Barry Dickens (Fleetwood Mac, Bee Gees, Bob Dylan) or Ian Fluke (Eurythmics and simple Minds) and they choose the agent who is suitable.
Two other sources are becoming more productive of new talent.
one is lawyers and the other is accountants.
These professional advisers to musicians have immense importance to the longevity of an artist's career and the retention of his or her wealth.
Pat savage and O. J. Kilkenny run a very successful accounting firm.
They represent Van Morrison and U2.
They knew Van needed an agent and suggested I speak to him.
These recommendations go on all the time, but they are recommendations and that is all.
The agent has to make the artist believe he or she can do the job.
The fourth way of finding acts is from among an agent's existing managers.
Jeff Jukes managed Camel in the 1970s and the Fixx in the 1980s.
They are both clients of mine.
If Bruce Allen signs another act, hopefully he would come to me after my work with Bryan Adams and Lover Boy.
Managers are not necessarily as transient as acts.
A successful manager may manage five or six bands in his career.
If an agent does a good job with the first one, and builds a successful relationship with the manager, there is no reason why that agent can't deal with all of a manager's acts.
However, if an agent is enjoying the wine with a Bryan Adams, he or she may be drinking the vinegar with a manager's smaller act who makes much more work than the bigger act, with absolutely no income.
Here the agent is investing in the small artist, trusting the manager's judgement that this act should go on to be the next big thing.
Bryan Adams
I look at the charts every week.
If there is something interesting, I make a call to the record company and find out whether an agent is in place.
If there isn't, I speak to the manager and arrange a meeting.
I saw Bryan Adams on the front of his album.
He was wearing a T-shirt and jeans and looked perfect for the UK market.
I listened to the record.
It was a rock ‘n’ roll record which is my kind of music.
I called Bruce Allen, his manager, and we met in Germany.
Bruce also managed a band called Lover Boy.
I agreed to represent Lover Boy and Bryan Adams throughout Europe.
The younger acts are the major problem in the music industry.
At Prestige Talent, we have three young agents learning the business from booking colleges and clubs like the Borderline in London.
We need these people to be our filters and talent scouts, going out to gigs and finding new bands.
However, 90 per cent of the bands we sign attract us either with recently recorded product or with a record due out on release.
It is now virtually impossible for a major London agency to book gigs for many acts who don't have a record deal.
The agent's problem with acts who are still looking for a deal is how to judge their potential for success.
If an agent decides to invest in an act for the first year of its career, this band may not sign a record deal.
In fact, they may split up, probably owing the agent money.
Agents have to regard these young acts as an investment.
The safer investments are ones with more people involved.
If the agent knows that a publisher, a record company and a manager have all invested, at least he or she can feel there are a number of people needing this act to be successful.
Young New Acts
Bands can't make it alone.
They must have a team of people to present their case to the industry.
The industry doesn't like dealing with the artist direct because that makes it difficult for music business professionals to be as critical or as observant as they would like.
The business wants to deal with a representative.
Young bands have to find their own team (agent, manager, publicist and others) to put around them and to believe in their music.
The most effective way of finding support is through gigs.
Any major music paper, such as NME or Melody Maker , lists the telephone numbers of music clubs and pubs and these places do book young bands.
They put on new acts if they are called direct and are sent a rough demo tape.
some members of a band could go out in the evening and pop into a whole bunch of places to ask if they will give  them a gig.
They won't pay a young act any money, but they will let them play third on the bill on a Monday night or on a Thursday night when there aren't many people in the venue.
Bands have to stay out there.
They have to be seen.
Nothing happens while you are rehearsing in a garage.
Nothing at all.
Record companies, managers or anyone in the music business can only notice your music if your band is at a venue playing in the public eye.
For example, I have been at a venue like the Marquee club to check out a band for a record company and have also watched 30 minutes of the first act.
Most often the support band are terrible, but they could have been great and they could have been you.
You might have been up there playing and somebody like me or a young talent scout from a record company.
might have been in there to look at someone else, to talk with a club owner or having a drink.
Maybe they would feel there was something interesting about your band.
Our young bookers look at about ten acts a week.
Most of these aren't signed, but if we look at them early and register our interest in the act, we hope the band will consider us to be their agent when they have a record deal.
As an established agent, I have to remember that our big acts of today were our little ones of yesterday.
I look after several young bands.
One of my successful young bands is Del Amitri, who are on A&M Records.
This is a scottish rock band (every album has to be categorized to some extent in order to sell it).
After meetings with A&M Records and the band's management, we realized Radio I wasn't necessarily going to welcome this band with open arms.
This posed a particular problem for an agent.
Usually, an artist can be booked out on the strength of a record's popularity and radio air play.
As the band's agent in this case, I had to work with the record company to circumvent the rigid Radio I Top 40 format.
We opted to promote the band at a local level, and not nationally.
This avoided putting full page ads in Melody Maker, NME and Sounds , and hoping somebody would read them.
Instead, we booked the band into pubs and clubs all around the country, anywhere we could.
Wherever there was a gig or a support, we took anything for Del Amitri.
The moment we had a gig, that city was faxed through to the record company marketing people.
They instructed us to tell the promoter that they would give some money towards the gig's adverts in the local papers.
The record company told their sales rep to go into the town's music shops with T-shirts, get the local papers promoting the act and put the band into the local radio station.
The following day the band was in another town, the day after that somewhere else.
As the band were good enough live, we could build up a ground swell of interest at a local level which then translated into national success.
The Problems of Success
After young bands have had a couple of hit singles, with their album selling well, everybody wants to see them perform live.
Everything is going right and the act have a very good chance of success.
However, modern artists haven't always played live very much and ‘paid their dues’.
They haven't worked in the clubs and colleges, building themselves up over the years.
suddenly, they are put into a situation where the expectations of their performance are much higher than they can possibly deliver.
That causes a problem.
The record buyer who has fallen in love with the band, and goes to see them play, is often disappointed by a lacklustre show.
It isn't the fault of the band.
They have become wildly popular, with their record sales and media profile, without knowing how to work with an audience, how to project, how to sell their performance or how to deal with their emotions on stage.
Why should they?
Probably they hadn't been on stage more than half a dozen times before they were put under this microscope.
The Making of a Good Agent
A good agent really understands the route a band has to take and must have a great relationship with his or her promoters to persuade them to believe in an artist.
Although the agent represents the artist, he or she also must represent the promoters' interests.
A lot of agents don't subscribe to this idea.
I believe that the more promoters to whom agents sell acts that lose money, the less people there will be around to do business with.
When an agent is cutting a deal, he or she needs to leave something for everyone.
The agent must ensure the promoter makes enough money, and that the manager doesn't squeeze the promoter's profit margin too much.
Getting into the agency business isn't as easy as it may seem.
A lot of young agents and bookers come from colleges where they have started as social secretaries and begun to book bands.
The advantage of this is that social secretaries deal with other people's money, so a few wrong decisions won't hurt their own wallet.
During their work on a social committee they can build their relationships with people in the industry, like agents selling bands and record companies helping with marketing and promotion.
To become an agent, these social secretaries simply have to reverse their roles with the agents who have been selling them acts for the previous few years.
If an aspiring agent doesn't go to college or university, there is no reason why he or she can't apply to an agency and come in as a very junior person to work their way up.
This business is open to opportunists and opportunity.
Getting in can be quite difficult, but once you are in and you work hard, it will work for you.
For a young band first starting work with an agency, the normal commission rate is 15 per cent.
The agent takes 15 per cent of the band's earnings which has nothing to do with the band's costs.
If a band rents a van or hires a roadie, that is of no interest to the agent.
The agent's percentage comes from the band's gross earnings at gigs.
When an act becomes more established, or if it is a new band with good management and someone who knows the business, the agent may make a 10 per cent deal — the standard commission rate.
There is a ‘Mr 10 per Cent’ feel about being an agent and there always will be.
However, if you become a superstar artist, the agent's 10 per cent quickly starts to dwindle.
Major Recording and Publishing Agents
BRIAN SOUTHALL is a consultant to various music business companies and a freelance writer.
His career in music began in the mid-1960s, editing and writing the pop page of his local Essex newspaper.
From there he moved to the trade paper Music Business Weekly and on to Melody Maker and Disc before joining A&M Records as press officer.
He held a similar position at Tamla Motown before becoming the head of press at EMI Records.
During 15 years with EMI he worked in artist development, marketing, promotion and public relations, and on leaving the company in 1989 he was the director of public relations and communications, EMI Music Worldwide.
He has published a history of Abbey Road studios and wrote the BBC Radio 1 special, ‘The House of Wax’, two programmes narrated by Cliff Richard telling the 90-year history of EMI.
The Structure of a Record Company
Record companies throughout the world operate in the same basic way.
They all try to achieve two simultaneous goals — success and profitability.
EMI Music Worldwide is one of the world's big five music companies along with CBS, Warners, BMG and polygram.
It operates in thirty-seven countries around the world and in 1988 celebrated ninety years in the recorded music business.
The activities of all its record companies, whether they are based in Europe, Asia or south America, centre around recording, manufacturing, distribution, artists and repertoire, sales, promotion, and marketing.
In some countries, EMI record companies aren't involved in all these operations.
Manufacturing, for example, is often carried out in one regional centre.
However, the areas of marketing, sales, and promotion are at the heart of every record company.
From wherever the music and artists originate, their recordings have to be marketed, sold and promoted, and this applies to international superstars as well as emerging talent.
The size of EMI's operation in any country is determined by the size of the local market, the availability of promotional outlets like.
radio  and television stations), and the number of local artists signed to the company.
The business of music publishing uses the same approach.
The size of each national publishing company is determined by the depth of the international song catalogue to be promoted, and the songwriting talent available locally.
The business of artists and repertoire, commonly abbreviated to A&R, is the most important part of any record company.
Charged with the task of discovering signing and developing artists, the A&R staff are the first point of contact with a record company for the new acts who are intent on becoming the superstars of tomorrow.
Before analysing the role of the A&R department in both record and music publishing companies, it would make sense to look at the other areas which create a fully operational major record company: manufacturing and distribution, recording studios, marketing and promotion, sales, professional advisers, and the international division.
Manufacturing and Distribution
This is concerned with the manufacture of records, music cassettes and compact discs (generally known as ‘product’) in factories owned and operated by individual record companies.
These factories are mainly concerned with manufacturing product for artists signed to the record company.
However, they also do contract work for other record companies which don't run their own plants.
All finished product, whether it is for EMI or another record company, is transported to a distribution centre.
From there, it is delivered to shops or to the warehouses of other record companies.
Telephone orders placed by retail dealers are processed at the distribution centre, and their requirements are ‘picked’ from the storage lanes and packaged for delivery to shops.
Under the direction of a senior executive, the M&D facility is responsible for maintaining appropriate stock levels of the raw materials with which to manufacture records, cassettes and CDs, including labels and inlay cards.
Record sleeves, which are printed and produced by specialist printers, are delivered to the plant in quantities specified by the record company's own production department.
similarly, the quantity of records, cassettes and CDs to be manufactured is set by the company's sales and marketing departments.
This reflects the probable initial demand for each release.
With product that has a regular and consistent sales pattern, the factory is responsible for ensuring that the appropriate levels of stock are maintained.
The supply of all product to shops is in direct response to retailers' orders, which are placed either with the distribution centre or with the company's sales force on their monthly calls.
Sales
The company's sales division consists of a national team of representatives who sell all product.
As well, there is a strike force to concentrate on singles.
This smaller team takes records to shops which have a high singles turnover and also carries the most popular current albums to top up a shop's supply of its best-selling products.
On every release, targets are set for the whole sales force by the sales manager or director, in consultation with the marketing division.
Each month, the company's new products are presented to the sales people by the marketing teams.
The sales staff show these new releases to retailers who decide whether to place an order.
If the finished product isn't ready when the sales force make their monthly calls, advance cassettes, track details and campaign plans will be presented to the retailers instead.
Most major record companies have experimented with selling other music-related items such as T-shirts, posters, calendars and books.
Almost all companies have decided that these items are best left to specialist manufacturers.
However, record company sales forces do supply music videos to the limited number of record shops which stock them.
Recording studios
These are often owned and run by record companies.
EMI Music, for instance, owns the famous Abbey Road studios in London and the Capitol Tower studios in Los Angeles.
Artists don't have to use their record company's studios, but most companies encourage this.
studios owned by record companies can also be hired by any artists and producers.
Marketing
Within a record company this involves planning campaigns aimed at record retailers and the record-buying public, along with the press and promotion staff who deal with newspapers, magazines, radio and television.
After it has been decided to make a record, these departments, together with the artist's manager and the A&R staff, discuss the release date.
Under the direction of a marketing director, artists will be allocated to a label manager, a press officer and a promotion person.
Their responsibilities include ensuring availability of the master tape to suit the release schedule; overseeing the production of artwork for the sleeve's manufacture; preparing the appropriate campaign for the single or the album release; and keeping within the promotion budget which is prepared with the marketing director.
In addition, they decide the quantity of the initial pressing of their artists' recordings (for a new artist's first single this would be around 5,000); they liaise with the manufacturing plant to ensure further stock is available if it is needed; and they avoid producing stock which would probably never be sold.
The label manager also organizes promotional material like T-shirts, badges, picture discs and special limited edition sleeves (in the right quantities to ensure maximum effect and minimum waste).
Along with the press and promotion staff, the marketing department has to ensure that every potential record-buyer is aware of their artists' work.
Assembling the right creative material, such as publicity photographs, sleeve designs, poster and advertisement material, is important for all artists.
This material emerges from a series of meetings between the label/product manager, the artist and their management.
Often artists have an idea of the image they wish to create.
For this, the choice of the right photographer and designer is critical.
some record companies have their own in-house designers.
These are usually the smaller, independent labels.
Major companies call on many of the world's leading photographers and designers.
The Promotion Team
The company's promotion team supplies records and promotional videos to all major radio and television stations, as well as arranging appearances by artists on particular programmes.
Without radio play, a record can disappear without trace.
The public will rarely buy a record they have never heard, particularly when it comes from a new or unknown artist.
Regional promotion ensures that TV and radio stations throughout the country are supplied with all the material and information available.
Club promotion reflects the importance of dance clubs and the contribution they make towards a record's popularity.
The Press Department
The press department is responsible for ensuring that records are sent to all major reviewers, as well as placing and arranging artists' feature articles and interviews in appropriate publications.
Marketing Records
Singles released by major, established artists often benefit from a substantial marketing campaign, with posters and media advertising.
The cost of this is covered by increased singles sales and the eventual high sales of the album.
Clearly, the more successful and popular the  artist, the greater demands there are from TV radio and the press while the promotional video will also be sought after by the media.
The release of a single by a new act doesn't usually result in a major marketing campaign.
While relevant trade and some consumer advertising will be placed, this early stage is more about attracting radio play and media coverage.
on the radio, the company can get the record heard by the public.
Newspaper and magazine articles create an interest in the artist.
As singles usually make a loss for record companies, being ‘tasters’ for the album, any large marketing campaign would only increase this deficit.
A new band's first album ideally follows some success with a single.
That doesn't always mean a high chart place, although it would be very helpful!
Good reviews, favourable media coverage and positive response from radio all serve to create a ‘buzz’ for the artist and promote interest in the album.
For the album, the marketing department constructs a campaign with appropriate advertising in newspapers and magazines, posters on buses, in the tube, at railway stations and on advertising hoardings, plus support for any live dates.
Live work for an up-and-coming artist is vital.
Although record companies aren't in the business of promoting tours (see the agent's article in this book), they will lend their support to ensure their artists' performances are in the right venues.
sometimes this back-up will be financial.
Releases from major acts have a bigger push and the marketing budget is much larger.
As TV advertising campaigns cost hundreds of thousands of pounds, there must be a guaranteed sales return to justify such expenditure.
For this reason the concentration on TV advertising is on compilation albums and greatest hits collections.
Packaging
The packaging of all artists' product is vital.
This is debated and discussed between the artist, manager, marketing staffs and the A&R person in order to create and present a consistent ‘face’ to the public.
It is unlikely that the record company would enforce their views on a new artist over publicity photographs, clothing styles, sleeve artwork or video plans.
However, these are the very subjects that need clarification and agreement before a record's release or the setting up of any tour dates and making of a promotional video.
International Division
On the international level, major record companies operate a marketing and promotion division.
Its responsibility is to create awareness, both in and outside of the company, of current artists' product.
Under the direction of a director (or a vice-president in the United States), the international operation co-ordinates the simultaneous, world-wide release of major artists' product; and it organizes the delivery of new and developing artists' records, promotional material and videos to all overseas companies where these recordings are considered for release.
The decision to release new product in overseas territories is made by each local company, taking into consideration the musical preferences of their own market.
When a record is released overseas, the international marketing division works on the promotional opportunities which exist locally, ensuring artists are available to visit those countries where there is radio, TV and media interest.
Professional Advisers
Within each record company there are financial and legal departments who play an important part in the company's investment programme, like signing artists, acquiring labels and assessing manufacturing capacity.
They draw up contracts, ensure appropriate legal protection for copyrights, advise on recording and marketing budgets and check that royalty payments to artists and producers are made in a timely and accurate fashion.
While the final policy on all major legal and financial matters is set by the company's managing director or president, the advice offered by these specialist executives improves the efficiency, profitability and overall performance of the company.
Artists and Repertoire
This is the usual first point of contact with a record company for an aspiring artist.
As a result, many young acts regard the A&R staff as the ultimate decision-makers: career makers or breakers, heroes or villains.
More often than not, the A&R personnel are working to a brief.
They may have noted gaps in the company's roster of artists which need to be filled.
Major record companies, by the very definition of the world ‘major’, are intent on targeting different audiences with specific styles of music.
To achieve that, they need a wide spread of artists.
Balancing an existing roster is of primary importance to a major company, whereas some smaller independent companies can and do concentrate on a particular sound or style of music.
The question most often asked of A&R people is ‘What happens to all the tapes sent in?’
The answer is simple.
Unsolicited tapes are allocated to the various members of the A&R team.
They review them and respond accordingly.
Usually a standard letter is sent if the tape is unsatisfactory or inappropriate.
However, if there is something of interest, one of the A&R team will make contact with the artist, assuming there is a contact address or telephone number on the tape (it is remarkable how many tapes arrive without these basic details).
The second popular question follows almost automatically, ‘What are the chances of getting a deal from an unsolicited demo tape?’
The answer is not encouraging.
One in 5,000 is a rough estimate.
Record companies receive between 80 and 120 tapes in an average week.
As Nick Gatfield, director of A&R for EMI Records (UK) says, ‘In three and a half years at EMI I have signed only one artist from an unsolicited demo tape.’
According to Gatfield there is one obvious way of reducing the odds:
It is all about presentation.
Send in a good quality tape with no more than four songs.
Choose the songs which show the widest range of your abilities, and put the best one first.
Also, include a brief biography and, if possible, a picture.
It is as plain and simple as that.
Some of the tapes we receive arrive on dodgy cassettes, have various bits and pieces of other music on them, and we have to waste time trying to find the relevant bit of the tape.
Frequently there is no contact number, so even if we like the music, we can't do much about it.
The material included on any demo tape, to gain the attention of A&R staff who are listening to tapes all week, should be strong properly presented and preferably original.
‘Cover versions can give an assessment of singing ability’, says Gatfield, ‘but not star quality.
I believe that non-writing artists need a staggering voice and great charisma.
We are really looking for original material performed in an original way.’
star quality is the ingredient which is almost impossible to define and most sought after by record companies.
‘Essentially what I look for is a star, somebody with great character,, confirms Gatfield. ‘of course, it is usually the front man, the singer, who needs to have that special appeal.’
The visual presentation of a new artist is another area of interest to A&R people.
presenting songs on video is a real bonus for the record company.
‘producing a video is fantastic.
Every piece of material we  have helps to assess an act.
We don't expect videos from emerging artists because they can be very expensive,’ explains Gatfield.
‘Leaving videos aside, I won't sign a band without seeing them perform live, if that is possible.
people are going out to see live bands again, and gigging is an important factor in establishing new acts.
Diesel park West sent us incredible demo tapes, but I would not do a deal without seeing them perform live.,
The role of management in the first stages of a band's career should not be underestimated.
As Gatfield says,
all artists should look for management very early on.
They can certainly get record company interest without management.
However once a record deal is signed the value of good management becomes obvious.
In addition to the A&R department's other duties, we also teach and help new, inexperienced managers who bring acts to us.
Inefficient management makes life very difficult for everybody, artists, record companies, agents and promoters alike.
A band's early live dates may attract interest from management companies who already have artists signed to record companies.
These are the people who open the doors which are closed to unsolicited demo tapes.
New artists without management could buy the annual directory published by the British music industry's leading trade magazine,Music Week.
This carries a list of managers plus all record company addresses.
However, managers have their own criteria before signing a band to their ‘stable’.
The easy part is identifying the manager you want.
The hard graft may be persuading him or her to do the job.
Like record companies, managers want to hear good demo tapes, see a good live show and identify the act as having excitement and potential.
of course, not all management companies and managers are based in London.
Every city and many large towns have a management company which can open doors and who are in regular contact with A&R staff, anxious for news about outside London.
With or without management, Gatfield has a few words of warning for up-and-coming hopefuls determined to make an impression on record company A&R people.
Don't pull stunts.
Don't turn up and play live on the back of a truck outside the record company.
It was probably effective the first time, but now it is looked on as a desperate move, a last ditch attempt to gain attention.
Don't arrive at the record company expecting, even demanding, a meeting.
You won't get an appointment.
send tapes in, or leave them at reception.
The A&R people will listen to them at their own convenience, which may be at midnight after a gig or on a flight across the Atlantic.
A&R staff don't listen to a tape for the first time in front of a new artist.
Finally, don't assume winning a talent contest is a passport to success.
We avoid all invitations to judge or sponsor such competitions.
They lack credibility.
If an act is good, we aim to be aware of them already.
We never offer recording contracts as  prizes, although we are constantly asked to do so.
There are enough places around the UK in which to play live, create a ‘buzz’ and catch our attention without competing with jugglers and animal acts.
As most new artists signed by record companies are introduced to A&R departments by established managers, or by music industry lawyers, artists should consider approaching more than just a record company when seeking a recording contract.
This situation also raises accusations that the record industry is an incestuous business in which the old pal's act dominates at the expense of new undiscovered talent.
Nick Gatfield disagrees.
‘The music business is a small community which communicates by word of mouth.
Any artist should seek out those people who can get them closer to a record company.’
The lucky few who are offered a recording contract must understand what they are signing.
As with any legal document, a record contract contains clauses and phrases which are not easily understood by the layman.
‘To ensure that artists are fully aware of all conditions and clauses we will offer a list of music industry lawyers for them to choose from if they need help with the contract.
We will not sign any artist who doesn't have legal representation.
This is as much for their protection as ours,’ says Gatfield (see Mark Melton's and Mark Boomla's articles for details of the legal and financial aspects of recording, publishing and other contracts).
There are other ways for aspiring stars to catch the attention of a record company.
According to Gatfield,
the music press is read avidly by A&R departments to find anything of interest.
These papers do review unsigned, up-and-coming acts and this is a useful source of information.
Also, anyone in the company can suggest names to us who? may be worth checking out.
In particular, sales people in the regions often notice or see promising local bands.
We check this information with our talent scouts.
We have two people working in A&R who are rarely in our offices.
They spend seven to ten days in a particular area, seeing bands, checking out the local press and radio stations, getting contacts for future reference.
These scouts need to be aware of new fashions as they happen so we can react immediately.
Before detailing the terms of a recording contract, Gatfield insists that artists who have been rejected should keep trying.
‘It is important that acts don't just send in exactly the same tapes time and time again.
Go back and work at it some more.
When you have something that is absolutely right, something you are proud to present, send it in.’
Artists who had been turned down can't expect assistance from a record company which already has a number of signed acts needing help and attention.
As Gatfield points out, ‘I can't  work on a host of acts who I am vaguely interested in, just in case one day they come up with something exciting.
If there is something of real interest to us, but we aren't ready to do a deal, we keep in touch and might fund a demo tape or some rehearsal time.’
The Recording Contract
‘Any artist thinking they have made it when they sign a recording contract is totally wrong,’ warns Gatfield.
‘That is when it really all starts.’
The Advance
As new bands get a pittance for live work, the record company put them on a wage which can be in the form of an initial advance.
For instance, an album deal will mean 50 per cent of the advance on signing.
This can be paid out weekly or monthly.
The remaining 50 per cent would be paid on delivery and acceptance of the album.
In football, the world's major players are invariably signed to the world's top clubs.
In music, the world's top artists are most often with the world's top record companies.
Contracts offered by major record companies are basically the same.
Artists sign a world-wide, long-term deal, and the record company is committed initially to releasing one or two singles and an album.
The record company, however, holds annual options to extend the deal up to five, six or even seven albums.
A Major Artist Deal
World-wide deal for seven albums
Advance (recoupable) £1.5m per album for first four albums; £2.0m in total for the remainder
Recording costs (recoupable) £150,000 to £250,000 per album
Video costs (recoupable) £300,000 to £500,000 per video
Manufacturing costs
35p per cassette
50p per /album
£2 per CD
Marketing costs £60,000 per album
Unit sales required for:
Contribution break even 700,000 albums and 550,00 singles
To recoup advances 1.6m albums and 1.3m singles
Signing major artists is a highly competitive business.
often it involves a long chase in which the relationships between the record company personnel, the artist and the manager can be the deciding factor.
This example of a major deal outlines the money paid to the  artist as advances for a seven-album, world-wide deal, with recording and video costs recoupable.
An essential part of such a major deal is that the album from an established artist is launched into the market place with a strong impact.
This is the reason for the committed marketing budget.
This amount confirms the record company's belief in the artist.
In turn, the artist supports the album by undertaking promotional work and, where possible, touring when the album is released.
A deal of this size, done by a British record company and covering the world, requires success not just in the UK, but also internationally.
The British market represents about 8 per cent of the world-wide record business.
The USA has 33 per cent, followed by Japan (14 per cent ) and Germany (9 per cent ).
However, there have been times in the recent past when 50 per cent of the artists selling and succeeding in the USA have been British.
Also, UK-based artists have been regularly responsible for over 30 per cent of the world's record business.
Unknown Artist Deal
Worldwide deal for five albums
Advance (recoupable) £30,000 to £75,000 per album
Recording costs (recoupable) £100,000 to £120,000 per album
Video costs (recoupable) £30,000 to £50,000 per video
Manufacturing costs
35p per cassette
50p per album
£2 per CD
Unit sales required for:
Contribution break even 110,000 albums
To recoup advances 350,000 albums
When signing a new artist the negotiating strength mainly lies with the record company.
However, the offer of a first record deal should not result in a ‘sign at all costs’ attitude from the artist.
An unsigned act which is being chased by half a dozen record companies does have some leverage in negotiations, but only as much as the levels of supply and demand will allow.
In the end, a record company makes a judgement on the value and potential of a new band.
The company is rarely persuaded to change that assessment, even in the light of competition from other companies.
The unknown artist deal reflects lower advances and reduced recording and video costs which sustain the emerging act through the development stage of their career.
A new artist with this sort of deal  should expect to receive a royalty rate of 10–14 per cent of the retail price.
This figure would include any producer's royalty.
As recording and video costs can rise with the artist's gradual development, there will be an evaluation of every record's sales figures to ascertain why a record failed or achieved only marginal success.
Then a decision can be taken about changing the artist's material, producer or musical style.
Finally, this decision amounts to the choice of whether to pick up the artist's annual option.
While it would be unlikely for a firm contractual commitment to be made which binds a record company to produce a promotional video, it is a matter of fact that a promotional video will be produced to support an artist's first single.
With limited production costs, this video would fall into the £15,000 to £30,000 range, as opposed to the six-figure costs incurred by the established major artists.
The cost of the promotional video for a developing artist would be recoupable against both audio and video income received by the record company.
The income to pay these video costs is usually minimal with new artists, so these expenses are often set against future video exploitation.
This is income which increases as the artist gains greater success and begins to release such items as compilation videos comprising selected promotional videos, or full length videos of live concert performances.
After the Deal: What Next?
After capturing the all-important record contract, the artist is left to work with the A&R person who made their introduction to the company.
‘In those early days,’ says Gatfield, ‘the A&R person is everything to a new act — they hold the purse strings and there is a very special relationship because it was the A&R person who offered them the way into a record company, which is very, very special.’
However, the days of moulding artists (’ wear that, play this, look like this, get your hair cut like that') have gone.
As Gatfield says, ‘I would not want to sign an artist who demands much moulding.
I am attracted to artists needing assistance to bring out the talent which is already there.
starting with the right material, the A&R staff try to encourage artists to write commercially and they introduce them to good studios, engineers, producers and other musicians.’
The whole process takes time.
It can be a year from signing the deal that the first single is released.
‘Those 12 months,’ explains Gatfield, ‘are spent preparing and fine tuning everything.
I don't like surprises in the recording studio.
I hope to go in with songs we are all happy with, the arrangements agreed and the musicians properly prepared.
It is too expensive to start rehearsing in the recording studio.
Having signed the new artist, spent time ensuring everything is right and finally gone into the studio to produce ‘the’ single, the record company puts its wares out for everyone to hear.
How will the public like it?
Will the radio play it?
Will it be a record that clubs get behind, or will the act become favourites with the media and no one else?
The A&R person's job doesn't end with handing over the record to the marketing, promotion and sales teams.
As Gatfield stresses:
In A&R, we are fully aware of the problems which exist in exposing new and developing acts, especially with the current state of British radio.
We are always looking for the revolutions in music, people like Prince or Jimi Hendrix.
But the nature of the media in this country isn't open to people breaking new ground.
Radio certainly isn't.
I believe that part of our responsibility in A&R is to introduce new artists and sounds to the market place.
It is tough, but with top quality artists we have a responsibility to offer their music to the public, however difficult it is to let them hear it.
Despite British radio's disinterest in new music, and the reduced influence of the music press, I believe real talent will eventually get through.
With good quality records and exciting live performances, artists can attract the attention of individual journalists and disc jockeys, even if they don't benefit from much daytime radio play.
Hopefully, these opinion-formers will champion the act's cause and gradually the public will be interested enough to find out more.
The pure pop act also has its problems when it comes to exposure.
According to Gatfield, ‘there is so much competition for air play between a host of pop bands, new ones need to have something special and different to stand out’.
Gatfield is still surprised by the record-buying public's assumption that the first record they purchase by a new act must be that artist's first release.
‘It is amazing how often they are wrong.
sometimes artists have been working for two or three years, releasing records unsuccessfully, although the public's perception is that their first hit must be their first record.
significantly, the more time that bands take becoming successful is often reflected by their longer stay at the top.’
Music Publishing
In music publishing there are also A&R people.
They have similar responsibilities to their counterparts in the record business.
The main difference is that in music publishing the company's interest is predominantly in the music and the lyrics — the written song or composition — rather than the recorded sound.
More recently, record company and music publishing A&R staff have been assessing much of the same talent from different standpoints.
This is because most of today's major recording artists compose their own songs.
similarly, most new and aspiring artists offer their own material for consideration.
There are some artists who rarely write their own material (Cliff Richard is the classic example), and as a result, the specialist songwriter always has a place in music publishing companies.
The music publisher represents the writer and their compositions.
The company's main duty is twofold: the exploitation and the protection of the ‘work’.
To achieve these aims, publishers collect all money due to the works in their catalogue.
This is from record sales, live performances and broadcasting (including TV commercials and film soundtracks).
In the UK, songs remain in copyright for the lifetime of the composer plus fifty years.
so, the publisher has constant work for new and contemporary writers as well as established composers whose work has spanned decades.
Music publishing companies are always alert to the possibility of signing new songwriting talent.
This is their main means of improving and updating their catalogue of songs.
They discover much of this talent in the same way as record companies.
often, new songwriters are searching for a recording contract as artists.
A music publishing contract may be offered to a developing artist after they have signed to a record company.
However, publishing companies are also the recipients of demo tapes.
publishers' requirements from these tapes are the same as those of record companies: a good recording which is well presented.
The former head of talent acquisition at EMI Music publishing in the UK, peter Doyle, explains this:
Presentation may not get you plus points, but poor presentation gets the sort of result which reflects the lack of effort put into the tape.
During my time at EMI, we received up to fifty tapes a week.
sadly, most of them fell well below the acceptable level of quality.
Although we did receive some sheet music, we mainly got tapes.
The ideal tape would have no more than three songs, a brief, factual biography, a photograph and details of any live dates.
It may seem odd that a music publishing company would want a photograph, but Doyle points out that the look of an artist may be important to develop an act's recording career.
If we sign an act without a record contract, we develop their music and their image so we can present them favourably to a record company.’
Many songwriting hopefuls never get that far.
Doyle believes it is mainly down to the quality of the songs which are submitted.
The songs are often badly written.
It is obvious the writers haven't paid enough attention to current popular songs and musical styles.
Unfortunately, most of the material which is sent in comes from people who have no other way of getting in touch with us, or who are unable to seek the advice of professional songwriters or publishers.
Essentially, they are amateurs with little experience.
Regrettably, this shows in the quality of their work.
Like record companies, publishing companies have their contacts.
Many of these are in recording studios.
producers or engineers who are working with a new artist, and creating something unusual or interesting, regularly tip off their contacts in the publishing business.
Doyle confirms this:
Most of the good songs which I heard about came to me that way.
People at a studio might call me, or tell the act to get in touch with me direct.
Like any other business, it is all to do with contacts and getting introductions.
People who could open my door were managers, agents, engineers and producers.
It is difficult for unknown newcomers to find those people in the first place.
The question of management and legal representation for aspiring new-comers is just as valid in publishing as it is in recording.
According to Doyle: ‘no one is forced to have a lawyer or manager when they meet with a publishing company, but deals would never be negotiated unless artists were legally represented.
We would help artists by suggesting a list of industry lawyers for them to choose from.’
To begin with, pure songwriters don't need managers as much as performing artists.
But when non-performing songwriters became successful, with their songs being recorded by major artists, and used in films or as TV commercials, then the need for a manager often becomes more pressing.
Contracts
The contracts on offer to music writers fall into two categories.
1.
The non-performing writer could be offered a firm one-year deal with options covering the next four years.
There would be an advance paid to the writer on signing the deal.
In return, the writer would give a product commitment.
This would be a promise to deliver anything up to ten songs in a year.
The royalties paid to writers for recorded music, referred to as mechanical royalty rates, are based on a percentage of the retail selling price.
This royalty is divided between the writer and the publishing company.
Initially, the split is around 70 per cent to the composer and 30 per cent to the publisher.
These shares will change with a writer's success, as an ever larger percentage will be paid to the composer, subject to negotiation.
The rights to the writer's compositions will remain with the publishing company for between ten and fifteen years after the expiry of the deal.
There is also the possibility of further income for the composer from sales of sheet music.
This is only a possibility when the songs are popular enough to be published in this form.
A royalty of between 10 and 15 per cent of the retail price of the sheet music could be negotiated for the composer.
2.
The songwriter who is also a performer, and has acquired a recording contract, could hope to receive a firm one-year deal with options covering the next three years.
There would be a product guarantee to deliver an album of material per year, which would be released under the separate recording contract.
If the publishing company are actively involved in acquiring a recording contract for the artist, they would provide studio time for producing demos.
Doyle explains another aspect of the deal: ‘the contract signed in the UK would be world-wide.
The advances would be at a level which enables the artist to live and concentrate on improving his or her writing skills.
The publishing deal is totally independent from any record contract.
There certainly would not be any conferring with the record company to try and establish comparable advances.,
So what does the publishing company do for the non-performing songwriter?
Doyle explains that
the publisher attempts to place the artist's songs with record companies, or with artists, to get them recorded and released on record.
In the UK, publishing companies take on very few non-performing songwriters.
There is more potential in the United States for that.
Most British recording artists write their own material, so they are the composers who are signed to publishing companies.
Despite that, a talented songwriter would, I believe, still get a deal in the UK.
In general, the emphasis in Britain is on the performer/writer.
Doyle advises songwriters who don't perform and who can't sing: ‘Don't try to perform your own songs.
You are doing yourselves and your songs a disservice.
Try and find someone who can sing.
It helps publishers enormously in judging the merits of your song.’
Having signed an artist, it is in the music publishing company's best interests to help this act win a recording contract.
‘When you are developing an act up to a record deal, you spend a lot of time with them,’ confirms Doyle.
‘At EMI we had our own recording studio.
our acts were in the building a lot of the time working on their songs, while we would help in the most appropriate ways to ensure the artist's continued development.’
The writer who is also a performer isn't the only one who gets help.
We advise our composers, helping to sift out the bad songs and to search out opportunities for our writers to compose ‘covers’ for particular artists.
While we aren't ruled by the charts, we do want our songs performed by the right people.
However, a lot of money can be earned from non-chart songs which are regularly ‘covered’, recorded, performed or used in films, television or commercials.
When a company runs a record and a publishing operation, there is some co-operation when signing artists.
some artists work with  EMI's music publishing operation and aren't signed to the record company, and vice-versa.
Doyle says:
Material did come to me at EMI Publishing from EMI Records, and if we were interested in an act who were also looking for a record deal, we would pass the information through to EMI Records.
Often, aspiring artists aren't as aware of publishing companies as they are of record companies.
As a result, record companies frequently receive demos tapes suited to a publisher's attention.
Artists interested in both publishing and recording contracts should send demo tapes to each company.
They should not assume their tape will get passed on.
The story of Elton John meeting his songwriting partner Bernie Taupin through a small ad in Melody Maker is one of the music industry's most famous legends, but the chances of two developing talents — a music writer and a lyricist — being brought together to form a successful partnership aren't good.
According to Doyle: ‘in principle, a publishing company would marry up a lyricist with a music writer, but I have never found the opportunity or the talent to do it.’
Breaking through, making it to the top and finding real success is never going to be easy, despite the well-voiced criticism of pop music being ‘tuneless rubbish’.
Peter Doyle is a publishing man who ‘admires the skill of the songwriter.
‘It is a craft that has to be learned, developed and finally mastered.’
Independent Recording and Publishing Companies
STEPHEN TANNETT is managing director of IRS Records, After a short recording career with the punk band Menace, Stephen joined Miles Copeland's organization working his way up from a job in the company's warehouse.
This article is an edited version of an interview with Stephen at IRS's offices.
Everybody producing music for sale to the public has the same problem: because making music costs money, selling product (records, tapes and CDs) is the only way to survive.
So small and large record companies all try to bring their music to the market place for an audience to buy.
The structures of majors and independents are determined by the size of the repertoire each company handles.
The staff of a major can be huge, but the nucleus of people who deal with a band is very similar in a good small company.
The A&R person is responsible for the artist's relationship with the record company.
At IRS, a lot of our A&R work is done by Miles Copeland and myself.
our press and radio promotions people can be our own staff or a freelancer, depending on the requirements of our artist.
Our label manager gets the finished master tapes to the stage of putting a sleeve around it, while our marketing person decides when records are released, in which formats and how radio and television will be approached.
These departments all exist in major and independent companies.
However, if a small company doesn't provide for any one of these operations, it is unlikely that company can give its artists adequate service.
single-handed operations are very difficult.
No one can be in more than one place at any time, and in the life of a single or an album, a record company needs people working in more than five places all at once.
As majors handle much more product than independents, they have more staff, maybe two or three label managers, two marketing people, and three or four radio promotions  staff.
our personnel at IRs reflect the number of people we need to do the job.
The advantages of a small company over a large one is a matter of swings and roundabouts.
In independent companies, a band can talk to the people who count and who make the decisions.
If a manager is in the A&R office at CBS, he or she rarely has access to anybody else in the company.
His or her only links are the A&R staff and perhaps the marketing people.
Unless the manager represents a big artist, he or she wouldn't work with the record company's senior directors.
By contrast, when a manager comes to seem me, I can make things happen to sort out any problems.
A small company will probably focus its attention on each artist's project more than a major label.
This is because majors work on the priority system.
If your band isn't this week's priority, you are probably going to be forgotten.
It isn't quite that cut and dried, but if you are signed to a small company with any degree of commitment, you can be sure that the company and their staff are in their weekly meetings pushing to get results from your music.
Independent and Major Publishers
Basically, publishers make paper transactions.
They don't produce a piece of vinyl to be sold in a retail outlet.
Old-style publishing was based around retail sheet-music sales, but current publishing is a banking operation which involves taking a risk on an artist.
Anyone can be a publisher by registering their songs with the various societies (MCPS and PRS).
If their copyright music becomes a record and is sold, royalties become due.
A publisher can collect that money just as easily as an artist, but a publishing company has the resources to offer the artist effective promotion services.
Often, smaller maverick publishers are the talent scouts for the music business.
They sign up new artists' songs, and franchise off their rights in that music to bigger companies when these larger firms become interested.
In effect, the small publisher ‘subpublishes’ their songs through a big company like SBK or Warner-Chappell.
The small publisher collects money in the same way as a larger one, but a bigger publisher has extra staff to promote a writer's repertoire.
If a writer has produced a song he or she thinks is a must for Cliff Richard, a major publisher is most likely to get that song where it needs to be in order to interest Cliff.
However, a small independent may take on an unknown songwriter when nobody else is interested.
In that case, the small publisher invests money to own the new writer's copyrights.
This can be one time when a young writer has to compromise on some immediate ambitions in order to progress on to the next stage of securing a record deal or having artists cover his  or her songs.
It must be better to have a publisher supporting your music, however big or small, than still being yet another unknown songwriter trying to get your first break.
Finding New Talent for Publishing and Recording
At IRS and the Bugle group we are very lucky because there is an agency called Prestige Talent which books concerts for artists who aren't signed to IRS or any other record company.
Like all booking agents, they have to be very hot on new talent.
They need to find the latest popular artists who are going to sell concert tickets.
IRs hears about a lot of young acts from prestige Talent.
Other ways we find bands include:(a ) being recognized in the industry as a company that is worth approaching (managers with new artists drop in to play a tape to me or any of the other A&R people);(b ) demo tapes (they all get heard eventually, but to get your tape picked out of the pile for special attention is difficult);(c ) seeing them play live on the London circuit.
If you work very hard at making somebody in a record company come and see you, that is probably as good a way as any to get some indication of your music's commercial potential.
After sending in a tape, with a biography, contact address and a photo, a useful approach can be to update the A&R department every time your band does one or a series of gigs. send in a sheet of paper personally addressed to your target A&R person.
The mail will come through to the secretary, and most of the time if it isn't a tape and is just a letter, the A&R person's morning mail will include your gig information.
At least your band's name and date sheet is on the A&R person's desk and they have seen it.
You can't lose from that.
Tapes are the last resort because they are the least effective way of attracting attention.
They are a part of the process, although I have never signed an artist from a demo without seeing the group play live.
You have to be creative to make your tape jump out of the pile.
If your biography says we are a 3 piece rock group from Lancashire, we play soft pop and melodic songs', it doesn't show much initiative.
If a band can work that little bit harder to be more original, someone somewhere should start to be interested in their music.
I have been approached on many levels, from stripograms in the office to packages arriving at reception with worms and a message inside threatening even worse if I didn't see the band (I didn't).
I did look at the stripogram group because I was so horrified at the thought that they might do it again.
Attracting interest is down to persistence.
Drop by the record company, go to the reception, give your tape to the receptionist and try to persuade him or her to put your demo on to your target A&R  person's desk.
You have to use these methods because there are fifty cassettes coming in every day and you need yours to be picked out and heard with particular care.
If somebody can manoeuvre your tape to the receptionist, who gets it to the secretary and then to the A&R person, it has to help your chances.
Everyone is overworked in this business.
The A&R work in smaller companies, when there isn't somebody whose sole job is sitting and listening to tapes, gets done when it can be.
If someone really works hard to get something to my attention, it will be heard that much quicker.
It is easy to find out who deals with A&R in a record company, and it has to be worth the legwork to find the person specializing in your type of music.
However it is more difficult getting an opinion about an act's music over the phone.
The phone rings a lot and usually it interrupts a meeting.
Developing New Artists
Once I am interested in an act's music and I like their live performance, the first thing I want to know is where this new band sees itself going.
some artists expect us to make them stars.
Others present what they do and what they want to achieve in their first year, for example, putting out an album and going on tour.
This reassures me that the band are clear about what they are trying to do, and it is far easier for me to get excited by someone coming in with a plan and an idea.
A recent example of this approach was our six albums with REM.
When we signed them, they had already made an EP by themselves.
They asked us whether we would consider releasing this record.
We decided to take it on.
They didn't ask for any money, they just wanted a good royalty and help with promotion.
From then on, they delivered an album absolutely on time for an August or September release six years running.
They always had their own plans.
They never complained that their music wasn't on certain radio stations because they understood the scope of their work.
It made life very easy for us.
We could concentrate on trying to bring their product to as many people in the market place as possible.
We weren't also having to create the idea and the reason for the band's existence.
They had those already.
If a band's young manager could come to me with an independently produced EP, with live circuit work pulling good crowds, success in merchandising T-shirts, and evidence of media interest, that would be a fantastic beginning.
Then everyone starts to believe in this group.
When a manager walks in with none of these things a record company is being asked to use a lot of imagination.
sometimes that    works.
When Kate Bush was signed, she wasn't a live artist and someone had to envisage her potential.
Stephen Tannett
After deciding we like a band, we would consider whether to make singles with an option for an album, or to go straight for an album.
In an album deal at IRS, we would make the band an offer based on the percentage royalty points which we thought were appropriate, having worked out a budget to make a record.
Almost always the company will pay the artist's recording expenses, give them a small advance and choose and pay the producer.
In any album deal, we normally take options for six albums.
When we are developing an artist on an international basis, success doesn't necessarily happen in the first or second album.
We may have to wait until the third one.
In that case, we want to be around for the big money in the fourth, fifth and sixth records.
All of our artists are on long-term contracts.
Normally, we don't pay less than 10 per cent to an artist.
smaller companies may try paying less, but a starting royalty of between 10 and 12 per cent is fairly standard.
Working with the Same Recording and Publishing Companies
If a recording artist comes to me without a publishing deal, I always insist IRS is considered for publishing as we can pay better percentage splits, do just as good a job, and help invest in an act's career at a vital time.
For instance, an IRs artist may want to tour.
We may only be able to afford to put up a certain amount of money to help fund them.
The band may turn to their publisher, who is part of a different company, for some extra money.
The publisher might refuse and there is little IRS can do to force that publisher to help the band.
If the band were signed to the publishing company which is part of the Bugle group, I could ring them to try and force the publisher to invest even more money in the artist.
That can make all the difference.
If we sign a publishing deal in conjunction with a record deal, we usually make the deals co-terminous. so, if we only make one single with a band, we don't keep the publishing on that act forever.
In a publishing deal, the average splits used to be 50:50.
Then it went to 60:40 in favour of the artist.
Currently, 75:25 is very favourable, 80:20 is exceptional and 90:10 is fantastic.
Most deals are done on the basis of 60:40.
Showcases
If a band has an A&R buzz, they may play a showcase at the Marquee or another London venue.
They probably invite the ‘fraternity’(the A&R staff from the major record companies) to the gig.
The risk is that there can be a collective NO from everyone.
one A&R person might tell another that he or she doesn't like the band, and the feeling  can spread like wild fire.
suddenly, everybody rejects the group, even though they may be fantastic.
In one go, the band have killed their chances with twenty-five different companies.
At least if it goes wrong with just one A&R person out front, there are plenty more to approach.
If I were looking for a record deal, I would be pursuing individual A&R people, getting them to come and see my band.
The band would have to be playing a lot of shows so they are available as often as possible for viewing.
Then, if the target A&R person does come, there is a better chance of him or her making a fair analysis of the artist without being caught up in A&R peer pressure.
There is apathy within the A&R departments of major record companies.
It is different for smaller companies like IRS.
If we go to see a band, we don't just send an A&R person, one of our product managers or maybe the sales director might come as well.
We want to know their opinion of the band so that if we sign the group, we hope everyone in the company will like the artist's work and try to promote it as well as possible.
Self-Reliant Acts
Independent companies are often the setting for bands who already have an idea of the sort of music they want to make, and where they want to end up.
More importantly, independents can be the right place for artists who want to keep a degree of creative control.
Radio
STUART GRUNDY is an executive producer at BBC Radio 1, with direct responsibility for evening and weekend programmes as well as special events.
He began in radio with the British Forces Broadcasting Service as a producer/ presenter and moved to Radio Luxembourg as a resident DJ in 1965.
Two years later he joined the BBC to help launch Radio 1.
Through the years he has produced almost every Radio 1 programme, written and presented numerous internationally syndicated music documentary series and published books on Great Guitarists and The Art of the Record Producer.
More recently he produced the overall sound coverage of Live Aid, and as a presenter one of his programmes, ‘Three at 30, Marvin Gaye’, won the 1989 New York International Festival's Gold Award for Best Talk/Interview Special.
Although many people would disagree, radio is without doubt the musician's best friend.
To make the most of it, musicians need to understand how it works.
Within the BBC, music is confined to three national networks, Radios 1, 2 and 3, with a limited amount being featured on Radio 5.
In contrast, local radio is a mix of commercial and BBC stations.
In the offing, with a probable start date of 1992, are three INRs or Independent National Radio stations.
Although the new Broadcasting Bill stipulates that these stations will provide a varied diet of programmes, the best bet is that one will feature primarily classical music, the second will have a pop/rock music base, while the third is likely to be an American-style ‘talk’ station.
As Britain's only national pop music station at present, Radio 1 is most likely to interest aspiring rock and pop musicians, so I will explain its workings and policies in some detail (although much of what is said about Radio 1 will also be applicable to Radio 2).
Radio 1
Radio 1 broadcasts for twenty-one hours a day, although shortly this will be twenty-four.
Its programmes are presented by well-established ‘personality’ broadcasters, some of whom are very music-oriented.
For them, music is their only consideration and they would regard themselves as fans and supporters of pop music.
other Radio I broadcasters see their job as being popular entertainers.
Indeed, one famous DJ was recently quoted as saying ‘I'm paid to provide the bits between the records’.
Not only is that true, it is also nothing to be ashamed of.
A lively radio station has a variety of on-air personalities, and not all of them will be as devoted to music as others.
Even though some presenters use music merely as a vehicle for their own performances, it is worth remembering that they would all find it very difficult to do their job without the music base.
Although presenters are encouraged to take an active part in preparing their programmes, this work is basically the responsibility of producers.
Currently, Radio 1 employs nineteen producers who supervise 147 hours of broadcasting each week.
They are all answerable to two executive producers, a head of music department and a network controller.
so, the station's management structure is quite bare and this helps it to respond very quickly to current events.
Every radio station needs a target audience.
This helps to structure the content of its programmes as well as its public image, and until the mid-1980s, Radio I was aiming at the 16–25 age group.
The received BBC wisdom was that young people went through a period of obsession with rock and pop, but that as ‘sanity and maturity’ prevailed, they would graduate ‘like their elders’to light, popular music.
Now, extensive research has proved that quite wrong.
It is very clear that today's parents don't fit the mould that society defined for them twenty years ago.
so, Radio I has widened its target audience to 16–35 year olds.
Radio 1 is heard by an average audience of over seventeen million every week.
The vast majority of people listen during the day, and the station has a different editorial approach to its weekday daytime programmes and to its evening and weekend shows.
put simply, weekday daytime programmes are more centrally co-ordinated and structured than all other shows.
The core of weekday daytime programming is the ‘playlist’, which has three major uses for Radio I: it provides an overall sound or ‘station feel’; it is an effective way to monitor how often the most popular records are played; and it makes a group responsibility out of a decision which may have far-reaching effects for individual musicians and the music industry.
The Playist
The Radio 1 playlist has changed its shape, size and effect considerably over the years.
Currently, there are fifteen records on its  A list and twenty on its B list (records on the A list are simply rotated more frequently than on the B list).
Every week, the playlisted records are programmed by a computer to rotate around the different weekday daytime shows.
out of the seven or eight records played in each Radio I half-hour, four or five will be from the playlist.
As a result, the A and B lists provide just over half of the records on daytime Radio 1.
As it is such an important programming tool, with such important consequences for musicians' careers, it is worth understanding how the playlist is chosen.
Every Monday morning, the Radio I playlist committee meets in one of the BBC's basement rooms.
This isn't for any covert reason, it just happens that most of the BBC's committee rooms are down there!
At this meeting are Radio 1's daytime producers and a chairperson who is usually the executive producer of weekday daytime shows.
Any presenters or other Radio I producers who want to contribute are welcome.
The emphasis at this committee is on records which have just been released, or which are about to be released.
Everyone arrives with a stack of singles which they think are worth considering for the playlist.
Each record is played and every member of the playlist group is asked to comment.
once the strength of the new week's material has been assessed, the next move is to decide which records will be removed from the present playlist to make room for the new ones.
This discussion may be based entirely on ‘gut feel’ or on more objective things like statistics of record sales or radio play.
But What Gets a Record on the Playlist?
This is a reasonable question often asked of all Radio 1 producers.
The truth is that although there are general criteria, like whatever is Record on ‘interesting’, ‘acceptable’ or ‘fantastic’, these change from season to the season, month to month, and even week to week.
The playlist discussion often dwells on a record's ‘freshness’ or ‘originality’.
However, so much of what is now being produced lacks these very qualities that it may be more useful to look at successful artists' work to find an answer to this question.
If you listen to David Bowie, Elton John, Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen or Paul Simon, you immediately recognize their music.
often this is because of a distinctive vocal sound, but sometimes more subtle devices make everyone want to listen.
For instance, a few years ago I studied paul Simon's music quite extensively.
I discovered that for quite a long part of their career, every Simon and Garfunkel recording used a set of distinctive and unusual percussion sounds.
I believe that these helped to combine their characteristic voices with a small element of surprise which gave each track its own fingerprint.
But even if you  aren't another Bowie or Elton John, you still need to try and develop an original style.
If you sound like everyone else, no one will remember you, even for five minutes.
These are general criteria and it is dangerous to be too specific.
Have the courage of your convictions to play what pleases you.
It may be that your enthusiasm gives that extra bit of life to your record.
Also, remember that radio producers listen to over 100 singles a week.
They get bored easily, so if you can't excite them in the first 30 seconds of your record, you are probably in the wrong business.
Chart position is one criterion which is used to consider a record for playlisting.
But no chart placing carries as much weight as the sound of the record.
A song may be at number one, but if it doesn't ‘feel’ right for Radio 1, it won't be playlisted.
Andrew Lloyd Webber was reputed to be furious when Radio I declined to playlist Michael Ball's hit, ‘Love Changes Everything’.
It is a lovely song, but it definitely sounds right on Radio 2 and very wrong on Radio 1.
Dance music, too, often doesn't work on radio.
Why should it?
Usually, it has been designed to be highly amplified in a night-club.
Chances are that it won't make an ideal radio record any more than ‘Candle in the Wind’ would be a dancefloor hit at Stringfellow's.
If you listen to the music on individual programmes you will soon get a fair idea of where the playlist is at each week.
There is no need to worry about the duration of a record.
It used to be said that ‘if you can't say what you want to say in three minutes, forget it’.
But the three-minute song is just a left-over from when that was all you could fit on to one side of a 78 record.
There have been many examples of long, classic singles, like ‘Eloise’, ‘McCarthur Park’ and ‘American pie’.
At Radio 1, the producers aren't very concerned about a record's length.
If a record is terrible, then a minute is too long!
Also, lyrical parameters are as wide as current popular taste allows.
It is worth remembering that we are dealing with ‘popular’ music.
If you are the sort of band that wants an arts council grant, then you are probably too special or too precious to conform to the limits set by ‘popular’ taste.
The Radio 1 playlist is much maligned, but it is as honest and fair as any system.
Despite that, it still puts Radio 1 producers into a catch-22 situation.
If they playlist a band's record, then that band think the playlist is ‘marvellous’.
But if they leave that record out, suddenly the playlist is ‘unfair, monstrous and corrupt’.
Often musicians don't realize that a record can be played more on Radio 1 when it is off the playlist altogether.
It happens all the time.
Radio producers have to remind themselves each week that radio broadcasting isn't about selling records, but about entertaining an audience.
Research shows  that less than 10 per cent of listeners to Radio 1 are regular record buyers, so it would be unrepresentative of our audience's taste to be ruled by the movements of the singles' chart.
Radio presenters and producers often get great pleasure from seeing the success of a record which they have championed.
But they are generally happy just to programme and share the pleasant experience of listening to popular music on the radio.
Pluggers
Apart from albums, there are over 100 singles released every week in Britain, and only five to ten of them will have much commercial success.
Any conscientious radio producer will try to hear and consider all of these.
However, it is very difficult to make a final decision on one hearing.
This is when ‘pluggers’ start trying to ‘persuade’presenters and producers to play a particular record.
I believe that in Britain an outstanding record will find its way into the system without much promotion, assuming that it has been distributed to producers.
pluggers exist to exploit the middle ground of those record releases which may be a hit, depending on whether radio producers and presenters are prepared to give them a ‘run’.
At worst, a ‘plugger’ merely ensures the delivery of a record to someone's office.
At best, the plugger can be a creative link between the artist, management, record company and radio station.
Obviously, it is in a ‘plugger's’ interest to claim that it was his or her work which made a record into a hit, but if you employ a ‘plugger’it is worth being sceptical when deciding what to believe.
Nevertheless, radio producers set aside some time each week to meet pluggers.
Producers will usually only meet pluggers who they know already, and rarely see any band's representative because they are probably far too close to the music to have any objectivity.
If you are new, young, and underfunded then don't worry.
Just make sure that a copy of your record reaches the producers of programmes that you value.
Your work should be your most eloquent argument.
If you can afford one, a good plugger can benefit both the artist and the radio station by acting as a fixer for guest appearances, or providing news and creative ideas; but like everything, some pluggers are better than others, and radio producers usually prefer to exercise their own musical judgement and not to pander to pluggers' suggestions.
Live Music Session Recordings
Radio 1 has always spent large amounts of time, effort and money recording live concerts and, in particular, recording full-scale sessions.
In the beginning, much of this effort was used to create music to play on the air when the station's needletime was used up.
(Needletime is a limit on the number of hours of commercially available recordings which can be broadcast by radio stations.
These limits were originally set by phonographic performance Limited, representing the record companies, and the Musicians' Union, to safeguard the viability of commercial recordings.)
Currently, Radio I devotes over 5,000 hours a year to recording musicians in its own studios, as well as at live concert performances.
The Maida Vale centre in London, for example, contains six music studios and has two of these regularly in use for pop and rock sessions.
On average, there is one session recorded each day which is likely to result in four broadcast items or songs.
The shape of a session is as follows:
1.
The setting-up and making of instruments.
2.
The recording or laying-down of tracks and vocals.
(Generally 2 x 3½-hour recording period.)
3.
The mixing of tracks and vocals (1 x 3½-hour period).
The only difference from a commercial studio is that the BBC's recordings aren't meant for release on record.
They are simply a recording of a band's live or alternative versions of their songs, which are used for one or two broadcasts.
This system of sessions lets certain producers develop young musicians' talent, and there is a lengthy list of internationally famous rock and pop stars who were helped by a Radio 1 session.
John Peel has encouraged hundreds of musicians on his programmes with his attitude that puts creativity and originality above musicianship.
It may be hard to accept, but the argument goes that it is easier for a creative and original performer to learn how to play his instrument than it is for a consummate player to learn creativity.
Certainly the numbers of internationally successful British musicians who came out of art school, rather than music college, seem to confirm this.
John Lennon, David Bowie, Eric Clapton, Jeff Beck, pete Townshend and Bryan Ferry are just the tip of the iceberg.
The producers who supervise Radio 1 sessions tend to be musicians who are used to coaxing good performances out of young bands in a limited period of time.
Artists are booked for these sessions by individual ‘commissioning producers’, who are responsible for the shows which feature sessions.
At present, the programmes in question are those of John peel, Nicky Campbell, Richard skinner, Andy Kershaw and Mark Goodier, and the Friday Rock show.
The producers of all these programmes are inundated with cassette tapes from bands, so they may take some time before listening to them all.
In every case, you have a better chance of being considered if you are able to put your performance on record.
It is possible to make a single, and sell it at your own gigs, for quite a small sum of money (see Chapter 13, ‘Doing it the Right Way’ by Horace Trubridge).
It is  even cheaper to pool your resources with four or five other bands and put together a composite album.
If you aren't willing to take a risk on your own music, then don't be surprised if others won't either.
If you are after a session, don't waste your time sending tapes and records all over the place.
Target them.
Find out which of the above programmes and their producers are likely to be most sympathetic to your style of music and remember the following:
1.
A record is better than a cassette.
2.
Only send in three tracks at the most (naturally your best).
3.
Give some brief biographical information.
4.
Include your address and telephone number.
5.
Don't hold your breath waiting for a reply.
It may take some time!
Sessions are often recorded with bands who already have a record deal.
In organizing the session, the initiative will almost certainly have been with the commissioning radio producer who will have approached the record company or manager.
occasionally a manager or agent will suggest that a band is ‘available for session’.
However, this usually produces a zero response.
As with their choice of records, producers like to rely on their own opinion when they book bands.
Other Ways of Attracting Radio's Attention
A local radio station might be worth contacting.
Regional breakouts aren't unknown, and local stations with a university campus nearby often provide the most fertile ground.
sometimes artists attract attention by producing some original news angle.
This is fine as long as the music stands up to scrutiny.
Often groups get publicity by claiming that their record has been banned.
This isn't a ploy to be recommended.
All too soon, bands find that their wish has been fulfilled! one of the few successful publicity ploys involved Elvis Costello being arrested for creating a disturbance outside the Hilton Hotel in London's park Lane.
CBS Records were inside holding their annual international conference, and Elvis stood in the street performing a selection of his songs using a small portable amplifier, just as his debut single ‘Less Than Zero’ has just been released.
This was a delightfully outrageous thing for a little label (stiff) to do, just to annoy one of the biggest international companies.
It gained terrific publicity, but it takes more than column inches to sell records, and I am sure that Elvis's continuing success has more to do with talent.
Local Radio
In its current form, local radio is shared between the BBC and the commercial companies of the ILR network.
In the main, BBC Local  Radio has pursued a programming policy based on local news.
But each station is autonomous and some are more music-oriented than others.
BBC Local Radio isn't well funded, and you may be able to provide some bargain-basement programming for them, particularly if you are a solo performer.
This would depend entirely on getting to know your local station and its personnel.
In contrast, ILR stations are businesses.
They have directors, sales directors and shareholders, and they broadcast to make money.
Recently there have been a number of mergers between these companies which have increased this financial pressure.
As a result, many stations are now programmed by one man and a computer.
Like their BBC counterparts, independent stations control their own programming policy.
some care about developing local musicians, like Radio Clyde, while many don't.
As part of their broad-based agreements with the IBA and the MU, ILR stations are obliged to spend at least 3 per cent of their net advertising revenue on live musicians.
Many stations choose to spend this money on recording their station's jingles, while others prefer to involve themselves with promoting local concerts by international artists.
Many stations still record local musicians in their own studios.
But, as always, it is worthwhile finding out more about your local station.
To get the best help from the radio, try to find someone in it who might be sympathetic to your music.
Listen to the radio carefully and choose your personal contacts accordingly.
If you are lucky, the radio can help your career enormously.
However, radio producers have the best music to choose from to entertain their audiences, and like its listeners, radio can transfer its affections overnight and without explanation.
Good luck.
The Musician's Union
STAN MARTIN is assistant general secretary of the Musicians' Union with responsibility for the media.
After drumming as a semi-professional in the 1960s, Stan took a degree as a mature student at Birmingham University, leading to ten years' work as a careers officer, In 1979 Stan became the Musicians' Union's South-East district organizer, and subsequently the Central London branch secretary and co-editor of the union's award-winning Musician magazine.
Strip away the insincerity and the hype from the music business and see it for what it is, a jungle.
When you work in rock and pop music, you are in the thick undergrowth.
Like the real jungle, the music business holds a dual attraction for the entrepreneur: the thrill of a gamble and the chance of a quick large profit.
Added to this is the reflected glory of being associated with a high-profile, media-exposed product and the prized magical ingredient of youth.
It is a heady combination!
The music business has some straightforward, honest, ‘invest some money and hope to make a profit’ entrepreneurs.
However, one of this industry's main characteristics is that it attracts the maverick.
The tales of manipulation, creative accountancy and downright dishonesty starring some of these wayward entrepreneurs are numerous and well documented.
The resulting debris in musicians, careers would be disastrous, but for the MU.
The union acts as an industry police force and a rescue service for its members.
What is the MU?
Fiction:
The MU only recruits and is only interested in professional, session and orchestral musicians.
Fact
: The MU has 40,000 members, with offices and branches throughout the UR, and almost anybody who is either a performer or a composer of music is a member of the MU.
The MU's Image
The union often gets a bad press, and there are good reasons for this.
The union came into existence to serve the interests of musicians.
It protects them and ensures they receive adequate payment for their musical skills.
The union is not a record company, publisher, radio or TV company, promoter, agent or management company.
It has no shareholders or directors.
It is run by musicians for the benefit of musicians.
Given this, negative coverage from the popular music press, who rely on the commercial music industry for their survival, is excusable.
It is less understandable when the union is caricatured in more seriously researched publications.
In some guides to the music business the treatment accorded to the union can be shallow and misleading.
There is no intimation that the very existence of the MU benefits all musicians, especially the young and inexperienced.
Nor is there coverage of the breadth and scope of the union's services.
Indeed, readers can be put off from finding out more about the MU, which is the only organization providing protection and service solely to musicians.
The aim of this article is to help you find out more about what the MU really does for musicians, day after day after day…
The MU as a Trade Union
As a trade union, the MU exists to protect its members and to maximize their rewards, just like all trade unions.
The similarity ends there.
Musicians' work and way of life is different to that of the members of most unions.
For example, most musicians are self-employed.
They don't work for one employer on a regular basis.
Going to work for a young musician may mean days spent rehearsing — getting songs down on tape, producing a demo on a front-room recording unit, or playing at a pub gig.
This is a unique lifestyle and because of this the MU is a unique trade union.
Like other trade unions, the MU negotiates with employers such as TV companies so that when a band appears on ‘Top of the Pops ’ or ‘Night Network ’the members of the band will be paid an MU-negotiated fee.
This is just one example of the MU as a negotiator on behalf of musicians.
There are many more, such as negotiating for musical employment in holiday centres or on ships.
one problem is that most live gigs are one-offs.
As the union can't negotiate separately with every club or pub in the country, the MU has established minimum rates of pay for these gigs.
These negotiations and setting of rates is only one part of the union's activities.
Printed across the bottom of MU application forms is the slogan: ‘Musicians’ Union — Working for Today's Musicians'.
Sting
Of course, there are all sorts of slogans.
some exhort ‘smash the…’. others inform.
The union's slogan informs you that it is concerned with servicing the needs of today's musicians.
The MU is not preoccupied with the problems of yesteryear.
The Music Business Adviser (MBA)
Today's musicians are often quite young and new to the business.
of the union's total membership, approximately half are under the age of 30. since the advent of rock in the 1950s and 1960s, the union has been the only independent organization to give service, protection and advice to rock musicians.
In the 1970s, the union appointed a rock organizer and developed a specialist contract-vetting service.
But life was simpler then.
solo performers or groups were signed to major record companies.
The independent record sector barely existed, and recording was the concern only of established studios.
In the 1980s, the independents became a real force, recording technology is easily accessible, and bands are more energetic and enterprising in producing their own records and promoting themselves.
The union has responded to these changes by appointing a music business adviser who has expanded the range of services aimed at rock musicians.
Free contract-Vetting Service
On recording, publishing and  mangement contracts, the MBA or our specialist solicitor provide union members with free advice and a contract-vetting service.
Also, a pre-contract discussion can be arranged with the MBA on an individual or band basis.
Music Business Seminars
These are regularly organized in London and other centres throughout the country.
Topics covered include: recording agreements, music publishing, management, merchandising, all financial matters relevant to a recording artist's career, the A&R process and department in record companies, opportunities for composers in the mechanical media field, and making and marketing your own record.
Speakers include music business lawyers, accountants, record company A&R staff, marketing directors, and press and publicity executives, Radio 1 producers, composers and members of independent production companies.
Other Services Provided by the MU
The services provided by the music business adviser are only part of the union's total commitment to servicing the needs of today's musicians.
The union works for musicians on two levels: supporting the individual member, and providing a protective umbrella for all musicians, whether or not they are MU members.
Insurance
All members are entitled to £500 free insurance cover on their instruments and equipment against damage and loss.
For insurance cover over £500, the MU Insurance Advisory service will arrange the best insurance deal to top up the excess.
The Insurance Advisory service will also provide cover for all your other insurance needs, such as for your car or your personal belongings.
The union's involvement in insurance stems from the difficulties musicians have experienced in getting car or van insurance.
Even when they did get cover in the past, the premiums were punitively high.
Benevolent Grants and Sickness and Accident Benefit
Financial  assisstance from the union's Benevolent Funds and from the union's benefit scheme is available to meet some of the needs which arise because of a personal accident or illness.
If you are ill and unable to work as a musician, the union has funds to help you.
Standard contracts
The union provides free contract forms for virtually every type of engagement.
Currently, there are sixteen contracts available.
The most popular of these is for a one-off gig between a band and a venue, part of which is reproduced here.
If the type of gig you are offered is so unusual that it is not covered by any of the existing contracts, an MU official will devise one to suit your needs, or add necessary clauses to an existing contract (for performing on the back of a moving open-back lorry, the contract might require clauses covering additional risks!).
Legal Services
This provides musicians with legal advice on all matters relating to musical employment.
This might be legal assistance to recover unpaid fees or help with the negotiations after a cancelled engagement.
These legal services include advice on band names, partnership agreements between band members, social security rights and entitlement, and music licences — anything and everything relating to music, even including: ‘Can a freight company hold on to my instruments/equipment because the tour promoter hasn't paid the bill?’
STANDARD CONTRACT
Musicians' Union Standard Contract
For the engagement of a band/group for casual arrangements The Agreement made this day — of — 19 — between — of — address —(hereinafter called the ‘Engager’) of the one part and — of — address —(hereinafter called the ‘Leader’) of the other part
Witnesses
1.
The Engager engages the Leader to provide a combination of — musicians (number) appearing as —(name of band/group) to perform for: *dancing/cabaret accompaniment/stage show/background music (*delete whichever is not applicable) at —(venue address) from — am/pm until — am/pm on —(date) 2.
It is agreed that the inclusive fee for the engagement shall be £ — which shall be payable in cash/by cheque (delete whichever is inapplicable) on the date of the performance.
Legal assistance is most commonly used to secure payment of unpaid fees, or payment for a cancelled gig.
You know the situation.
Your band is booked for a pub gig.
You perform.
There aren't many people present because the landlord forgot to advertise, even in the free listings papers.
As a result, the landlord blames the band for the poor attendance and refuses to pay.
He is a big man with two Rottweiler dogs, so you don't argue!
The union would attempt to secure payment.
If necessary, we will support you through the court process.
Information Leaflets
General leaflets are available to members about gigs, royalties,— copyright and contracts.
Also, there is a series of specialist leaflets on management, publishing, recording contracts, work abroad, and agents.
These leaflets are written in a direct readable style.
As an example, I have provided an extract from the ‘Gigs’ leaflet.
ALWAYS ESTABLISH HOW MUCH YOU ARE BEING PAID AND/OR HOW YOU WILL GET THE MONEY
Some examples of the arrangements that you might be offered are:
* Straightforward fee paid on the night.
* A small amount plus half the door take.
* The whole door take.
whatever it is.
* A guaranteed payment plus ‘Pass the hat around’ or similar arrangement.
In some cases these arrangements may seem reasonable, In others they are clearly a-rip-off'.
The Union believes that any musician playing to the public should be guaranteed reasonable money.
Directories
A directory of the MU members in each geographical area is produced every two years.
Every member receives a free copy and these directories are also supplied to contractors, agents and venues.
Posters
Good quality, well-designed, blank posters are supplied free to members and venues.
Many bands now take responsibility for advertising their gigs, and these posters encourage these self-help initiatives.
Diaries
Every member is given a free MU diary.
This isn't intended for the profound jottings which occur in the back of the van after a gig (to be  auctioned at Sotherby's when you are dead!).
The MU diary is a musician's professional pocket information kit.
It doesn't merely contain such valuable information as the date of Mothers' Day, the distance from London to Inverness, and how to control the bleeding of a wound.
It covers legal and taxation notes for musicians, as well as advice on recording contracts and other session engagements.
It lists the names, addresses and phone numbers of all the union's offices and officers, at national, district and branch level.
so wherever you are in the country, you can contact someone local when you need the union's help.
The Umbrella Activity
As well as these individual benefits and services to members, the union provides an additional service to all musicians by its presence and its activities.
As ‘the police force of the music business’ the union is heavily committed to ‘crime prevention’.
It promotes this icy in two ways.
Firstly, by educating and advising musicians to avoid traps, and on how to secure the greatest rewards for their talents, the MU decreases the pool of prey on which music industry sharks can pounce.
secondly, pursuing untrustworthy promoters or record companies, if necessary through the courts and on to the enforcement of judgements, deters other business people from trying to get rich at the expense of musicians.
When the union publishes a special Notice in its magazine warning members about the activities of a promoter, record company or contact agency, this not only informs members, it also puts off other unscrupulous operators.
The value of these union activities isn't as easy to measure as the benefits and services to individual musicians, but they are just as important.
The ‘police’ role of the union is performed by its full-time officials.
As well as national officials such as the general secretary, assistant general secretaries, and the session organizer, who operate from the union's national office in London, there are full-time officials in every district of Britain.
The MU's geographical structure gives every member easy access to the union's services and to the ear of a full-time official.
These district officials are a combination of advisers, negotiators, lawyers and general trouble-shooters.
They are familiar with every branch of the music business, whether it is chamber music or anarchic rock.
They have a working knowledge of contract law and other legal areas which affect musicians, such as noise levels and music licences, so that they can give advice on anything and everything that affects musicians.
The least visible of the union's services is the constant activity which benefits all musicians indirectly.
This includes: making written submissions to public bodies; lobbying MPs and Members of    the House of Lords when legislation on anything connected with music, like copyright, is being enacted; representing musicians' interests in national and international forums on issues such as the collection and payment of royalties on behalf of performers and composers.
An example of this activity producing direct benefits to musicians is the case of commercial (ILR) radio stations.
In the 1970s when commercial radio was first introduced to Britain, the MU persuaded both the Government and the Independent Broadcasting Authority that the new radio stations should have an obligation to provide some musical employment, and not just fill every minute of air time with recorded music.
The agreement which the union negotiated is that commercial radio stations must spend not less than 3 per cent of their net advertising revenue on the employment of musicians.
since the union negotiated this, union officials have ‘policed’ the radio stations to ensure their compliance.
Stan Martin
Perhaps the most visible of the union's activities is the financial sponsorship of events such as the ICA/MU Rock Week held in May 1989.
This is one example of the union ‘leading by example’.
The union teamed up with the Institute of Contemporary Arts to copromote a Rock Week held at the ICA building in London.
This was a showcase for a wide variety of young British musicians and bands currently working outside the mainstream of rock and pop.
The bands which appeared were selected by the Hackney Agency for Music Marketing Action (HAMMA) on behalf of the MU and the ICA.
The theme of the week was ‘Dangerous Bands in safe Hands’, and this was an attempt to highlight the union's concern that live music promoters should be aware of their responsibilities to new artists, and provide them with opportunities for live work with fair conditions and rates of pay.
The union is constantly looking out for ways like this to show promoters, record companies and the rest of the music industry the right way to treat musicians, and to remind the business yet again of their responsibility to put back into music just a small part of the rewards which they enjoy, thanks to the skills of musicians.
That is the MU in action.
If you want to find out more, write to the Musicians' Union: 60 — 2 Clapham Road, London SW9 0JJ.
Copyright and Performing Right
BRIAN ENGEL is the membership representative of the Performing Right Society.
Before joining the PBS, Brian worked as a singer (including being a member of the New Seekers), songwriter, actor, artist and toy inventor among other creative and business interests.
People seem to find it relatively easy to understand the term/patent', but have difficulty with ‘copyright’.
This is probably because, put simply, the word ‘patent’ applies to a physical thing, like a new piece of machinery or electrical gadget, whereas ‘copyright’applies to ‘intellectual property’, that is ‘ideas’and ‘creations’.
In the UK there is no requirement for a copyright reference, no copyright number or anything.
Copyright is exactly what it says: it is the right to copy.
The minute you have written a piece of music (providing it is genuinely original) you create a copyright.
However, you need to be able to establish and prove that it was you who created the copyright.
only then will you avoid difficulties which you would otherwise encounter in claiming any money owing to your copyrights.
The PRS
When you are starting out in the music business there seems to be an impenetrable jungle of initials to understand: MCPS, PPL, MPA, PRS, BASCA, BMI, ASCAP; the list seems endless! so what are they all for?
In the case of PRS, the title is self-explanatory.
The Performing Right society is a society of songwriters and publishers (or ‘copyright owners’) which grants the ‘Right to perform’ copyright music in return for an annual fee (or licence).
The PRS was formed in 1914 and now has over 22,000 members.
As the UK is such a small geographical market, there is only one performing Right society.
This works in favour of music writers, and  because the PRS is the only organization which can license venues and media in this country, it is sufficiently strong to make sure its members' copyrights are appropriately rewarded for any performances.
Securing a Copyright
A music writer can protect a copyright in a number of ways:
(i)
put the music down in some physical form, like a musical score or as a demo tape.
Date it and place it in the safe keeping of a bank manager or a solicitor (although these professionals often don't like doing this, as it is a lot of trouble).
(ii)
Get the copyright ‘signed’ to a publisher.
It is then the publisher's responsibility to see that you receive the money which you are due.
(iii)
put the song down into a physical form, as described above, and send it to yourself by REGISTERED POST.
Keep the receipt and DON'T OPEN THE PARCEL.
It is accepted in the musical business that this is the easiest and best way to secure your copyright.
As a musician it is worthwhile to deal both with copyright and performing right.
If you are a writer, the majority of your income may come from performances of your music either on the radio, the television or at live concerts.
Consider this: every time a writer/ performer sells an album, their royalty earns them around 60p (assuming they are on 10 per cent).
But each time their music is played on BBC Radio l, they are paid about £50 — simple mathematics explains the rest!
It is never too early to consider the copyright and performing right on your songs.
As soon as you start writing original work, register the copyrights in one of the ways already outlined.
Then you should be able to collect any money which your songs may earn in the future.
PRS ‘Licences'
Anyone who ‘uses’ copyright music has to buy an annual licence from the PRS These ‘music users’include everyone from radio and television stations, clubs, pubs, restaurants, shops, concert halls, dance halls and any other place where there is either live or recorded music audible to the public.
The money which is collected from PRS licences is distributed to the society's members (the writers and publishers) in proportion to the number of times their works have been played.
Of course, the amount which the society collects each year varies with inflation and the actual number of licences which are granted.
In the late 1980s, the PRS regularly received around £100,000,000 for its members.
The Amount Each Member Gets
Each member's PRS earnings depends on how much money the society collects and how often a member's work is played on PRS-licenced media and premises.
For a three-minute play on a British national radio station, the PRS pays approximately £50.
For a similar play on a small local station the payment will be less.
Often the writer doesn't earn the whole payment.
Instead, these fees are divided between a writer and a publisher.
so, if a songwriter has a 60:40 publishing deal, he or she would receive 60 per cent of the PRS payment, and the publisher would get the other 40 per cent.
However, a writer doesn't need to have a publisher, and in this case the writer would receive the entire sum.
How PRS Pays Its Writers
Every radio and television station submits lists of the music which they broadcast to the PRS.
To check the stations' information, the PRS also monitors their output.
From this steady stream of data, the number of television and radio broadcasts of every registered song, tune, or any other piece of music, is constantly being counted by the PRS.
Then, the amounts due to the society's writers and publishers are calculated and distributed either as a direct payment to a bank account or as a cheque.
There are four distributions a year and these payments also include substantial royalties received by the PRS from equivalent foreign societies for the performance of PRS members' music overseas.
As there are many types of live performance venues, like clubs, discos, and major stadiums, there is a variety of licence fees payable to the PRS.
For instance, a concert attracting 70,000 at Wembley would have to pay more than a gig at the sock and Warthog in the High street.
Also, it would be impractical for the society to pay out each time a particular tune is played at every PRS-licensed venue.
The administration costs would be endless and it would be difficult to prove exactly how many times a local pub rock group has played any one song.
To deal with this, the PRS has developed a complex scale of payments for live performances.
In short, the society requires a list of all music which is performed live only at major venues and on the bigger tours.
A band doesn't have to concern itself with filling in PRS forms at their gigs until they are working in these larger venues.
At this point, the venue or the promoter will raise the issue with the band or their management.
The event's promoter will pay an agreed fee to the PRS for the works which are to be performed, and a payment is then made by the PRS to the writers and publishers for the works listed as being played.
For live performances at smaller venues there is no need for an itemized PRS form because no payment is made for each individual song.
A fee is collected by the PRS from the management of the venue and this is put into a fund called the General Distribution pool.
This fund is paid out to all members of the society.
For more details on this subject, consult the PRS Yearbook which all members receive annually.
Running the PRS
There is no ‘owner’ of the PRS.
It is a non-profit-making organization which is controlled by its members.
They are represented by an elected general council of music publishers and writers who are drawn from a cross-section of the music profession (classical, popular, rock, TV, films, advertising).
Its administration is carried out by a staff of several hundred who work under the direction of the general council.
The council makes all the decisions which concern the society's policy, but on major issues, the members' opinions are sought through ballots and general meetings.
Membership of PRS
A writer is eligible for membership in a number of ways.
Membership may be given if a writer has had three works recorded for sale to the public which have been released by a recognized recording label lone which is registered in the Music Master catalogue).
This doesn't have to be a disc — a cassette or video qualifies as well.
A writer is also eligible if he or she has three works broadcast on the radio or the television.
These broadcasts don't need to be records because live performances on local radio can also count.
If you write a song that sells well enough to reach the top 50 in the albums or singles chart you are eligible automatically.
Or if you have three works which are performed live in PRS-licensed premises at least twelve times over the course of two years, you can also become a member of the society.
A songwriter proves these twelve live performances simply by supplying the society with copies of posters, press advertisements or tour dates —Anything which confirms these plays.
providing that these gigs were at PRS-licensed venues, then an application for membership will be accepted for serious consideration.
A publisher is eligible for membership when they publish fifteen titles, ten of which must have been commercially exploited land they must all have been written by PRS writer members).
The Organizations which Deal with Copyright
MCPS : this is the Mechanical Copyright protection society Ltd. of Elgar House, 41 Streatham High Road, London SW16 1ER.
Their telephone number is 081–769 4400.
This society pays the copyright owners (the writers and/or publishers) for the manufacture and sales of the physical articles into which their music is made, like vinyl records, compact discs, videos, and cassettes.
This is a percentage of the selling price of these music products.
PPL : this is phonographic performance Ltd. of Ganton House, 14–22 Ganton street, London W1V 1LB.
Their telephone number is 071–437 0311.
This organization pays money to record companies and artists for the performances of their music on radio and television, unlike PRS which pays the writers.
If a performer is also a writer, then this society would be worth joining.
A quick phone call to either PPL or MCPS will establish whether you are eligible for membership.
Further details about the PRS can be obtained at 29–33 Berners street, London W14P 4AA. phone: 071–927 8345.
If you think you should be a member, we will take up your case.
Deciphering the Legal Jargon
MARK MELTON has been the Musicians' Union's music business adviser since 1987.
Before that he was involved in band management and ran an independent record company, New England Records.
He has a keen interest in popular music and the developing laws and rights in respect of musical performers and songwriters.
This chapter will discuss the main long-term contracts which a potential recording artist is likely to sign.
These long-term contracts differ from shorter or one-off agreements (for endorsements or live performances) because they almost always call for musicians' exclusive services.
I will consider these five contracts:
1.
Agreements between band members
2.
Management agreements
3.
Recording agreements
4.
Music publishing agreements
5.
Booking agency agreements
All of these are for a personal service.
As such, they involve a high degree of trust, good will, confidence and faith in all parties' ability to do the job in hand.
Musicians must seek legal advice if they are offered any of these agreements, and their legal adviser should be a specialist in the music business.
A solicitor in divorce law or conveyancing will not deal with the music business on a day-to-day basis and he or she will not be able to advise you fully on the terms of a music industry agreement.
The best way to find a legal adviser is to ask musicians in other bands, write to the Law society or, if you are a member of the Musicians' Union, request a list of music business lawyers from the union's national office.
Currently, music business solicitors are in the talent-spotting game, just like record companies, publishers, managers and agents.
It is  quite common for specialist music solicitors to offer their services free of charge to a band who approach them, who are broke and are creating a ‘buzz’.
Of course the solicitor will charge the band when a record or publishing deal is signed.
As the top solicitors are highly regarded in the music business, sometimes this can be another way of getting a foot in the door.
For the five contracts dealt with in this article, there is no such thing as a ‘standard’ agreement.
However, it is also unlikely that any company will draw up an agreement from scratch.
Most companies (record companies, music publishers and large management firms) have what they refer to as their standard agreement.
This is offered to all the artists they sign.
The company may be reluctant to deviate too far from the basic terms of this agreement, but there are a number of things which are negotiable.
Legal and business advice is extremely helpful in establishing exactly which areas in an agreement can be negotiated.
1.
Agreements between Members of a Band
The first issue is when a formal agreement should be made between the members of a band.
Ideally, some sort of agreement should be worked out fairly early on.
This gives each band member a degree of security.
If there is no formal agreement between the band members, and if the band has been working in practice as a partnership, I have always viewed the band as operating as if there were a formal partnership agreement.
In that case, the following rules normally apply.
Joint Financial Responsibility
All members of the band are equally responsible for the band's financial affairs.
If there are any band debts, all members share the liability equally.
If a member leaves the band, he or she is only responsible for the debts incurred prior to his or her leaving.
New members of the band are only liable for debts incurred after their joining.
Profits and Assets
Without anything in writing to the contrary, it is legally assumed that all members of the band equally share the band's profits and assets.
This is always the case unless the purchase of equipment and other costs are undertaken privately by one or more members of the band.
Band Name
If there is no written agreement on the matter, all members of the band share equally in the rights of the name.
This makes it difficult if the band is split in half with both sides wanting to use the band's original name.
Other Points to be Considered in a Formal Agreement
Band member leaving the band
Often there will be a clause in a partnership agreement stating that if a band member leaves the band.
he or she is required to give a certain amount of notice.
This can range from one to three or six months, depending on what the band feel is most suitable.
Band member being dismissed from the band
This issue is always riddled with acrimony.
There needs to be a unanimous decision from all members of the band (except, of course, the band member being sacked) before anyone is dismissed.
Also, there is a need for a dissolution account to be drawn up so musicians know the state of the band's finances when a member either leaves or is dismissed.
The points about joint responsibility for assets, liabilities and profits apply whether a band member is dismissed or he or she leaves voluntarily.
Composer members
often only one or two members of the band write songs.
In recent years, it has been more common for songwriting members to allow the band's non-songwriters to share in a percentage of their songwriting royalties. otherwise, the non-songwriting members of the band would be considerably poorer than the others.
By sharing songwriting income, the songwriter is recognizing that without the help of the other band members, his or her songs may not be generating any income at all.
Band bank account
The partnership agreement may deal with where the band's joint bank account is held and how many signatures are required on the account to deal with the band's finances.
Band decisions
A democratic approach would be that a majority of the band constitutes the necessary authority to make decisions.
Limited companies
It isn't uncommon for a band to form a limited company.
Usually this is because of tax advantages.
However, in the early days of a band's existence it operates more often as a partnership.
2.
Management Agreements
Of all the music business agreements artists are likely to sign (with the possible exception of the agreement between the different members of the band), the management/artist relationship is a contract for services at its most personal.
As a result, both parties should always behave in good faith.
The manager should take into account the artist's wishes and aspirations.
The artist must undertake to act reasonably at all times if offered fair advice by his or her manager.
Also, the manager is expected to use his or her best endeavours to promote the artist's career, while the artist should do nothing to jeopardize the reputation of the manager.
Due to the ‘Fiduciary’(trusting) nature of the relationship, honesty and integrity is to be assumed on both sides.
Below, I have dealt with the areas most commonly negotiable in a management agreement.
These should be discussed by both parties before entering into the relationship.
Exclusivity and Territory
A management agreement is an ‘exclusive’ agreement.
Most managers want to deal with all of an artist's activities in the entertainment business throughout the world .
Neither of these limitations are necessarily negative for the artist.
Musicians need someone to co-ordinate all of their music business activities, and it makes sense that this should be done on a world-wide basis.
Length of the Agreement
Most management agreements are signed for between three and five years.
A maximum of three years is preferable for the artist.
Each year, the manager has the choice whether to continue the agreement.
These ‘options’ only work on behalf of the manager.
With an established, respected management company it is unlikely that any band would secure an agreement for less than five years.
There are certain safety clauses music solicitors put into management agreements to give the artist an escape from the contract.
This type of clause may demand that if the manager hasn't secured a recording contract to the artist's satisfaction within a period of twelve months from the start of the agreement, the artist should have the right to terminate the agreement.
other safety nets (known as ‘performance clauses’) can require the manager to secure a certain level of earnings for the artist throughout the agreement.
Ideally, the artist could terminate the agreement at any time.
However, managers put a lot of time, energy and commitment into their artist's careers (as well as a substantial financial investment), so  it would be unfair for the manager to be dismissed at a moment's notice, just because the artist fancied a change of management.
The important thing is to achieve the right balance.
Commission
Management commission rates vary, but a current average is 20 per cent of the artist's earnings.
The agreement must specify that this 20 per cent should be on money actually received by the artist, not on items such as bad debts, and that there should be allowances for exactly what the commission is chargeable on in certain circumstances.
For example, most managers seek commission on gross earnings, whereas artists' representatives attempt to reduce the manager's commission to net earnings from the band's live touring.
Currently, touring is an extremely expensive business.
As a result, solicitors argue that managers should not take commission on what the artist is being paid each night, but on the money the band earns as profit after having paid for the PA, lights, accommodation and other expenses.
Non-Commissionable Items
The following should not be subject to commision by the manager:
recording costs;
promotional video costs;
producer's advances and fees;
tour support money (money advanced to artists by record
companies to underwrite any losses from touring).
Expenses
Clauses in management agreements about ‘who pays what’ are often the most contentious.
It is generally felt that the manager should be responsible for his or her own office overheads, telephone bills, secretarial services and so on.
All other expenses come out of the artist's earnings.
These can include equipment, artist's travel and accommodation, the engagement of a tour manager, any personal assistance for the artist/band, legal and accounting fees.
The most awkward of these are the manager's expenses when travelling at the request and on behalf of the artist.
It often pays the artist to try and put a ceiling figure on these expenses.
This ensures that the manager seeks the artist's permission before spending more than a certain amount of money.
other clauses could refer to the manager travelling and staying in accommodation of the same class as the artist.
Collection of Money
The British music business seems to be changing its practices for collecting money.
previously, managers received all the artist's money, deducted their commission and expenses, and finally paid the balance to the artist within an agreed period of time.
However, the American method is now gaining popularity.
In this situation, the artist is responsible for collecting money (often through their own accountants), while the manager invoices the artist on a monthly basis for his or her commission and expenses.
A manager who is efficient at plotting an artist's career isn't always the best person to look after the artist's financial interests or sort out VAT, tax and National Insurance.
If all the artist's money is paid to the artist's accountant directly, these financial matters can be dealt with by an expert, leaving the manager free to develop the artists career.
Some bands are extremely keen to sign with a respected manager who insists on collecting the artist's money.
In this case, certain safeguards can be built into the agreement to protect the artist and speed up the accounting of money.
If the manager collects the money, the artist may insist the manager sets up a completely separate bank account.
This would be in the artist's name, with the manager as the sole signatory.
No money from any of the manager's other interests could be mixed in with this account, and the manager should not be allowed to borrow money from it.
All he or she could remove from the account would be his or her commission and expenses.
The balance would be paid to the artist.
Usually, this payment would be made four times a year, but for larger sums the process should be quicker.
Finally, if the manager were to get into financial difficulties, and his or her creditors required payment, it should be clear that no money in this account belongs to the manager, and it cannot be used to settle the manager's personal debts.
Right of Audit
An important clause in a management agreement where the manager collects the money is the right of audit.
This allows the artist to look at the manager's books, with reasonable notice.
If the artist is to collect the money, then the manager will require a similar right.
After the Agreement is Over
Most managers want to take commission on any deals they set up for the artist.
However, record contracts tend to last longer than management agreements (a management agreement might last for three years while a record contract may go on as long as ten).
As a  result, artists feel that if they have parted company with their manager after three years it is unfair if their previous manager continues to take commission on album sales for another seven years.
Conversely, managers (quite reasonably) insist that it would be equally unjust if their rights to commission on projects which they have initiated were to cease the moment they parted company from the artist.
Consequently, compromises have built up over the years.
one of these is that when the two parties separate, the manager continues to take commission for a number of years, but only on those records issued or those songs written during his or her term of office.
This means that an artist can take on a new manager who can — take commission on all new projects, while the former manager continues to earn from all previous albums for a specified time.
The exact details are negotiable and depend on the circumstances of each deal.
Getting out of the Agreement
Both parties in a management agreement should have the right to terminate the agreement if certain things go wrong.
Like any legal agreement, if there is a material breach by either party there should be a right for the injured party to terminate the contract.
A manager's persistent failure to pay over money to the artist would constitute such a breach, as would constant failure to make him or herself available to the artist, or the wilful neglect of the artist's career.
Both parties need the right to end the agreement if the other goes bankrupt or is forced into liquidation, or ceases to operate in the music business.
When things go wrong between artist and manager, it is often difficult to prove any of these contractual points.
In that case, the four fundamental aspects of the manager/artist relationship are the focus of negotiation.
Have both the parties acted in good faith?
Has either party breached the fiduciary nature of the relationship?
Has the manager at all times respected the wishes and aspirations of the artist?
Has the artist acted unreasonably in ignoring the advice of the manager?
3.
Recording Agreements
The record deal is certainly the most important of an artist's longterm contracts.
The legal terms of this agreement will not necessarily govern the day-to-day relationship between the record company and artist, but it will set out the obligations of both parties, or ‘who is responsible for what’.
As with other long-term agreements, a record company demands an exclusive contract with its recording artists.
This is hardly surprising as establishing new artists is a costly and lengthy process.
How is the Artist Paid?
Royalties on record sales govern how much an artist earns from his or her recording career.
Royalties vary depending on the perceived value of the artist to the record company.
An average of 10 to 14 per cent of the record's retail selling price is the average for a new band.
In pence per record terms, this means that most bands receive a royalty of between 50p and 70p per album sold.
This figure is calculated on the assumption that an album retails for just under £7.
However, the royalty is based on the retail price less VAT and a percentage of the packaging charge, to which record companies require artists to contribute.
Before these royalties are earned, the company want to recover the cost of recording the albums plus any other financial advances they have paid to the artist.
For example, a new band signing a major record deal may well spend £50,000 recording an album and receive another £50,000 in personal advances (money to live on until royalty income is generated).
If their royalty from album sales is equivalent to 50p per album, the band needs to sell 200,000 albums before they break even.
This begins to explain why record companies require long-term agreements with artists and are looking for acts with world-wide potential.
Most new artists and bands aren't in a strong bargaining position.
They may have to settle for royalties which are lower than they would prefer.
Consequently, artists' representatives tend to build ‘bonuses’ into agreements with which record companies are usually quite happy.
It isn't uncommon for a record contract to allow for a royalty increase of I per cent throughout each year of the agreement, and for this to be raised once certain sales figures have been reached (commonly, this might be for gold and platinum status albums).
There are other areas such as 12″ singles, TV advertised albums and various mail order clubs which are all subject to negotiation between the record company and artist.
Once musicians' royalty income becomes greater than the cost of their recording time and personal advances from the record company, they start receiving royalty statements.
Usually these arrive twice yearly, within ninety days of the end of June and December.
The Length of the Record Deal
Most record company agreements are on the basis of a one-year period plus a number of options.
Major record companies normally  require at least five or six options.
potentially these options tie the artist to the record company for up to seven or eight years.
However, if the company elects to exercise its option at the beginning of a contract year, it must pay the artist a previously agreed sum of money as an advance against future royalties.
It is important to set a figure for these advance payments which is realistic for the band to live on throughout the period of the contract.
There is no ‘average’ advance figure, but major record companies are often willing to pay in excess of £50,000 to a new band, rising each year throughout the contract.
smaller independent companies aren't in this league.
With an independent, it is vital to restrict the maximum length of the agreement to the shortest time possible.
Recordings
The artist needs to ensure the record company is committed to releasing a certain amount of product each year.
Ideally, artists should see an album released in every twelve months of the agreement.
Contracts should be structured so that if the company doesn't release any recordings during a certain contract year, the artist has the option to terminate the agreement and look elsewhere for a record deal.
The choice of material, recording studio and producer are always contentious.
Currently, the balance of power over these decisions seems to have swung in the artist's favour.
Most recording agreements allow for a mutual choice on all these areas between the artist and company.
Third-party producers often require a royalty as payment for their work.
More often than not, the producer's money comes out of the artist's record company royalty payment.
The most an artist can do is to limit the amounts which are paid to a well-known producer.
I suggest this should be a maximum of 2 per cent.
In this case, if the artist receives a 12 per cent royalty, and the producer requires a 2 per cent royalty on record sales, the artist is left with a royalty of only 10 per cent split between the members of the band.
Videos
Videos have proved spectacularly successful in launching many bands on a world-wide career.
In the early 1980s, many British bands were household names in the USA without having toured there.
Record companies normally want to recoup 50 per cent of the cost of videos from the artist's royalty account.
For the artist, it is certainly worthwhile watching the video's budget and not spending excessively if at all possible.
Tour Support
There are often phenomenal overheads in putting a band on the road.
In the early days of a band, the fees received from gigs are unlikely to cover the touring costs.
It has become usual practice for record companies to advance bands some money to underwrite the costs of these first tours.
This should not be necessary as soon as the band plays in larger venues.
Record companies consider this support quite economic because they view a band's tours as a good way of promoting records.
Tour support advances are invariably recoupable from the artist's royalty account.
All other expenses on marketing the artist's records (such as radio promotion, posters, and press advertisements) are the responsibility of the record company.
The artist should not contribute financially to these.
Major record companies invest vast sums of money in new artists every year.
It isn't rare for a quarter of a million pounds to be spent on an act in one year.
With these amounts of money involved, the relationship between band and record company can occasionally be quite strained.
The record company is anxious to recover their investment quickly.
The band is also in a difficult position.
They are likely to be in debt to their record company for a number of years.
Even though this debt isn't repayable if the band aren't successful, it is always an uncomfortable feeling to know someone else is pulling the strings.
Artists who can work with their record company effectively (often with the help of intelligent management) probably stand more of a chance than the naive, bad-tempered or egocentric band.
A potential recording artist must realize there have to be some compromises between art and business.
4.
Songwriting and Music Publishing
Most bands write their own material.
There is a great deal of money to be made from income generated by composers' royalties and fees as well as the earnings from performing and recording.
sometimes every member of a band writes songs, but often it is only one or two.
It is a matter for the band partnership agreement to clarify each songwriter's policy on whether the non-writing band members will earn any money from his or her publishing royalties.
Songwriters and composers are eligible to join various collecting societies such as the performing Right society and the Mechanical Copyright Protection society.
However, many songwriters still choose to sign an exclusive publishing agreement with a music publisher, thereby giving up a portion of their royalties and fees, and  assigning all rights in their songs to that music publisher for a set period of time.
There are various reasons why a songwriter/artist should do this.
I have listed four of the more common ones below.
Advances
Publishers often pay their songwriters fairly large, annual financial advances on account of future royalties.
The size of these advances will vary, but if a writer has already several hit singles in his or her catalogue the advance may be very sizeable.
Record Deals and Promotional Assistance
Alert music publishers are sometimes quicker than the record industry at spotting songwriter/artists' commercial talent.
In this situation, it is quite common for the songwriter/artist to sign an exclusive agreement with the publisher.
This would include annual advances (although not as large as in the previous situation), access to a recording studio for making demos, and involvement with the publisher's various contacts in the music industry to help secure a record deal.
Administration and collection
Later on in their career, musicians may decide to form their own publishing company and to seek only the administration services of a large corporate publisher.
In return for a small share of the songs' royalty earnings, the larger company takes over the day-to-day business of administering the musicians' song catalogues while the musicians retain all copyright and control of their material (see the ‘self-publishing’ section below).
Covers
Not all songwriters are active performers.
A non-artist songwriter will need a music publisher who can promote his or her writers, songs aggressively, trying to place them with major recording stars.
some music publishers certainly have a better track record in this area than others.
It can be worthwhile to look through trade magazines and check on various companies' success in placing their songs with artists.
Also, talk to other writers, solicitors and friends in the music business to confirm your research.
Earning Money as a Songwriter
The following areas are the most common ways of earning money from your songs.
Mechanical Royalties
As well as the recording artists receiving a royalty from record sales, the songwriter is also entitled to a royalty payment from each record sold.
These royalties are collected from the record company, on behalf of the songwriter, by either the songwriter's publisher or, provided she or he is a member, by the Mechanical Copyright protection society (MCPS).
Unlike artists' record royalties, all songwriters receive the same royalty which is a rate agreed between the record industry and the MCPS.
Performing income
Money is also payable to songwriters from radio and TV stations in the form of ‘air play’ money.
All songwriters should join the performing Right society when they become eligible.
The PRS collects this portion of money for writers.
Synchronization fees
These are one-off payments made by film or television companies to the copyright holder of a song.
They buy the right to incorporate a piece of music into a film or television programme's soundtrack.
Sheet music
some songs sell well in sheet music form (ballads are usually very popular).
There is a royalty payable on sales from this area.
The Publishing Agreement
All of the areas mentioned below are subject to negotiation.
It is very important to stress that the relative bargaining strength of each party governs the kind of a deal which is made.
Length of contract
An agreement may be for one song, or for everything a musician writes over a number of years.
Longer term contracts are often known as ‘blanket’ deals.
The most common period of time for this sort of agreement is three or four years, and the advances payable should reflect this.
As with recording advances, there is no such thing as a typical figure, but for a non-performing writer, enough money to live on should be sought.
Assignment of copyright
Copyright exists in a musical work until fifty years after the end of the year in which the songwriter dies.
At the end of this period, the musical work becomes public property.
Until quite recently, most music publishing agreements assigned all rights in a song to the publisher for this full copyright term.
However, the publishing business has recently become more competitive and it is now possible for songwriters to restrict the length of the assignment of copyright to what is known as a ‘retention period’.
This is usually for the length of the publishing agreement (normally about three to four years) plus a period which could range from five to twenty-five years, depending on the writer's bargaining position.
Royalties and advances
For a songwriter/artist who the music publisher believes has a good chance of success, it is quite usual for there to be a royalty split of 70:30 in favour of the writer.
This should cover all the areas mentioned above except sheet music where a royalty of between 10 and 12 per cent of the full published price is the going rate.
As with record royalties, those songwriters who sign on less advantageous terms are sometimes successful in securing increases throughout each new year of the agreement.
For example, a writer who signs an agreement with a 60:40 split may be able to negotiate a rise of 5 per cent in every year of the contract.
Accounting
As with record companies, this tends to be twice yearly.
It is important that the agreement gives a songwriter a ‘right of audit’, the right to inspect the publisher's books.
Reversion and determination clauses
These are particularly important clauses for the songwriter.
If the publisher has failed to exploit the song in any manner, within a given period of time, the songwriter is able to have all rights in the songs returned.
Also, if the publisher enters into liquidation, the writer must have the right to terminate the agreement and get back all rights to his or her songs.
Self-Publishing
At a certain point in a writer's career, he or she may want to set up his or her own publishing company.
This is the usual route to self-publishing.
Unless a writer is eligible to join the PRS as a publisher member (in addition to being a songwriting member) there is little point in setting up a new publishing company.
on the release of a writer's first album, it is unlikely that he or she would have enough qualifying works to become a publisher member of PRS (see the ‘Copyright and Performing Right’ article for details on these qualifying requirements).
For this reason, some writers enter into an ‘administration deal’ with a corporate music publisher.
In this case, the songwriter should retain his or her songs' copyrights, and the publisher is responsible for administering the song catalogues (collecting the money payable to the writer's songs).
The publisher will charge around 10–15 per cent of the royalties received from the writer's songs for this service.
Usually, these deals can be negotiated for a short term.
This allows the writer to join the PRS as a publisher member when he or she has enough qualifying works, to end the administration deal, and to sign the rights in his or her songs into a personally owned published company.
For a songwriter, the main advantages of owning a publishing company are usually regarded as keeping total control of, and earning 100 per cent of the income generated by, his or her songs.
some writers set up publishing companies for tax purposes.
Others believe it looks more professional.
However, there are disadvantages.
The most obvious is that a larger amount of time is required from the writer.
This is particularly evident when the writer has to organize the negotiations for the essential deals with foreign sub-publishers who collect royalties in non-UK territories.
5.
Booking Agency Agreements
The brief of booking agents has changed radically in recent years.
In the past, a band would acquire an agent fairly early in their career.
The main job of the agent would be to assist the band in moving up through various grades of gig.
Currently, bands seem to be facing a shrinking number of live venues coupled with the enormous expense of going on the road.
This has resulted in no one making a profit from most bands' early tours.
Indeed, some bands are unable to tour without their record company's financial support.
Not surprisingly, established booking agents have reacted to this situation by being ever more wary of signing bands without a record deal.
Another factor which has affected the band/agent relationship has been the prominent role of strong legal advice.
Lawyers always advise clients to limit the term of any music business agreement to as short a term as possible.
Recently there has been a certain amount of paranoia from agents who have been tied to short-term agreements, and then have lost a band to the highest bidder just as the act is becoming successful.
As a result, agents are becoming even more cagey about developing raw talent.
In the artist/booking agent agreement, the most important areas of negotiation are as follows.
Commission
Most booking agents charge a commission of 15 per cent which is payable on the gross fees for any live work.
As an act's appearance fees become higher, the agent may settle for a smaller percentage.
Length of Agreement
This is variable, depending on how the two parties perceive the relationship.
Most agents prefer a term of about three years, whereas bands want to work on a yearly basis.
some larger acts engage an agent for one tour at a time.
If an agent is insistent on a three-year agreement, it is quite common for the artist to negotiate performance  clauses.
These call for a minimum level of earnings at strategic intervals throughout the relationship.
Territory
Agents invariably want to represent an artist throughout the world.
This may not necessarily be useful to a band if the agent is a small or new company.
Larger companies have contacts throughout the world and reciprocal arrangements with foreign agencies.
Any commission paid to a foreign sub-agent should not be charged to the artist.
It should be paid by the artist's UK agent, out of his or her commission.
Collection of Money
This concerns the collection of revenues arising from the artist's live appearances.
The ideal situation for the artist is that all money should be paid to the artist.
Then the agent either sends an invoice to the artist for the commission, or arranges for the commission to be paid by the promoters.
However, some agents prefer to collect all gross revenues from promoters and, having deducted their commission, pay the balance on to the artists.
For a band, this is not at all desirable because their earnings are out of their direct control.
The Need for Legal Advice
All the long-term agreements facing a potential recording artist are highly complex legally binding documents which have a great effect on an act's career.
The value of good legal assistance cannot be overstressed.
I always advise musicians to digest at least a certain amount of knowledge about their business affairs.
There have been far too many examples of artists ‘living for the moment’, putting their faith in others to run their career, and waking up to find themselves penniless, out of favour with the public and feeling rather stupid.
As an aspiring recording artist, I can only hope you will enjoy your music and live the lifestyle, while you remember that the music business is a career, just like any other.
Music Business Accountancy
MARK BOOMLA works in the Entertainments Division of Touche Ross, one of the biggest accountancy firms in the world, He has considerable experience of advising major pop artists and companies on all aspects of their finances.
Everything about a musician's life concerns money.
Whether it is hiring the local scout hut for rehearsals or the huge expenses of a worldwide tour, someone has to count the cost.
However, although your accountant is your ‘servant’ he or she isn't clairvoyant.
Your accountant relies on the information and explanations which you make available.
Then he or she can help you get the best financial return from your music.
The first stage of any band's life is playing for fun.
Unwittingly, the members of the band have formed an unincorporated association.
They aren't trading because they don't receive income.
All expenses are paid by the band's members as with any hobby, so an accountant doesn't need to be involved, although there are certain precautionary steps which should be taken at this early stage.
Firstly, all equipment should be bought and owned by specific members of the band, and all purchase invoices should be kept.
To avoid unnecessary disputes, draw up a list of equipment and its owners so that it can be agreed by all the members of the band.
similarly, all songs composed by the band should be credited to those members who actually wrote them.
If songs are co-written, then each songwriter should be credited with the proportion of the song which they created.
Turning Professional
This is the second stage in a band's life, when they first receive income.
This can happen in a number of ways.
A band could sign a recording contract, or receive income from live performances or session fees (the receipt of prize money from a talent contest is tax  free and does not give rise to taxable income unless this occurs on a regular basis).
Now, the band has been transformed from an unincorporated association into a partnership.
The existence of a partnership has significant legal consequences, and it is best practice for the members of any partnership to have a written agreement, drafted by a lawyer.
In this article, I have assumed that a band has reached this second stage by being offered a recording contract.
It is now that the band requires an accountant.
The band should meet their accountant before signing the recording contract to discuss the following:
1.
The accountant, in conjunction with the lawyer, will advise the members of the band whether they should form a limited liability company before entering into any legally binding relationship with a record company.
2.
The accountant should inform the band that, as they are about to start trading, it is necessary to notify the Inland Revenue (the tax man).
The accountant will be happy to do this on the band's behalf.
3.
It is likely that any ‘advance’ paid by a record company will be in excess of the minimum level of income for compulsory VAT registration purposes, so the band should be aware of their obligation to register for VAT immediately.
Once registered there is a requirement to file a VAT return every three months with the Customs and Excise and the accountant will discuss how these will be completed and filed.
4.
The band will need to open a bank account, if they haven't done so already.
It is best practice for the accountant to discuss with the band who should be the cheque signatories on this account.
A cash book should be maintained for each bank account to record every item of income and expenditure, analyse these into appropriate costs and back them up with supporting documentation.
It may seem a chore to gather invoices to document your expenses, but without these, items of expenditure may not be allowed as a deduction from income by the Inland Revenue.
Then the band would have to pay more tax than would otherwise be necessary.
For instance, when the accountant produces the band's first accounts, and files them with the Inland Revenue, the invoices for the band's musical equipment may need to be produced so that the accountant may obtain tax relief for these items, although they were purchased in the first stage of a band's life.
5.
As the accountant will, if required, help produce the annual accounts, he or she will want to ensure that adequate.
cash books are maintained.
To do this, the accountant will discuss who will be responsible for them (this might be a band member, the accountant  or the band's manager).
If necessary, he or she will advise on the detailed layout of the cash books, and suggest that he or she reviews them occasionally to ensure their adequacy.
Also, the accountant will wish to establish who is responsible for completing and filing the VAT return for the Customs and Excise.
It may be appropriate for the person who maintains the cash books to do this, but because of their technical nature it may be necessary for the accountant to do this instead.
6.
There may be an obligation for the band members to deduct income tax (Pay As You Earn) from the salaries of any employees.
In this case, it is necessary to set up a PAYE scheme with the Inland Revenue, to deduct tax and National Insurance, and to pay these over on a regular monthly basis.
For the band members' own ‘salaries’, a Certificate of Tax Deposits can be purchased from the Inland Revenue.
The advantage of this scheme is that you don't need to remember to save the money which you would have paid to the Government later on!
The accountant will identify whether there is a need to establish a PAYE scheme and, if the band or their manager aren't willing to take on this responsibility, the accountant will operate this scheme on their behalf.
The Record Deal
The band is likely to negotiate a large non-returnable, but ‘recoupable’(out of future royalties earned) advance from the record company.
The accountant will try to ensure that the band have given enough thought to how long this money is likely to last, and how best to use it until the next payment or earnings are due.
The budgets of anticipated income and expenditure which are prepared at this stage are vital if the band are to appreciate the limits of their financial resources.
All too often large advances can seem like a ticket to stardom.
In reality they are mercilessly small when you realize for how long they have to be eked out!
As an example, consider the situation of a three-piece band who are about to receive £100,000 as a record company advance (and they have taken the decision to delay any possible publishing advances until after the release of two singles from the forthcoming album).
out of the £100,000, it is likely that the manager of the band will take 20 per cent(£20,000).
Various other costs such as administration, legal accountancy fees, as well as paying off any debts of the individual band members, could all amount to a further £20,000.
This leaves the band with £60,000.
From that, each member of the band is likely to have a ‘salary’ equivalent to around £20,000 per annum before tax.
Although this is a fair wage, it isn't going to sustain a rock ‘n’ roll superstar lifestyle for longer than a few weeks, so it is only by sensible use of budgets that the real size of the advances can be put in context.
This example might seem unrealistically pessimistic, as a new band may feel confident of being able to record and release their album in just a few months, with money from sales and royalties quickly starting to now in.
In practice this is never the case.
Recording an album inevitably takes longer than expected.
songs may have to be rewritten, particular studio engineers or producers may not be available when first required, band members may fall ill and the record company may delay the release of the album ‘until the market is right’.
There are innumerable reasons why albums take longer than expected to get into the shops.
Also, because of the type of accounting system adopted by all record companies, it is quite feasible for royalties generated from record sales in the UK to take nine months before they are paid to the artist.
Record sales in foreign territories can take up to two years before they are paid.
Furthermore, the three-piece band's advance was to be ‘recoupable’.
This means that all of the band's percentage of the royalties generated from their record sales are spent first on repaying the record company advance.
When that has been paid off, the band will start to see some profit from their records.
so, although the advance of £ 100,000 may appear a vast sum of money, it can result in a lack of spending power in the rockets of individual band members.
Recording Costs
Recording in a top flight studio is often new and exciting for any band.
suddenly, musicians can be working with engineers, producers and a whole host of technical equipment which previously had been the stuff of their dreams.
Musically, this can seem like an Aladdin's cave, but financially it can be a nightmare.
The band may not realize all the costs of recording and of hiring an engineer or producer.
The band must remember that recording costs are treated in a similar way to advances.
To start with, the record company will pay the costs of the recording studio, the producer and the engineer, but these will all be charged to the band's account at the record company.
The record company recoups this expenditure by making the band liable to pay these costs from their share of the royalties generated from record sales.
The band's earnings from their recording contract go towards paying this debt to the record company as well, putting off even further the stage when the band earns money from its records.
It is worthwhile for the band to keep some diary notes as to the studios they have used and on which days.
Also, record which engineers, producers and backing musicians were employed.
This  information will be particularly useful when checking the recording costs debited to the band's royalty statement.
Touring
Once the recording has been completed, it is likely the band will go on tour to promote their album.
The accountant, in conjunction with the lawyer, will consider using a separate limited company to undertake the touring activity, and advise accordingly.
The main advantage of a limited company is that in general only the company and not the individual is liable for the business debts.
once the coffers have run dry, there is no recourse to the individual band.
members to pay any outstanding bills personally.
There are important exceptions to this rule on which advice will need to be sought.
The principal disadvantage is that a limited company invariably incurs some additional costs.
Touring generates two particular problems for the accountant.
At the beginning of a career, any band's tours are likely to make a loss.
It is likely that this loss will be funded (at least in part) by the record company and, in this case, the band are likely to receive an advance against future royalties.
This is usually recoupable, so the band should realize that they are spending their own money on tour, and not the record company's.
The second problem of touring is that the volume of the band's financial transactions will increase dramatically.
From the dozen or so per week when the band is in the studio, there will be up to 100 per week as they go on the road.
Clearly, if a member of the band has maintained the books until this point, it wouldn't be practical for him or her to continue.
For small tours, a tour manager is the most suitable person to do this book-keeping.
For larger tours, bands need a tour accountant to travel with them and record all transactions as they are made.
The tour manager or tour accountant must maintain adequate books to reflect these transactions so they can all be accurately included within the band's finances.
Publishing
If a band delayed signing a publishing contract until the singles from their album had obtained some success, it was because they believed, not unreasonably, that they could negotiate a better contract by demonstrating their chart success to a publisher.
But how do writers' royalties arise?
There are two main sources of publishing income.
The first, and usually by far the largest, is the ‘mechanical’ royalty.
This is payable when a copy of a writer's or composer's song is made mechanically  (or these days electronically).
Consequently, a mechanical royalty arises each time a record company makes a copy of an album, cassette or compact disc.
The second source of publishing income is public performance.
This is collected by the performing Right society (PRS) from the licensing of TV, radio and venues for the public performance of music (see the ‘Copyright and performing Right’ article).
Songwriters, both lyricists and composers, have two alternatives for publishing their work.
Either they sign one contract with a worldwide publisher, or several contracts with music publishers in each individual country throughout the world.
The first option is referred to as a world-wide contract, and the second is known as a territory-by-territory contract.
The band's lawyer will advise as to which is appropriate, depending on the artist's circumstances.
The accounting for royalties by a music publisher, for a world-wide or territory-by-territory contract, is very similar to record companies' methods.
A music publisher will give writers an advance.
Like advances from record companies, this will be recoupable out of future royalties.
However, the main difference between the record company's and publishing company's advance is that the publisher usually has no large expenses to pay such as the recording costs of an album.
As a result, publishers have few costs to charge writers and composers against their publishing royalties.
This often makes songwriting more profitable than performing.
Doing both is ideal.
As with many of a band's activities, the accountant will consider whether a separate limited liability company is required in order to act as a vehicle for the publishing royalties.
Music publishing deals are often referred to by two figures, like 95:5 or 85:15.
The first figure relates to the writer's or composer's percentage (95 or 85 per cent), and the second to the amount retained by the publisher (5 or 15 per cent ).
From the writer's point of view, the larger the first number and the smaller second, the better.
Before signing any deal, the band's writers and composers should discuss with their accountant and lawyer the proportion of the band's publishing royalties which they will receive.
It is quite feasible that band members will have contributed to the composition of songs in different amounts, so the income received from the band's songs is often split to reflect this.
In order to minimize the accountant's workload (and the accountancy bill), ask the publishing company to undertake this quite laborious division of royalties.
If the company are unwilling to do this, the accountant, possibly with the assistance of a computer bureau, will generally be happy to get this done.
It is important for musicians to appreciate the difference between an ‘income received’ deal and an ‘at source’deal.
It may save bands a lot  of money.
If a writer or composer signs an ‘at source’ deal, they should receive the negotiated percentages of the royalties arising in foreign territories in tact .
If they sign an ‘income received’ deal, they will only receive their proportion of the royalties sent to their UK publisher , after the foreign publisher has taken a percentage.
Royalty Examination
When the band have achieved considerable chart success (when they have sold approximately a million copies of their albums), they should consider whether a royalty examination should be done.
The right to carry out a royalty examination of a record or publishing company should be set out in the recording or publishing contract.
The recording artist or the writer and composer will have the right to appoint a firm of accountants to examine the accounts of the record or publishing company.
This is to ascertain whether these companies have paid over the correct royalties to the band.
Recording contracts can be particularly complicated due to the different royalty rates and ‘packaging deductions’ which can be applied to different types of record, and to where it is sold, when it is sold, and in which cover it is presented.
As a result, errors can occur in the processing of the royalty payments and the contract may be open to various interpretations.
A royalty examination usually begins with an analysis of royalty statements by the band's accountant to see if there are any peculiarities which warrant further investigation.
Usually there are a number of these which makes it necessary for the accountant to visit the record or publishing company.
There he or she examines the record or publishing company's accounts.
As a result of this visit, the accountant will prepare a royalty examination report, in conjunction with the solicitor, which will set out the claims for underpayment of the band's royalties by the recording or publishing company.
The lawyer, often with the assistance of the accountant, will then negotiate the claim with the particular company and reach a settlement.
Clearly, it is only worthwhile for the band to request a royalty examination if the potential claim will exceed the professional fees incurred.
As a result, this is usually only undertaken if a band has enjoyed significant record sales.
However, settlement payments by the record company or publishing company are often in excess of £100,000, while the accountant's fees are measured in tens of thousands.
The music business is very fickle.
Careers at the top can be mercilessly short.
Usually, a band or artist will have only a short working life in which to earn sufficient money to live on for the rest of their lives.
While it is important to choose an accountant with whom you feel comfortable and professionally secure, you will also need the best available financial advice.
By the time you realize your accountant has been second rate, your career may be over.
Choose an accountant who specializes in the music industry.
When you meet your potential accountant, ask him or her about who else he or she acts for.
If he or she doesn't act for a number of successful bands, he or she is unlikely to have a thorough understanding of accounting in the music business.
You need to know whether your potential accountant could undertake royalty examinations, and if he or she has colleagues in other countries to assist with international tax problems at very short notice.
Deciding on an accountant isn't easy.
It may involve visiting several firms before you find the right one.
But with a good accountant, it could make the difference between you, the pop star, being rich and famous, or just famous.